 

 

 

 

 

Collective Bargaining Agreement

Between

City Of Henderson, Nevada

and
International Association of Firefighters Local 1883;

The Henderson Police Officers’ Association
and

The Henderson Police Supervisors Association

October 16, 2013 through December 31, 2015

 

 

 
AGREEMENT

2013-2015
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page No.
Preamble
Article 1. Recognition 2
Article 2. Employee Benefit Plans 3
Article 3 Grievance Procedure 6
Article 4. Strikes 7
Article 5 Non-Discrimination 7
Article 6 Savings Clause 8
Article 7 Agreement Severable 8
Article 8 Effective Date 8
Definitions 10-11
PREAMBLE:

THIS AGREEMENT is entered into by and between the CITY OF HENDERSON,
hereinafter referred to as the City, and the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
FIREFIGHTERS LOCAL 1883, THE HENDERSON POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION AND THE HENDERSON POLICE SUPERVISORS ASSOCIATION
hereinafter referred to as the Unions.

The purpose of this Agreement is to achieve and maintain harmonious relations
between the CITY and the Unions; to provide for an equitable and peaceful adjustment
of differences that may arise; and to establish appropriate level of employee benefits
and sustainable funding to provide such benefits.

ARTICLE 1, RECOGNITION:
The CITY OF HENDERSON recognizes the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF

FIREFIGHTERS LOCAL 1883, THE HENDERSON POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION AND THE HENDERSON POLICE SUPERVISORS ASSOCIATION

-2-

COH

HPOA HPSA LocalAS83
hereinafter referred to as the Unions, as the bargaining agents for the classifications
listed in their respective individual Agreements for the purpose of collective bargaining
as set forth in NRS 288.

ARTICLE 2, EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
Section 1: | Committee Structure

The Unions and their Members will participate in the Benetit Plans provided
by the City, These specific plans will be managed by the Self-Funded
Insurance Committee (Committee). The plans currently managed by the
Committee include medical, dental, vision, life insurance, long-term
disability and employee assistance benefits. These plans provide benefits to
the City’s employees represented by the Unions and all non-represented
full time regular employees.

The Committee will consist of eight (8) voting members, equally divided
among the non-represented workforce and the Unions. The current voting
membership is:

   
 
 

Group Voting Members
Henderson Police Officers Association Two
Henderson Police Supervisors Association One
International Association of Firefighters Local 1883 One
Non-represented Employees

 
    

 

The Committee is governed by the established by-laws that have been
approved by the majority vote of the Committee and the City Manager; with
the ultimate authority being the Henderson City Council. The Committee
will normally meet on a monthly basis to manage the business of providing
these benefits.

The Unions agree to participate in the City’s Benefit Plans for the term of
this agreement through the Committee structure.

Section 2: City of Henderson Monthly Contributions to Fund These Benefits

The City will make a monthly contribution to an internal service fund that is
established for the purpose of managing the income and expenses for the
benefits identified in Section 1. The Committee will determine the level of
benefits and the number of options available for covered employee’s
consideration. The Committee will normally establish a collective rate for
these benefits no later than October of each calendar year.

he — CE th A
HPO, HPSA al 3 COH
Effective January 1, 2013 through December 31, 2013, the City’s
contribution to the intemal service fund for all employees covered by these
plans {represented and non-represented) shall be the composite cost of
these benefits at each level offered as established by the Committee not to
exceed $847.04 per month. The Committee will normally establish the
composite rate for these benefits no later than October of each calendar
year.

The Committee will also determine the employee contribution at each
level of coverage and employees authorize the City to deduct that
expense from their bi-weekly earnings.

Effective January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2014, the City’s
contribution to the internal service fund for all employees covered by these
plans (represented and non-represented) shall be $875.00 per month.
Additionally, employee monthly contributions for calendar year 2014 will be:

Health Plan of Nevada (HPN)

Employee Only $ 47.28
Employee plus Spouse/Domestic Partner $ 94,23
Employee plus Child(ren) $ 89.92
Employee, Spouse and Child(ren) $ 140.47
City Self-Funded (PPO)

Employee Only $52.53
Employee plus Spouse/Domestic Partner $ 104.70
Employee plus Child(ren) $ 99.91
Employee, Spouse and Child(ren) $ 156.08

Effective January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2015, the City’s
contribution to the intemal service fund for all employees covered by these
plans (represented and non-represented) shall be $900.00 per month.
Additionally, employee monthly contributions for calendar year 2015 will be:

Health Plan of Nevada (HPN)

Employee Only $57.40
Employee plus Spouse/Domestic Partner $114.41
Employee plus Child(ren) $ 109.17
Employee, Spouse and Child(ren) $ 170,55
City Self-Funded (PPO)

Employee Only $ 63.78
Employee pius Spouse/Domestic Partner $ 127.12
Employee plus Child(ren) $ 121.30
Employee, Spouse and Child(ren) $ 189.50

 

ah

4 Z -4-
HPSA ci COH
Section 3:

Section 4:

HPOA

With this Agreement the Unions and the City have modified the previous
retirement health savings account structure and City contributions to
employees covered by this agreement. A portion of the previous bi-
weekly contribution will now be directed to a sub-account within the
internal service fund identified in Section 2. The sub-account will be
established as quickly as possible after the effective date of this
agreement. Employees covered by this Agreement will experience a
reduction of their current Vantage Care contribution of twenty dollars
($20.00) each pay period and those resources will be deposited into the
sub-account. The purpose of this sub-account is to provide additional
resources to the Committee to influence the monthly premium charged to
retirees for their on-going insurance and benefit needs. The City commits
to a fifteen dollar ($15.00) per pay period contribution for non-represented,
non-public safety PERS employees and twenty dollars ($20) per pay
period for non-represented public safety PERS employees.

As with all active employees, the Committee will establish the rates
charged retirees for all levels of coverage in October of each calendar
year for the following calendar year.

(a) Any residual amount of previous health savings account contributions
above those required for the sub-account is addressed in each of the
Union's individual collective bargaining agreement.

(b) The parties acknowledge that should the City cease to provide
employee benefits as defined in this Agreement whether through
Council action or legislatively imposed; the contributions to the sub-
account will end immediately and that amount would be added to the
current City bi-weekly contribution to the Members individual health
saving account. Should the City no longer offer the benefits within
the Self-funded Benefit Plans, the City will be liable for the maximum
negotiated monthly contribution for each employee covered by this
agreement, for the purposes of funding a group benefit plan. The
City is not required to pay individual employees the maximum
negotiated monthly contribution as a form of income.

In the event of a Member's death, the CITY will help the beneficiaries
complete the necessary life insurance and retirement forms and insure
that they are properly signed in order that the beneficiaries will receive any
monies due them.

A deceased employee’s final paycheck, including wages earned and all
payable leave accruals per this Agreement, will be distributed to the
beneficiary(s), designated on the employee’s City-provided life insurance

aD

HPSA

 
form. If no such beneficiary(s) are identified, the proceeds will be
dispersed per the provisions of NRS 281.155.

ARTICLE 3. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:

A grievance is defined as any dispute which arises regarding an interpretation,
application, or alleged violation of any of the provisions of this Agreement.

The purpose of the Grievance Procedure shall be to settle all grievances between the
CITY and the Unions as quickly as possible to insure efficiency and promote employee
morale. Should the Unions or the City feel aggrieved, including the claim of unjust
discrimination or any matter, adjustment shall be sought.

For the term of this Agreement and the term of subsequent Agreements, the Unions will
identify a designated President to act as the lead spokesperson for any disputes
covered under this section of this Agreement. Additionally, the Unions will identify a
Member of one of their unions to participate in the Step 2 hearing defined below.

Section 1: Any dispute concerning the interpretation or application of an expressed
provision of this Agreement shall be subject to this, and exclusive to this
grievance procedure.

STEP 1: The designated President from one of the Unions will contact the
Human Resources Director and arrange a meeting in an effort to resolve
the difference prior to the requirement that the grievance be filed in writing.
If after this meeting the issue cannot be resolved, it may be formalized as
a written grievance at Step 2. The Human Resources Director or
designee may also call for such a meeting and if the issue cannot be
resolved, the City may file a written grievance with the designated
President.

STEP 2: If a Step 1 is unsuccessful, either party may present a signed
written grievance to the other for further adjudication. All grievances must
be filed in writing, by the either party within thirty (30) calendar days of the
aileged violation of this agreement or the first time a covered employee,
the Unions or the City became aware of the alleged violation.

A meeting will be scheduled to review this grievance for possible
resolution. The meeting will be held no later thani4 calendar days from
the receipt of the written grievance by either party. The designated
Assistant City Manager and the Union's representative identified for this
purpose will conduct a review of the grievance. Both parties will have the
opportunity to present the facts as they view them and Assistant City

-6-

 

HPOA HPSA ocal4883 COH
Manager and Union designee will have the opportunity to ask questions of
the parties and request additional information from agreed to sources.

Upon completion of the meeting, the Assistant City Manager and Union
designee will review the information provided and either reach consensus
on a decision at that time, or adjourn the meeting until any additional
information requested has been delivered. If a consensus decision is
ultimately achieved, the Union designee and Assistant City Manager
would provide their decision in writing. Within 10 calendar days of the
issuance of their decision, the parties may either accept the decision as
binding or request arbitration as defined in Step 3 of this grievance
procedure. Failure to request arbitration through a written communication
to the other party during the 10 calendar day period after the opinion is
issued will be viewed as acceptance of the opinion and the matter will be
considered resolved.

STEP 3: If a mutually agreeable solution does not occur through the first
two steps of this procedure, either party may request that the issue be
subject to binding arbitration. An arbitrator would be selected from a panel
provided by the American Arbitration Association through alternating
strikes from the list until a sole arbitrator remains. The arbitration should
be scheduled as quickly as possible.

The Arbitrator's decision shall be final and binding, and the non-prevailing
party shall pay the fee and related expenses of the arbitrator. If the public
safety unions are responsible for this, the arbitrator's fee would be split
equally among the three unions.

The parties shall bear their own expenses for attorneys, court reporters
and other related arbitration expenses.

 

ARTICLE 4. STRIKES:

Section 1: The UNIONS agrees that there shall be no strikes.

Section 2: Despite possible disputes, the UNIONS and their members will continue to
furnish efficient fire and police protection to the CITY.

ARTICLE 5. NON-DISCRIMINATION:

Section 1: The CITY and the UNIONS agree there shail be no discrimination against
any employee because of race, age, creed, sex, religion, political or
personal reason or affiliation. The Americans with Disabilities Act and the

a

HPOA HPSA Local ¥883 COH
Section 2:

Section 4:

ARTICLE 6.

Section 1:

ARTICLE 7.

Section 1:

ARTICLE 8.

Section 1:

Section 2:

fe

Family and Medical Leave Act, as amended from time to time, are hereby
adopted.

It is further agreed that the CITY and the UNIONS will comply with all
applicable federal laws and executive orders pertaining to non-
discrimination and equal employment opportunities.

It is agreed between the CITY and the UNIONS that employees violating
this Article will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including
termination of employment.

SAVINGS CLAUSE:

This Agreement shall be binding upon the successors and assigns of the
parties hereto, and no provisions, terms or obligations herein contained
shall be affected, modified, altered or changed in any respect whatsoever
by the consolidation, merger, annexation, transfer, or assignment of either
party hereto, or affected, modified, altered, or changed in any respect
whatsoever by any change of any kind of the ownership, or management,
of either party hereto, or by any change geographically or otherwise in the
location or place of business of either party hereto, insofar as it is possible
for the CITY and the UNIONS to bind their successors.

AGREEMENT SEVERABLE:

This Agreement is declared to be severable and if any paragraph, phrase,
or part is declared to be void by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not
be construed to void or nullify the entire Agreement, and those parts not
declared void shall be binding upon the parties. The parties agree that, if
and when any provision of this Agreement is held or determined to be
illegal or void, they will then promptly enter into lawful negotiations
conceming the substance thereof. This Agreement is the entire Agreement
of the parties terminating all prior Agreements.

EFFECTIVE DATE

This Agreement shall be effective October 16, 2013, and shall remain in full
force and effect up to and including December 31, 2015, and during the
period of any statutory impasse procedures.

In the event either party desires to open negotiations concerning the terms
of a successor agreement, written notice of such desire shall be given on or
before August 1. 2015.

Ge ogee
COH

HPSA Le 883
Section 3: In the event the parties cannot negotiate a new Contract, the parties shall
comply with statutory impasse procedures.

Section 4: Each party reserves its rights as established by Chapter 288 of the Nevada
Revised Statutes, as amended.

Execution of this Agreement by the UNION does not waive any rights explicitly set forth in
NRS 288.

DATED this /O" day of Ox , 2013

CITY OF-HENDERSON, NEVADA

   

By;

Manager

 

ATTEST:

oe Mercadante, MMC

City Clerk

INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
FIREFIGHTERS LOCAL 1883

    

an Pentkowski

 

President

— ae

HPOA HPSA 11883 COH
HPOA

HPSA

Henderson Police Supervisors Association

  

By:

 

feutenant Thomas M. Chiello
President

REVIEWED AND APPROVED AS TO FORM:

‘
By:
Josh M. Reid
City Attorney
10-
amr
fodal/1883 COH
DEFINITIONS:

This Agreement is made pursuant to and in conjunction with the Local Government
Employee-Management Relations Act of the State of Nevada, and all terms used herein
which are terms used in the Local Government Employee-Management Relations Act
shall have definitions ascribed to them by said Act.

Arbitrator:

Assistant City Manager:

Self-Funded
Insurance Committee:

Composite Cost:

Retirement Heaith

Savings Account:

Sub-account:

Impact Bargaining:

An impartial third party chosen in accordance with the
provisions of this contract.

The person designated by the City as the co-hearing officer
for Step 2 grievance hearings

A Committee of eight (8) active employees of the City;
evenly split between the three (3) public safety unions and
the non-represented employees of the City, charged with
management of the designated employee benefit plans as
defined in the associated by-laws, as approved by the City
Manager.

The total cost of the employee benefit plans managed by
the Committee at each level of coverage. i.e. single
coverage, two party coverage, family coverage. This
composite cost is established by the Committee annually.

Individually controlled accounts subject to employer
contributions on a per pay period basis, that are used to
pay eligible health care expenses when retired.

A separate account within the internal service fund
established to provide the employee benefits identified in
this Agreement, established for the purpose of employees
collectively pooling their resources to facilitate more
favorable pricing for these benefits once retired.

Collective bargaining requested by the unions when
management decisions are made or external legal or

 

ha >
HPOA HPSA

-11-
Loci 83 COH
ae

HPSA

legislative actions impact mandatory subjects of
bargaining as defined in NRS 288.150.

focayfB83 COH
