MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING OF RIALTO

BETWEEN THE CITY OF RIA :
bi TARuar 12 PH 5: 05
THE RIALTO POLICE BENEFIT ASSOCIAREON,Y ED
POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING GNITCLER®

 

The following provisions constitute the agreements reached by representatives of the City of
Rialto (City) and the Rialto Police Benefit Association, Police Management Bargaining Unit
(Association).

The City and the Association have agreed to the following terms in this Memorandum of
Understanding:

PREAMBLE

This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU or Agreement) is entered into with reference to the
following facts:

The Rialto Police Benefit Association, Police Management Bargaining Unit is the recognized
employee organization for personnel employed by the City of Rialto in the classifications of:
Police Captain, Police Lieutenant, Police Sergeant, Police Records Supervisor, Emergency
Dispatch Supervisor, and Crime Analyst. The terms of this Agreement extend to all such Police
Department employees.

Therefore, the City and the Association agree that subject to adoption and implementation by the
City Council of the City, the wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment for the
affected employees shall be as follows:

ARTICLE 1
TERM OF AGREEMENT

The term of this Agreement shall be from January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2015.

ARTICLE 2
WAGES

The salary ranges for classifications within the Management Bargaining Unit are set forth in
Appendix A.

ARTICLE 3
OTHER PAY

SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL

There shall be a 2'4 % shift differential paid to civilian personnel covered by this Memorandum
of Understanding for hours worked outside of the traditional work hours of 7:00 AM to 5:00 PM,
who meet certain criteria. Personnel who work 51% of their assigned shift between the hours of
5:00 PM and 7:00 AM shall receive a 24 % shift differential for their work entire shift.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

January 1, 2014 to December 31, 2015
Page | of 26 E9400 — 1268108.)

 
 

BILINGUAL PAY

A unit member that is certified by the City as “bilingual” or “sign linguist” and who is required
to utilize his/her abilities as part of their regular duties shall be compensated at the rate of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per pay period.

The City shall reserve the right to determine which languages qualify for Bilingual status within
the city.

The City shall reserve the right to establish and administer examinations to verify the
qualifications of the employee.

OVERTIME/COMPENSATORY TIME

Sergeants, the Police Records Supervisor, the Emergency Dispatch Supervisor, and the Crime
Analyst represented by the Rialto Police Benefit Association, Police Management Bargaining
Unit, shall be paid at one and one half (1.5) times the employee's regular hourly rate for time
worked in excess of the regular scheduled workday, when requesting overtime pay. Overtime is
adjusted to the nearest % hour for purposes of payment or posting to an employee’s time record.

Sergeants, the Police Records Supervisor, the Emergency Dispatch Supervisor, and the Crime
Analyst have the right to choose between compensatory time or cash payment at the rate of time
and one-half, when working hours in excess of their work day or week. This does not restrict the
City’s right to schedule workweeks and work days at the regular (straight time) rate.

Sergeants, the Police Records Supervisor, the Emergency Dispatch Supervisor, and the Crime
Analyst who are represented by the Rialto Police Benefit Association, Police Management
Bargaining Unit may accrue a maximum of 150 hours as compensatory time. Compensatory
time is accumulated at one and one half times the employee’s regular hourly rate. All hours in
excess of 150 shall be paid in cash at the overtime rate.

Employees holding the rank of Police Captain or Lieutenant may not receive overtime pay.
Police Captains and Lieutenants may receive overtime pay in extraordinary circumstances with
permission of the Chief of Police and the City Administrator. Police Captains and Lieutenants
shall receive 120 hours, per fiscal year as paid Administrative Leave.

Administrative leave must be used in the fiscal year accrued or it shall be forfeited. Prior
approval is required for the use of Administrative Leave.

For purposes of calculating entitlement to overtime (at time and one-half) on a daily basis, paid
leaves of absence shall be excluded from the total hours worked. Paid leaves of absence include,
but are not limited to the following:

Holiday Leave 4850 Time

Sick Leave Jury Duty
Administrative Leave Bereavement Leave
Compensatory Leave Military Leave

Workers’ Compensation Leave

Vacation leave shall not be excluded from total hours worked in calculating daily overtime.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015
Page 2 of 26 634-000 — 12681081
COURT APPEARANCE PAY
Any employee of this bargaining unit, entitled to paid overtime, when properly subpoenaed, who

makes a court appearance during his/her off duty time shall receive overtime compensation for
actual time in court with a minimum three (3) hours’ time.

ACTING PAY

Employees who are temporarily assigned to perform duties of a higher classification will be
compensated for performing at the higher classification. As used herein, “temporary” is defined
as the affected employee is in said position for less than twenty (20) consecutive working days in
a higher classification.

 

After the 20" consecutive working day the affected employee will be compensated at either the
bottom step of the higher classification or receive a five (5%) percent salary increase of their
higher base salary, whichever is greater. This increase shall be effective on the date of
assumption of the duties of the higher classification and terminate with the conclusion of the
temporary assignment. In all cases the affected employee’s supervisor in a detailed
memorandum to the Police Chief shall note the dates of the starting an ending of “Acting
Status.”

LONGEVITY PAY

Members with ten (10) to fourteen (14) years of cumulative service in the field of law
enforcement will receive longevity pay equal to 1.5% of their base salary. Members with fifteen
(15) or more cumulative years of service in the field of law enforcement will receive longevity
pay equal to 2.25% of their base salary.

PROMOTIONAL PAY
Upon promotion, safety personnel will receive a minimum increase of five (5%) percent in base
salary.
ARTICLE 4
INSURANCE PROGRAMS

LIFE INSURANCE
The City will pay the cost of dependent life insurance for life insurance coverage contracted by
the City for all affected employees. Current benefit level is:

Employee $ 75,000
Spouse (or registered domestic partner) $ 10,000
Children $ 5,000
ARTICLE 5
CAFETERIA BENEFIT PLAN

A. Employees in the Unit shall be provided with a Cafeteria Plan which will be administered
by the City pursuant to Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code.

B. The Cafeteria Plan is designed to give employees the flexibility to choose various
benefits. The cafeteria plan gives employees a set dollar amount in which the employee
may access any amount up to the maximum City contribution. Employees have the

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015
Page 3 of 26 1654-200 — 12681041
 

choice of applying Cafeteria Plan dollars to purchase health, and dental benefits provided
through City plans. The employee may also choose to opt out of the cafeteria plan as
outlined in Section D.

C. Employees who began the Police Department’s hiring process on or before May 10,
2011, will receive $1,000 per month as the City’s contribution to their cafeteria plan for
health and dental insurance premiums. (Employees who promote from the RPBA
General Unit into the Management Unit will not be considered new employees for
purposes of two-tiering Cafeteria Plan premiums so long as they began the hiring process
on or before May 10, 2011.) Employees who began the Police Department’s hiring
process after May 10, 2011, will receive $500 per month as the City’s contribution to
their cafeteria plan for health and dental insurance premiums. Effective the first payroll
period following adoption of the MOU, all members of the Bargaining Unit will receive
an additional $200 per month contribution towards health insurance. Employees who
began before May 10, 2011 will receive $1,200 per month as a contribution, while those
who began after May 10, 2011 will receive $700 per month increasing to $1,200 effective
January 2015.

D. Opt out provision

The opt out provision will allow employees to receive the dollar amount that is not
utilized to purchase any of the benefits through the City. Documentation is required to
verify that the employee has obtained insurance outside of the City or is receiving
insurance through his or her spouse’s (‘Spouse’ includes registered domestic partners
throughout this MOU so long as required by California law) plan before the employee
may opt out. Employees may use some of the amount for benefits, with any remaining
amount paid out to the employee.

DENTAL INSURANCE
This benefit is encompassed in Article 5 (Cafeteria Benefit Plan).

HEALTH INSURANCE
This benefit is encompassed in Article 5 (Cafeteria Benefit Plan).

The City shall contribute to the retired employees’ plan according to the following

schedule:

MONTHLY
EMPLOYEE ONLY $279.25/month
EMPLOYEE + 1 $558.49/month

EMPLOYEE +2OR MORE _— $726.04/month

MEDICARE

Employees hired by the City on or after April 1, 1986, shall be required to pay the designated
employee contribution to participate in the Medicare Program and the City shall be under no
obligation to pay or “pick up” any such contribution. In the event the City and its employees are
required to participate in the Federal Medicare Program, the contribution designated by law to be
the responsibility of the employee shall be paid in full by the employee.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

January 1, 2014— December 31, 2015
Page 4 of 26 994-000 ~ 12681081

 

 
 

ARTICLE 6
DEFERRED COMPENSATION

All unit employees will receive $100 per month in deferred compensation.

Employees will have access to the 401A, Money Purchase Pension Plan and Trust, subject to
City Council modification of the plan as authorized by federal and state laws.

If, during the term of this MOU, the City provides the Fire Management Unit or the SBPEA
Management Bargaining Unit a higher amount of deferred compensation, the same amount will
also be given to the Police Management Unit.

ARTICLE 7
VACATION AND LEAVES

VACATION ACCRUAL ACCOUNTING

A. No employee shall be granted vacation time he/she has not earned.
The vacation hour accrual cap is 600 hours. Employees who are denied vacation requests
due to City staffing needs such that they reach the 600 hour ceiling will be cashed out up
to 20 hours so that they do not lose potential future accrual.

B. Vacation accrual will be determined by the employee’s number of years of service with a
law enforcement agency as set forth below. Human Resources Department shall certify
the number of years of service via PERS, county or other retirement statements.

Cc. Vacation leave will be earned at the following rate:

Number of Hours Vacation Leave Earned on Anniversary

City Service Years Hours/Per Pay Period
0 thru 4 4.61
5 and above 6.15

D. Vacation cash outs shall be suspended between January 1, 2014 and December 31, 2015.
All unit members shall be eligible to cash out, or deposit into deferred compensation
account, up to two hundred and forty (240) hours’ vacation leave time per fiscal year.
The employee may opt to cash out vacation in ten (10) hour minimum increments prior to
the beginning of the next fiscal year, as long as such cash out shall not deplete the
employee’s accrued vacation leave below eighty (80) hours. The cash out of vacation
leave time will be at the employee’s current salary rate.

——— eee
RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 5 of 26 694-000 — 1268108.1

 

 
HOLIDAYS

 

A. NON-SHIFT EMPLOYEES: The following holidays are observed:

New Year's Day Labor Day

Martin Luther King Day Veterans Day
President’s Day Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day Christmas Day
Independence Day

Employees shall be credited with ten (10) hours for each floating holiday on January | of each
year, provided employees have completed six months’ service. If an employee has not
completed six months’ service on January 1, then the hours shall be credited to the employee's
holiday leave bank upon completion of six months’ service.

Non-shift personnel who do not accrue holiday leave shall be paid ten (10) hours for holidays on
the day of observance. If a holiday falls on a “regular” day off, the employee shall take an
additional day off within the work week (the supervisor shall advise the affected employee(s)
when to take the additional day off keeping in mind that adequate staffing is maintained). When
a holiday falls on a scheduled work day, the employee shall be paid for ten (10) hours’ holiday
and the employee must then use leave hours (vacation*, comp time, floating holiday hours) for
balance of hours otherwise scheduled to work, or, the employee may make up hours within the
work week.

B. SHIFT EMPLOYEES: The following holidays are observed:

New Year’s Day Labor Day

Martin Luther King Day Veteran’s Day
President’s Day Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day Christmas Day
Independence Day

Employees working on the above Holidays will be credited 10 hours’ “Holiday Time”.
Employees shall be credited with ten (10) hours for each floating holiday on January | of each
year, provided employees have completed six months’ service. If an employee has not
completed six months’ service on January 1, then hours shall be credited to the employee’s
holiday leave bank upon completion of six months’ service.

Shift personnel shall have the option of receiving ten (10) hours of straight time pay for holidays
or accruing ten (10) hours of time off to be used within the following fifty-two (52) weeks.
Hours accrued as time off shall be separate from accrued compensatory time off under overtime.

*Employees must be employed one year to be eligible to use vacation leave.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015
Page 6 of 26 RHL.000-~ 12681041

 
SICK LEAVE

A.

SICK LEAVE ACCUMULATION

 

Sick leave is accumulated at the biweekly rate of 4.62 hours. This is equivalent to 120
hours per year. Time is charged against the employee's sick leave account on an hour for
hour basis to the nearest quarter hour.

Employees may use accrued and available sick leave entitlement to attend to illness of
child, parent, spouse, or registered domestic partner. In one calendar year, employees
may use an amount of sick leave not less than that which normally accrues to them during
six months.

SICK LEAVE — CASH OUT

1. Sick leave cash outs shall be suspended between January 1, 2014 and December 31,
2015.

2. All employees with a minimum of three hundred and twenty (320) hours of
accumulated unused sick leave in the bank, shall be eligible to cash out up to one
hundred (100) hours’ pay. The employee may opt to take any increments of sick
leave up to one hundred (100) hours in the first pay period in November and/or the
first pay period in May of each year, as long as such cash out shall not deplete the
employee's accrued sick leave below three hundred and twenty (320) hours. No
more than one hundred (100) hours may be cashed out in each fiscal year. The cash
out of sick leave time will be at the employee’s current salary rate.

3. An employee with ten (10) or more years of service with the City and with at least
five hundred (500) or more hours of accumulated unused sick leave in the bank,
may at his/her option cash out an additional fifty (50) hours to be placed into
employee deferred compensation account. Such cash out shall be deducted from
his/her accumulated sick leave.

SICK LEAVE PAY ON TERMINATION

bE At the time of separation from service, the employee shall receive compensation
at their current hourly rate for the number of hours credited to him/her as accrued
sick leave on his/her last actual day at the following rate with completion of years
of cumulative service in the field of law enforcement:

5 years of service - 50%
10 years of service - 65%
15 years of service - 75%
20 years of service — 100%

ae In the event of a service connected death, after five years of city compensated
service, his/her estate shall be paid for one hundred percent (100%) of the accrued
days at his/her regular rate at the time of death.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 7 of 26 1RS94-000— 12681041
 

ae In the event of a non-service connected death, after five years of city compensated
service, his/her estate shall be paid based on the above years of service of the
accrued days at his/her regular rate at the time of death.

BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

Any eligible employee who is absent from work by reason of death in the immediate family may
be allowed a leave of absence with full pay. Such leave shall not exceed a total of five (5)
cumulative working days (50 hours) in any fiscal year. Such leave shall not be deducted from
the employee’s sick leave. Such leave must be approved in advance and will be granted only in
accordance with existing policies and practices. Immediate family includes spouse, registered
domestic partner (so long as required by California law), father, mother, brother, sister, children,
grandparents, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, and sister-in-law of the employee. A
maximum of three (3) cumulative days may be taken for leaves to attend funerals in the state,
while a maximum of five (5) cumulative days (to a maximum of fifty hours) may be taken for
leaves to attend out-of-state services.

ON-DUTY APPOINTMENTS

Employees who have suffered a work place injury which is covered by worker’s compensation
may attend such appointments while remaining “on-duty” so long as the appointment could not
reasonably be scheduled during a period of time when the employee is “off-duty”.

ARTICLE 8
EXPERT WITNESS FEES
Civil and Criminal Cases

The fee commonly deposited with the City is forfeited to the City. Overtime shall be paid in the
same manner as any other “Court Time”.

In all cases a properly served subpoena is required, commanding the employee’s presence at the
court hearing.

ARTICLE 9
SELF-IMPROVEMENT INCENTIVES BENEFIT ELIGIBILITY

The City and Association recognize the importance and desirability of creating self-improvement
incentives to motivate employees to upgrade their skills and develop their careers throughout the
department, resulting in mutual benefits to the employee and City. It is agreed by the parties that
these objectives can best be met through special training and continuing higher education. To
this end, Professional Certificate, Educational, and Tuition Reimbursement incentives are
established. Employees are eligible to receive Professional Certificate Incentive pay and either
Educational Incentive or Tuition Reimbursement pay. The employee shall select either
Educational Incentive or Tuition Reimbursement Incentive, but shall not be eligible to receive
both at the same time.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

January 1, 2014— December 31, 2015
Page 8 of 26 694-000 ~ 1268104.1

 

 
PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATE INCENTIVE

 

A.

2-1/2% INTERMEDIATE INCENTIVE
A swom employee who has completed the initial probationary period and has attained the
POST Intermediate Certificate is eligible for a 2-1/2% increase in base salary.

2.5% NON-SWORN INCENTIVE

A non-swom employee who has completed the initial probationary period and is in the
position of: (1) Emergency Dispatch Supervisor and has attained an intermediate post-
certificate for the position is eligible for a 2.5% increase in base salary; (2) Police
Records Supervisor and has attained a post-records supervisor certificate is eligible for a
2.5% increase in base salary.

5% ADVANCED INCENTIVE

A sworn employee who has completed the initial probationary period and has attained the
POST Advanced Certificate is eligible for a 5% increase in base salary. Effective the
payroll period increased PERS contributions become active (as stated in Article 14,
Section C), the percentage increase in base salary will be 8%.

5% NON-SWORN INCENTIVE

An Emergency Dispatch Supervisor who has completed the initial probationary period
and has attained an advanced POST Certificate for the position is eligible for a 5%
increase in base salary. A Crime Analyst who has completed the initial probationary
period, attained and successfully maintains an IACA certificate is eligible for a 5%
increase in base salary. A Records Supervisor who has completed the initial probationary
period and has attained a POST Records Supervisory Certificate for the position is
eligible for a 5% increase in base salary.

7.5% SUPERVISORY INCENTIVE

A sworn employee who has completed the probationary period and has attained the
POST Supervisory Certificate is eligible for a 7.5% increase in base salary. Effective the
payroll period increased PERS contributions become active (as stated in Article 14,
Section C), the percentage increase in base salary will be 10.5%.

10% MANAGEMENT INCENTIVE

A sworn employee who has completed the probationary period and has attained the
POST Management Certificate is eligible for a 10% increase in base salary. Effective the
payroll period increased PERS contributions become active (as stated in Article 14,
Section C), the percentage increase in base salary will be 13%.

The above increases are not cumulative.

Except as noted above, the salary increase shall become effective the first pay period
following the receipt of the POST Certificate or other recognized Certificate by the
Department.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 9 of 26 1694-000 ~ 1268104.1

 
 

TUITION REIMBURSEMENT

A.

Up to $1,600 per fiscal year of expenses for tuition by employees covered under this
MOU is available as follows:

L Tuition reimbursement for a grade “C” or better, up to a maximum of $1,600 shall
be reimbursable in any calendar year for certain college level classroom courses
taken.

2 Pass-Fail classroom courses will be treated as having received a grade of “C” if a
mark of “Pass” is achieved.

Classroom courses must be taken through an accredited college or university and must be
job or degree goal related, and must have the prior approval of department head. The
department head’s determination as to job relatedness is not subject to administrative
challenge.

Reimbursement shall be payable only after successful completion of course(s).

The purpose of this Article is to provide assistance to those seeking job related college
level education. Those classes that are specifically related to or are in preparation for
another profession are barred from consideration for reimbursement. It is the
responsibility of the employee to demonstrate the job relatedness of any class where there
is a concern as to the purpose of taking the class. No reimbursement consideration will
be given for credit given by an institution solely for life experience. Home study,
television, or mail order courses do not qualify for reimbursement under this Article.

Effective the payroll period increased PERS contributions become active (as stated in
Article 14, Section C), the maximum amount of tuition reimbursement per year shall be
increased to $2,500.

EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE

A.

ASSOCIATES OF ARTS DEGREE: An employee who has completed the probationary
period and attains an Associate of Arts or Science degree from an accredited college shall
receive an additional one and one half percent (1.5%) of his/her regular base salary.

BACHELOR OF ARTS DEGREE: An employee who has completed the probationary
period and attains a Bachelor of Arts or Science degree from an accredited college shall
receive an additional three percent (3%) of his/her regular base salary.

MASTERS OF ARTS DEGREE: An employee who has completed the probationary
period and attains a Masters of Arts or Science degree from an accredited college shall
receive an additional five percent (5%) of his/her regular base salary.

The purpose of this Article is to reward employees for their achievement of degrees in
higher education. Degrees attained strictly based on life experience, home study, or from
non-accredited institutions shall not be eligible for this incentive. Incentives are not
cumulative with other degree incentives.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 10 of 26 694-000 ~ 1268104.1

 

 
ARTICLE 10
[RESERVED]

ARTICLE 11
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

Employees in the classifications of Police Sergeants, Police Lieutenants, and Police Captains are
required to wear or maintain a department approved uniform. Upon entry into the Rialto Police
Department each sworn employee shall receive two police officer uniforms at City’s expense
consisting of:

2 (two) class “A” shirts, with the appropriate patches, and 2 (two) metal nametags;
2 (two) class “A” pants;

1 (one) uniform belt;

1 (one) uniform tie and tie bar;

1 (one) field jacket with appropriate patches and nametag.

The replacement of these items and any other uniform items not listed as, “safety equipment”
shall be at the employee’s expense.

The below listed classifications shall receive a uniform allowance as follows:

Police Sergeants $1,300 Police Lieutenants $1,300
Police Captains $1,300 Records Supervisor $ 500
Emergency Dispatch Supervisors $500

The uniform allowance is intended for use by the employee to replace worn and unserviceable
uniform items. The uniform allowance shall be paid semi-annually (50%) in arrears with no
receipts required.

Prorating of uniform allowance payments shall not occur. Affected employees in place on
December 31 shall receive 50% of their yearly uniform allowance in the first pay period after
June 30 of the following year. Employees in place on June 30 will receive 50% of the yearly
uniform allowance in the first pay period following December 31. Employees who are not in
place on the specified dates will not receive a uniform allowance payment until he or she has met
the above requirements.

ARTICLE 12
STAFF/TAKE HOME VEHICLES

Departmental Captains and Lieutenants shall be allowed to take home a Police Department
vehicle. One Detective Division sergeant, the sergeants assigned to the Scat Team (if subject to
callout, at the discretion of the Police Chief, or designee) and Narcotics (undercover car), Traffic
Division (marked patrol unit) and Professional Standards Division shall be allowed take home
Police Department vehicles.

Employees assigned to take home vehicles shall be allowed de minimis personal use of car
because of being subject to on call status.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 11 of 26 694-000 — 1268104.1

 
 

ARTICLE 13
RECALL TIME

“Recall” and “call out” time shall be recognized as overtime, with a two (2) hour minimum. The
minimum includes make ready time and travel time to and from the employee's unit of
assignment. This article is to include all members of this bargaining unit swor or civilian who
are entitled to paid overtime. Both recall and call out time are recognized when the affected
employee arrives at his or her work assignment.

ARTICLE 14
RETIREMENT PLAN

A. RETIREMENT PLAN
Employees hired after January 1, 2013, who are “new members” (as defined in
Government Code Section 7522.04(f), or its successor) shall be enrolled in the Public
Employee Retirement System: (1) 2.7 percent at 57 Plan for sworn members; and (2) 2
percent at 62 formula for non-swom members.

For other employees, the City shall continue its contract with PERS for: (1) the 3 percent
at age 50 retirement plan for sworn members; and (2) the 2.7 percent at age 55 formula
for non-sworn members.

B. MILITARY BUY-BACK
The PERS contract is amended to include a military buy-back benefit. The cost of such
buy-back is to be borne by the employee.

C, CONTRIBUTION

Pursuant to Government Code Section 20516(a), The City shall contract with PERS for
employee cost sharing as set forth below. All contributions made by bargaining unit
members described below shall be in accordance with IRS Code Section 14(h)(2) (or any
subsequent amendments to said IRS Code Section) whereby employee contributions shall
be tax deferred (not subject to taxation until time of constructive receipt). As required by
law, new members, as defined above, shall be required to pay 50% of the expected
normal cost rate for their benefits. (This amount is 13% of reportable compensation for
sworn members and 8% [6.75% employee share + 1.25% employer cost sharing] for non-
sworn members as of January 1, 2013, but may change in future years based on rates
calculated by PERS.) Sworn (Safety) members of the bargaining unit who are “classic
members” will continue to contribute 9%, and an additional 3% towards employer cost-
sharing for a total of 12% the first pay period following the necessary contract
amendments with PERS, of their salary and non-sworn (Miscellaneous) classic members
shall continue contribute 8 percent of their salary on a pre-tax basis.

D. SINGLE HIGHEST YEAR BENEFIT
The City shall maintain the PERS contract retirement benefit to be based on the single
highest year compensation for those who are not new members, as defined above.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 7522.32, new members will receive a retirement
benefit based on the highest average annual pensionable compensation earned by the
member during a period of at least 36 months.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015
Page 12 of 26 1694-000 — 12681041

 
 

E. PERS COLA
The City shall contract with the PERS contract to provide a 4% COLA for retirees. This
benefit is only applicable to safety employees, and does not apply to miscellaneous
employees.

F. Employer Paid Member Contributions (EPMC) - The City will add the EPMC benefit
effective January 1, 2010. For any employee retiring after January 1, 2010, the City will
report as “compensation” for retirement purposes the Employer Paid Member
Contribution of 9%.

ARTICLE 15
SAFETY EQUIPMENT

The City shall issue the appropriate safety equipment to all new employees depending on their
classification with the department as follows:

Police Sergeant/Police Lieutenant/Police Captain

The following safety items shall remain the property of the Rialto Police Department at all times.

Safety Vest, type III

Ballistic Helmet w/face shield

Sam Browne Gun Belt w/belt keepers

Holster and Service Weapon (weapon as determined by Department)
Appropriate Speed loaders w/leather case (for issued weapon)
Handcuff s w/leather case

ASP Baton w/leather case

Pepper Spray w/leather case

The above listed Safety Equipment issued to the employee will be replaced as necessary when
the equipment is worn, non-repairable or expired (as to useful shelf life) as determined by the
appropriate Supervisor.

The following equipment shall become the property of the employee after one year of service.
The responsibility for replacing these items resides with the employee.

° Rain Jacket or Rain Suit
. Metal Whistle

The following safety items shall remain the property of the Rialto Police Department at all times.

. Safety Vest, type III
. Sam Browne Gun Belt w/belt keepers
. Pepper Spray w/leather case

——— ee
RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 13 of 26 Re94-000 — 12681041

 
 

 

ARTICLE 16
SPORTS CENTER FACILITY

Employees, retirees and spouses shall be entitled to free membership in the City Sports Center
Facility, entitling employees to use the facilities during normal operating hours as long as the
City has Managerial control of the Sports Center Facility. Employees, retirees and spouses shall
adhere to the same regulations regarding reservations and the use and care of the facilities as the
general public.

ARTICLE 17
EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS ORDINANCE

The parties have agreed to a new Employer-Employee Relations Ordinance. It is the intent of
the parties that RPBA continue to be able to represent both the Police Management Bargaining
Unit and the Police General Unit.

ARTICLE 18
REOPENERS

A. Salary: Either party may reopen regarding increases to salary.

B. “Me Too” should any other management unit receive any increase in compensation in
any form of remuneration to the extent such an increase is not offset by concessions by
such other management unit then benefit amounts shall be matched for this unit.

Cc; Reopener Requests. Request for reopeners must be in writing.

ARTICLE 19
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Section 1. Definitions

1.1. A “grievance” is a written allegation by an employee within the bargaining unit alleging
that the employee has been adversely affected by a violation of specific written
provisions of this MOU or of written rules, regulations or procedures affecting terms and
conditions of employment. Grievances shall not be utilized to challenge the agency’s
exercise of its authorities set forth in Article 20 Management Rights and Responsibilities
of this MOU. Additionally, by virtue of entering into this MOU, the parties agree that no
matters, whether labeled as grievances, “complaints,” or otherwise, may be appealed to
the Personnel Advisory board or to any other administrative entity or body except as
described herein. Further, the grievance procedure shall not be utilized to challenge or
change the policies of the City, whether they be written or otherwise. Additionally,
performance evaluation reports and reprimands, whether written or verbal, are not subject
to the grievance procedure. Challenges to written reprimands pursuant to Government
Code Section 3304(b) shall be confined to an administrative appeal consisting of a
meeting with the Chief of Police in accord with the substantive and procedural

requirements of Skelly v. State Personnel Board.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015
Page 14 of 26 694-000 ~ 1268104.1

 

 
 

1.2 Unless otherwise stated, a “day” is a day in which the City Hall is open for business.

1.3. “Representative(s)” — A representative is a member of the unit, union representative(s), or
legal counsel who shall represent any party in interest at his/her election.

1.4 “Union” — Union means the union elected as the exclusive representative or designee
thereof.

1.5 “Grievant” — Any unit member.
Section 2. Informal Meeting

Any unit member(s) alleging a grievance shall meet with his/her immediate supervisor with the
objective of resolving the matter informally. The unit member(s) may have a representative
present with him/her at this informal meeting. Request for such meeting shall occur within ten
(10) days after the occurrence of the act or omission giving rise to the grievance or ten (10) days
after the grievant knew or reasonably should have known about the act or omission, whichever is
later.

Section 3. Formal Level I: Immediate Supervisor

3.1 In the event the grievance is not resolved at the informal meeting, within ten (10) days of
the meeting, the grievant may submit the grievance as a formal written grievance to the
immediate supervisor. If the grievant has not submitted a written grievance with this
time period, the grievance will be deemed to have been resolved.

3.2 Within ten (10) days after receipt of a written grievance by the immediate supervisor, a
personal conference with the other party shall take place at the request of either the
grievant or the supervisor. Within fifteen (15) days after the receipt of the grievance, or
ten (10) days after the date of the Level I meeting, whichever is later, the supervisor shall
render a written decision to the grievant and shall transmit a copy to the Union.

Section 4, Formal Level II: Police Captain

4.1 If the grievant is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at Level 1, or if no
decision is rendered within the designated time period, the grievant may forward the
written grievance to the Police Captain within ten (10) days after the decision at Level I
or twenty (20) days after the grievance was presented to the immediate supervisor,
whichever is later.

4.2 Within ten (10) days after receipt of the written grievance by the Police Captain, a
personal conference with the other party shall take place upon the request of either the
grievant or the Police Captain. Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the grievance or
ten (10) days after the date of the Level II meeting, whichever is later, the Police Captain
shall render a written decision to the grievant and shall transmit a copy to the

Association.
RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015
Page 15 of 26 ROS4-000 — 1268108.1

 

 
 

Section 5. Formal Level III: Department Head or Designee

5.1

52

5.3

If the grievant is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at Level II, or if no
decision is rendered within the designated time period, the grievant may forward the
written grievance to the Department Head or his/her designee within ten (10) days after
the decision at Level II or twenty (20) days after the grievance was presented to the
Police Captain, whichever is later.

Within ten (10) days after receipt of the written grievance by the Department Head, a
personal conference with the other party shall take place upon the request of either the
grievant or the department head. Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the grievance or
ten (10) days after the date of the Level III meeting, whichever is later, the department
head or his/her designee shall render a written decision to the grievant and shall transmit
a copy to the Association.

In those cases where a “grievance” regards a disciplinary proceeding which is both
subject to the grievance procedure and which constitutes a proposed deprivation of
property giving rise to a pre-disciplinary proceeding in accord with Skelly v. State
Personnel Board, the subject employee shall commence his/her grievance at this Level
Ill. The proceeding before the department head or designee shall constitute both an
exhaustion of the Level III grievance, and provision of any due process-mandated pre-
deprivation proceeding.

 

Section 6 Formal Level IV: Arbitration

6.1

6.2

6.3

If the grievant is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at Level III, or if no
decision is rendered within the designated time period, a grievant may forward a written
grievance to the Director of Human Resources, proposing that arbitration be undertaken.

Said written grievance request for convening of arbitration shall be considered timely
only if received by the Director of Human Resources no later than ten (10) days after
service by the department head/designee of the Level III decision or twenty (20) days
after the grievance was presented to the Department Head or designee, whichever is later.
Said request for arbitration shall clearly state the provisions of the MOU and/or written
rules, regulations or procedures affecting terms and conditions of employment, which
have been allegedly violated. The arbitration proposal shall also set forth a detailed
statement by the grievant containing all facts then known to the grievant which support
his/her claim of an MOU/rule or regulation violation. A general or specific denial of
wrongdoing or claim of misconduct shall not be sufficient. The arbitration proposal shall
be signed by the grievant. Signature by a representative shall be insufficient.

Within ten (10) calendar days of receipt by the Director of Human Resources of a timely
grievance, the parties shall confer by writing, telephone or in person, as regards selection
of a mutually agreeable arbitrator. If said meeting either does not occur or if said
meeting does not result in the selection of an advisory arbitrator, then within fifteen (15)
calendar days of receipt by the Director of Human Resources of the timely grievance, the
Director shall mail to the State Mediation and Conciliation Service, a request that a list of
seven (7) qualified potential arbitrators be sent jointly to the grievant and to the City.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 16 of 26 |R694-000 ~ 1268104.

 

 
 

6.4

65

6.6

6.7

6.8

6.9

 

Within ten (10) calendar days of mailing by the State Mediation and Conciliation Service
of such list, the parties shall by telephone or other mutually acceptable means, select an
arbitrator by means of alternate striking of names until one name remains. Said
individual shall be the arbitrator. Determination of which party shall make the initial
strike shall be by lot.

Within five (5) calendar days of said selection process being completed, the Director
shall mail written notice to the State Mediation and Conciliation Service of the identity of
the individual mutually selected to hear the grievance matter.

The hearing shall commence on a date mutually agreeable to the parties and to the
arbitrator, but in no case greater than 120 calendar days after selection of the arbitrator,
unless otherwise mutually agreed to by the parties.

In those arbitration proceedings, which are non-disciplinary, the burdens of proof and
production of evidence shall be upon the grievant. The ultimate issues in such cases shall
be whether or not proof by a preponderance of the evidence supports a finding that a
specific written section of the MOU and/or rules and regulations affecting terms and
conditions of employment, has been violated, and if so, the nature of the appropriate
remedy.

In those cases regarding disciplinary matters involving the deprivation of property, the
burdens of proof and production of evidence shall be upon the department and shall be by
a preponderance of the evidence. In such cases, the ultimate issues shall be as follows:

1, Does a preponderance of the evidence support a finding that misconduct did
occur?

2 If so, was the disciplinary decision a reasonable exercise of the discretion vested
in the appointing authority?

3. If yes, the discipline shall be sustained.

4. If no, the discipline shall be subject to modification.

Es All arbitration hearings shall be closed to the public unless the employee
requests, in writing, no later than five (5) calendar days before the hearing, that the
hearing be open.

2) Subpoenas (no subpoenas duces tecum) shall be issued by the arbitrator at the
request of either party. State civil rules governing the issuance and validity of
subpoenas shall also govern the issuance and validity of subpoenas issued herein.

3. The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with technical rules relating to
evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort
of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct
of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory
rules which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 17 of 26 1694-000 ~ 1268104,1

 
in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing

or explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a
finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of
privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now or hereafter may
be recognized in civil and criminal actions. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious
evidence shall be excluded.

The hearing shall proceed in the following order:

a) The department imposing discipline shall be permitted to make an opening
statement.

b) The appealing party shall then be permitted to make an opening statement.

c) The department imposing disciplinary action shall produce the evidence
on its behalf.

d) The party appealing from such disciplinary action may then offer his/her
defense and offer his/her evidence in support thereof; the employee bears
the burden of proof and the burden of producing evidence for any
affirmative defenses asserted.

The parties may then, in the above order, respectively offer rebutting
evidence, unless the arbitrator for good cause, permits them to reopen and
offer evidence in their case in chief.

Oral closing arguments shall be permitted. Written briefs may be
permitted at the discretion of the arbitrator. The department shall have the
right to open the oral closing arguments followed by the employee. The
department shall then have the right to reply.

g) The orders of presentation and burdens of proof shall be reversed in those
cases where non-disciplinary grievances are heard.

6.10 The arbitrator shall determine relevancy, weight, and credibility of testimony and

6.11

evidence. During the examination of a witness, all other witnesses, except the parties,
shall be excluded from the hearing unless the arbitrator, for good cause, otherwise directs.
However, both parties shall be permitted to designate an investigator or assistant to be
present at the hearing, even if such person is or may be a witness. The arbitrator shall
render judgment as soon after the conclusion of the hearing as possible but in no event
later than thirty (30) calendar days after submission of closing arguments. The decision
shall set forth which charges, if any, are sustained and the reasons therefore. The
decision shall set forth findings of fact and conclusions of law. The arbitrator’s decision
shall be binding in disciplinary cases regarding termination, reduction in rank and
suspension without pay, with the City Administrator retaining jurisdiction to make a final
determination in non-disciplinary grievances as set forth below.

With respect to non-disciplinary grievances only, within thirty (30) calendar days of the
receipt of arbitrator’s findings and recommendations, the City Administrator shall adopt,

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 18 of 26 694-000 ~ 1268104.1

 
amend, modify or reject, in whole or part, the arbitrator’s findings and/or conclusions.
Prior to making a decision which rejects or modifies in whole or in part, the findings
and/or recommendations of the arbitrator, the City Administrator shall review the
transcripts of the arbitration hearing. The City Administrator shall not conduct a de novo
hearing. The decision of the City Administrator shall be administratively final and
conclusive and is subject to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1085.
Copies of the City Administrator's decision shall be served on the grievant and the
department and shall be filed, along with the arbitrator’s recommendations and finding.

The City shall bear the cost of a mandatory court reporter. The City shall bear the cost of
transcripts that are required by the City Administrator or the arbitrator. Each party shall
bear its own costs where the ordering of transcripts is a voluntary act. Each party shall
bear its own witness and attorney fees. Additionally, each party shall equally share all
fees and costs billed by the arbitrator, unless the arbitration arises in the context of the
grievant's right to procedural due process. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to
require the grievant to individually pay for the administration of a Skelly hearing, or
arbitration arising therefrom, where the grievant maintains such due process rights.

It is specifically agreed and acknowledged by the parties that failure by the grievant to
strictly comply with the time limitations for taking action in connection with review of a
grievance, shall be considered a jurisdictional defect and shall result in a waiver by the
grievant of any and all appeal rights, regardless of how brief or minimal is the failure to
comply with the time limitations. The department shall not be required to show or prove
the suffering of any prejudice as a condition precedent to strictly enforcing the time
limitations described herein. In any case where the department or City does not strictly
comply with the time limitations described herein, then the grievant’s remedy shall be
movement of the grievance process to the next higher level. In no case shall failure by
the department/City to comply with the time limitations described herein, result, in and of
itself, in a finding adverse to the department/City.

In any case where a party or potential party disputes the arbitrability/jurisdiction of a
grievance, said dispute shall not be resolved by the arbitrator, but shall be first resolved
through civil proceedings.

Section 7. Formal Level V: City Administrator or Designee
71 Subsequent to Level III (Where Advisory Arbitration is not Elected)

a. If the grievant is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at Level III, or
if no decision is rendered within the designated time period of Level III, the
grievant may forward the written grievance to the City Administrator or his/her
designee within ten (10) days after the decision at Level III or twenty (20) days
after the grievance was presented to the Department Head or designee, whichever
is later.

Within ten (10) days after receipt of the written grievance by the City
Administrator, a personal conference with the grievant shall take place upon the
request of the grievant or the City Administrator. Within fifteen (15) days after
receipt of the grievance or ten (10) days after the date of the Level III meeting,

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 19 of 26 634-000 — 1268104.

 
 

whichever is later, the City Administrator or his/her designee shall render a
written decision to the grievant and shall transmit a copy to the Association.

c The decision of the City Administrator shall be final and binding, and is subject to
the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6.

d. Copies of the City Administrator's decision shall be filed in the employee's
personnel file, unless the matter involved discipline and the discipline was not
upheld by the City Administrator.

Section 8. General Provisions.

8.1 Since it is important that grievances be processed as rapidly as possible, the number of
days indicated at each level shall be considered as a maximum, and every effort should be
made to expedite the process.

8.2 Failure by the grievant to meet any of the specified time lines shall constitute a
withdrawal of the grievance. Failure by the City to meet any of the specified time lines
shall entitle the grievant to appeal the next level of review.

8.3. The time specified, however, may be extended by mutual consent.

8.3.1 The grievant is entitled to representation of his/her choice at any point in the grievance
procedure.

8.4 Any member of the unit may at any time present grievances to the employer and have
such grievances adjusted without the intervention of the exclusive representative as long
as the adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of this contract; provided that the City
shall not agree to a final resolution of the grievance until the exclusive representative has
received a copy of the grievance and the proposed resolution and has been given the
opportunity to file a response.

8.5 Neither party shall take reprisals against any member of the Association, Association
representative, management person, or any other participant in the grievance procedure
by reason of such participation.

ARTICLE 20
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Rialto Police Management Group recognizes the prerogative of the Rialto Police Department
(employer) to operate and manage its affairs in all respects and in accordance with its
responsibilities, and the powers of authority which the employer has not officially abridged,
delegated, granted, or modified by this Agreement are retained by employer, and all rights,
powers, and authority employer had prior to the signing of this Agreement are retained by
employer and remain exclusively without limitation within the rights of employer. It further
agreed that the association and the City will follow the tenets contained in the Rialto Municipal
Code 2.51.050.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015
Page 20 of 26 694-000 — 1268104.1
 

Except as may be limited herein, the City of Rialto Police Department retains the rights in
accordance with the constitution and laws of the State of California and the responsibilities and
duties contained in the ordinances and regulations of the City of Rialto as follows:

(a)

(b)
(c)

(d)

(e)

cc)

(g)

(h)

(i)

@)
(k)

a
(m)

To determine Rialto Police Department policies including the rights to manage
the affairs of the Rialto Police Department in all respects;

To assign working hours, including overtime;

To direct the members of the Rialto Police Department, including the right to hire,
promote, or transfer any employee;

To discipline, suspend or terminate any employee for good and sufficient cause;
To determine the organizational chart of the Rialto Police Department including
the right to organize and reorganize the Rialto Police Department and the
determination of job classifications and ranks based upon duties assigned;

To determine the safety, health, and property protection measures for the Rialto
Police Department;

To allocate and assign work to all Employees within the Rialto Police
Department;

To be the sole judge of the qualifications of applicants and training of new
employees;

To schedule the operations and to determine the number and duration of hours of
assigned duty per workweek;

To establish and enforce Rialto Police Department rules, regulations, and orders;

To introduce new, improved, or different methods and techniques of Rialto Police
Department operations or change existing methods and techniques;

To determine the amount of supervision necessary;

To control the departmental budget;

It shall remain the responsibility and authority of the Rialto Police Department to take whatever
actions may be necessary to carry out the mission of the City of Rialto in situations of

emergency.
SS Ee
RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 21 of 26 [RSS4-000~ 12581041

 

 
 

ARTICLE 21
NO STRIKE — NO LOCKOUT

A. PROHIBITED CONDUCT

I The Association, its officers, agents, representatives, and/or members agree that
during the term of this Agreement, they will not cause or condone any strike,
walkout, slow down, sick out, or any other job action by withholding or refusing
to perform services.

2. The City agrees that it shall not lockout its employees during the term of this
Agreement. The term “lockout” is hereby defined so as not to include the
discharge, suspension, termination, layoff, failure to recall, or return to work of
employees of the City in the exercise of its rights as set forth in any of the
provisions of this Agreement or applicable ordinance or law.

3. Any employee who participates in any conduct prohibited in Section 1 above may
be subject to termination by the City.

B. ASSOCIATION RESPONSIBILITY

In the event that the Association, its officers, agents, representatives, or members engage
in any of the conduct prohibited in Section A above, “Prohibited Conduct,” the
Association or its duly authorized representatives shall immediately instruct any persons
engaging in such conduct that their conduct is in violation of the Memorandum of
Understanding and unlawful, and they should immediately cease engaging in conduct
prohibited in Section A above, “Prohibited Conduct,” and return to work.

ARTICLE 22
NON-DISCRIMINATION

The parties agree that there shall be no discrimination in employment as follows:

No person in the competitive service, or seeking admission thereto shall be employed, promoted,
demoted or discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of race, sexual
orientation, national origin, color, sex, physical handicap, religious belief, political opinions or
affiliations.

An Affirmative Action Program is in effect in the City of Rialto, and it is the policy of the City
of Rialto that only qualified persons available are selected for position assignments without
prejudice or discrimination by reason of race, sexual orientation, color, sex, age, religious belief,
political affiliation, or national origin.

It is agreed that the above language also protects members involved in Association activities.

ARTICLE 23
SOLE AND ENTIRE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

A. It is the intent of the parties hereto that the provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding shall, except as herein provided, supersede all prior agreements and

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015
Page 22 of 26 ‘R6S4-000 — 1268104.1

 

 
 

memorandums of agreement, or memorandums of understanding, or contrary salary
and/or personnel resolutions, oral or written, express or implied, between the parties, and
shall govern the entire relationship and shall be the sole source of any and all rights
which may be asserted hereunder except as provided otherwise herein. This
Memorandum of Understanding is not intended to conflict with Federal or State law.

B. The parties acknowledge that the City Council will adopt this Agreement by resolution
which will be known as the Personnel Resolution and to the extent that the Personnel
Resolution is not specifically inconsistent with this Agreement, said Resolution shall
remain in full force and effect during the life of this Memorandum of Understanding.

ARTICLE 24
WAIVER OF BARGAINING DURING TERM OF THIS AGREEMENT

Except as provided herein, during the term of this Memorandum of Understanding, the parties
mutually agree that they will not seek to negotiate or bargain with regard to wages, hours, and
terms and conditions of employment. The parties may by mutual agreement in writing agree to
meet and confer about any matter during the term of this Memorandum.

ARTICLE 25
SAVINGS CLAUSE

If any of the provisions contained in this Memorandum of Understanding are determined to be
unlawful, then only such provision(s) shall be deleted from this Memorandum of Understanding,
full force and effect. Upon the issuance of a decision declaring any section of this Memorandum
to be unlawful, unenforceable, unconstitutional, or not applicable, the parties agree to meet and
confer immediately concerning only those sections.

ARTICLE 26
CONTRACTING OUT

During the term of the MOU, the City will not contract out any basic police services (such as
patrol, detective, and dispatch services), not otherwise contracted out at the current time, without
either RPBA approval or voter approval.

ARTICLE 27
[RESERVED]

ARTICLE 28
LAYOFF PROCEDURES

When the City anticipates employee layoffs due to financial needs, work force reduction or job
classification elimination the City will make every effort to work with the Association and the
affected unit members to retain said employee(s).

Retention shall be via a voluntary demotion or transfer to another classification for which the
affected employee meets the minimum qualifications. The employee’s association shall be given
a minimum of two (2) weeks’ notice before such lay off is to take place to discuss such matters
as to the timing of lay off and the identity of the affected employee(s). Voluntary demotion or

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015
Page 23 of 26 RES4-000 ~ 1268105.1

 
 

transfer may be made from the Management unit to areas within the General unit.

Management shall determine the classification of the employee(s) and numbers of employees to
be laid off. The order of layoff within the affected classification(s) shall be as follows:

1) Contract Employees
2) Probationary Employees

3) Permanent Employees

Employees to be laid off first shall be those employees considered as “contract employees”. The
term “Contract Employee” as used within this Agreement shall be construed to mean those
employees that are not considered probationary or permanent city employees.

If further layoffs beyond those employees identified as contract employees should be needed,
then those employees considered as “probationary employees” shall be laid off next. The term
“Probationary Employees” as used within this Agreement shall be construed to mean those
employees that have not yet attained permanent employment status with the City.

If further layoffs beyond those employees identified as contract or probationary employees
should be needed those employees to be laid off shall be based on seniority within the
classification or rank. The term “Seniority” as used within this contract shall be defined as total
time the employee has served in the position. A bumped down employee becomes the most
senior person in the new classification.

Affected unit members shall be offered: (1) transfer in lieu of layoff; or (2) voluntary demotion
in lieu of layoff (example: clerical to dispatch, community service officer to clerical, etc.) for
which he/she meets the minimum requirements for that position within the Police Department for
which a vacancy exists.

Should vacant positions not exist within the Rialto Police Department, the City and Association,
working together with other employee bargaining units within the City, shall attempt to identify
those vacant positions that the affected employee would qualify for if he/she meets the minimum
requirements for that position.

If the affected employee chooses not to accept a transfer or demotion in lieu of layoff then
employee will be placed on a re-employment list for a minimum of one (1) year. Members on
the re-employment list shall be re-employed within their former classification and at their former
salary step when positions become vacant irrespective of whether on not a current eligibility list
has been established. Placement on the re-employment list shall be based on Department
seniority as defined within this article.

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015
Page 24 of 26 (RES4-000~ 12681081

 
ARTICLE 29
UNIT DEFINITION

The following classifications are represented by the Rialto Police Benefit Association, Police
Management Bargaining Unit*:

Police Captain Police Records Supervisor
Police Lieutenant Emergency Dispatch Supervisor
Police Sergeant Crime Analyst

The City Agrees to add “Executive Assistant” (assigned to the police department) to the
classifications represented by the Rialto Police Benefit Association, Police Management
Bargaining Unit upon approval of SBPEA Mid Managers Association’s release of said position.

Classifications within the bargaining unit may be changed, added or deleted based upon mutual
agreement by the parties or upon action by the City Council.

ARTICLE 30
MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BENEFITS

All wages and benefits as provided in this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect during
the entire term of this MOU and until a subsequent MOU is in effect.

ARTICLE 31
ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION FOR WORKER’S COMPENSATION

The City agrees to work with the Rialto Police Benefit Association, Police Management
Bargaining Unit to implement a new alternative dispute resolution plan for worker's
compensation issues. The parties’ goal is to have the plan implemented no later than July 1,
2014.

This Agreement shall become effective upon ratification by the City Council and the
Association.

FOR THE CITY: FOR THE ASSOCIATION:

[pt (pec feeraner 7
Deborah Robertson/Mayor Richard Royce, RPBA President

ft Smith, Sergeant

Date: A W/ / 4 Date: 3-4-4

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 25 of 26 694-000 — 1268104,1

 
Animal Control Supervisor

| $3,547 | $3,725| $3,911 | $4106] $4312] $4527] $4,754 |
| $4,322 | $4,538] $4.765| $5,003] $5,253 $5,516| $5,792 |

| $9.757 | $10,244 | $10,757 | $11.294 | $11,859 | $12,452 |
$7,626 | $8,008] $8.408| $8,828 $9,270 $9.733 | $10,220 |
56,259 | $6,572] $6,901] $7.246| $7,608] $7,989] $8,388 |

 

RIALTO POLICE MANAGEMENT BARGAINING UNIT MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

January 1, 2014 — December 31, 2015

Page 26 of 26 694-000 ~ 1268104.1

 
