Memorandum of Understanding

between the
City of Richmond

and the

Richmond Police Officers’
Association

July 1, 2013 -June 30, 2016

 
ARTICLE

CMONAGDVARWNPE

TITLE

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

CITY OF RICHMOND AND RPOA

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Effective Dates
Continuation of Benefits ..
Sworn Officer, Definition
Recognition
Agency Shop.
Bulletin Board:
Use of City Facilitie:
Union Representation
Rest Periods...........
Hours of Work and Overtim
Miscellaneous Allowances..
Holidays..............
PERS Medical Plans.
Flexible Benefits Plan
Other Insurance...
Supplemental Pays
Call-Back Time

Leaves of Absence.
Leave of Absence With Pay.
Military Leave and Extended Active Dut
Sick Leave
Workers Compensation Leav
Vacation
Bereavement Leave..
Leave For Jury Duty.
Court Subpoenas ...
Nepotism
Observer at Promotional Examinations.
Acting Pay.......isee
Procedures For Grievances
Layoff...
Salaries
Longevity.
Retirement Plat
Non-Discrimination.
Probationary Period
Part-time Employees.
City Rights.
Savings Clause

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Signature PAGe.......c.ccccccccecccescssssesseessesssesseessasessesssesssesssesesesseessessteseesees 31
40.

Salary Schedule.

Appendix “A”

 
2013 - 2016
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

Between

CITY OF RICHMOND
And

RICHMOND POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION

THIS MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING, made and entered into this 17" day of September,
2013 by and between RICHMOND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION, referred to as “RPOA” or
"UNION," and the CITY OF RICHMOND, hereinafter referred to as "CITY," for and on behalf of its
members hereinafter identified.

1. THIS MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BECOMES EFFECTIVE July 1, 2013, and
continues through and including June 30, 2016. This Memorandum embodies all items agreed
upon by and between the City of Richmond and the Richmond Police Officers’ Association.

2. CONTINUATION OF BENEFITS: Benefits previously negotiated and ratified by the parties
hereto shall continue in effect during the term of this Memorandum except as stated in this
Agreement.

3. "SWORN OFFICER: "The term "Sworn Officer" as used herein shall mean employees in the
classifications of Police Officer and Police Sergeant.

4. RECOGNITION: The City recognizes the Union as the sole representative of the Police
Bargaining Unit consisting of the following classifications:

Police Officer
Police Sergeant

4.1. The addition or deletion of classifications from this representation unit by the City Manager will

be made in conformance with the Employer-Employee Relations Resolution.

5. AGENCY SHOP: An employee in the classes included in the Memorandum of Understanding, in
accordance with applicable state law, and thereafter during the term of this Agreement, shall within
thirty (30) calendar days of ratification of this Agreement and, in the case of a newly-hired
employee, within thirty (30) calendar days of his/her employment, shall become and remain a
member in good standing in the Richmond Police Officers’ Association; or pay to the Richmond
Police Officers’ Association an initial fee equal to the regular initiation fee; and thereafter a monthly
service fee equal to the regular monthly Richmond Police Officers’ Association dues; or, in the case
of an employee who certifies he/she is a member of a bona fide religion, body or sect which has
historically held conscientious objections to joining or financially supporting public employee
organizations, execute a payroll deduction authorization form as furnished by the Richmond Police
Officers’ Association, and thereby pay sums equal to Richmond Police Officers’ Association dues,
initiation fee or service fees to (1) the American Cancer Society; (2) the Muscular Dystrophy
Association; or (3) Sickle Cell Anemia Research and Education, Inc. (SCARE), in lieu thereof.

Page 1 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
The Richmond Police Officers’ Association shall indemnify and save harmless the City, its officers
and employees from and against any and all loss, damages, costs, expenses, claims, attorneys’
fees, demands, actions, suits and judgments and other proceedings arising out of any collection of
said fees described above.

The City shall furnish the Richmond Police Officers’ Association, on a monthly basis, the name,
date of hire, salary, classification and work location of all newly-hired employees subject to this
Agreement along with verification of any monthly transmittals to charitable organizations.

5.1, PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS: Effective upon adoption of this Memorandum of Understanding, the
City agrees to automatic dues deduction for Sworn Officers, in accordance with State Law.

5.2. The City shall deduct Union dues or service fees and premiums for approved insurance
programs from employees’ pay in conformity with State and local regulations. The City shall
promptly pay over to the designated payee all sums to be deducted.

5.3. The employees’ earnings must be regularly sufficient, after other legal and required deductions
are made, to cover the amount of the appropriate Union dues. When a member in good standing
of the Union is in a non-pay status for an entire pay period, no withholding will be made to cover
that pay period from future earnings, nor will the member deposit the amount with the City which
would have been withheld if the member had been in a pay status during that period. In the case of
an employee who is in a non-pay status during only a part of the pay period, and the salary is not
sufficient to cover the full withholding, no deduction shall be made. In this connection, all other
legal and required deductions have priority over Union dues.

6. BULLETIN BOARDS: Reasonable space shall be allowed on bulletin boards as specified by the
Police Chief for use by the Union to communicate with departmental employees. Material shall be
posted upon the bulletin board space as designated, and not upon the walls, doors, file cabinets or
any other place. Posted material shall not be obscene, defamatory, or of a partisan political nature,
nor shall it pertain to public issues which do not involve the City or its relations with City employees.
All posted material shall bear the identity of the sponsor, shall be neatly displayed, and shall be
removed when no longer timely.

7. USE OF CITY FACILITIES: City facilities may be made available upon timely request for use by
employees and the Union. The request for such use shall be made to the management person
under whose control the facility is placed.

8. UNION REPRESENTATION: Employee members of the Union's bargaining committee, not to
exceed four (4) in number, shall be allowed time to absent themselves from duties for a reasonable
period without loss of pay when meeting with City representatives in meet and confer sessions.
Employee members of the Union's bargaining committee shall be extended the same privilege to
participate in any meetings mutually called by the parties during the terms of this Agreement for
review of grievances and contract compliance questions.

8.1. UNION BUSINESS LEAVE. With seven (7) days advance notice and at the sole discretion of
the Chief of Police or his/her designee, whose decision shall be final, Association Board members
may be granted paid leave at their regular, straight-time rate of pay, to attend to Association
business when such business would conflict with the regular work schedule of the Board member.
“Association business” shall mean attendance at conventions, seminars, official Association
general membership meetings, and official Association Board meetings, all of which must be

Page 2 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
related to employer-employee relations and involving matters solely pertaining to the bargaining
unit covered by this Memorandum of Understanding. All requests for leave under this section shall
be made in writing on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police. Additional requests for union
business leave may be granted on a case-by-case basis at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police
or his/her designee.

9. REST PERIODS: Each employee shall be granted a rest period of fifteen (15) minutes during
the first (1st) half of the employee's work shift and one additional fifteen (15) minutes rest period
during the second (2nd) half of the employee's work shift; provided, however, that rest periods are
not scheduled during the first or last hour of such period of work. There is no obligation upon the
City to provide facilities for refreshments during the rest periods or for procurement thereof. A meal
period of thirty (30) minutes shall be taken by each employee during each assigned shift no sooner
than one hour after commencement of the shift and not later than one hour prior to the end of the
shift.

10. HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME: The normal work week may consist of either eight or
ten (10) hours per day, forty (40) hours per week, or a 9/80 schedule consisting of one 36 hour
week and one 44 hour week over nine working days. Other schedules may be implemented upon
mutual agreement between the Parties hereto. An employee shall be paid at time and one half (1-
1/2) his/her regular rate after working in excess of his or her normal work day, or in excess of 40
hours of time worked in a given week, except when working the regularly scheduled 44 hour week
within a 9/80 plan or any other mutually agreed upon schedule. Employees working a 9/80 plan will
receive overtime pay when working over 80 hours in their normal two week 9/80 period or in excess
of their normal work day. Overtime for any other mutually agreed upon schedule shall be
determined upon mutual agreement of that schedule. For purposes of this subsection, time worked
shall include all paid leaves, such as vacation time, holidays, comp time, jury duty, bereavement,
and sick leave. The Side-Letter concerning hours of work shall expire on January 3, 2010.
Representatives of the Police Officers’ Association will meet with the Chief of Police at reasonable
intervals to discuss the on-going implementation of that side-letter.

The calendar week shall begin at 12:01 Sunday morning, and shall end at 12:00 midnight Saturday.

10.1. Employees assigned to serve in an acting capacity shall be paid overtime based on the
following:

Employees shall receive time and a half based on the regular pay rate reflecting the duties
being performed during the specific hours involved, i.e., employees working overtime in an
acting capacity shall be paid one and one half (1-1/2) times their acting regular pay rate,
and employees working overtime in their regular classification shall be paid one and one
half (1-1/2) times the regular pay rate applicable to that classification.

10.2. Regular pay rates, premium, and overtime are based upon the rate of pay applicable to the
shift to which the employee is regularly assigned. Regular pay rates as used throughout this
Section 10, include supplemental pay for education/training, attainment of degrees and certificates,
shift differentials, and longevity pay which may apply to the specific officer.

10.3. No employee shall receive compensation for overtime unless overtime has been authorized
and approved by the Police Chief or designated representative. No overtime shall be paid for any
period of less than one-quarter (1/4) hour, and fractions of less than one-quarter (1/4) hour of
overtime worked shall not be accumulated in order to total one-quarter (1/4) hour or more.

Page 3 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
10.4. Each employee who has earned overtime compensation shall have the right to request either
cash payment or compensatory time off (CTO). Employees will be allowed to accumulate up to
one hundred twenty (120) hours of CTO. CTO accumulated in an amount in excess of one hundred
twenty (120) hours shall be paid off in cash. The City may at its option cash-out up to one-half of
each employee’s CTO accumulation (a maximum of 60 hours) by no later than November 15 of
each calendar year. CTO will be paid consistent with the FLSA.

When requesting use of CTO, employees agree to provide the following advance notice:

1. One (1) week advance notice for use of one (1) accumulated CTO day off.

2. Two (2) weeks advance notice for use of two (2) consecutive accumulated CTO
days off.

3. Three (3) weeks advance notice for use of three (3) consecutive accumulated
CTO days off.

4. Four (4) weeks advance notice for use of four (4) or more consecutive
accumulated CTO days off.

Employees adhering to the above advance notice schedule shall not be denied their requested
accumulated CTO days off unless granting such a request would result in undue disruption of the
Department's operations. For purposes of this section, “undue disruption” shall include a situation
which results in more than two (2) employees on the same team being off on vacation, holiday or
CTO leave at any one time.

10.5. EFFECT OF TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT UPON OVERTIME: Each employee who
resigns or is otherwise terminated shall be entitled to compensation for his/her accumulated
overtime of record.

10.6. ATTENDANCE: Employees shall be in attendance at their work in accordance with the rules
governing hours of work, holidays, and leaves. Absence without authorized leave may be cause
for disciplinary action.

10.7. SHIFT ASSIGNMENTS: Subsequent to the annual shift draw, an officer shall be entitled to
meet with the Chief of Police on a confidential basis to discuss an alternative shift assignment.
Upon request, the Chief shall personally meet with the officer to discuss concerns of the officer
arising out of a shift assignment to work with a supervisor who may present compatibility, personnel
or performance issues if he/she were to work with that particular sergeant. The Chief shall
consider the stated concerns of the officer and may, with the consent of the officer take the
appropriate action to accommodate the concerns of the officer. The parties acknowledge that this
provision applies only when officers draw to patrol assignments without the benefit of knowing
which sergeant has been assigned to a particular shift prior to the shift draw. The Chief will keep
all communication on this issue confidential.

11. MISCELLANEOUS ALLOWANCES: The following allowances shall apply to employees
covered by this MOU.

Page 4 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
11.1. UNIFORM REIMBURSEMENT: Sworn Officers shall receive an annual allowance of eight
hundred dollars ($800.00) for uniform purchase and maintenance and shall elect by December 1 of
each year whether to receive the reimbursement semiannually or monthly. Semiannual
reimbursement will be paid in two equal installments with the second pay check in June and the
second pay check in December; monthly reimbursement will be paid in twelve equal installments
with the second pay check in each month.

11.2. UNIFORM DAMAGE: The City agrees to maintain its procedure for reimbursement of Sworn
Police personnel for uniforms damaged in the course of their employment. Such reimbursement will
be made for repair where repair is practical and for replacement of items where damage precludes
repairing the item to department inspection standards. Reimbursement for replacement will be on a
formula ranging from a maximum of one hundred percent (100%) to a minimum of fifty percent
(50%) of cost depending on the number of months the item has been in service. (Refer to schedule
“A’).

11.3. MEAL ALLOWANCE: A $10.75 meal allowance shall be allowed each employee, who is
otherwise eligible to be compensated for overtime, for each four (4) hour period of overtime he/she
works beyond his/her normal work shift on a regularly scheduled workday. Such meal allowance
shall also be allowed for each employee who works more than four (4) hours of unscheduled
overtime on any of his/her normal days off.

For the purpose of this subsection, “overtime” is considered to be unscheduled unless the request
for such overtime is made more than eight (8) hours before the beginning of such overtime. No
receipt is required to be submitted with the claim for reimbursement. Such claims shall be paid as
soon as possible, but in no event later than sixty (60) days from the date the claim is submitted.

When appearing in court in an out of town case, employees shall be eligible for a $10.75 meal
allowance if the court recesses for lunch and reconvenes. No receipt is required to be submitted
with the claim for reimbursement. In unusual circumstances, reimbursement for a higher amount
may be requested by submitting a written justification through the chain of command. The claim for
the meal shall be approved by the affected employee’s Bureau Commander and forwarded to the
Management Section. Such claims shall be paid as soon as possible, but in no event later than
sixty (60) days from the date the claim is submitted.

11.4. WELLNESS PROGRAM: Effective July 1, 2006, all Sworn Officers covered by this
agreement are eligible for approved wellness program activities, in an amount up to $250.00 per
fiscal year for health club membership or reimbursement of personal physical fitness equipment.

12. HOLIDAYS: Sworn Officers (other than those identified in Section 12.1 below) shall be
permitted to exercise either of the following options for utilization of holiday allowances:

A. Full pay at straight time for fourteen (14) days with no holiday taken as days off.

B. Up to but not in excess of seven (7) days off and pay at straight time for seven (7) days.
Employees shall elect by December 1 of each year whether to receive holiday pay semiannually or
monthly. Semiannual reimbursement will be paid in two equal installments with the second pay

check in June and the second pay check in December; monthly reimbursement will be paid in
twelve equal installments with the second pay check in each month.

Page 5 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
12.1. Those Sworn Officers who are assigned to specific duties where the work schedules and
holiday benefits in fact are the same as or similar to those applicable to general employees’
bargaining unit shall not be entitled to these cash payments in lieu of holidays. The holidays for
such employees are as follows:

Independence Day July 4

Labor Day First Monday in September

Admission Day September 9

Columbus Day Second Monday in October

Veteran's Day November 11

Thanksgiving Holidays Fourth Thursday in November
and the Friday following

Christmas Day December 25

New Year's Day January 1

Martin Luther King Jr's Birthday Third Monday in January

Washington's Birthday Third Monday in February

Memorial Day Last Monday in May

12.2. In addition to the holidays listed in the preceding paragraph, such employees shall be granted
one paid “floating holiday” per calendar year which may be taken at any time during the calendar
year subject to the approval of the employee's department head. Said holiday must be taken
during each calendar year and may not be carried over from one calendar year to the next. To be
eligible for such holiday, an employee must have been working for the City prior to September 1 of
the calendar year.

Each of these employees shall be entitled to eight hours off without loss of pay on the last regular
workday before Christmas, New Year's Day, or before another recognized religious or cultural
holiday. This is a once a year benefit, not to be used prior to more than one holiday.

Employees covered by section 12.A. shall be entitled to pay for eight hours for the day prior to
Christmas.

When an employee covered by section 12.B. or 12.1 takes time off, the first hours he or she takes
off, will be automatically credited towards his/her holiday days, unless the officer indicates
otherwise. Once all holiday hours are exhausted for the calendar year, subsequent days will be
vacation or compensatory time off as requested.

13. PERS Medical Plans

13.A.1. CAFETERIA OPTION: Bargaining unit members who opt not to utilize the Operating
Engineers’ benefit package, and who can document to the City's satisfaction that he/she has
comparable group insurance benefits through a spouse's plan or through another source (e.g.
retired military benefits) shall receive a payment of $244 a month in lieu of the health and welfare
premium. This option is available upon initial employment and at the annual insurance benefits
“open period." Bargaining unit members receiving $244 in lieu of benefits may apply the credit
towards an IRS Section 125 Flexible Benefits Plan.

Page 6 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
As soon as possible after the ratification of this agreement, the City shall contract with the
California Public Employees Retirement System (PERS) Health Benefits Program to provide
medical insurance for all active employees, future retirees and future eligible survivors. Eligibility of
retirees and survivors of retirees to participate in this program shall be in accordance with the
regulations promulgated by PERS.

 

13.B.2. The City shall pay the minimum required amount per month to CalPERS on behalf of each
active employee, eligible retired employee or eligible survivor of a retired employee who subscribes
with CalPERS for coverage. This amount on behalf of retirees or their eligible survivors shall be
increased annually as required by CalPERS regulations.

13.B.3. Active employees benefit account: In addition to the contributions listed above, the City
shall establish a benefits account for each active employee eligible for medical coverage who has
enrolled in one of the PERS medical insurance plans offered by the City. All such employees shall
receive monthly contributions from the City into their benefits account. Payment shall be sufficient
to cover the premium of the Kaiser North medical plan less the amount the employee receives
indicated in Section 13.B.2. For employees with no dependents, the amount shall be at the single
premium rate; for employees with one dependent, the amount shall be the two-party rate; and for
employees with more than one dependent, the amount shall be the family rate. If any employee
chooses a plan more expensive than the Kaiser North medical plan, the City contribution shall be
no more than the Kaiser North premium less the amount the employee receives indicated in
Section 13.B.2, at the appropriate single, two-party or family rate, and the excess premium cost
shall be paid by the employee. For the term of this Agreement only, the City shall pay any
increased premiums in the Kaiser North medical plan or in plans that are less expensive.

 

13.B.4. The City shall not treat the City contributions of the amount the employee receives
indicated in Section 13.B.2 or the Employee Benefit Account as compensation subject to income
tax withholding unless the Internal Revenue Service or the Franchise Tax board indicates that such
contributions are taxable income subject to withholding. Each employee shall be solely and
personally responsible for any federal, state, or local tax liability or penalty that may arise out of the
implementation of this section.

13.B.5. Employees shall have the right to inform the City of an increase in their dependents at any
time and have the amount contributed be adjusted accordingly, in accordance with PERS or the
insurance carriers rules. Employees shall be required to inform the City of any reduction in
dependents and a corresponding reduction in premium amounts contributed by the City shall be
made.

 

13.B.6. The City agrees to continue payment for health benefits to PERS for the surviving spouse
of an officer killed in the line of duty until such spouse remarries, and for the surviving children of
such officer until each reaches the age of 18 or is no longer a dependent of the surviving spouse
(as determined by |.R.S.) whichever is earlier.

 

Page 7 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
13. Retired Employees:

(a) Employees retiring on or after July 1, 2004 will receive longevity retirement benefits* based on
the following chart:

Years of Service With Percent of Premium Paid Not to exceed $614 total
the City of Richmond towards health, dental, and vision nor 100% of the actual
combined premiums

25 years or more 100%
15 through 24 years 90%
10 through 14 years 50%

*benefits are based on the retiree’s status as single, one dependent, or more than one dependent.

For purposes of determining Years of Service for members of the bargaining unit, all prior service
as a sworn member of 1) the California Highway Patrol; 2) any California Sheriff's Department; 3)
any California Municipal Police Department; and/or 4) the Bay Area Rapid Transit District Police
Department shall count as Years of Service with the City of Richmond upon the member's
completion of five (5) consecutive years of service from the member's date of hire with the
Richmond Police Department.

After the first year of this agreement, and on each succeeding anniversary, the monthly payment to
the retirees in Section 13.B.7. (above) shall be reduced by $1.00 monthly.

(b) On July 1, 2008, the retiree medical reimbursement shall be increased to $714.00.
Commencing on July 1, 2009 and on July 1 of each succeeding year of this MOU, the City shall
increase the monthly amount of the retiree medical reimbursement by five percent (5%). The
retiree medical reimbursement will therefore be $750.00 effective July 1, 2009, $787.00 effective
July 1, 2010 and $827.00 effective July 1, 2011. The increases to the retiree medical
reimbursement shall be applied to all members who retire during the term of this MOU. Any
increases in the retiree medical reimbursement, and application to retirees, after the expiration of
this MOU on June 30, 2012 shall continue subject to meet and confer between the parties.

13.B.8. For those retiring as Police Officer or Police Sergeant, to be eligible for the benefit in
section 13.B.7, the retiree must: (1) retire on or after the date the PERS health plan is
implemented; (2) be enrolled in a medical plan offered through PERS at time of separation and
thereafter; and (3) be eligible for a PERS retirement.

13.B.9. The payment for retirees set forth above shall be made monthly from the date of retirement
in accordance with the PERS Medical program. If a retiree’s family status changes, and the retiree
fails to report the change in status to the City within 30 days of its occurrence, he/she shall be liable
for refunding the excess amounts received.

Page 8 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
13.B.10. If a retiree qualifying for benefits above is survived by a spouse who qualifies as an
annuitant (i.e., is continuing to receive a pension from PERS or the City) said surviving spouse
shall receive all the benefits described above and be subject to the same administrative
procedures.

14, FLEXIBLE BENEFITS PLAN

The City established a Flexible Benefits Plan under the provisions of IRS Section 125, subject to
any changes in Federal law or regulation that may occur. The Flexible Benefits Plan will be
available to all bargaining unit employees.

Employees may use their own funds on a tax free basis to participate in the Flexible Benefits Plan.
The maximum amount that can be applied by an employee during the Plan year is $5,000.

Options available through the Plan are:

1. Medical Premiums
2. Dependent Care
3. Health Care Reimbursement

15. OTHER INSURANCE

15.1, LONG TERM DISABILITY INSURANCE: Effective July 1, 1997, the City agrees to pay the
Richmond Police Officers’ Association twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month per member to cover
the cost for the Long Term Disability Trust Fund. The Association shall administer payments to the
Trust Fund, and handle all claims relative to this coverage for the life of this contract.

15.2 . GROUP LIFE INSURANCE: The City will provide $50,000 group life insurance/accidental
death and dismemberment coverage for full-time employees in this bargaining unit.

15.3. EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM: The City will contract with an Employee Assistance
Program (EAP) to provide up to twelve counseling visits without cost to the member per year.

15.4. DENTAL INSURANCE: On the same date that the PERS medical plan is implemented,
members will become covered by the City’s dental plan. The City shall contribute the full premium
toward group dental plan benefits for employees and dependents including $1,500 maximum
towards dental benefits and a $2,000 maximum for orthodontic coverage.

Part of the amount available through section 13.B.7. above may be applied towards retiree dental
insurance. Once a retiree has dropped the dental plan, he/she may not re-enroll at a later date.

15.5. VISION PLAN: On the same date that the PERS medical plan is implemented, members will
become covered by the City’s vision plan. The City shall contribute the full premium for a no
deductible group vision plan providing for eye exams and new lenses every twelve months and new
frames every twenty-four months.

Part of the amount available through section 13.B.7. above may be applied towards retiree vision
insurance. Once a retiree has dropped the vision plan, he/she may not re-enroll at a later date.

Page 9 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
16. SUPPLEMENTAL PAY FOR ATTAINMENT OF DEGREES AND CERTIFICATES: A Sworn
Officer, who has achieved college degrees, approved POST Certificates or the equivalent in
approved college units in addition to the required ongoing biannual advanced officer POST course,
shall receive the following supplemental pay above his/her regular salary:

 

AA Degree or
POST Intermediate Certificate........ 2-1/2%

BA Degree and higher or
POST Advanced Certificate ........ 5%

16.1. SUPPLEMENTAL PAY FOR EDUCATIONITRAINING: A Sworn Officer who has completed
three (3) consecutive years of satisfactory service and who completed fifty (50) hours of approved
training outside of normal working hours during a calendar year, shall, in addition to his/her regular
salary and any supplemental pay as provided for in Section 16 above, receive the following:

 

a. Sworn Officer who qualified for five percent (5%) supplemental pay in Section 16
above (has attained a BA, POST Advanced Certificate, or higher)....... 2-1/2%

b. Sworn Officer who does not qualify for five percent
(5%) supplemental pay in Section 16 above (has not achieved a BA or POST
Advanced Certificate).... 5%

NOTE: The maximum pay supplements for a Sworn Officer, who qualifies for supplemental
pay under Section 16 and 16.1, is seven and one-half percent (7-1/2%)

16.2. A Sworn Officer, hired prior to January 1, 1992, who achieves a BA Degree or the POST
Advanced Certificate and who qualifies for supplemental pay for education/training as provided for
in Section 16.1 above for three (3) consecutive years, will continue to receive the supplemental
pay.

16.3. A Sworn Officer, hired prior to January 1, 1992, who possesses a Master’s Degree shall be
entitled to supplemental pay for education/training as provided for in Section 16.1 above after three
(3) years of consecutive service without further qualification.

A Sworn Officer, hired on or after January 1, 1992, who possesses a Master’s Degree shall be
entitled to supplemental pay.

16.4. SUPPLEMENTAL PAY: Sworn Officers assigned to the Investigative Division shall receive a
five percent (5%) supplement to their base salary. Sworn Officers assigned to traffic enforcement
on motorcycles who complete advanced accident school and who are in an on-call status shall
receive a five percent (5%) supplement to their base salary.

17. CALL-BACK TIME: An employee called back to work shall be credited with a minimum
amount of three (3) hours at the overtime rate. The three (3) hours of overtime shall begin at the
time the employee reports to their work location. Call-back shall be based upon a proper request to
an employee after that employee has completed the normally assigned duty hours of that workday
and has left the City job with the anticipation of being off duty until the next scheduled day. Call-

Page 10 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
back time shall not be credited to an employee when the employee is called to work prior to the
starting time of his/her regularly scheduled shift and remains at work from the time he/she reports
until the starting time of the regular shift. Call-back time shall not be credited to an employee when
overtime is scheduled with twenty-four (24) or more hours of advance notice.

The Department may assign law enforcement duties to employees called back for an entire three
(3) hour period.

17.1. Time which is worked as overtime within the provisions of Section 10 and which exceeds the
three (3) hours stated in this section shall be compensated under the provisions of Section 10. Call-
back time shall not be credited to any employee for time worked during the normal work day for that
employee.

A bargaining unit member called back to duty and who is not re-contacted canceling the call back
within fifteen (15) minutes from initial notification shall be entitled to the receive the three (3) hours
minimum. For purposes of calculating time worked in excess of the three (3) hour minimum, the
bargaining unit member's time of arrival at either the police department or designated call back
incident, whichever occurs first, shall be used.

17.2, REQUIRED ATTENDANCE FOR MANDATORY MEETINGS OR TRAINING: An employee
required to attend a mandatory meeting or training session, not contiguous with the regular shift of
the employee, shall be credited with a minimum of three (3) hours’ pay at the overtime rate.
Meetings and training sessions that are contiguous with the shift shall be compensated on an hour
per hour basis, at the overtime rate.

18. LEAVES OF ABSENCE: The following shall be considered as normal types of leaves of
absence:

18.1, LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY: The City Manager, at his/her discretion, may grant
a leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed one (1) year.

18.2. No employee shall be granted a leave of absence without pay for a period in excess of three
(3) days unless:

(a) he/she makes written request of the department head, stating the reasons;
(b) The department head recommends it;

(c) The Director of Personnel Administration recommends favorable action to the City
Manager; and

(d) The City Manager approves it.

(e) Absence without leave, for three consecutive days shall be deemed job abandonment
and shall be an automatic resignation as of the last date on which the employee worked. The City
will make the following attempts to contact such employees: first class mail; registered mail; and
phone calls to their last known address and emergency contact person, if known. If the City
receives no response and has not been contacted by the employee, the employee will be
considered as having resigned.

Page 11 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
If the employee or an authorized representative of the employee contacts the City within 30
calendar days of the date of resignation requesting reinstatement, the City will, on a case by case
basis, review the circumstances of the employee's absence and decide whether or not to reinstate
the employee. This provision in no way limits the discretion of the City to discipline an employee
for his or her absence without leave.

18.3. A request for a leave of absence without pay for a period of three days or less may be
granted to an employee by the Police Chief.

18.4. Failure on the part of an employee to report promptly at the expiration of his leave may be
considered as cause for disciplinary action or discharge.

19. LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITH PAY: The City Manager, upon recommendation of the
department head and the Director of Human Resources Management, shall have the authority to
grant leave of absence with pay. The manner of and the condition for granting such leaves shall be
prescribed by the City Manager, except that where a leave of absence with pay is to extend for a
period of more than two (2) calendar weeks, it shall require specific Council approval.

20. MILITARY LEAVE AND EXTENDED ACTIVE DUTY: Military leave shall be granted in
accordance with the provisions of applicable law. All employees entitled to and taking military
leave shall give the department head the right, within the limits of military necessity and regulations,
to determine when such leave shall be taken.

 

20.1. No person shall be appointed permanently to a position from which another is on military
leave. However, an employee appointed to fill a position of another employee on a military leave of
absence may apply to another position in the same class if there is a vacancy.

20.2. Employees on military leave for annual military reserve training shall be entitled to receive
their full salary less any pay received from the military while on such leave. When an employee is
called for and serves extended active duty in the U.S. military, not including such activities as
military reserve training, the City will pay the difference between the employee’s extended active
duty pay and his or her regular pay for a period of up to twelve (12) months. This will only occur
when the employee’s City pay is higher than the employee's military pay. In the event of extended
active duty longer than twelve months, an employee may use accrued vacation on a pro-rated
basis to make-up the difference between military pay and the employee's base pay.

20.3. MILITARY SERVICE CREDIT: Bargaining unit members may “buy-back” time served on
active duty with the U.S. military prior to employment with the City, pursuant to Public Employees
Retirement System (PERS) rules and regulations to the extent allowed by law.

21, SICK LEAVE: Each employee shall be entitled to leave of absence from duty without loss of
salary, in each calendar year, on account of sickness, disability caused by pregnancy, or non-job
injury. Each employee shall accrue sick leave credits at the rate of one day (eight (8) hours) per
month of service beginning thirty (30) calendar days immediately following original appointment.
There shall be no limit on the number of sick leave days that an employee may accumulate. A
Sworn Officer, who laterally transfers from another Law Enforcement Agency on or after July 1,
2006, shall be able to transfer fifty percent (50%) of their accrued sick leave balance with that
agency, not to exceed eighty (80) hours.

Page 12 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
21,1. PAYMENT FOR SICK LEAVE: Each eligible employee who has used five (5) days or less
of sick leave during the preceding calendar year may elect to receive pay for twenty-five percent
(25%) of the sick leave earned during the preceding calendar year less the amount of such leave
used during the same period. At the employee's option the payment for unused sick leave may be
converted to equivalent vacation time. Employees shall express their preference no later than
January 15 each year, and payment will occur no later than February 15 each year. When an
employee elects to receive payment in cash or vacation time, his/her sick leave balance shall be
reduced by the amount paid off in cash or converted to vacation. Sick leave not converted to
vacation or cash will remain on the employee's credit. To be eligible for this provision, an employee
must have been a full-time employee for two (2) years prior to the calendar year on which the pay
for unused sick leave calculation is based.

Effective January 1, 1998, any employee who retires from City service other than for disability
reasons shall be entitled to receive pay for sixty percent (60%) of his/her accumulated sick leave at
the effective date of his/her retirement. This section shall also apply to individuals who are still
covered by the City's prior Police and Firemen's retirement fund. Effective upon ratification of this
agreement, if an employee dies while on the City's payroll, his/her estate shall receive the above
60% cash out of his/her sick leave balance. This option is in lieu of the PERS credit option
described in section 21.5 below.

Cash buyout of sick leave shall be computed at the officer's regular, straight-time, base rate of pay
including any applicable longevity and/or educational incentive premiums.

21,2. FAMILY SICK LEAVE: A bargaining unit member may use sick leave for illness or injury to
a member(s) of his/her family. For purposes of this section, family member is defined as child,
parent, spouse or domestic partner. Such usage of sick leave shall be within the amounts specified
in Section 21.

21.3. TYPES OF MEDICAL CARE QUALIFYING FOR SICK LEAVE: Sick leave properly may be
used for the following or similar purposes: illness, non-job disability, dental care, diagnosis, and
therapy when requested or ordered by competent medical-dental authority, and family illness or
injury as indicated in the preceding paragraph.

21.4.__DOCTOR'S CERTIFICATE OF ILLNESS: A doctor's certificate or verification of the
employee’s illness, date(s) the employee was incapacitated, and the employee’s ability to return to
work, must be furnished by the employee at the request of the City Manager or department head
(or his or her designee).

21,5. PERS CREDIT FOR SICK LEAVE: Pursuant to the Public Employees’ Retirement System
regulations, employees who retire from City of Richmond employment shall be entitled to convert
all unused sick leave credits to service credit for the purpose of calculating retirement benefits at
the rate of .004 years of service for each unused day of sick leave in accordance with the
provisions of Section 20862.8 of the California Government Code.

21.6. PARENTAL LEAVE:

a. All natural mothers shall be granted a leave of absence without pay for a period up to four
months. An additional two months shall be granted with appropriate medical documentation.
During this leave, the City will continue to pay the premium for her medical plan and long term
disability plan, subject to policy rules and regulations.

Page 13 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
b. All fathers or adoptive parents shall be granted thirty (30) days leave without pay commencing
one week prior to the birth or adoption of a child, during which time the City will continue to pay the
premium for the employee's medical plan.

c. All parents granted a leave of absence as described in 21.6.a. and b. above shall receive forty
(40) hours paid leave as part of their Parental Leave. Employees shall be entitled to receive the
aforementioned forty (40) hours paid leave at the beginning of their Parental Leave.

d. All leaves described in this Section 21.6 run concurrently with FMLA, CFRA and/or PDL leave
as legally appropriate.

21,7. FAMILY AND MEDICAL CARE LEAVE: Pursuant to State and Federal law, the City will
provide family and medical leave for eligible employees. The following provisions set forth unit
members’ rights and obligations with respect to such leave. Rights and obligations which are not
specifically set forth below are set forth in the Department of Labor regulations implementing the
Federal Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA) and the regulations of the California Fair
Employment and Housing Commission implementing the California Family Rights Act (CFRA).
Unless otherwise provided by this section, "leave" under this section shall mean leave pursuant to
the FMLA and the CFRA.

a. Amount of Leave: Eligible members are entitled to a total of 12 workweeks of leave during any
12 month period. A member's entitlement to leave for the birth or placement of a child for adoption
or foster care expires 12 months after the birth or placement.

The 12 month period for calculating leave entitlement will be a “rolling period" measured backward
from the date leave is taken and continues with each additional leave day taken. Thus, whenever a
member requests leave under this provision, the City will look back over the previous 12 month
period to determine how much leave has already been used under this provision and determine the
balance available.

b. Use of Other Accrued Leaves While on Leave: If a member requests leave for his/her own
serious health condition, the member must also exhaust City-paid leaves concurrently with the
leave.

c. While the City recognizes that emergencies arise which may require employees to request
immediate leave, employees are required to give as much notice as possible of their need for
leave. If leave is foreseeable, at least 30 days notice is required. In addition, if an employee
knows that he she will need leave in the future, but does not know the exact date(s) (e.g.. for the
birth of a child or to take care of a newborn), the employee shall inform his/her supervisor as soon
as possible that such leave will be needed. If the City determines that an employee's notice is
inadequate or the employee knew about the requested leave in advance of the request, the City
may delay the granting of the leave until it can, in its discretion adequately cover the position with a
substitute.

22. WORKERS COMPENSATION LEAVE: Any City employee, who is unable to work because of
bodily injury or sickness which occurs while he/she is acting within the course and scope of his/her
employment, shall be paid his/her full salary up to a maximum of fifty-two (52) weeks from the date
that he/she is unable to work in accordance with Labor Code Section 4850, subject, however, to
the following conditions.

Page 14 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
22.1. A return to duty or retirement with pension within said period of time shall automatically
terminate the City’s liability hereunder.

22.2. During the time the employee is receiving total temporary disability compensation payments,
the City shall make payment in accordance with Labor Code Section 4850 as applicable. If, after
completion of disability leave, it is determined that a permanent and stationary disability exists, it
shall be the City’s decision to retire the employee.

22.3. The termination by the City of payments under this Section 22 shall terminate the City’s
liability hereunder for the payment of full salary. If, within sixty (60) days after the termination of
said total temporary disability compensation payments, an employee applies for a hearing before
the workers’ Compensation Appeals Board (WCAB), the employee’s full salary shall be paid
forthwith pending decision by the WCAB, but not to exceed a total of fifty-two (52) weeks from the
beginning of the injury or illness.

22.4. In the event that it shall be determined from competent medical evidence that it is reasonably
probable that an employee absent on compensation leave will not be physically or mentally able to
perform the full duties of his/her position, the City shall terminate his/her right to any contribution
toward his/her salary. Said employee shall be obligated to immediately apply for a disability
pension. The employee's department head shall be responsible for the administration of the
provisions hereof, and he/she shall require the employee to submit periodic medical reports and
also, if necessary, require the employee to submit to such medical examinations as may be
necessary to provide the City with information as to the employee's physical and mental condition.
Said employee shall cooperate fully with the City.

Effective January 1, 1998, on the employee's date of disability retirement, the employee shall be
entitled to receive as final settlement, a lump sum payment of sixty percent (60%) of his/her sick
leave accumulated up to his/her retirement date.

Cash payouts of sick leave shall be computed at the officer’s regular, straight-time, base rate of pay
including any applicable longevity and/or educational incentive premiums.

22.5. During the time that an employee is disabled by reason of bodily injury or sickness resulting
from the course and scope of his/her employment, neither his/her vacation leave nor sick leave
account shall be charged for the purpose of paying compensation leave benefits during said period.

22.6. An employee absent from duty under this Section 22 shall have such absence considered as
“service” for purposes of computing rate of sick leave and vacation leave.

22.7. In the event that an employee's injury or sickness results from the carelessness or negligence
of a third party, the City of Richmond shall have the same right of subrogation for reimbursement of
salary paid as does the City's compensation carrier under the Labor Code of the State of California.

22.8. In case a dispute arises by reason of the provisions of this Section 22, the City Manager shall
have the right make such investigation as he/she deems advisable and he/she shall make a
determination in accordance with the provisions of City of Richmond Resolution No. 241-95, or as
such resolution may hereafter be amended, subject to any mandated meet-and-confer
requirements.

Page 15 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
23._ VACATION: Each employee shall be eligible for vacation leave as described in the following
sections.

23.1. The purpose of annual vacation leave is to enable each eligible employee annually to return
to his/her work mentally refreshed. As one aid in achieving this purpose, vacation generally shall
be used in units of not less than five (5) consecutive working days. However, an employee may
use vacation leave in lesser amounts when authorized to do so in writing by the department head.
23.2. The authorized annual vacation leave for employees covered by this agreement shall be:

YEARS OF SERVICE HOURS OF VACATION

1-3 80 HOURS

4-14 120 HOURS
15-25 160 HOURS
26+ 240 HOURS

Effective July 1, 2006, A Sworn Officer, who has laterally transferred from another Law
Enforcement Agency shall accrue Vacation Hours based on years of law enforcement service up to
a maximum of ten (10) years of service previous to the City of Richmond.

23.3. Compensation for vacation leave shall be the rate, including any applicable premium pay,
which the employee was regularly receiving prior to the vacation leave.

23.4. Employees may use their vacation entitlement in no less than one (1) hour increments.

23.5. Upon reinstatement or re-employment to the Classified Service, the employee's years of
service, for the purposes of computing vacation rights, shall be based upon the anniversary date
established under the provisions of section 31.9 of this agreement.

23.6. LIMITATION ON VACATION DURING THE FIRST YEAR OF SERVICE: Each employee
working in a regularly established, continuing position in the Classified Service normally must have
served one (1) year continuously in order to be eligible for vacation leave. When unusual needs
exist and after proper formal approval has been obtained, an employee, after six (6) months of
continuous service, may be permitted to take accumulated vacation.

 

23.7. LIMITATIONS ON USE OF VACATION LEAVE: No employee shall take a vacation that
lasts longer than the employee's accrual for the year unless authorized by the Department Head.
An employee may take multiple vacations if the employee has sufficient accrued vacation time.

23.8. No employee in the Classified Service shall accumulate more than the equivalent of two
annual vacation periods plus 112 hours. The Department shall schedule vacation off, on or before
an employee reaches the vacation maximum.

An employee on 4850 leave will continue earning vacation for up to one year, in excess of the
above limitation, while on 4850 leave. Upon return to work from 4850 leave, the employee may
continue to earn vacation for an amount equal to the time they were on 4850 leave, but not to
exceed a period of six months. After that six month period, the employee shall cease to earn
additional vacation if he/she is above the two annual vacation periods plus 112 hours limitation.

Page 16 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
23.9. Vacation which was deferred at the request or order of the department and approved by the
City Manager is excluded from the preceding provisions of Section 23.8.

23.10. TIMES AT WHICH VACATION LEAVE SHALL BE TAKEN: The times at which an
employee shall take his/her vacation leave during the calendar year shall be determined by the
Police Chief or his/her designee, with due regard for the wishes of the employee and particular
regard for the needs of the service. However, the Police Chief must ensure that each employee
uses his or her vacation leave within the calendar year unless that employee requests and obtains
postponement under the preceding provisions of Section 23.7.

23.11. To the extent practical and consistent with the personnel needs of the department, seniority
will govern in the selection of vacation days. Where not in conflict with the City's staffing needs,
total service with the Police Department will take precedence over sub-unit seniority for purposes of
selecting vacation days.

23.12. EFFECTS OF HOLIDAYS UPON VACATION LEAVE: For those employees whose
holidays are governed by Section 12.1 and 12.2 of this Memorandum of Understanding, in the
event one or more municipal holidays fall within a vacation leave, such holidays shall not be
charged as vacation leave, and the vacation leave shall be extended accordingly.

23.13. EFFECT OF EXTENDED MILITARY LEAVE UPON VACATION ACCRUAL RATE Time
spent on military leave from City service shall be counted as time spent in the service of the City.

23.14. VACATION AMOUNTS AT TERMINATION OF ACTIVE EMPLOYMENT: Following
termination of active employment for whatever cause, or the granting of extended military leave, the
City shall pay to the employee or to the estate such vacation as was due to the employee at
termination. The City shall obtain reimbursement from the employee or estate for used vacation
which was in excess of vacation due to the employee at termination, by deduction from severance
pay or otherwise.

23.15. REQUIRED MINIMUM ADVANCE NOTICE TO BE GIVEN: An advance written notice of
not less than thirty (30) days shall be given prior to canceling an employee's vacation as scheduled,
transfer from one bureau to another bureau, or a change in shift assignment and/or days off. When
an emergency exists affecting normal operation of the department, the provisions of this Section
may be exempted by the Chief of Police or his/her designee. An emergency is defined as a
sudden, unforeseen circumstance requiring immediate attention.

23.16. VACATION DEBIT: Following an employee's first year of employment, employees may be
permitted to schedule and use vacation leave which is anticipated to be accrued by the end of the
current calendar year. Any such leave which is used prospectively shall be deducted from the
employee's vacation leave balance at the end of the calendar year.

24. BEREAVEMENT LEAVE: Only City employees working full-time and continuously in a
regularly established City position shall be eligible for the bereavement leave provisions specified
below.

24.1. In the case of a death within the immediate family of an eligible City employee, that employee
shall have a right to leave of absence with full pay to a maximum period of four (4) consecutive
workdays for each such death. Such leave must have one or more of these purposes: making
arrangements for burial services; enabling employee and family members to recover from

Page 17 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
emotional upsets; and settling property estate and similar problems.

One (1) day of bereavement leave is available to attend services for relatives not meeting the
definition of "immediate family" as listed in section 24.4. These would include nieces, nephews,
and cousins.

24.2. Absence by eligible employees to attend burial services for persons other than those
specified in Section 24.1 or 24.4 shall be either as compensatory time off, in no-pay status, as
vacation in amounts needed, or in full pay status under extenuating circumstances as determined
and approved by the City Manager.

24.3. Usage of the foregoing provisions of this Section shall be subject to the approval of the
department head and City Manager, or their duly authorized representatives.

24.4. For purposes of this article, immediate family shall include: spouse, child, stepchild, parent,
step-parent, guardian, grandparent, grandchild, uncle, aunt, sister, brother, stepsister, stepbrother,
father-in-law, mother-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, minors living as a member of the family,
and domestic partners. In unusual cases, the City Manager may make exceptions to these
restrictions. The City Manager's decision under this article is not subject to the grievance
procedure.

25, LEAVE FOR JURY DUTY: A City employee ordered to jury duty during the employee's
regularly scheduled work hours has a right to full-pay leave during actual jury service. The
following shall apply:

25.1. All City employees generally shall willingly accept ordered jury duty as one of the obligations
upon all eligible citizens.

25.2. City employees shall properly inform the officials who control jury duty of such unusual factors
in their City jobs,

Including work load, as the jury officials might judge to be adequate grounds for deferral of or
excuse from jury duty.

25.3. Such leave may be based upon, but is not limited to: Coroner, County Superior Court, and
Federal jury duty.

25.4. Employees shall pay immediately to the City government, such amounts of money as they
receive as a per diem but shall be entitled to keep such mileage payment as is made to them.

25.5 Each employee shall expeditiously report his/her probable absence for jury duty and must
immediately report the termination of active jury service.

26. COURT SUBPOENAS: Department personnel must report as directed when summoned by
subpoena or a written notice to appear. Personnel are to be on time, have a copy of their police
report, be familiar with the facts of the case and prepared to testify, dressed in appropriate court
attire.

Personnel are to contact the Court Liaison, District Attorney's Office, or person responsible for
sending the subpoena 24 hours prior to their scheduled appearance, or the Friday before a Monday

Page 18 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
appearance. Notification procedures are subject to change, and will be detailed by written Special
Order.

If the appearance is cancelled within the 24 hour period prior to the proceeding, compensation will
be processed as a recall for off-duty employees. Otherwise the officer must appear at the District
Attorney's Office or other specified venue, must sign in on a roster (unless extraordinary events
prevent the Officer from signing the roster), and make contact with the person responsible for
handling the case.

If an Officer's subpoena is cancelled while in route to Court, compensation in these instances will
be processed as a recall for off-duty employees and not compensated at the Court overtime rate.

26.1 CERTAIN COURT APPEARANCES: Each Sworn Officer who is subpoenaed to report to a
or Superior Court on off duty time in connection with official police duties shall be compensated four
(4) hours pay at the overtime rate.

a. If a subpoena is served on a Sworn Officer requiring appearance at a time when an officer is
not on duty and is thereafter canceled less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the appearance
time, the officer will receive two (2) hours pay at straight time. If the employee receives no
notification of the cancellation, he/she shall be paid as provided above.

b. A bargaining unit employee will receive time and a half overtime pay for any hours they are
required to remain in court, on off duty time which exceed the four (4) hours reporting pay
described above.

26.2. Court overtime is not authorized when an employee is unavailable for work due to illness or
injury leave.

27. NEPOTISM: The Chief has the responsibility and discretion to address claims raised by
employees concerning the effect on safety, efficiency and/or morale of members of immediate
families (a) being in a direct or indirect supervisory relationship over each other or (b) reporting to
the same supervisor. During the term of this Agreement, the Chief will attempt to resolve any such
issues through mechanisms such as changes in shift or assignment, without financial hardship to
employees. Immediate family for purposes of this article include husband, wife, domestic partner,
parents, grandparents, brothers, sisters, grandchildren and children.

28. OBSERVER AT PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATIONS

1. Scheduling. Promotional examinations will be conducted by the City at the request of the Police
Chief within the Personnel Department's established priorities and resources. If the first phase of
an examination is to be delayed in excess of 60 days after the Department has requested a list, the
City will contact the Union to discuss the need for the delay.

2. Sign-up. An eligible employee may sign up to take the next examination, after publication of the
announcement, at any time prior to the deadline stated on the examination announcement.
Employees wishing to compete in an examination will sign up by submitting a fully completed City
of Richmond application to the City Personnel Department. Announcements will be distributed to
the Police Department and Union for posting in all appropriate locations. Announcements may be
distributed by email. The Police Department will make a good faith effort, based on the employee

Page 19 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
address in the Department's file, to send a copy of the announcement to employees who are not
reporting to work due to vacation, injury or special assignment. No employee may sign up for an
examination after the posted closing date.

3. Announcement. Each examination announcement shall specify the classification title, the nature
of the work to be performed, the pay rate or range for the classification, the basic type of
examination, the score required to qualify in the examination, the relative weight to be assigned to
each part of the examination, the probable nature of the written test, if any, the closing date for the
filing of applications and the minimum and desirable qualifications. The Personnel Director may in
addition add such other information as he/she deems advisable.

4. Employee Test Preparation. If study guides exist and are available for a particular phase of the
examination, the City shall make the guides available for employees wishing to use them, and/or
advise employees which publications will be useful in studying for the examination.

5. Examination Observer. A neutral observer(s), who is not an employee of the City of Richmond,
may be appointed by the Union to observe the process subject to the following conditions.

a. The observer must observe all candidates who participate in the specific portion
of the examination that is to be observed, e.g.. an observer sitting in on a particular
panel's interviews must sit in on the interview of every candidate the panel reviews,
not just specific candidates.

Similarly, if the observer wishes to review certain written test items, e.g.. essay or in-
basket, the observer must review all essays or in-baskets to be aware of the quality
of the full range of responses the candidates have made. Such review of written test
items must be requested before the items are removed from the City to be scored by
a consultant.

b. There shall be no more than one observer for any portion of the examination, e.g..
if simultaneous interviews are being conducted, there would be an observer with
each interview panel, but not more than one observer with each panel.

c. The observer shall report to the City and the Association those examination
process irregularities, if any, which appear to discriminate on the basis of race, sex,
national origin, religion, age, or any other area protected by State or Federal law.
The observer is not to comment on the ratings that individual raters make. E.g..
infer that the test is biased because the panel's ratings are different than the
observer's.

d. The observer will sign a City confidentiality statement promising not to disclose
the contents of the test to any party. The observer may also be required to sign a
separate confidentiality/test security agreement by a consultant conducting the test.

e. The observer shall not discuss the performance of an individual candidate, unless
that candidate files a grievance alleging discrimination. In that case, the City, the
Association, and the observer will meet to discuss the observer's observations
regarding the candidate's performance.

Page 20 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
f. The observer shall be present as the examination is conducted and during any
briefing/training of raters in their roles.

g. If on site raters are utilized, the observer may review the final ratings of the
candidates on the specific exercise they have observed. Such request to review
ratings must be made before the exam materials are removed from the City by a
consultant for grading.

h. The observer shall not talk, disrupt, provide clues to any candidates or raters
during the examination process, interrupt proceedings in progress, or otherwise
disturb the examination process. Any comments the observer wishes to make on
the process shall be made as described in c. above.

6. Examination Observer Selection. Observers for promotional examinations shall be selected on
the basis of the following criteria:

a. The observer shall be a law enforcement officer from a jurisdiction other than the
City of Richmond and shall be at least of the rank being tested for, so as not to
personally benefit from observing the examination.

29. ACTING PAY: The Department may, in its sole discretion, assign employees to perform work
in a higher classification. Such assignments shall be no longer than three (3) months unless
extended by the Chief or designee. An employee so assigned shall be compensated at the step
within the range of the higher classification that provides a minimum of five percent more than
his/her salary as currently defined on the payroll system. Acting pay shall be paid for all assigned
time worked in the higher classification. The department has the prerogative to return such
employees to their regular classification at any time. Primary consideration for an acting
assignment will be given to those Officers on an active promotional Sergeants list provided that
they are currently performing their duties in a satisfactory manner and meeting departmental
expectations.

If an Officer on the promotional Sergeants list is not selected for an acting assignment, at the
Officer's request, Management will provide feedback regarding the reason(s) they were not
selected.

The Department, at the Chief's discretion, may develop a list of desired qualifications for an acting
Sergeant, in an effort to prepare an Officer to perform in an acting assignment.

29.1 Any employee so assigned and working in a higher classification who incurs an injury or
illness which causes the employee to be absent from work, shall revert immediately to the
employees regular classification, unless otherwise required by law, and shall not receive acting pay
for any time not actually worked.

Page 21 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
30, PROCEDURES FOR GRIEVANCES: In order to establish a proper procedure to permit the
hearing and resolution of grievances and to provide means for the resolution of grievances as
rapidly as possible, the procedures set forth below shall apply:

Definition of Grievance: A grievance is a claimed violation, misapplication, or misinterpretation of a
specific provision of this Agreement which adversely affects the grievant except for the following:
rejection from probation, performance evaluations, any exercise or lack of exercise of management
rights, any complaint for which another avenue of appeal exists, and any claim of violation of law
including the requirement to meet and confer under the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act. A grievance is
also any dispute concerning a disciplinary action which results in loss of pay. A letter of reprimand
may be grieved but only to Step 4 of the grievance procedure. No other disputes may be pursued
through this grievance procedure.

30.1 TIME LIMITS: The employee and/or the Union must initiate a grievance as provided in Step
1 within fourteen (14) calendar days of the occurrence of the dispute or fourteen (14) calendar days
from such time as the employee and/or the Union could have been aware of the problem. At each
step, the City representatives shall have fourteen (14) calendar days to respond to the grievance.
The employee shall have fourteen (14) calendar days from receiving notice of a rejected grievance
to forward the grievance to the next higher step. These fourteen (14) calendar day limits may be
extended by the mutual agreement of the parties. Failure of the employee to act within the
specified time limits unless such are extended, shall dismiss and nullify the grievance. Failure of
the City to observe such time limits, unless such are extended, shall cause the grievance to be
moved to the next higher step.

Electronic mail shall be considered an appropriate method of notice and/or response by either party
in the grievance process.

STEP 1.

The employee and/or his/her representative shall present his/her grievance personally, in writing or
orally, to his/her immediate supervisor. The written grievance must set forth the specific complaint
and all pertinent facts. This step is not intended to preclude open and frank discussions between
supervisors and subordinates before a grievance is filed. However, the time limits will not be
extended during this discussion period unless both parties agree in writing. The supervisory
disposition at each stage of the grievance process should be in writing.

STEP 2.

If the problem is not settled at this level, the employee and/or his/her representative shall submit
his/her grievance in writing to his/her Captain. The Captain will allow full discussion of the
grievance. If the grievance is rejected, he/she shall give to the employee and/or his/her
representative the reason or reasons therefore.

STEP 3.

The employee and/or his/her representative may then have the grievance heard by the Deputy
Chief. The Deputy Chief shall hear the grievance in the form of an appeal of the division head's
written decision. All pertinent information shall be presented by the division head and the
employee and/or his/her designated representative. The Deputy Chief shall allow full discussion of
the grievance. If the grievance is rejected, he/she shall give in writing to the employee and/or
his/her representative the reason or reasons therefore.

Page 22 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
STEP 4.

The employee and/or his/her representative may then present the grievance to the Police Chief or
his/her designee. At this meeting, the Police Chief, the employee and/or his/her representative,
and other designated parties who have direct knowledge of circumstances related to the grievance
may be present. After full discussion, the Police Chief or his/her designee shall advise the
employee in writing of his/her decision and the reasons therefore.

STEP 5.

If the grievance remains, the employee and/or his/her designated representative may submit in
writing the grievance to the City Manager, and a meeting may be held with designated parties to air
the complaint. If the City Manager or his/her designee rejects the grievance, written notice of such
rejection and the reasons therefore shall be given the employee.

STEP 6.

If the appealing employee has not obtained the redress or corrective action which he/she seeks,
the employee may submit his/her request for a hearing before the Personnel Board in accordance
with Personnel Rule XI.

If a grievant is appealing discipline which has gone through the “Skelly meeting” process, the
grievant may take the grievance directly to Step 6 of the grievance procedure.

30.2 EXCLUSION OF NON-RECOGNIZED ORGANIZATIONS: For the purpose of this Section,
the provisions of Section 28 of this Agreement shall be construed to limit the employee's right of
selection of a representative to the extent that any agents, other than the Richmond Police Officers
Association, are specifically excluded from so acting. In those cases in which an employee elects
to represent himself or herself or arranges for other representation, Union shall have the right to
participate in the resolution procedure for the purpose of protecting the interest of its members in
negotiated conditions of employment.

30.3 _ ADVISORY ARBITRATION:

a. Definition. A grievance is defined for the purpose of advisory arbitration to be disciplinary
suspension of an employee of between forty hours and eighty hours.

b. Request procedure. If an employee is dissatisfied with the decision of the City Manager or City
Council, based on the Personnel Board's recommendation under Personnel Rule XI he/she may
submit a written request for advisory arbitration within ten (10) working days after delivery of the
City Manager's decision on the Personnel Board's findings and recommendation, or the City
Council's determination on such disciplinary action.

c. Selection procedure. An impartial arbitrator shall be selected jointly by the City and the Union
within ten (10) days of receipt of the request. By mutual agreement, the parties shall select the
arbitrator. In the event the parties are unable to agree as to who shall be the arbitrator, they shall
request the California State Conciliation Service to submit a list of five arbitrators. Each party shall
in turn cross off one name on the list; the first party to cross off a name to be determined by a flip of
acoin. The final name left on such list shall be the arbitrator. The arbitrator shall have access to
all written statements and documents relevant to the grievance. The arbitrator shall render a

Page 23 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
recommendation to the City Manager no later than thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the final
hearing. Such recommendation shall be in writing and made in accordance with, and conformance
to, the terms of this Memorandum of Understanding. The recommendation is advisory only to the
City Manager and/or City Council. Copies of the decision will be furnished to both parties.

d. Costs. The fees and expenses of the arbitrator and of a court reporter shall be shared equally
by the City and the Union. Each party, however, shall bear the cost of its own representation,
including but not limited to the preparation of hearing and post hearing briefs, if any.

30.4 BINDING ARBITRATION:

The following section entitled Binding Arbitration is agreed to by the Union and its members with full
knowledge that they are waiving their rights, in the following circumstances, to a Personnel Board
hearing as described in Personnel Rule XI, and in Article XIIl Section 7.(a). of the City Charter.
Specifically, employees utilizing binding arbitration waive the right for a Personnel Board
investigation, hearing, and recommendation to the City Manager.

a. Definition. A grievance is defined for the purpose of binding arbitration to be a disciplinary
termination of employment or a disciplinary action equivalent to suspension without pay for 80
hours or more.

b. Request procedure. If an employee is dissatisfied with the decision of the City Manager's
designee after receiving the decision from a Skelly meeting, he/she may submit a written request
for arbitration within ten (10) working days.

c. Selection procedure. An impartial arbitrator shall be selected jointly by the City and the Union
within ten (10) days of receipt of the request. By mutual agreement, the parties shall select the
arbitrator. In the event the parties are unable to agree as to who shall be the arbitrator, they shall
request the California State Conciliation Service to submit a list of five arbitrators. Each party shall
in turn cross off one name on the list; the first party to cross off a name to be determined by a flip of
acoin. The final name left on such list shall be the arbitrator. The arbitrator shall have access to
all written statements and documents relevant to the discipline. The arbitrator's decision shall be
final and binding upon the parties. The arbitrator shall render a decision no later than thirty (30)
days after the conclusion of the final hearing. Such decision shall be in writing and made in
accordance with, and conformance to, the terms of this Memorandum of Understanding. Copies of
the decision will be furnished to both parties.

d. Costs. The fees and expenses of the arbitrator and of a court reporter shall be shared equally
by the City and the Union. Each party, however, shall bear the cost of its own representation,
including but not limited to the preparation of hearing and post hearing briefs, if any.

31, LAYOFF: The City Manager may layoff an employee from the Classified Service because of
shortage of work, lack of funds, material change in duties or organization, return of an employee
from a leave of absence, or for other valid reasons. All possibilities for a transfer must be
exhausted before layoff.

31.1 At least two (2) weeks prior to the effective date of a proposed layoff, the department head
shall notify the Director of Human Resources Management of the proposed action with the reasons
therefore, and shall submit at that time, a statement certifying in each case whether or not the
services of the employee to be laid off have been satisfactory. A copy of such notice shall be given
to the employee affected.

Page 24 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
31.2 Whenever the layoff of one or more employees shall become necessary, as defined in Article
XIII of the Charter and this Section, such layoff shall be made within classification and department
when employees with permanent appointments in the class are involved.

31.3 The order of layoff of employees with permanent appointments in the class shall be in the
reverse order of total time served within that class upon the established date for the layoff to
become effective. This will permit layoff to a lower classification, provided that the amount of time
the employee has served in the higher classification, plus the amount of time the employee has
served in the lower classification(s), exceeds the amount of time served in the lower
classification(s) of at least one other employee.

31.4 No employee holding a permanent appointment in the class from which layoff is to be made
shall be laid off unless all provisional and probationary employees in that class have first been
terminated.

31.5 The names of probationary employees and employees with permanent status who are laid off
shall be placed on re-employment lists for the class from which they were laid off in the order of the
total time served in that classification. Total time in such cases shall include time served on military
leave of absence from the Classified Service.

31.6 The City will maintain its regular level of contribution towards health and life insurance
benefits for one (1) month, in addition to any employer pre-paid coverage they may be eligible for,
for any permanent employee who is laid off.

31.7_SEVERANCE PAY: A full-time permanent employee who is laid off due to reduction in force
shall be entitled to severance pay in the amount of six days of unused sick leave for each year of
continuous service up to a maximum of thirty (30) days pay. Any such employee who is laid off and
subsequently re-employed by the City shall only be entitled to receive severance pay for those
work days during which the individual was not in an employment status.

Reinstatement from lay off is contingent on the employee first repaying any severance pay he/she
is not entitled to.

31.8 SENIORITY: Employees hired on the same date, who have been employed previously as a
full-time peace officer in the Highway Patrol, any California Sheriff's Department, any California
Municipal Police Department, and the Bay Area Rapid Transit Police Department, shall have their
order of seniority determined by the length of such prior full-time peace officer status. Employees
hired on the same date who have not been previously employed as a full-time peace officer shall
have their order of seniority determined by lot on their first day of employment. In any event, total
City of Richmond service time shall date from the date of hire with the City of Richmond except as
outlined in Section 31.9.

31.9 SENIORITY AFTER RE-EMPLOYMENT: A sworn officer who returns to City employment
within two years of a prior resignation shall have credited up to two additional calendar years of
previously accrued seniority after completing one year of re-employment.

31.10 MANAGEMENT BUMPING: A former member of the bargaining unit who has been
promoted to management will have the same bumping rights as described in 30.3.

Page 25 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
32. SALARIES:

32.1 The City shall make the following base hourly pay rate increases during the term of this
Agreement:

e¢ 3% salary increase effective 7/01/13.
e 3% salary increase effective 7/01/14.
e 3% salary increase effective 7/01/15.

RETIREMENT:

The Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act (PEPRA) calls for employees to pay at least 50% of
normal pension cost (the maximum contribution that can be imposed on safety is 12%). Currently,
RPOA members pay 9% of normal pension cost. RPOA understands and agrees that 3% of the
above across the board salary increases will be an offset for a 3% future employee contribution
towards CalPERS pension cost, effective on the dates delineated below:

o Effective 7/01/13, RPOA members will pay an additional 1% toward pension
cost (a total of 10%).

o Effective 7/01/14, RPOA members will pay an additional 1% toward pension
cost (a total of 11%).

o Effective 7/01/15, RPOA members will pay an additional 1% toward pension
cost (a total of 12%).

As of 9/01/15, RPOA members will be paying the full pension cost (12%) that PEPRA currently
requires. If the law is modified, repealed, and/or amended, and the City is not legally mandated to
require safety members to pay 50% of normal pension cost, the City agrees that the additional 3%
in pension cost that RPOA members are contributing, will be reverted to salary for all members.

32.2 Police Officers and Police Sergeants shall receive five percent (5%) additional pay when
assigned to swing shift and seven and one-half percent (7.5%) when assigned to graveyard shift.
Day shift will be applied when a regular shift begins at 6:00 am or later. Swing shift starts at 2:00
pm Monday through Thursday and 1:00 pm Friday through Sunday. Graveyard shift will be applied
when a regular shift begins at 9:00 pm or later except for Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays with
twelve and one-half (12.5) hour shifts that begin at 7:00 pm shall also be paid at the graveyard shift
rate. These differentials shall also apply to all probationary Police Officers when they are working
without a Field Training Officer.

32.3 BILINGUAL PAY: Positions certified by the Personnel Department as bilingual shall receive
2% (of base pay) additional compensation. Said pay shall commence upon appointment as a
sworn officer.

32.4 SALARY DESIGNATIONS: The salaries herein established are on a monthly basis, except
as where otherwise designated.

Page 26 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
32.5 __ ADVANCEMENTS AND PROMOTIONS: Salary advancements shall be made in
conformance with the salary plan contained within this Memorandum of Understanding and in
conformance with the provisions of the City Charter and Personnel Rules as these relate to salary
advancement and employee promotion.

32.6 EFFECT OF CERTAIN PERSONNEL ACTIONS UPON SALARIES: An employee
occupying a position which is reallocated to another classification, the maximum salary for which is
less than the maximum salary for the incumbent's present classification, shall continue to receive
his/her present salary. An employee occupying a position in a classification, the maximum salary
rate for which is reduced, shall continue to receive his/her present salary. Such continuation of
present salaries shall each be designated as a "Y" rate. When an employee on a "Y" rate vacates
his/her position, subsequent appointments to that position shall be made in accord with the salary
ranges established by this Memorandum of Understanding. "Y" rating does not apply to
classification changes due to a reduction in force (layoff).

When the classification's salary range increases to the level of the employee's "Y" rated salary, the
employee will once again be eligible for salary increases through both merit and across the board
increases, not to exceed the top step of the salary range.

32.7_ ELIGIBILITY FOR SALARY ADVANCEMENT: Each year of satisfactory service normally
shall make an employee eligible for consideration for salary advancement within the salary range of
his/her classification, except where such employee is in a class for which there is a single rate of
pay. Annual advancement shall not be automatic, but shall depend upon the increased value of an
employee to the City as reflected by the recommendation of his/her supervisor and his/her
Department Head and all other pertinent evidence.

 

Exceptionally meritorious service shall be considered adequate grounds for consideration for
advancement even though such service is of less than one year's duration. Nothing in this section
shall be construed as limiting the authority of the City Manager to increase, make no change in, or
reduce the salary of any employee in the Classified Service for good and sufficient reasons.

32.8 PROMOTION - EFFECT UPON RATE OF COMPENSATION: Whenever an employee is
promoted to a higher class, she/he shall be entitled to receive in the new position the nearest
higher monthly salary in the salary range which attaches to the higher class.

32.9 DEMOTION: The rate of compensation to be paid in all cases of demotion, whether voluntary,
disciplinary, for incompetence, or in lieu of layoff, shall be determined by the City Manager, based
upon the recommendations of the Department Head and the Director of Human Resources
Management .

32.10 EFFECT OF LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY UPON SALARY ADVANCEMENT:
An employee who has taken leave of absence without pay for a total of thirty (30) days or more
within a given service year shall have his/her anniversary date set back by the time in excess of
thirty days.

 

Leave of absence for a period totaling less than thirty days in the given service year shall have no
effect upon the employee's anniversary date.

32.11 POLICE TRAINING OFFICER (“PTO”): While assigned to train recruit officers, PTO’s shall
receive four (4) hours of overtime for every forty (40) hour block of training each week. Substitute
PTO’s who are required to train recruit officers on a day-by-day basis due to the absence of the

Page 27 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
regularly assigned PTO, shall receive one (1) hour of overtime for each full day (10 hours) of
completed recruit training and the assigned PTO shall receive one (1) hour of overtime for each full
day of completed recruit training that took place during that week. Officers assigned to train
Reserve Officers shall also be compensated with four (4) hours of overtime at the completion of
each forty (40) hour block of training certified to the Reserve Coordinator. Additional overtime
compensation can be granted by the PTO Coordinator or Watch Commander when specific training
needs have been identified. PTO’s assigned to the Orientation Program shall receive four (4)
hours of overtime for every forty (40) hour block of training each week.

32.12 CANINE HANDLING DUTY: Officers assigned to the Canine Unit and who are handling and
are responsible for a police service dog will receive a $250.00 monthly stipend. This remuneration
by the City of Richmond will cover incidental expenses normally incurred by the Officer so
assigned. These expenses would include feeding, grooming, house and car cleaning, replacement
of lost or damaged equipment and/or the construction of a dog kennel or run at their private
residences. The City of Richmond will contract with a veterinary hospital to provide for medical care
and emergency care and any short or long term care or medication that may be required by the
police service dog. Authorized equipment used in the training and handling of a police service dog
will be supplied by the City of Richmond.

Canine Officers will transport their assigned police service dogs in a City of Richmond canine unit
during their work week. Canine Officers will use the vehicle normally assigned for patrol duties.

33. LONGEVITY: Effective January 1, 1998, Police Officers and Police Sergeants who have
completed their fifth year of sworn service with the Richmond Police Department shall receive 2%
additional pay. Police Officers and Police Sergeants who have completed their tenth year of sworn
service with the Richmond Police Department shall receive 2% additional pay for a total of 4%.
Police Officers and Police Sergeants who have completed their fifteenth year of sworn service with
the Richmond Police Department shall receive 3% additional pay for a total of 7%. Police Officers
and Police Sergeants who have completed their twenty-fifth year of sworn service with the
Richmond Police Department shall receive 2% additional pay for a total of 9%.

33.1 LONGEVITY - LATERAL TRANSFERS: Effective July 1, 2006, Police Officers who Laterally
transfer from another law enforcement agency shall be able to apply up to five years of previous
law enforcement experience towards years of service relative to qualifying for longevity increases
to base salary once he/she has passed probation. Existing Sworn Officers shall also receive this
benefit beginning July 1, 2006.

34, RETIREMENT PLAN

34.1 Each employee shall pay his or her own CalPERS retirement contribution which is nine
percent (9%) of pensionable compensation. The City will take appropriate steps to implement the
provisions of Internal Revenue Code Section 414 (h)(2) relative to employee-paid PERS
contributions.

34.2 Effective July 1, 2005, the City shall stop contributing any portion of the employee's share of
CalPERS retirement, and will cease reporting the value of “EPMC” as special compensation.
Employees shall thereafter be responsible for paying the full amount of their required PERS
contribution.

34.3 Members of the bargaining unit may apply for military service credit directly to PERS.

Page 28 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
34.4 Members of the bargaining unit upon retirement may have their sick leave balance credited
towards years of service, unless they choose to exercise the 60% sick leave buy-out option.

34.5 Effective July 1, 1995 the City implemented Government Code Section 20023(c)(4) pursuant
to Section 20615, entailing reporting the employer paid member contributions to PERS as special
compensation.

34.6 The Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act (PEPRA) calls for employees to pay at least 50%
of normal pension cost (the maximum contribution that can be imposed on safety is 12%).
Currently, RPOA members pay 9% of normal pension cost. RPOA understands and agrees that 3%
of the across the board salary increases, delineated in Section 32.1 of this MOU, will be an offset
for a 3% future employee contribution towards CalPERS pension cost, effective on the dates
delineated below:

o Effective 7/01/13, RPOA members will pay an additional 1% toward pension
cost (a total of 10%).

o Effective 7/01/14, RPOA members will pay an additional 1% toward pension
cost (a total of 11%).

o Effective 7/01/15, RPOA members will pay an additional 1% toward pension
cost (a total of 12%).

As of 9/01/15, RPOA members will be paying the full pension cost (12%) that PEPRA currently
requires. If the law is modified, repealed, and/or amended, and the City is not legally mandated to
require safety members to pay 50% of normal pension cost, the City agrees that the additional 3%
in pension cost that RPOA members are contributing, will be reverted to salary for all members.

35. NON-DISCRIMINATION: No employee covered by this Agreement shall be discriminated
against by the City or by the Union by reason of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, age,
national origin, physical or mental disability, or an exercise of rights under government code section
3502.

36. PROBATIONARY PERIOD

36.1 PURPOSE OF THE PROBATIONARY PERIOD: The probationary period is a basic part of
the employee selection process, and shall be used for close observation of the employee's work
and conduct, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new employee to his/her position, and
for rejecting any probationary employee whose performance clearly does not meet the minimum
standards of work production, conduct, fitness, and development which are required.

36.2 LENGTH OF PROBATIONARY PERIOD: All appointments made from eligible lists to
permanent positions shall be tentative and subject to a probationary period. With the approval of
the Director of Human Resources Management and City Manager, continuous temporary service
prior to appointment from an appropriate eligible list may be counted as part of the probationary
period provided that the temporary service was in the same class and the same position to which
the probationary appointment is made. The probationary period shall be one year from the date the
employee successfully completes the field training program. The Department Head may request
that a probationer may be granted her/his permanent status in less than 12 months or extend the
probationary period by six (6) months.

Page 29 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
36.3| REJECTION DURING PROBATIONARY PERIOD: During the probationary period, any
probationary employee may be rejected at any time by the Department Head. Notification of
rejection in writing and reasons for rejection shall be served upon the probationer, and a copy filed
with the Director of Human Resources Management. Rejection during probation is not subject to
the grievance procedure included within this Memorandum of Understanding.

 

36.4 REJECTION OF PROBATIONER FOLLOWING PROMOTION: Any employee rejected
during the probationary period following appointment to a higher classification shall be reinstated to
the position from which he/she was appointed unless charges are filed and he/she is discharged in
the manner provided in Article XIII of the City Charter and the Personnel Rules. Rejection during
probation is not subject to the grievance procedure included within this Memorandum of
Understanding.

 

36.5 PROBATIONARY PERFORMANCE REPORTS

36.5.1 It shall be the duty of each Department Head during the probationary period of each
employee in her/his organization to investigate thoroughly the probationer's adjustment,
performance and general acceptability to determine whether or not the probationer is fully qualified
for permanent appointment. He/she shall be responsible for reports on the probationer's
performance and conduct at the completion of every three (3) calendar months during the
probationary period, and within ten days of the end of the probationary period, or more frequently if
deemed desirable by the Department Head. Such reports will be reviewed with the probationary
employee by the rater. The Department Head or his/her designee shall give a copy of the report to
the probationary employee.

36.5.2 The final probationary report on each probationary employee shall include the Department
Head's recommendation to the City Manager either to retain or reject the probationer.

36.6 EFFECT ON LEAVES OF ABSENCE ON PROBATIONARY PERIOD: The probationary
period of a given employee shall be extended by the time equal to the time she/he has been on
paid administrative leave pending investigation or other leave of absence, other than sick leave,
compensation leave, vacation, or holiday leave during this probationary period.

 

37. PART-TIME EMPLOYEES: If the City determines to hire part-time officers, it will notify the
Union in advance of hiring, and meet and confer over the Union's proposal for prorated benefits for
part-time officers.

38. CITY RIGHTS: The Richmond Police Officers' Association recognizes the authority of the Chief
of Police as described in Section 206.00 of the Richmond Police Department Operations Manual.
This in no way removes or limits the rights contained in section 30 of this MOU.

39. SAVINGS CLAUSE: If any provision of this Agreement shall be held invalid by operation of law
or by any court of competent jurisdiction, or if compliance enforcement of any provision shall be
restrained by any tribunal, the remainder of this Agreement shall not be affected thereby.

Page 30 of 31
2013 — 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
Dated: 0 Aslev
FOR THE RPOA:

Hector Esparza,
Richmond POA Preside!

Eddie zed)

    

 

   

Richmond POA ; [29 /: i
67 Wetthtte.. WE

Rockne A. Lucia, Jr.
Richmond POA Chief Negotiator

2013 —2016 MOU

Page 31 of 31

FOR THE CITY:

   
 

  

Chris Magnus,
Chief of Police

  
   

uman Resources Director

Ney oWarlalc 4 ! ‘ lief
Jack Hughes \ \~
City Chief Negotiator

Richmond Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
 

 

City of Richmond
RPOA
Effective Jul 1, 2013
3% Increase

Job Class Title Range Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4
Police Officer Trainee 299 =Base 4,000

Police Officer 300 Base 7,822 8,179 8,607 9,022
5 Yrs 2% Longevity 7,978 8,343 8,779 9,203
10 Yrs 4% Longevity 8,135 8,507 8,951 9,383
15 Yrs 7% Longevity 8,369 8,752 9,209 9,654
25 Yrs 9% Longevity 8,526 8,915 9,381 9,834
Police Officer w/ 2.5% Inc Base + 2.5% 8,017 8,384 8,822 9,248
5 Yrs 2% Longevity 8,178 8,551 8,998 9,433
10 Yrs 4% Longevity 8,338 8,719 9,175 9,618
15 Yrs 7% Longevity 8,579 8,971 9,440 9,895
25 Yrs 9% Longevity 8,739 9,138 9,616 10,080
Police Officer w/ 5% Inc. Base + 5% 8,213 8,588 9,037 9,473
5 Yrs 2% Longevity 8,377 8,760 9,218 9,663
10 Yrs 4% Longevity 8,541 8,932 9,399 9,852
15 Yrs 7% Longevity 8,788 9,189 9,670 10,137
25 Yrs 9% Longevity 8,952 9,361 9,851 10,326
Police Officer w/ 7.5% Inc Base + 7.5% 8,408 8,793 9,252 9,699
5 Yrs 2% Longevity 8,577 8,969 9,437 9,893
10 Yrs 4% Longevity 8,745 9,145 9,622 10,087
15 Yrs 7% Longevity 8,997 9,408 9,900 10,378
25 Yrs 9% Longevity 9,165 9,584 10,085 10,572
Police Sergeant 304 Base 9,307 9,744 10,247 10,750
5 Yrs 2% Longevity 9,493 9,939 10,451 10,965
10 Yrs 4% Longevity 9,679 10,134 10,656 11,180
15 Yrs 7% Longevity 9,959 10,426 10,964 11,503
25 Yrs 9% Longevity 10,145 10,621 11,169 11,718
Police Sergeant w/ 2.5% Inc Base 2.5% 9,540 9,988 10,503 11,019
5 Yrs 2% Longevity 9,731 10,188 10,713 11,240
10 Yrs 4% Longevity 9,921 10,387 10,923 11,460
15 Yrs 7% Longevity 10,208 10,687 11,238 11,791
25 Yrs 9% Longevity 10,398 10,887 11,448 12,011
Police Sergeant w/ 5% Inc Base + 5% 9,773 10,231 10,759 11,288
5 Yrs 2% Longevity 9,968 10,436 10,974 11,514
10 Yrs 4% Longevity 10,163 10,641 11,189 11,739
15 Yrs 7% Longevity 10,457 10,948 11,512 12,078
25 Yrs 9% Longevity 10,652 11,152 11,727 12,304
Police Sergeant w/ 7.5% Inc Base + 7.5% 10,005 10,475 11,015 11,557
5 Yrs 2% Longevity 10,205 10,685 11,235 11,788
10 Yrs 4% Longevity 10,405 10,894 11,456 12,019
15 Yrs 7% Longevity 10,706 11,208 11,786 12,366
25 Yrs 9% Longevity 10,906 11,418 12,006 12,597

 

 

 

12/17/2013 Page 1 of 1
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY OF RICHMOND AND RPOA
INDEX

 

 

 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Acting Pay.

Active Employee Benefit Account . 7
Advisory Arbitration .23
Agency Shop . 1
Attendance.. 4
Bereavement Leave.

Binding Arbitration...

Bilingual Pay..

 

 

Bulletin Boards

 

 

Cafeteria Option
Call-Back Time..
Canine Handling Duty .
City Rights ..

    
  
 

 

 

 

 

Compensatory Time. 4
Court Appearance. .19
Court Subpoenas.. .18

 

Dental Plan
Doctors Certification of Illness

 

 

 

 

 

Effective Dates
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) .

 

 

Family and Medical Care Leave
Family Sick Leave.......
Flexible Benefits Plan .
Floating Holiday

 
 
 
 

 

 

Graveyard Shift PAY .....ccccccccccccccessscsesesessesessesesseseseesseesseeceseeseseeseseeeeeeeseeenseeeeeeess
Grievance Procedure
Grievance-Time Limits ...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HOUrS Of WOLK ooscccccssceeeesecseee esses eeeeeeceeeeseseeeeeseceeeesseseesesseseseesneseesesnesiesesnesieeeeneseees 3
Investigative DiviSiON SUPPICMENE oes ceecceccee eect eee eee eee eee eee reece sees reese eee eeee nents 10
JULY DULY LOAVE 0 eeeeeeeceeceeeeeeccceeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeueeeeeeseeneeeeseeeaeeeeseeeaeeeeseeeeeeeseeseeneeeeeteees 18

 

2013 - 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY OF RICHMOND AND RPOA
INDEX

 

 

Layoff-Management Bumping.
Layoff-Order.
Leaves of Absence
Leaves of Absence Without Pay
Leaves of Absence With Pay
Life Insurance
Long Term Disability Insurance .
Longevity
Longevity-Lateral Transfers .

  
  
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
  
 

Mandatory Meetings or Training
Medical Plans
Meal Allowance..
Military Leave
Military Service Cred i
Miscellan@OUus AHOWANCES .....cccscccecssesseeeeeeeeee secs eeeseseeeesseseeeesneseeseteeseeeseeseeeseeseees

Nepotism
Non-Discrimination

 

Observer at Promotional Examinations
Overtime

 
 

 

Parental Leave
Part-Time Employees .
Payroll Deductions
PEPRA Contribution.
PERS Credit for Sick Leave.
Police Training Officer (PTO)..
Probationary Performance Report:
Probationary Period
Probationary Period-Length....
Probationary Period-Rejection
Promotion-Effect Upon Rate of Compensation

 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

Recognition
Release Time
Rest Periods ...
Retired Employees Medical Reimbursemen :
Retirement PLAN o..ecccccscccccssee eects cee cece ee eee ceeeeeeeseeceseesseeessesesesseseseseesseseseesneseseesecets

2013 - 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY OF RICHMOND AND RPOA
INDEX

Salaries
Salary-Advancements and Promotions
Salary Designations
Salary-Eligibility for Salary Advancement .
Salary Schedule
Savings Clause
Seniority for Layoff
Severance Pay.
Shift Assignments .
Sick Leave .........
Sick Leave-Payment for Sick Leave
Signature Page...
Supplemental Pay for Degrees & Certificates. .
SWING Shift PAY... cccccecete cece eee cee cece e eee eee eee eee eee eee eee sees eee sees eee sees eee see sees eeeseeeeeeeeeeeeees

 

 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  

 

UMiFOFIM DAMA ou.sscceccccccceseccesesceseesssesessessssessssesssuesssessssesesseseeeseteeseeseeeteesetseseneeeeeee
Uniform Reimbursement
Union Business Leave
Union Representation .
Use of City Facilities ...

 
  
  
  
 
 
 

Vacation
Vacation-Advance Notice Requirements
Vacation Debit.
Vacation-Effects of Holidays...
Vacation-First Year of Service
Vacation Leave Limitations ..
Vision Plan

 

 

Wellness Program.
Workers Compensation Leave

 

2013 - 2016 MOU Richmond Police Officers’ Association
