AGREEMENT

between

THE CITY OF ROCHESTER

and

ROCHESTER POLICE LOCUST CLUB, INC.

JULY 1, 2013

TO

JUNE 30, 2016
COIDARWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 PURPOSE OF AGREEMENT

ARTICLE 2 RECOGNITION AND DUES CHECKOFF

Section 1 Bargaining Agent
Section 2 Non-Interference

Section 3 Agency Shop

Section 4 Dues Checkoff

Section 5 Police Benevolent Dues
Section 6 Rehired Members

Section 7 Remittance of Deductions

ARTICLE 3 POLICE SALARIES

Section 1 Wage Schedule
Section 2 Differential
Section 3 (A) Salary Steps-Police Officers,
Bracket 90
(B) Other Jurisdictions
(C) Salary Steps - Pay Steps -
Officer Ranks
Section 4 Longevity
Section 5 Pensions
Section 6 Shift Adjustment
Section 7 Field Training Officers &
Coordinators
Section 8 Flexible Benefit Program
Section 9 Deferred Compensation Plan
Section 10 K-9

ARTICLE 4 PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS
ARTICLE 5 (RESERVED)

ARTICLE 6 PAID HOLIDAYS
Section 1 Recognized Holidays
Section 2 Payment for Holidays

ARTICLE 7 BENEFITS FOR ON-DUTY INJURY
Section 1 Benefits
Section 2 Other Provisions

NNNN

3-5

ey yy AD

00 00 CO GO

woo
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

ARTICLE 8 SICK LEAVE

Section 1 Statement of Purpose
Section 2 Eligibility

Section 3 Bills for Service

Section 4 Discontinued Tours

Section 5 Sick Leave Allowance
Section 6 Obligation of Officer on Sick

Leave to Remain at Home or
in Place of Confinement

ARTICLE 9 PERSONAL LEAVE FOR PERFECT

ATTENDANCE
ARTICLE 10 VACATIONS
Section 1 Statement of Purpose
Section 2 Emergency Situations
Section 3 Choice and Retention of
Furlough
Section 4 Vacation Allowance

ARTICLE 11 HOSPITAL AND SURGICAL INSURANCE

AND DEATH BENEFITS
See Appendix 2 (Memorandum of Agreement)
EXCEPT FOR
Section 8 Dental Plan
ARTICLE 12 CLOTHING & MILEAGE ALLOWANCE
Section 1 Clothing Allowance & Payments
Section 2 Payment for Terminated or
Retired Members
Section 3 Safety Prescription Glasses
Section 4 Mileage Allowance
Section 5 Uniforms
Section 6 Weapons & Equipment
ARTICLE 13. CLOTHING BOARD
Section 1 Representation
Section 2 Consultation and
Recommendation
Section 3 Meetings
ARTICLE 14. EDUCATIONAL BENEFITS
Section 1 Payment for Courses
Section 2 Educational Incentives
Section 3 Federal or State Programs
Section 4 Proportional Payment
Section 5 Procedures

10
10

10
11

11

11

12
12

12
12-13

51-56

13

13

13
13-14
14
14
14-15

15
15

15
15-16
16
16
16-17
COIDNAWNH

10
11
12

14
15
16
17
18
19

21
22

24
25
26
27

29
30
31
32

34
35
36
37

39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

ARTICLE 15
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3
Section 4

Section 5
Section 6
Section 7
Section 8
Section 9

ARTICLE 16
Section |
Section 2
Section 3
Section 4

ARTICLE 17
Section 1
Section 2

ARTICLE 18
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3
Section 4
Section 5

ARTICLE 19
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3

Section 4
Section 5
Section 6

Section 7

Section 8

OVERTIME

Overtime Computation

Call Backs to Duty

Court and Training Time

Member's Option on
Compensatory Time

Payment for Compensatory Time

Special Events Overtime

Trading Time

Compensatory Time Procedures

Distribution of Overtime

LEAVE DUE TO DEATH IN FAMILY

Immediate Family
Other Relatives
Regular Days Off
Official Notice

Calculation Rate
Severance Pay

WORK SCHEDULE

Work Week
Split Shifts
Work Hours
Relief Schedule
5" Platoon

TRANSFERS

Definitions
Involuntary Transfers
Posting of New Positions
and Vacancies
Selection to New Positions or
Vacancies
Maintenance of Seniority
Voluntary Assignment Rotation
Administrative Assignment
Pending Investigation
Realignment Transfer

ARTICLE 20 DISCIPLINE

Section 1

Departmental Investigation
and Bill of Rights

Interview times

Interview location times

17
17
17-18

18
18
19
19
19
20

20
20
20
20

CALCULATION OF ECONOMIC BENEFITS

20
20-21

21
21
21-23
23
24

24-25
25
25-26
26
26
26-27

27
27-28

28
28
CONIDNAWN

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 2

ARTICLE 21
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3

ARTICLE 22
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3
Section 4

ARTICLE 23

Section 1
Section 2
Section 3

ARTICLE 24
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3
Section 4

romIvUAW

oS

Interviewer's identity

Copy of Reports

Nature of investigation

Representation

Copy of Statements

Representatives’ conversations

Electronic recordings

Threats, promises,
offensive language

Lie Detectors, polygraph

Opportunity to be Heard

Copies of memorandum

Reprisals

Selection of Hearing Board

Time limits

Disposition notification

Advance notice

List of eligibles

Statements of witnesses

Violations of procedures

3" Platoon Interviews

Privacy Between Member/Union

Command Discipline

MEMBERS' RIGHTS

Access to Personnel File
Release of Police Photographs
Release of Employment Records

SENIORITY

Police Officers & Investigators
Commanding Officers

Current List

Reinstated Employees

OUT-OF-TITLE WORK AND/OR
TEMPORARY APPOINTMENT

Compensation
Method of Payment
Selection for Out-of-Title Work

CIVIL SERVICE PROCEDURE

Duration
Scheduling of Tests
Physical Standards
Standards

32
32
32-33

34
34
34

34
34

35
WCOHIDNAWNH

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 5
Section 6

ARTICLE 25
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3

ARTICLE 26
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3

Section 4
Section 5
Section 6
Section 7

Section 8
Section 9

ARTICLE 27
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3
Section 4

ARTICLE 28

Section 1
Section 2
Section 3
Section 4

ARTICLE 29

ARTICLE 30
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3
Section 4

Section 5

Promotional Vacancies

35

Civil Service Investigator Examination 35

LEAVES OF ABSENCE

Leave of Absence Without Pay
Educational Leave
Unapproved Leave of Absence

RELEASE TIME FOR CLUB BUSINESS

Release Time for Club Business

Release Time for Club President

Release Time for State P.B.A.
Convention

Release Time for Regular and
Special Club Meetings

Release Time for Negotiation
Committee

Release Time for Election
Commissioners

Designation of Club
Representatives

Executive Board Members

Executive Officer Release Time

CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION

Definitions
Procedure
Grievance Steps
Arbitration

GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE AND
REPRESENTATION

Club Representatives
Representative Pursuance
Release from Assignment
Representative with Grievance

POLICE LABOR-MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEE

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Applicable Laws

Savings Clause

Contract Modification

Changes in Rules, Regulations
and General Orders

Printing of Contract

35
35
35

35
35-36

36

36

36

36

36
36
37

37
37-38
38
38-39

39
39-40
40
40

40

40
40
40

41
41
OOIDNBRWNH

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 6 Police Vehicles

Section 7 Lounge

Section 8 Defense and Indemnification

of Police Officers

Section 9 Chief's Award Day

ARTICLE 31 BULLETIN BOARDS AND
INFORMATION UPDATE

ARTICLE 32. TERM OF CONTRACT

Section 1 Duration

Section 2 Negotiations

ARTICLE 33. JURY DUTY
ARTICLE 34. PUBLIC SAFETY AIDES

SIGNATURE PAGE

APPENDIX 1 DISCIPLINE GUIDELINES
CLASSIFICATION OF
PENALTIES

APPENDIX 2 Hospital and Surgical Health Benefits
Memorandum of Agreement

41
41

41-42

42

42-43

43

43

43

45

46

47-50

51-56
CaOIrANWAWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

ARTICLE 1
PURPOSE OF AGREEMENT

The purpose of this Agreement is to provide orderly collective bargaining
relations between the City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.,
to secure prompt and equitable disposition of grievances, and to establish fair wages,
hours and working conditions for the employees covered by this Agreement.

All references to employees in this Agreement designate both sexes, and
wherever the male gender is used, it shall be construed to include male and female
employees.

IT IS AGREED BY AND BETWEEN THE PARTIES THAT ANY
PROVISION OF THIS AGREEMENT REQUIRING LEGISLATIVE ACTION TO
PERMIT ITS IMPLEMENTATION BY AMENDMENT OF LAW OR BY
PROVIDING THE ADDITIONAL FUNDS THEREFORE, SHALL NOT
BECOME EFFECTIVE UNTIL THE APPROPRIATE LEGISLATIVE BODY
HAS GIVEN APPROVAL.

ARTICLE 2
RECOGNITION AND DUES CHECKOFF

Section 1: Bargaining Agent

The City recognizes the Locust Club as the sole and exclusive bargaining
agent for the purpose of establishing salary, hours and other conditions of
employment for all members of the unit established as follows: all Police Officers;
all Investigators; all Sergeants; all Lieutenants; and all Captains except: a maximum
of four sworn employees assigned to and working in the office of the Chief of
Police, the Chief's Aide, the commanding officer of the Professional Standards
Section, the commanding officer of the Research and Evaluation Section and a
Captain assigned to the Administration Bureau.

Section 2: Non-Interference

The City will not interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees because of
membership in or lawful activity on behalf of the Club and will not attempt to
dominate or interfere with the Club, nor will the City discriminate in regard to hiring
or promotion or tenure of employment or encourage or discourage membership in
the Club. It is understood that membership in or lawful activity on behalf of the
Club shall not interfere with the employee's duties nor with the carrying out of the
responsibilities of the Rochester Police Department.

Section 3: Agency Shop

The parties recognize that this is an Agency Shop Agreement and each
employee who is a member of the bargaining unit herein above defined, but is not a
member of the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc., shall be liable to contribute to
said Club as representative costs an amount equivalent to Club dues as are from time
to time authorized, levied and collected from the general membership of the
Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Page 1
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 4: Dues Checkoff

The City recognizes the obligation of those employees who are or may
become members of the Club to pay their Club dues and, upon written authorization
on the part of such employees, the City agrees to deduct Club dues from the wages
of all Club members who appear on the City payroll, pursuant to 93-b of the General
Municipal Law of the State of New York, and forward such dues, together with a
list of employees for whom dues deductions are made, to the Club. Dues deductions
are to be made bi-weekly.

Section 5: Police Benevolent Dues

The City also recognizes the obligation of those employees who are or may
become members of the Rochester Police Benevolent Association to pay their
Benevolent Association dues and, upon written authorization on the part of such
employees, the City agrees to deduct from the wages of all Benevolent Association
members who appear on the City payroll, pursuant to 93-b of the General Municipal
Law of the State of New York, and to forward such dues, together with a list of
employees for whom dues deductions are to be made, to the Benevolent Association.
Dues deductions are to be made monthly.

Section 6: Rehired Members

In the case of employees rehired, or returning to work after a leave of
absence, or being transferred back into the bargaining unit, who have
previously executed authorization, and re-executed that authorization, the City
agrees to resume deductions.

Section 7: Remittance of Deductions

Deductions will be remitted to the Club's designated Treasurer as soon as
possible, or before the next regular payroll, together with a list of those for whom
deductions have been made and the amounts of such deductions.

Page 2
¢€ abeg

WIZES BE B69'ES

LS6LOIS 8S1'96$

ETSLYES —- ZILLES

9S€°06$ 8IZ‘S8$

ETELO'ES 9” 8687S

¥06°6L$ O9E'SLS

OO'PSO'ES =: ET'OLB“TS

yOr‘oLs 098°PL$

Oo'rE897T$ = OH'LES‘TS = TO'OET'TS

P8L°69$ p6v‘99$ 966°LS$

Saag paag EaaIs
SATIV IVS AOITOd

€ A TOLLYV

sAppeamiq
:yenuue
urede) 56

sApjeomiq
:yenuue
queuaynary 6

:APpomiq
cyenuue
queasiag 76

sApjooantq,
:yenuue
JoVeSSSAUT 16]

LT9681$ = PO'LESTS sApyaomiq
£0€6r$ £96°6€S yyenuue
JOO 20110 06

7 daIg T dais Pypelg

€l0z ‘TE AINE Jose aanoayg = “V

anpayag sau

2] WoIW90g

 
y obeg

$8°666°ES SETLL'ES :Appaemiq

966°€0I$ 180°86$ syenuue

ureide $6

EL PSS OT E”EES :kppoomiq

£91°6$ 7Z6°98$ :yenuue

queusmnaty 6

OLPEIES = HOSES :4pjeamiq,

zos‘18$ L9OSOLS :yenuue

queasiag 76

OPSITES 6167S :Appoomiq

z00'18$ LOE‘OLS yyenuue

JoVSYSSAU] 16]

99° LELTS 79°809°7$ ETSLTT$ = VEGTS = LL'LOS“I$ -Apjaomiq
OL ILS bZ8‘L9$ 9S1‘6S$ 687'0S$ ZOL‘O$ syenuue

AOOGIO 20d 06

Saas peas Tang = Tas Taag EE
Plow ‘TATAL Joseoanoayg =“

anpayas aden 2] WoOKI9g

SaRIVTVS AOITOd
€ FTIOILAV

. ID ISNDOT OT ORD
g ebeg

SS 6Il'b$ OS S88°ES

OITLOIS €ZO'LOIS

SOISES OH EYES

826°P6$ O£s‘68$

ELBZTES —- TLS HOES

LV6'ESS ELU6LS

OSG07'ES —-8B°SZO'ES

Loves €L9°BL$

18'618°7$ — 98'989'7S OOS EHE'ZS

STEELS 858°69$ 1£6°09$

SaaIS pass € ais
SAIAVTVS AITO

€ WILLY

sApjeamiq,
:yenuue
urede) $6

2APJIomM1Q
cyenuue
yueuanNaIT $6

:Apyoomiq,
:yenuue
yweesleg 76

sApjaamiq
:yenuue
JoyeSNSSAUT 16]

ETZOHT$S  —«dLBHIDIS :Ahppaomq
86L‘IS$ S86'Ip$ :jenuue
TOIIO 290d 06

7 das Taaig Ppa

soz ‘TATar Jose aanmayq = “Vv

anpayag aseay

t] WORI0g

 
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 2: Differential
Effective July 1, 2007, the differentials between ranks shall be:
Between Police Officer (Bracket 90, Step 5)

and Sergeant --- 14.5%

Between Sergeant and Lieutenant --- 13.08%
Between Lieutenant and Captain --- 12.84%

The differential between Investigator, Bracket 191, Step 3 and 4 shall be
maintained at $500 less than Police Sergeant, Bracket 92, Step 3 and 4, respectively.

Section 3: Salary Steps
A. i, Police Officer --Bracket 90
HIRED BEFORE JULY 1, 1997
The steps shown below shall be reached at the following intervals:

Step 1:

Step 2:

Step 3:

Step 4:

Start

At the beginning of the first full pay period
following successful completion of the formal
recruit training and field officer training program, or
at the beginning of the first full pay period after
completing 8 months of service, whichever comes
first.

At the beginning of the first full pay period after
reaching the first anniversary after completing the
formal recruit training and field officer training
program, or at the beginning of the first full pay
period after completing 20 months of service,
whichever comes first.

At the beginning of the first full pay period after
reaching the second anniversary after completing the
formal recruit training and field officer training
program, or at the beginning of the first full pay
period after completing 32 months of service,
whichever comes first.

A. ii. Police Officer --Bracket 90
HIRED ON OR AFTER JULY 1, 1997
The steps shown below shall be reached at the following intervals:

Step 1:

Step 2:

Steps 3, 4, 5:

Start

At the beginning of the first full pay period after
successful completion of the formal recruit training
and field officer training program, or at the
beginning of the first full pay period after
completing 8 months of service, whichever comes
first.

At the beginning of the first full pay period
commencing one year after reaching the prior step.

Page 6
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

1 B. Notwithstanding subdivision A above, police officers who transfer to
2 the Rochester Police Department from other jurisdictions or deputy
3 sheriffs hired shall receive a starting salary at Step 2, at a minimum.
4 Starting salaries for such personnel may exceed Step 2, under
5 mitigating circumstances, after consultation with the Union.
6
7 Cc. Pay Steps - Officer Ranks
8 Rank Bracket Step 3
9 Investigator 191 Upon Civil Service Appointment
10 Sergeant 92 Upon Civil Service Appointment
11 Lieutenant 94 Upon Civil Service Appointment
12. Captain 95 Upon Civil Service Appointment
13
14 Rank Bracket Step 4
15 Investigator 191 At the beginning of the first full pay period after
16 completion of | year of service at Step 3
17 Sergeant 92 At the beginning of the first full pay period after
18 completion of 1 year of service at Step 3
19 Lieutenant 94 At the beginning of the first full pay period after
20 completion of | year of service at Step 3
21 Captain 95 At the beginning of the first full pay period after
22 completion of 1 year of service at Step 3
23
24 ~~ Section 4: Longevity
25 Effective 7/1/2000, in addition to the salaries provided in Section | of this
26 Article, each member of the Unit shall receive a longevity benefit as
27 follows:
28 1. Longevity payments will be made at a rate of $100.00 for each
29 year of service beginning on the employee's third (3rd)
30 anniversary, and increased by the amount of $100.00 per year
31 for twenty-two (22) additional years, with a maximum of
32 $2,300.00.
33 2. Payments are to be made by adding the longevity payment to the
34 twenty-six (26) bi-weekly paychecks in the following manner:
35 When the anniversary falls during a month, the payment shall
36 begin in the first full pay period of the following month.
37
38 = Section 5: Pensions
39 The City will provide coverage in the New York State Policemen's and

40 Firemen's Pension System for the officers of the unit in the following pension
41 sections:

42 (a) Section 375-C Non-contributory Plan

43 (b) Section 384 25-Year Plan

44 (c) Section 384-F, G, H 25-Year Plan

45 (d) Section 384-D 20-Year Plan

46 (e) Section 302-D One-year final average pay base

47 for pension for Tier 1 members
48 (f) Section 360-B Guaranteed $20,000 Ordinary Death
49 Benefit (police officers with ninety
50 (90) or more days of service)

51 (g) Section 375-1

52 (h) Section 384 (e)

33

Page 7
CaoIraANnewn—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 6: Shift Adjustment

Members assigned to patrol platoons |, 3, or 4, or their equivalent, shall
receive a $.90 per hour adjustment for each scheduled hour during such shift for which
the employee is paid, except that an employee on sick or injury leave for five (5) or
more days shall not receive a shift adjustment for the period of sick or injury leave.
This adjustment shall not be part of a member's base salary.

Section 7: Field Training Officers & Coordinators
A. Those assigned as Field Training Officers shall be paid an additional per
diem amount equal to seven and one-half percent (7 1/2%) of their base
salary (as set forth in Section 1) for each day in which they perform the
duties of a Field Training Officer including training periods and the
periods during which a Field Training Officer is assigned a probationary
officer. Payment shall be made on a bi-weekly basis.

B. Those assigned by the Police Chief or his authorized representative as
Field Training Coordinators shall be paid an additional per diem
amount equal to seven and one-half percent (7 1/2%) of their base
salary (as set forth in Section 1) for each day in which they perform the
duties of a Field Training Coordinator. When the section has three or
more recruits assigned, a Field Training Coordinator shall be assigned
to that section.

Section 8: Flexible Benefit Program

The City shall make available the Flexible Benefit Program currently
available to other employees, while such program is permissible under Internal
Revenue Codes. Design, administration and choice of administrator shall be at the
City's discretion.

Section 9: Deferred Compensation Plan

The City shall make available to all members of the bargaining unit a
Deferred Compensation Plan pursuant to Section 457 of the United States Internal
Revenue Code. The design and administration of such plan shall be at the discretion
of the City.

Section 10: K-9

All unit members assigned to a K-9 dog shall receive additional compensation
of twenty (20) minutes per day, at the overtime rate, for every day the unit member is
responsible for the K-9 dog.

ARTICLE 4
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS

The Union recognizes the necessity of continuous improvement in efficiency
and effectiveness throughout the employer's operations covered by this collective
bargaining agreement and in this connection, it will urge its representatives and
members to cooperate jointly with the employer in accomplishing this result.

ARTICLE 5
“RESERVED”

Page 8
CardaAHr.wN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

ARTICLE 6
PAID HOLIDAYS

Section 1: Recognized Holidays

A. The following thirteen (13) days during each year of this agreement

will be recognized as paid holidays:

1 Independence Day
2. Labor Day
3 Columbus Day
4, Veterans Day
5. Thanksgiving Day
6. Christmas Day
7. New Year's Day
8. Lincoln's Birthday
9.

. Washington's Birthday
10. Good Friday
Il. Easter Sunday
12. Memorial Day
13. Martin Luther King Jr. Day

B. If a holiday falls on a workday and the officer is granted the day off,
the officer must use a vacation day, personal leave day or
compensatory day on the holiday.

C. Holiday pay shall be based upon the step and bracket of the employee
at the time of each holiday, not upon the step and bracket at the time of
payment.

Section 2: Payment for Holidays

Members shall be paid by the first Friday in December for all holidays
enumerated in Section | of this Article. Payment shall be based on a holiday year
from Christmas of the preceding calendar year through Thanksgiving of the current
calendar year, except that if a member is employed for less than the full holiday year
from Christmas to Thanksgiving, he shall be paid only for those holidays observed
during his period of employment.

ARTICLE 7
BENEFITS FOR ON-DUTY INJURY

Section 1: Benefits

The City will provide the following benefits for any member who is injured
in the performance of his duties or who is taken sick as a result of the performance
of his duties (as set forth in City Charter Section 8A-6), until his disability arising
therefrom has ceased: base salary (Article 3, Section 1), longevity payments
(Article 3, Section 4), pension benefits (Article 3, Section 5), paid holidays (Article
6, Section 1 and 2), health insurance (Article 11, Section 1-6), dental insurance
(Article 11, Section 8), and educational incentives (Article 14, Section 2).

Section 2: Other Provisions
A. Clothing Allowance shall be provided during the first 12 months of
Section 8A-6 status. Said allowance may be continued at the discretion of
the Chief of Police.

Page 9
CaerIranusaun—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

B. Payment of shift adjustment, if any, will be made pursuant to Article 3,
Section 6.

C. Vacations will be covered by the appropriate General Order (currently
General Order 230), except that if the officer is off duty on Section 8A-6
status for more than 90 calendar days, he may have future vacation
accruals reduced in proportion to non-working time at the sole discretion
of the Chief of Police. Said decision of the Chief of Police shall not be
reviewable or grievable.

D. There shall be no accrual of personal leave while an officer is on Section
8A-6 status.

E. The practice of providing compensatory days because the officer worked
one work wheel rather than another shall cease for officers on Section 8A-6

status.
ARTICLE 8
SICK LEAVE
Section 1: Statement of Purpose

This Article establishes sick leave benefits for the members of the
bargaining unit. Procedures implementing these benefits will be covered by the
Sick Leave General Order (currently numbered 210).

Section 2: Eligibility

A member of the Department will be eligible for sick leave only when
suffering from an illness or injury that would prevent the performance of duty. He
will not feign sickness or injury; nor will he deceive or attempt to deceive any
physician, surgeon, commanding officer or other competent authority concerning his
mental or physical condition.

Section 3: Bills for Service

Bills for professional service by private medical or surgical specialists
rendered to members injured on duty or while on Police Department premises will
be paid from City funds in the event that the Police Surgeon is unable to personally
provide the service, provided that the private medical or surgical specialist has been
approved for that purpose by the Police Chief. This provision will not apply to
necessary first aid or emergency services rendered in cases of injury in line of duty.
Eligibility for the benefits described above shall initially be determined solely by the
Chief of Police. The decisions of the Chief of Police shall be subject to the
provisions of Article 27.

Section 4: Discontinued Tours

When a member discontinues his tour of duty due to injury or illness, he
will be on sick leave and will be subject to all the regulations of this Sick Leave
Article and applicable General Orders. The member must report sick, as required, if
he wishes to use sick leave on working days subsequent to this discontinued day.
However, discontinued days will not be counted as absence from duty in
determining loss of personal leave day or furlough due to absences as a result of
injury or illness.

Page 10:
CaraANEaun—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 5: Sick Leave Allowance
A member of the Department may be permitted up to six calendar months of
continual sick leave for any illness or injury not sustained in the line of duty. If
unable to return to duty after this period, his case will be reviewed by the Chief and
one of the following determinations will be made:
1. Temporary termination from the payroll with reinstatement
rights at any time within one year.
2. Retirement from active service if so entitled.
3. Dismissal from the Department.
4. Anextension of sick leave.
Prior to making his determination, the Chief will obtain a written report from
the Police Physician which shall include the report, if any, of the member's personal
physician.

Section 6: Obligation of Officer on Sick Leave to
Remain at Home or in Place of Confinement
A. Unless authorized by his immediate commanding officer, or his
designated representative, a member of the Department on sick leave
will not leave his residence or place of confinement during his
regularly scheduled hours of work except for:

1. obtaining professional medical treatment;

2. performing exercise prescribed in writing by his physician
which is part of his recovery treatment, a copy of which must
be submitted to his Commanding Officer prior to commencing
such exercise.

The Commanding Officer’s decision may be appealed to high command or
ultimately to the Chief of Police in consultation with the member’s physician.

B. The requirements of this Section shall not apply to members disabled
due to a service connected injury, as determined by the Chief of Police.

ARTICLE 9
PERSONAL LEAVE FOR PERFECT ATTENDANCE

A. Employees covered by this Agreement will earn one day of personal leave
for each calendar quarter of perfect attendance. Any personal leave earned according
to this Article shall be credited within the next pay period after it was earned. The
employee may use such leave for any purpose subject to advance approval of his
absence. The employee may accumulate up to four days of personal leave for this
purpose, which may be carried across contract or fiscal years, provided that the four-
day maximum is not exceeded. For the purpose of calculating personal leave
earnings by calendar quarter, the starting date shall be January !, 1989. On January
1, 1989, members shall be credited with personal leave proportional to the period of
perfect attendance for the 90 days prior to January 1, or for the period from January
1, 1989 back to the last date on which personal leave was computed, calculated to the
nearest whole hour.

B. This Article does not apply to employees hired after July 1, 1984.

Page 11
CarIraAHuNpwn

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

ARTICLE 10
VACATIONS

Section 1: Statement of Purpose

This Article establishes vacation benefits for the members of the bargaining,
unit. Procedures implementing these benefits will be covered by the furlough
General Order (currently numbered 230).

Section 2: Emergency Situations

In the event the Chief determines that a serious emergency exists, he may
cancel or terminate furloughs, provided, however, that he first exhausts all
additional manpower available through call-in procedures. In the event of a
declared emergency, the Chief may terminate or cancel furloughs immediately.
Furloughs canceled or terminated will be rescheduled by the Chief of Police at a
later date.

Section 3: Choice and Retention of Furlough

Choice of furlough dates will be based on seniority as defined in Article
22. A member who has chosen his furlough will not lose his choice by reason of
transfer unless the transfer was requested by the member, in which case the Chief
of Police may, in the case of furlough conflict, reschedule the member's furlough
within the same period (prime or non-prime). If the furlough is not rescheduled
within the same period, then the member will be allowed to carry over those
furlough days into the next calendar year.

Section 4: Vacation Allowance
A. Effective January 1, 2015, vacation accruals commence after one
calendar month of full-time employment and monthly thereafter all
members shall accrue vacation on the following basis unless
otherwise provided:
1. less than one year of service through 3 complete years;
12 days (1 day per month)
2. 4 years through 8 complete years; 16 days (16/12 or
1.34 days per month)
3. 9 years through 14 complete years; 18 days (18/12 or
1.5 days per month)
4. 15 years through 19 complete years; 20 days (20/12 or
1.67 days per month)
5. 20 and more complete years; 25 days (25/12 or 2.08
days per month)

Newly hired members will accrue vacation allowance according to the
schedule above; they will not be allowed to use vacation allowance during their
periods of academy training or field training.

All vacation days are working days and do not include R days.
Members can accrue vacation time up to a maximum equivalent of two
years of accruals. The maximum accrual allowed is fifty (50) days. Furlough

days cancelled by the Chief pursuant to Section 2 of this Article will not be
subject to the accrual limits in this provision.

Page 12
COI AAkwWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

B. To transition to the vacation accruals delineated in Section 4A of this
Article, effective November 1, 2014, unit members whose vacation
time banks exceed fifty (50) days (412.5 hours) will have their
vacation time banks reset to fifty (50) days (412.5 hours). However,
on a one time basis, the vacation time accrued, prior to November 1,
2014, that exceeds the above referenced maximum will be converted
to compensatory time and placed in the unit member’s compensatory
time bank. All vacation time converted to compensatory time will be
governed by the provisions of Article 15, Sections 5 and 8 of the
collective bargaining agreement.

ARTICLE 11
HOSPITAL & SURGICAL INSURANCE & DEATH BENEFITS
See Appendix 2 (Memorandum of Agreement 11-7-12)
EXCEPT for

Section 8: Dental Plan

Effective October 1, 2011, the dental plan shall be the Guardian
“DentalGuard Preferred” Plan. Those enrolling in the dental plan shall contribute
ten percent (10%) of the cost of the premium on a monthly basis, through payroll
deductions.

ARTICLE 12
CLOTHING AND MILEAGE ALLOWANCE

Section 1: Clothing Allowance & Payments
A. All Investigators shall be paid an annual $500 clothing allowance. All
other members directed to work in plainclothes shall be paid on a per diem
basis. Payment shall be made in the last payroll period of June and
December of each year to all members who were directed, in writing, to
work in civilian clothing during any part of the preceding six (6) months.

B. Effective 7/1/01, all members on the payroll on December | of each year
shall receive an annual uniform accessory allowance of $500 through the
current vendor voucher system to be paid in the first payroll period of
December of each year.

C. Effective December 1, 2007, all members on Long Term Disability, except
for those injured in the line of duty, shall not receive the uniform accessory
allowance under Article 12, Section 1(b) until they return to duty status, at
which time that year’s allowance shall be fully restored and must be used
by November 30 of that year.

In no event will allowance be paid at separation from service or carried
over to the following year pursuant to this section.

Section 2: Payment for Terminated or Retired Members

Members who are terminated or who retire before one of the semi-annual
payments outlined above will receive the clothing allowance which they are due in
their final paycheck.

Section 3: Safety Prescription Glasses

A. The City will provide and replace as needed safety prescription eyewear
when the member presents a prescription for eyewear. All safety

Page !3
COI DHAwWnN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 4:
A.

Section 5:

prescription eyewear shall conform to ANS Z87.1 and O. S. H. A.
Standards.

Members of the unit will be permitted to purchase safety glasses in frames
other than the standard frame, provided, however the member shall pay
the difference between the cost of the standard frame and the approved
frame he chooses.

The Chief will designate at least six (6) frame styles which are consistent
with the image of the Rochester Police Department.

Mileage Allowance
The City shall pay mileage reimbursement for the use of a member's
privately-owned vehicle for the conduct of the City's business where such
use has been permitted by the Chief or his designee. The reimbursement
shall be the operative Federal (IRS) rate per mile. Record-keeping
requirements may be established by the City.

For the working days during which a privately-owned vehicle is used on
City business pursuant to subsection (A), the City shall provide a parking
space or shall reimburse the member for parking expenses, at the City's
option.

Use of a privately-owned vehicle may be made a condition of assignment.
However, this requirement shall not apply to assignments in which the
member is normally required to make arrests or perform patrol functions.

Notwithstanding (A), (B), and (C) above, the provisions of Special Order
No. S-82-74 shall remain in effect.

Members assigned to the SCIS will be provided the use of an Employer-
owned vehicle at no cost to the member when there are vehicles available
for use that are otherwise used for their assignments.

Uniforms

The City will continue to provide such items of uniforms and personal

equipment.
by the Chi

, or their equivalent, as are currently provided, and as may be authorized
ief of Police. No member will be required to pay for any newly authorized

personal equipment and/or uniforms issued.

Section 6:
A.

Weapons and Equipment

Effective 7/1/93, the City will provide each member with the authorized on-
duty weapon. Weapons so purchased by the City shall remain the property of
the City. Those members who purchased a weapon for on-duty use on or
after July 1, 1993 shall be reimbursed by the City for the actual cost of the

weapon.

The City shall provide ammunition, one spare clip, leather goods, and
replacements due to loss or destruction in the line of duty, without cost to the

member.

The City will repair or replace, without charge, weapons damaged or lost in
the line of duty, unless the loss or damage is the result of negligence

attributable to the member.

Page 14
SocwmiudsH»R YN

AUUNAANHRERARSERPARARYYREOLYUWYYYYRBRPNOPVPRRNRBESTADEGSI
VERBS SSERESEESESSSSRARGAEGHASOCAIAADEYN A= SCOMIAHVERYN —

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

D. Members must obtain a New York State pistol permit on which their duty
weapon will be registered.

E. Members who resign or who are dismissed from the Department shall retain
ownership of their weapon or receive reimbursement for the cost of the
weapon at the option of the Chief of Police.

F. Members will maintain their weapons in compliance with standards
established by the City.

ARTICLE 13
CLOTHING BOARD

Section 1: Representation

The parties will establish a joint labor-management clothing board with
equal representation. Total membership on the board will be no less than six (6) and
no more than ten (10).

Section 2: Consultation and Recommendation

The Chief of Police will consult with the Board before making decisions
relative to clothing and personal equipment issued to members of the unit. The
Board may make recommendations to the Chief on matters relating to clothing and
personal equipment.

Section 3: Meetings
Both parties to this Agreement may request meetings of the Clothing Board
to discuss pertinent issues coming under the review of the Board.

ARTICLE 14
EDUCATIONAL BENEFITS

Section 1: Payment for Courses

The City agrees to pay the full cost of all tuition and books to all police officers
successfully completing a police-work-related course within the period of this contract
leading to an Associate's Degree, Baccalaureate Degree, or Master's Degree in Police
Science or Criminal Justice from an accredited institution. Courses required for such
degree programs shall be deemed to be police-work-related. Electives may be deemed
to be police-work-related with the prior approval of the Police Chief. If a disagreement
should arise over electives, the matter shall be resolved by the Labor-Management
Committee.

Payment shall be made as per the following schedule:
‘A. One-half (1/2) of all expenses mentioned above upon presentation of
evidence of successful completion of individual courses.

B. _ All such expenses previously not reimbursed shal! be paid in lump sum
upon completion of two (2) years’ continuous service from the day of
receipt of such degree.

Section 2: Educational Incentives
A. The City agrees to provide an educational salary benefit of 5% of the
officer's base pay to qualified police personnel and employed recruits
starting on the next full payroll period following their successful

Page 15
CaraAuawn—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

completion of the receipt of an Associate's Degree in Police Science
or Criminal Justice, or 6 1/2% of the member's base pay upon receipt
of a Bachelor's Degree or a higher degree in any subject. This
paragraph applies only to those employees who entered the Police
Department prior to April 18, 1979 and who matriculated into such
educational programs prior to June 30, 1984.

B. Effective July 1, 1995 for those members who do not receive an
educational incentive pursuant to paragraph A above, the City agrees
to provide an educational salary benefit of 2% of the officer's base
pay to qualified police personnel and employed recruits starting on
the next full payroll period who hold or attain an Associate's Degree
in Police Science or Criminal Justice, or an educational salary benefit
of 4% of the officer's base pay to those officers who hold or attain a
Bachelor's Degree in any subject. The educational incentive stipend
provided herein shall be added to a member's base pay and paid as
such.

C. Payment of educational incentive will begin in the next full payroll
following submission by the member to the Department Personnel
Office of sufficient evidence of receipt of the appropriate degree.
Such evidence shall be a copy of the degree or a copy of the college
transcript noting the award of the degree.

Section 3: Federal or State Programs

If Federal or State programs exist to pay all or a portion of the educational
costs referred to in Section 1, the City will decrease its share appropriately so that
100% of the direct educational costs are paid.

Section 4: Proportional Payment

The City will pay 50% of the direct educational costs incurred in obtaining a
Baccalaureate Degree in accordance with existing City Administrative Regulations. If
the individual receives Veteran's Administration payments, the City will pay 50% of
the direct educational expenses, or the difference between the Veteran's
Administration payments and the total cost, whichever is less.

Additionally, the City will pay 50% of the direct educational costs incurred in
obtaining a Master’s Degree in any subject area deemed to be work related, as
determined by the Chief, subject to review pursuant to Article 27 of this Agreement.

Section 5: Procedures
The following procedures shall be complied with in order to be eligible for
tuition reimbursement:
1. The member shall submit to the Police Chief proof of matriculation
from the educational institution, prior to submitting applications for
tuition reimbursement.

2. Employees shall submit Tuition Reimbursement Applications to the
Police Chief no later than two (2) calendar weeks after commencement
of any course for which educational reimbursement is sought.

3. For courses previously approved for educational reimbursement,
employees shall submit to the Police Chief official notification of
course grade and receipts for allowed expenses no later than thirty (30)
calendar days after receipt by the employee of such notification of
grade.

Page 16
CIAKUAWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

4. For degrees specified in Section | of this Article, employees shall

Section 1:
A.

Section 2:
A.

Section 3:

A.

present official notification from the educational institution of the
awarding of such degree no later than thirty (30) calendar days after
receipt of the degree. Within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the
two (2) years of service from the date of such degree, the member shall
submit application for the remainder of expenses to be reimbursed.

ARTICLE 15
OVERTIME

Overtime Computation

Except as provided in Section 3, time-and-one-half overtime will be paid
for all time worked in excess of eight and one-quarter (8 1/4) hours in
one tour of duty and for all time worked on any regular day (R day) off.
Any member who works any personal leave day, compensatory, or
vacation day, when such days off have been approved at least one week
in advance, and when such days off have not been canceled more than 72
hours in advance, shall be paid time-and-one-half overtime for time
worked on such days.

Effective July 1, 1995, all members of the Rochester Police Department
shall report for duty 15 minutes prior to their scheduled shift starting
time. Such time shall be compensated at the straight time rate in
accordance with Section 7(k) of the Fair Labor Standards Act, and shall
be added to a member's base pay and paid as such. Members shall either
attend Roll Call or be present for assigned duties as directed, during the
15 minutes immediately preceding their scheduled daily tour.

In those assignments where members do not currently stand Roll Call,
effective July 1, 1995, they shall report to duty 15 minutes prior to the
start of their scheduled shift starting time to receive updates, review
reports and obtain other necessary Department communications.

Call Backs to Duty
Except as provided in (B) and (C) below, on all authorized call backs to
duty, a minimum of four (4) hours of pay, at the overtime rate, shall be
provided.

Except as provided in (C) below, for all authorized, scheduled overtime
for administrative meetings only, when a member has been given at least
48 hours’ notice, a minimum of three (3) hours of pay, at the overtime
rate, shall be provided.

For overtime worked when a member is held over after the end of the
regular tour of duty or when overtime is scheduled, at least 48 hours in
advance, contiguous to and prior to the regular tour of duty, overtime shall
be paid for time worked.

Court and Training Time
All members who are required to report to City, County, Family, Supreme,
Federal Court, Grand Jury Proceedings, Professional Standards Section
interviews, District Attorney interviews, Corporation Counsel interviews,
or quasi-judicial administrative agencies during off-duty hours as a result
of the performance of their official duties shall be compensated at time-
and-one-half with a minimum of two (2) hours.

Page 17
CoOrIrAuawWnN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Notwithstanding the above, those working 3rd platoon who are required to
report to a PSS interview prior to their regular tour of duty shall be paid
overtime only for the time from the scheduled start of the interview until
the employee’s regular 3rd platoon starting time.

B. All members who are required to report to In-Service Training scheduled

on off-duty hours shall be compensated at time-and-one-half with a
minimum of two (2) hours.

C. All members who are required to transfer evidence during non-duty hours

shall be paid a minimum of one and one-half (1 1/2) hours at time-and-
one-half.

D. All members who are assigned to training as trainees or trainers shall

assume the “R” day schedule of the training assignment without the
payment of overtime.

Section 4: Members' Option on Compensatory Time

A.

B.

Members of the bargaining unit will have the option of accruing
compensatory time in lieu of overtime payment, provided, however, that no
member, except as provided in Paragraph B, will be credited with
compensatory time in excess of 360 hours. Compensatory time will be
earned and computed at the same rate as is overtime pay.

Effective January 1, 1996, no member who works a 5-2 schedule will be
credited with compensatory time in excess of 416 hours.

Section 5: Payment for Compensatory Time

A.

All members shall be allowed to receive cash payment for earned
compensatory time above 280 hours and up to 360 hours of accumulated
compensatory time. Such payment shall be made at the member's base
salary, plus educational incentive, if applicable.

Effective January 1, 1996, all members who work the 5-2 schedule shall
be allowed to receive cash payment for earned compensatory time above
280 hours and up to 416 hours of accumulated compensatory time. Such
payment shall be made at the member's base salary, plus educational
incentive, if applicable. Members who are assigned to a 5-2 work
schedule, and who accumulated more than 360 hours of compensatory
time, and who are subsequently changed to work a 4-2 schedule, shall
maintain all of the accumulated hours of compensatory time until the next
payment period as defined in paragraph C of this section at which time the
member’s bank will be reduced to 280 hours and the member will be paid
for all compensatory time that was removed from the compensatory time
bank. During this period when the member is assigned to a 4-2 work
schedule, and prior to October | of that year, the member will not be
allowed to add compensatory time to his bank above 360 hours unless he
is reassigned to a 5-2 work schedule.

Payments for compensatory time shall be paid only on or before October
1 each year, provided that the member has requested such payment on or
before September | of that year. Payment will be based on compensatory
time earned through the last full pay period in August of that year.

Page 18
CorIrAuauwun—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 6: Special Events Overtime

The procedures for the selection and payment of overtime for Special

Events will be covered by General Order #265.

Section 7: Trading Time

Members shall be allowed to “trade time” with another member of the same

rank, in the same section and same assignment, under the following conditions:

1,
2.

3.

The trading of time must be completely voluntary between the members,
free from reprisals or sanctions by supervision.

The reason for the trading of time must be attributed to the member’s desire
or need to attend to personal matters.

Requests for trading time shall be in writing, on a form designed by the
Department, which is signed by both members involved in the trade, and
submitted to both members’ supervisors for approval and signature.
Requests shall be promptly acted upon by the supervisor. A copy of the
supervisor’s response will be forwarded to the Union and to the Office of
the Chief.

All traded time must be “repaid” before the end of the following payroll
period.

The member who does not report as agreed shall be held responsible for
his/her absence.

Trade time worked for others is not counted as time worked for the purpose
of computing pay or overtime.

Approval may be denied at the discretion of the Department if the trading
time or any consequent activities negatively impact the operations of the
Section or Department. Approval of any such request shall not be withheld
on an unreasonable or arbitrary basis.

Any changing of a member’s “R” day(s) as a result of trading time pursuant
to this Section shall not result in the payment of overtime under Article 15
to either involved member.

Section 8: Compensatory Time Procedures

A.

The use of all compensatory time off, except as provided in paragraph E
herein, shall be preceded by a member’s written request submitted to the
member’s supervisor. Requests shall be submitted a minimum of seven (7)
days in advance. The supervisor must respond in writing within forty-eight
(48) hours of receipt of the request. The supervisor shall approve the
request unless approval would unreasonably interfere with the ability to
provide police services. Payment of overtime shall not be the sole factor for
denial of the initial request for compensatory time but may be a factor for
denial of subsequent requests within the same platoon or section. If the
request is not granted, then the supervisor shall articulate the reason(s) for
the denial.

Requests shail be considered according to the order in which they were
received, considering the earliest request first.

In the event that two or more members submit a request on the same day,
for the same period, then the member who is more senior shall have his
request considered first.

Upon approval or denial, the Union and the Office of the Chief shall be sent
a copy of the request form.

Requests for use of compensatory time made with less than seven (7) days
advance notice are not covered by this Section and shall continue to be
addressed in accordance with current Department practice.

Page 19
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 9: Distribution of Overtime

Notwithstanding the provisions of General Order 265 pertaining to Special
Events, the parties agree that distribution of scheduled overtime within various
sections or units shall not be arbitrary or capricious. Members shall not be deprived
of scheduled overtime for disciplinary or punitive reasons or because of exercising
their option of working for compensatory time or cash.

If distribution of overtime is grieved and appealed to arbitration, the
Arbitrator shall make his decision based upon fairness to the employees, the
practical application of the scheduled overtime, seniority, and the ability and need of
the Department to fulfill its mission.

ARTICLE 16
LEAVE DUE TO DEATH IN FAMILY

Section 1: Immediate Family

Members shall be granted leave with pay for the death of a wife, husband,
child, father or mother (whether natural, adopted or by legal guardianship), brother
or sister, father-in-law or mother-in-law, grandmother, grandfather, grandchild, or
any relative residing in the household. Said leave shall be from the time it is granted
until the day after the funeral when the member shall report for duty, except that any
officer working the first platoon will report to duty at their regular scheduled time
the night of the day following the funeral.

Section 2: Other Relatives

Members may be granted up to one (1) day for the purpose of attending the
funeral of a brother-in-law or sister-in-law or a blood relative not included in
Section 1.

Section 3: Regular Days Off

If regular days off fall within the permitted leave time for a death in the
family or if the police officer involved is on furlough at the time of the death in
the family, no additional days off will be granted due to the death.

Section 4: Official Notice
Official notice of death shall be furnished to the employer by the
employee, upon request.

ARTICLE 17
CALCULATION OF ECONOMIC BENEFITS

Section 1: Calculation Rate
The hourly rate of pay shall be determined by dividing the annual rate of
pay (including educational incentive, if applicable, and roll call pay), by 2007.

The biweekly rate of pay shall be determined by dividing the annual rate
of pay (including educational incentive, if applicable, and roll call pay), by 26.

Section 2: Severance Pay
A. In the event that a member of the Unit retires, dies or otherwise
terminates service with the City of Rochester, Severance Pay shall be
paid for all unused vacation time, not to exceed forty (40) days, and all

Page 20
CaeraAueun—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

accrued overtime (compensatory time), not to exceed fifty-one ($1)
days.

Payment shall be made upon retirement, death or other termination of

services for all accrued holiday time.

ARTICLE 18
WORK SCHEDULE

Section 1: Work Week
A. Except as provided in subdivision B, effective with work cycles

beginning on and after 1/1/96, all members working assignments on a
5-2, 4-2, 4-2 work wheel will work a 4-2 non-rotating schedule. Until
work cycles ending on and after 1/1/96, members will continue to work
a 5-2, 4 2, 4-2 work wheel.

Notwithstanding any provision of this section, members working
assignments on a 5-2 work schedule will continue to work a 5-2 work
schedule.

Members may be assigned to a work schedule that consists of five (5)
days of duty followed by two (2) consecutive days off provided that
the consecutive days off are either Friday-Saturday, Saturday-Sunday,
or Sunday-Monday. All shifts shall be on a non-rotating basis,
commonly referred to as a 5-2 schedule.

Effective 1/1/96, all members working a 5-2 schedule shall receive
136 hours per year, pro rata, in compensatory time, added to
compensatory time banks quarterly, for working the 5-2 schedule.

Effective 7/1/95, all members shall work an 8.25 hour tour which includes
a 15-minute pre-shift Roll Call or other duties as assigned for officers not

assigned to patrol.

Any vacant non-patrol position or assignment may be changed from a 5-2
or 4-2 schedule and may be changed to any existing platoon upon the

posting of the vacant non-patrol position or assignment.

Section 2: Split Shifts

A. Except in serious or emergency situations, as declared by the Chief of
Police or his authorized representative, there shall be no split shifts.
However, split shifts can be volunteered to by members and/or mutually

agreed to between members and their commanding officer.

It is understood and agreed upon between the parties that Section 2 (A)
above shall not apply to the police officers assigned to the Special
Criminal Investigation Section. Split shifts shall not be used mainly for

the avoidance of the payment of overtime.

Section 3: Work Hours

A. All employees shall be scheduled to work a regular tour of duty which
shall have a regular starting time and regular quitting time. Except as
otherwise provided in this Section, all hours worked outside the regular
tour of duty shall be compensated for pursuant to Article 15 of this

Agreement.
Page 21
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

B. The Employer may change the regular starting and quitting time of a

position due to deployment needs, as follows:
1. The change in starting and quitting times does not exceed two
(2) hours.
2. The change shall be effective for a period not to exceed eight (8)
consecutive workdays.
3. Written notice is provided to affected employees and the Union
at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance.

The Tactical Unit, the Special Criminal Investigation Section, and all
fourth platoons shall be exempt from A and B above, with reasonable
advance notice, when there is a demonstrated need to re-deploy
manpower. However, the movement of 4th platoon staff to cover for
routine and normal absences, such as illness, vacations maternity leaves or
other approved leaves of absences of officers on other platoons, is nota
demonstrated need to re-deploy manpower.

Captains and Section or Unit Commanders may have their starting and
quitting times changed upon advance notice of at least forty-eight (48)
hours, or at their individual request, subject to supervisory approval,
without incurring any overtime compensation unless they work more than
41.25 hours in a work week.

. Temporary assignments to the Professional Development Section shall be

exempt from the provisions of subdivision B above, except that written
notice to the affected employee and the Union shall be given forty-eight
(48) hours in advance.

An employee may request in writing, for good cause, to temporarily
change his/her regular starting and quitting time with the approval of the
Chief or his designee, and with the consent of the Union President. Such
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld and/or delayed.

.. The provisions of Article 15 do not apply when the City acts in accordance

with subdivisions B, C, D, E and F above, Article 19 and Article 20,
Section 2(B), of this Agreement.

Sergeants and Lieutenants newly assigned to a Patrol Section may, at the
discretion of the Commanding Officer, rotate through any and all platoons
for four (4) consecutive work days on each platoon, during the first thirty
(30) days of the new assignment. All newly assigned Sergeants and
Lieutenants shall be advised of such rotation schedule upon arrival at the
new assignment. Such rotation schedule shall not be utilized to avoid the
payment of overtime.

School Resource Officers (SRO’s) shall work the hours which conform to
the daily school schedule to which they are assigned.

The City will not be required to pay overtime under the provisions of
Article 15, Section 1.A of this Agreement for voluntary training
opportunities of one, two or three days duration that require attendance on a
member’s regularly scheduled R-day.

1. A member seeking a voluntary training opportunity as described
above will utilize PH/PW (trading R-day) rather than being paid
overtime for attending voluntary training on the member’s R-day.

Page 22
CaonrAUseeon—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

2.

For purposes of this Section, “voluntary training opportunities”
includes, but is not limited to, training associated with a member’s
voluntary position on specialized teams, which include the
Emergency Task Force (ETF), Crisis Negotiation Team (CNT),
Bomb Squad, the SCUBA Squad, and Grenadiers.

PH/PW cannot be utilized for regular Department-wide training.

PH/PW may also be utilized for voluntary training opportunities
sponsored by the Locust Club provided such training is approved
by the Chief or the Chief's designee.

The PH/PW must be used in the same pay period in which the
training takes place.

In the event that a member is denied a voluntary training
opportunity, the member or the Union may request an articulated
reason from his/her supervisor that will be completed within five
(5) business days. A denial of a voluntary training opportunity will
not be grievable under Article 27 of this Agreement.

K. Members assigned as Crime Prevention Officers as of January 1, 2015, will
work their assigned duty hours on a 5-2 schedule.

CPOs may have their starting and quitting times changed upon advance
notice of at least forty-eight (48) hours, subject to supervisory approval,
without incurring any overtime compensation unless they work more than
41.25 hours in a work week.

Members assigned as Crime Prevention Officers after the above listed date
will be assigned to regular starting and quitting times at the discretion of
the Department as noted on any posting for new or vacant CPO positions.

Section 4:
A. The City may, at its option, assign one unit member to the Relief schedule
in the following sections:

m

Relief Schedule

1. Staff Duty
2. Technical Services Section
3. Downtown

The relief schedule shall consist of a 4-2 schedule, where the member
works two (2) tours on the 3rd platoon, immediately followed by two (2)
tours on the Ist platoon.

The relief schedule shall be an exception to Section 3(A) of this Article and
no premium pay for changing shifts shall apply.

All members assigned to the relief schedule shall be paid the appropriate
shift adjustment according to Article 3, Section 6.

All members assigned to the relief schedule shall receive one hundred
fourteen (114) hours per year, pro rata, in compensatory time, added to
compensatory time banks quarterly, for working the relief schedule.

Page 23
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 5: 5th Platoon
A. Effective 7/1/2000, the Department may create and institute a Sth platoon
schedule in each of the Patrol Sections to respond to calls for service and
to perform patrol functions.

B. The starting hours of such Sth platoon shall commence no earlier than 8:00
a.m. and shall consist of the standard 8.25 hour workday on the 4 on, 2 off
schedule.

C. The initial starting time of the 5th platoon in each Patrol Section may be
initially determined unilaterally by the City, subject to the 8:00 a.m. start
time limitation. The work schedule and the work hours of the 5th platoon
in each Patrol Section shall be subject to the provisions contained in
Article 18 of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 19
TRANSFERS

Section 1: Definitions
A. Transfers

1. A transfer shall be defined as the change of assignment from one
section to another section, or from one division to another
division. Changes of assignment made within the Criminal
Investigation Section, except for Police Officers assigned to the
Technicians Unit and License Investigation Unit or the Special
Investigation Section will not be considered transfers.

2. A permanent change in platoon assignment shall be considered a
transfer when it exceeds 60 days in duration.

B. A temporary assignment shall not be for more than 60 days in duration at
which time it shall become a change of assignment subject to this
Article. However, temporary transfers may be made to PDS for the sole
purpose of conducting backgrounds, for a period of up to six months.
The positions shall be posted to determine interest; the employer shall
make selections at its discretion; the employees shall be returned to their
original position upon completion of the temporary assignment, or if the
member is selected for another position pursuant to the provisions
contained below.”

C. Temporary transfers to limited duty assignments due to disabilities may
be extended for the duration of the disability. Such reassignments shall
not result in eligibility for overtime payment in accordance with Article
18, Section 3 (A) of this Agreement.

D. Realignment transfer is a permanent transfer among Patrol Sections with
no change of platoons. Realignment transfer pertains to the rank of
Police Officer in the Patrol Sections only. Members on a 5-2 work wheel
subject to a realignment transfer shall retain a 5-2 work wheel.

E. 1. Newly hired Police Officers will be in temporary assignment period
status for a period of twenty-two (22) months from date of hire.

2. Police Officers who are hired by the City of Rochester as lateral
transfers from another Police Department will be in temporary

Page 24
SocwmrdsHswWN=

NVNNRereere eco
BSPSeaerAnaon—

24

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

assignment period status for a period of ten (10) months from date of
hire with the City of Rochester.

3. During temporary assignment period status as referenced in |. and 2.
above, Police Officers may, with at least fourteen (14) days advance
notice, be reassigned to different patrol sections, different platoons or
both, for a period of at least ninety (90) days.

4. Reassignment under the provisions of this subsection will not be
considered as a transfer within the meaning of Article 19 and
therefore, the provisions of Article 15 and Article 18 do not apply. In
addition, reassignments under this subsection will not be deemed to be
involuntary transfers.

Section 2: Involuntary Transfers
A. The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall maintain the right to transfer
employees when necessary to meet legitimate operating needs of the
Department. Transfers shall not be made for punitive reasons except
when done as a result of discipline in accordance with Article 20,
Section 2(B) of this Agreement.

B. Anemployee subject to a transfer under paragraph A above, upon written
request given to the Section Commander within five (5) days of the
notice of transfer, shall receive within five (5) days of such request a
written statement as to the specific reason for such transfer. This
statement shall be binding on the City.

Qe

All transfers made under this Section shall be subject to grievance and
arbitration pursuant to Article 27 of this Agreement, and any grievance
alleging a transfer made in violation of this Section may be filed directly
at Step C of the grievance procedure within five (5) days of receipt of the
written statement provided pursuant to paragraph (B) above.

D. In any arbitration proceeding alleging a transfer made in violation of this
Section, the City shall go forward and show legitimate operating needs
for the transfer.

nm

The Chief shall have the right to transfer any Captain for programmatic
reasons, Such transfer shall not result in the obligation to pay overtime
for changes in work hours or schedules that occur as a result of the
transfer, Such transfer shall be grievable only by the Captain individually
and shall be heard by an arbitrator pursuant to Article 27, Section 4.

Section 3: Posting of New Positions and Vacancies
A. Unless a transfer is made for a specifically identified operating need under
Section 2, paragraph A above, or as provided in paragraph F below,
whenever the City desires to permanently fill a new position or vacancy
within the bargaining unit, notice will be made by teletype and/or Daily
Bulletin, and posted to inform members for a period of ten (10) calendar
days.

B. All announcements of new positions or vacancies will specify the

qualifications and criteria established for the position or vacancy by the
Chief of Police or his designee.

Page 25
48

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Cc:

Section

A.

Section

shall be

Section
A

Members may apply for consideration for a new position or vacancy
posted under this Section. Requests will be considered department-wide.

No new position or vacancy may be filled during the ten (10) day posting
period except on an acting basis when necessary as a result of emergency
or to replace a transferred or promoted member. Members who submit
requests after the ten (10) day posting period will not be considered.

New positions or vacancies shall be filled as provided in Section 4 of this
Article. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as requiring the filling
of new positions or vacancies.

New positions or vacancies which exist in the positions specified as
exceptions in Article 2, Section |, are not subject to this Section. No unit
member may be involuntarily transferred to any position specified as an
exception in Article 2, Section 1.

4: Selection to New Positions or Vacancies
The establishment of qualifications and criteria for new positions or
vacancies shall be solely the responsibility of the Chief of Police or his
designee.

Unless the new position or vacancy is filled by a transfer made pursuant
to Section 2 of this Article, or pursuant to Section 3(F) of this Article,
new positions or vacancies posted pursuant to Section 3 of this Article
shall be filled by a member who has applied for such new position or
vacancy, and who meets the qualifications and criteria established for
such new position or vacancy. In determining who shall be selected for a
new position or vacancy, the Chief of Police, or his designee shall select
the most senior candidate, if all other factors relative to the candidate's
ability to perform the duties of the position are equal. It is the
responsibility of the candidate seeking the position to demonstrate that he
possesses the qualifications for the position or vacancy.

Any candidate not selected shall be entitled to a written statement as to
the reasons for non-selection, upon written request to the command
responsible for the final selection.

Selections made under this Section shall be subject to the grievance and
arbitration procedure contained in Article 27 of this Agreement, upon a
grievance filed by a candidate who was not selected in favor of a less
senior candidate. In any arbitration proceeding alleging a violation of
this Section, the burden of proof shall be upon the City to establish that
all other factors were not equal when selecting the less senior candidate.

5: Maintenance of Seniority
When a member is reassigned or transferred pursuant to this Article, there
no loss of seniority.

6: Voluntary Assignment Rotation

. The City may offer members the opportunity for voluntary assignments
within the Department for career development. These assignments will
not exceed three (3) months in duration, unless a longer period is agreed
to by the parties. These assignments are designed for career
development purposes and are not permanent. A voluntary assignment
will not be considered a “transfer” within the meaning of Article 19 of

Page 26
CeOIDAWAWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section

Section

I

8:

this Agreement. Members who are selected for an assignment may have
their work hours and schedule changed for the duration of the voluntary
assignment rotation, and the provisions of Article 15 and Article 18 of
this Agreement do not apply.

When the Department elects to offer a voluntary assignment rotation
opportunity, it will post the assignment for interest and state the
minimum requirements. Selection for voluntary assignment rotation
opportunities of the members who meet the posted minimum
requirements will alternate as follows:

1. The Chief of Police will make the first selection at his sole
discretion.

2. The next selection will be of the most senior member
applying for the voluntary assignment.

Voluntary assignment rotations to S.1.S. of Police Officers is to provide
training and experience that will enhance their knowledge and
experience of street level drug enforcement for their uniform patrol
assignment.

Upon completion of the voluntary assignment rotation, the member will
be returned to his/her original position or another position for which the
member has been selected pursuant to the provisions of this Article.

Administrative Assignment Pending Investigation

In the event a member becomes the subject of a criminal and/or PSS
investigation involving an allegation of conduct that could constitute a
criminal offense, the Chief of Police may elect to temporarily place the
member in an administrative assignment that does not include police
enforcement duties. Such assignment may not exceed sixty (60) days in
duration unless the Union and the member agree to a longer period of
time. This temporary administrative assignment will not be considered a
“transfer” within the meaning of this Article.

The member’s regular work hours and work schedule may not be
changed for a temporary administrative assignment unless the Union and
the member agree to different work hours and/or a different work
schedule. If the Union and member agree to different work hours and/or
a different work schedule, the provisions of Article 15 and Article 18 of
this Agreement will not apply.

Upon completion of the temporary administrative assignment, the
member will be returned to his/her original position, or another position
for which the member has been selected pursuant to the provisions of this
Article, or such other assignment that results from discipline imposed
under Article 20 of this Agreement.

Realignment Transfer
Effective calendar year 2016, the Chief of Police or his designee may
realign the number of Police Officers assigned to the various Patrol
Sections and Platoons once each calendar year. This realignment shall
be done in accordance with the following procedure:

1. The Chief of Police will determine the desired Police
Officer staffing deployment levels in the Patrol Sections by
platoons.

Page 27
SowmiIudsHs YON

BGR=

15
16
17
18
19
20
21

23
24
25
26

28
29
30

32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39

4l

43

45
46
47
48
49
50
SI
52
53
54
55

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 1:

2. The first attempt to achieve the desired staffing deployment
level will be by posting and filling the assignments in
accordance with this Article.

3. Upon completion of the posting and assignment process, if
the desired staffing deployment levels are not reached, the
necessary personnel moves will be made by inverse
seniority.

4. A Department reorganization cannot be the basis for a
realignment transfer.

ARTICLE 20
DISCIPLINE

Department Investigation and Bill of Rights

Whenever a Unit member is being investigated by the Professional
Standards Section (PSS) or by any other Section performing similar functions, the
following shall apply:

The interview of any member of the bargaining unit shall be at a
reasonable hour, preferably when the member officer is on duty, and
during the daylight hours, unless the exigency of the investigation
dictates otherwise.

The interview shall be conducted at a location designated by the
investigating officer, preferably at Police Headquarters.

The member of the bargaining unit shall be informed of the rank, name
and command of the officer in charge of the investigation as well as the
name and rank of the officer conducting the interview, and the identity
of all persons present during the interview.

A member of the bargaining unit shall have made available to him at his
request all reports which he has submitted regarding said investigation.
The member of the bargaining unit shall be informed of the nature of
the investigation before any interview commences. Sufficient
information to reasonably apprise the member of the allegations made
against him shall be provided prior to any interview.

A member of the bargaining unit shall have the right to have present, as
a representative, at the member's own interview an attorney of his
choice, or a representative designated by the Club, except that the
member may not be represented by any other unit member who is
identified as a target or witness of the investigation at the time the
member is interviewed by members of the Professional Standards
Section, or may waive such right to representation. The designation of
a particular representative shall not unduly delay the process. This
representation shall extend to allowing the attorney or the representative
to pose questions to the member of the bargaining unit at the conclusion
of the questioning being done by the Police Department, or if the
member is unrepresented, he shall have the right to make a statement.
The attorney or Club representative shall not interfere with or impede
the investigation. It is further agreed that the City of Rochester and the
Rochester Police Department will attempt to resolve disciplinary actions
only with the attorney selected by the member of the bargaining unit, or
a representative of the Club where the member has elected such
representation. It is the express intent of the parties to restrict
representation of the members of the bargaining unit to representatives.
of the Club in those instances when the member of such bargaining unit
is not represented by counsel or is not representing himself.

Page 28
CaAIAHEWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

7.

15.1

15.2

A member of the bargaining unit subject to such investigation by the
Police Department shall have the right upon request to a copy of any
statement he shall make to the Police Department, free of charge, within
30 days of its production, provided such statement is reduced to writing
and may have a copy released directly to an authorized Union
representative upon signed release of the member.

The City of Rochester agrees that it will not interrogate bargaining unit
members in Professional Standards Section interviews regarding
conversations between the members and their Union representatives
which occur as a result of the Union's statutory duty to represent its
members.

A member of the bargaining unit shall have the right to electronically or
otherwise record any and all statements he gives to the Police
Department during such investigation.

A member of the bargaining unit subject to such investigation by the
Police Department shall not be subject to any offensive language nor,
except as otherwise provided herein, shall he be threatened with transfer,
dismissal, or any other disciplinary punishment. No promise or reward
shall be made as an inducement to answering questions. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed as to prohibit the Police Department from
instructing the member that his failure or refusal to answer any questions
can become the subject of disciplinary action itself, resulting in
disciplinary punishment.

In no event shall a member of the bargaining unit be ordered or requested
to submit to a lie detector or polygraph test.

Prior to the filing of departmental charges, the bargaining unit member
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard.

Any member of the bargaining unit shall be given a copy of any warning
or memorandum entered in his personnel file. If in the opinion of said
member, the warning or memorandum issued was not justified, then the
member shall have the right to respond in writing and have such response
entered in his personnel file. Such warnings and memoranda are not
discipline.

A member of the bargaining unit subject to such investigation by the
Rochester Police Department shall suffer no reprisals, directly or
indirectly, for exercising his rights under this Article.

Except as provided in Section 2 of this Article, discipline shall be
covered by Civil Service Law Section 75 and 76. The Hearing Board
shall be selected in the following manner:

A. The Appointing Authority will submit to the member a list of 3
command officers of the rank of Lieutenant or higher from which
the member must select at least 2 who shall serve on the Hearing
Board.

B. The member may submit to the Appointing Authority a list of 3
other members holding a rank higher than his rank from which the
Appointing Authority shall select one member of the Hearing
Board.

C. Ifa civilian is named to serve on the Hearing Board upon the
request of the complainant, the civilian will serve in place of one
of the Appointing Authority's designees. The member will decide
which command officer will be replaced by the civilian.

A member charged with misconduct and/or incompetence may elect to
have his/her hearing held before a single Hearing Officer pursuant to
Section 75 of the Civil Service Law. Such Hearing Officer shall be a
professional neutral, selected, on a rotating basis, from a panel of at least
three neutrals mutually agreed to by the City and the Locust Club. In the

Page 29
CeOrIAUNUAWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

20.

21.

22.

23.

event the parties cannot agree to a panel, the neutral shall be selected by
the Appointing Authority from a list of such neutrals maintained by the
American Arbitration Association regional office in Syracuse, New
York. The costs and expenses of such neutral Hearing Officer shall be
paid by the City, and the Hearing Officer shall conduct a hearing
pursuant to Section 75 of the Civil Service Law and shall forward his/her
Findings and Recommendations to the Appointing Authority for decision
in accordance with the provisions of Section 75.

No removal or disciplinary proceeding shall be commenced more than
eighteen (18) months after the occurrence of the alleged incompetence or
misconduct complained of in the disciplinary charges, except that such
limitations shall not apply where the incompetency or misconduct
complained of and described in the charges would, if proved in a court of
appropriate jurisdiction, constitute a crime.

The Chief shall make a written final disposition and notify the accused
officer of the Hearing Officer’s recommendation within thirty (30) days
following receipt of the recommendations. A copy of the disposition and
the Hearing Officer’s recommendation will be provided to the member
and the Union President.

Unless the nature of the investigation requires immediate attention, the
member shall be given at least 48 hours advance notice of any interview
conducted under this Section.

All members placed on the Hearing Board list will be done so at the
discretion of the Chief of Police. The list of eligibles shall be made
available to the Locust Club President at a reasonable time prior to the
selection of a Hearing Board panel.

(A) The City agrees to release a copy of all statements of potential
witnesses that the City anticipates calling as a witness for the City of
Rochester against an accused member. The statements shall be released
to the member's attorney or the Locust Club president or his designee at
least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the hearing, provided that the
member agrees in writing not to contact or have an agent contact any
person whose statement is to be provided. Upon receipt of the
statements, neither the Union nor its agents shall contact any person
whose statement has been provided.

(B) The Union agrees to release a copy of all statements of potential
witnesses that the Union anticipates calling as a witness for the defense
of any accused member. The statement shall be released to the
Commanding Officer of the Professional Standards Section at least forty-
eight (48) hours prior to a hearing date.

Upon receipt of the statement, the City agrees not to contact any person
whose statement has been given to the City's representative.

The Union can allege violation of procedures to the Chief of Police in
writing. The Chief will take such allegation into consideration as
possible mitigating circumstances in selecting the disciplinary penalty, if
any.

Professional Standards Section interviews of employees assigned to the
3rd platoon shall be scheduled to begin no later than 2 PM unless the
exigency of the investigation dictates otherwise.

Bargaining unit members will not be questioned in Professional
Standards Section interviews regarding conversations between the
members and their union representatives which occur as a result of the
union’s statutory duty to represent its members.

Discipline Guidelines and Classification of Penalties - see Appendix 1

Page 30
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

9
10
iB
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 2:
A.

Command Discipline
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 75 and Section 76 of the Civil
Service Law, or Section 1! of this Article, Section Commanders,
regardless of rank, or any command officer holding the rank of Major or
higher, may impose discipline for minor violations of the Rules &
Regulations and General Orders of the Department.

Discipline imposed through command discipline shall be one of the
following: Letter of reprimand; suspension without pay for a maximum
of three (3) days; requirement to work up to three "R-Days" without
additional pay; reimbursement up to $100 of the value of the property
which is intentionally or negligently damaged or lost by a member;
successful completion of a driver training program; or transfer.

When command discipline is imposed, the member shall:

1. accept the commander's disciplinary findings and punishment; or

2. accept the commander's disciplinary findings and appeal the
punishment to the Command Discipline Appeal Board, the
determination of which shall be final; or

3. refuse the commander's disciplinary findings and punishment
and elect disciplinary proceedings pursuant to Section 75 of the
Civil Service Law.

The Command Discipline Appeal Board shall consist of two (2)
command officers appointed by the Chief of Police and the President of
the Locust Club or an elected Club officer designated by him.

Disciplinary determinations made under this Section shall be governed
only by these procedures and shall not be subject to the grievance
procedure set forth in Article 26 of this collective bargaining agreement
or appealed in any other manner, including a proceeding under Article 78
of the CPLR, or the Civil Service Law. This subdivision shall not be
interpreted to preclude the member from utilizing the procedure set forth
in subdivision C(3) of this Section.

No command discipline shall be commenced under this Section more
than ninety (90) days after the occurrence of the alleged misconduct.

The record of any command discipline shall be removed from a member's
personnel record after the member has had no other discipline imposed
for a period of one year, and will not be used against the member
thereafter. Upon request of the member, such written records shall be
destroyed or returned to him.

Upon the member accepting the commander's disciplinary findings and
punishment, or upon the determination of the Command Discipline
Appeal Board, the appointing authority may under no circumstances
overrule the punishment imposed or impose further discipline for the
same violation.

Page 31
Cord dksAswn—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

ARTICLE 21
MEMBERS RIGHTS

Section 1: Access to Personnel File

A member shall, after requesting in writing, be permitted to review his own
personnel file that is maintained in the Police Chief's office, in the presence of an
appropriate official of the Department. Only complainants’ names and addresses and
reference sources shall be deleted from said file when it is so deemed necessary.
Requests for such viewing must be honored within fifteen (15) days of such request.

Section 2: Release of Police Photographs

The City agrees not to release the Police identification photograph of any
member to the news media unless the City first receives the permission of the
affected member.

Section 3: Release of Employment Records

1. Upon receipt by the City of a request for the employment records of a
member or former member of the Rochester Police Department, the City
may disclose to the requesting party the records of any prior disciplinary
proceedings in which such member or former member was found guilty or
pled guilty following charges and an opportunity to be heard pursuant to
Section 75 of the New York State Civil Service Law. The City may also
disclose to the requesting party records of disciplinary charges if such
member resigned or retired from the Rochester Police Department with the
disciplinary charges pending. However, a member who retires or resigns
from the Rochester Police Department with disciplinary charges pending
shall have the right within two weeks after leaving the Rochester Police
Department to file a written statement which shall be maintained with the
charges and which shall be disclosed whenever the disciplinary charges are
disclosed. The City shall not disclose to the requesting party records of an
internal investigation that was pending without charges at the time the
member resigned or retired from the Rochester Police Department unless
charges were brought after the member retired or resigned, and said member
was given an opportunity for a name-clearing hearing or to file a written
statement. Such charges shall be brought within the time for bringing
disciplinary charges against a member of the Department. The member
shall be allowed two weeks to either request a name-clearing hearing or to
file a written statement. If the member elects to file a written statement, the
statement shall be maintained with the charges and shall be disclosed
whenever the disciplinary charges are disclosed. If the member elects to
have a name-clearing hearing, the hearing shall be held before a member of
the Rochester Police Department of the rank of Captain or above who is
chosen by the Chief from a list of three names submitted by the former
member. The hearing shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence.
The hearing officer shall make a recommendation to the Chief, who shall
make the final determination. A transcript shall not be required, but either
party may provide for a transcript at their own cost. The sole issue in such a
hearing shall be whether substantial evidence supports the charges so that
the records can be released to a requesting party. The hearing shall have no
effect on the former member’s status with the Department and shall not
constitute a determination of guilt or innocence on the charges for
disciplinary purposes. The former member may be called as a witness at the
hearing by either party.

Page 32
CeIDAHAWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

2. Any member or former member of the Rochester Police Department shall
have the opportunity to review his or her own history record maintained by
the Professional Standards Section of the Rochester Police Department,
upon written request, at a time and in a manner to be reasonably established
by the Professional Standards Section, provided that nothing contained
herein shall give any member or former member the right to review the
history record of an investigation pending at the time of such review if the
member or former member has not yet been notified of the investigation,
nor the right to review any record relating to any investigation by the
Professional Standards Section other than the history record.

Section 1:

ARTICLE 22
SENIORITY

Police Officers & Investigators

Police Officer seniority shall be based upon:

A.

moO@

m

Date of appointment as a member of the Rochester Police
Department

Position on Civil Service list from which the member was appointed
Prior BMP Certification

Overall standing in the City of Rochester sponsored Academy Class
Date of hire as a Police Officer in the member’s previous Police
Department

Police Chief’s discretion.

Investigator seniority shall be based upon:
A. Date of assignment or appointment as an investigator, whichever

B.
Cc.
D.

mm

occurs first

. Position on the merit testing or Civil Service list from which the

member was appointed
Length of service as a City of Rochester Police Officer

. Position on Civil Service list from which the member was appointed

to the Rochester Police Department
Total length of service as a Police Officer
Standing in the City of Rochester Police Academy class

G. Discretion of the Police Chief

Section 2:

Commanding Officers

Commanding officers’ seniority shall be based upon:

A.

=moow

Section 3:

Date of promotion into rank

Position on the Civil Service list

Length of service as a City of Rochester police officer
Total length of service as a police officer

Standing in the City of Rochester Police Academy class
Discretion of the Police Chief

Current List

Current seniority employment lists in each rank, by name and date of
appointment to the Rochester Police Department, shall be made available for
inspection. The list shall be updated every four months.

Section 4:

Reinstated Employees

A member of the unit who leaves Rochester Police Department
employment, and who is subsequently reappointed to the department in accordance
with Civil Service Law, shall have his/her seniority calculated from the original

Page 33
COI Aura wn—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

date of appointment, less the time that the member was not an employee of the
Rochester Police Department. The member shall receive his/her seniority based
upon original date of appointment, and adjusted for time not employed by the
Department, after one year of continuous service from the date of reappointment.

ARTICLE 23
OUT-OF-TITLE WORK

Section 1: Compensation

When a member of the unit is assigned by competent authority to work out-
of-title at the rank higher than his regular rank, he shall be compensated for working
in the position for the time worked on a "per diem" basis which shall reflect the
difference between his regular salary and the salary which he would receive if
promoted regularly to the higher title. The subject of excessive out-of-title work is a
valid labor management discussion item.

Section 2: Method of Payment
Payment for out-of-title work shall be made in the payroll period following
the payroll period in which the out-of-title work was actually worked.

Section 3: Selection for Out-of-Title Work

A. Officers shall be assigned to out-of-title work within the Section and
Platoon by the Police Chief or Commanding Officer by utilizing the
following criteria: position on current promotional list, work experience
and quality of work.

B. If work experience and quality of work are equal in the judgment of the
Police Chief or Commanding Officer, preference will be given to the
officer highest on the promotional list, or in the absence of a promotional
list, seniority will replace position on the promotional list placement.

C.. The Police Chief at his discretion may appoint Police Officers to out-of-
title and/or temporary Investigator positions in the Special Investigation
Section who have specific knowledge, skills and abilities in order to
address specialized investigations. Officers assigned under this provision
will assume 4th platoon hours for a period not to exceed three months.

D. Appointments under this Section shall not entitle the member to overtime
pay in accordance with Article 18, Section 3(A).

ARTICLE 24
CIVIL SERVICE PROCEDURE

Section 1: Duration
The Police Chief agrees not to request an extension beyond two (2) years
for any Civil Service List for promotion.

Section 2: Scheduling of Tests

The Police Chief agrees to request the Civil Service Commission to adopt a
policy of holding promotional examinations at least 60 days before expiration of
existing promotional lists.

Section 3: Physical Standards

The Police Chief agrees to request the Civil Service Commission to publish
physical standards for appointment and promotion.

Page 34
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

1 Section 4: Standards

2 The City agrees to maintain at least the minimum standards and
3 qualifications in accordance with the Civil Service Law for the appointment of
4 Police Officers.

5

6 Section 5: Promotional Vacancies

7 The Police Chief agrees to forward a list of promotional vacancies to the
8 — Club President or his designee, upon request. This notice will clearly state the date
9 of the vacancy.
10
11 Section 6: Civil Service Investigator Examination
12 The City agrees to establish without delay a Civil Service Investigator examination.

13. Further, the City intends to make promotions to the rank of Investigator within two years.

15

16

17 ARTICLE 25

18 LEAVES OF ABSENCE

19

20 = Section 1: Leave of Absence Without Pay

21 Leave of absence without pay up to the time limitations of the New York

22 Civil Service Law in effect at the time may be obtained subject to the approval of
23 the Appointing Authority.

25 An employee on an unpaid leave of absence shall notify the Appointing
26 Authority at least two (2) weeks in advance of his intent to return to active duty.
27 Failure to give such notice will result in termination of employment.

28
29 Section 2: Educational Leave
30 A leave of absence without pay may be obtained as an educational leave

31 subject to the approval of the Appointing Authority if such is for the purpose of
32 acquiring educational training which will increase the efficiency and usefulness of
33 the employee to the Police Department.

34

35 Section 3: Unapproved Leave of Absence

36 Leaves of absence other than those provided by Sections | and 2 above
37 will not be granted and will result in termination of service.

38

39

40 ARTICLE 26

4l RELEASE TIME FOR CLUB BUSINESS

42

43 Section 1: Release Time for Club Business

44 The City agrees to place one member on release time, up toa maximum of

45 2,000 hours per contract year, for the purpose of conducting official Club business.
46 The Club President shall determine which member shall be released and shall
47 notify the Chief of Police after the determination has been made at least one ()
48 — week prior to the commencement of such release time, specifying the period or
49 periods of such release time.

50

51 Section 2: Release Time for Club President

52 A. The City agrees to place the President of the Rochester Police Locust
53 Club on full, detached duty with full pay and all benefits commensurate
54 with his rank and assignment. The President shall not be assigned any
55 regular police duties unless an emergency is declared. He shall be
56 eligible to participate in any scheduled, voluntary overtime program and

Page 35
Carus sHN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

any Special Events detail, at which time he shall be subject to all Rules,
Regulations and General Orders of the Department. While on release
time, the President shall perform the duties related to representation of
members of the Union and consistent with the duties and responsibilities
of the Union President.

B. The member released from duty pursuant to this Section shall not suffer
any loss of salary or benefits.

C. The President is designated to be on full, detached release duty. He may
work irregular hours and have an irregular work schedule. For the
purpose of determining his pay, he shall be considered to be assigned to a
2nd platoon position with a 5-2 work schedule with Saturday and Sunday
as his regular “R” days. It is also understood that he may change his
regular days off, but if he does so to perform the duties related to Union
President, he will not be paid overtime for working a scheduled “R” day.
However, the President shall receive overtime pursuant to the provisions
of this Agreement if he performs police duties at the direction of a
competent police authority. When working such overtime, the Union
President will not conduct Union business and will report and respond to
competent police command authority, unless relieved to respond to
emergent Union duties.

Section 3: Release Time for the State P.B.A. Convention

The City will give release time with pay for a maximum for four (4) days,
not to exceed eight (8) delegates once a year, to those members designated by the
Club to attend the State P.B.A. Convention.

Section 4: Release Time for Regular and Special Club Meetings

The City will give release time with pay, not to exceed five (5) members
(including all Club officers on release time), to those members designated by the
Club to attend regular and special Club meetings.

Section 5: Release Time for Negotiation Committee

The City will give release time with pay, not to exceed seven (7) repre-
sentatives at any one time, to those members designated by the Club to participate as
the Negotiating Committee.

Section 6: Release Time for Election Commissioners

The City will give release time with pay, not to exceed three (3) members,
to those police officers who serve as election commissioners of the Locust Club on
the day of the Locust Club election or special elections.

Section 7: Designation of Club Representatives

Officers, delegates and Locust Club Representatives who are to be granted
leave for Club business as set forth above, without loss of pay, are and shall be those
officially elected to such position by members of the Police Locust Club, Inc.
Except that for purposes of Section 5 above, non-elected members of the Police
Locust Club, Inc. who are officially designated by the officers of the Club as
members of the Police Locust Club Negotiating Committee, shall be granted leave
for negotiations without loss of pay.

Section 8: Executive Board Members

The City will give release time with pay for up to twelve (12) Executive
Board members to attend regular Executive Board meetings once a month for a
maximum of two (2) hours a meeting.

Page 36
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

1 Section 9: Executive Officer Release Time

2 A. The City agrees to place one member, who shall be an elected officer of
3 the Union and so designated by the Union President, on full, detached duty
4 with full pay and all benefits commensurate with his rank and assignment.
5 This member shall not be assigned any regular police duties unless an
6 emergency is declared. He shall be eligible to participate in any scheduled
7 voluntary overtime program and any Special Events detail at which time he
8 shall be subject to all Rules, Regulations and General Orders of the

9 Department. While on full release time, this member shall perform the
10 duties related to his elected Union office and other general Union duties as
i assigned by the Union President.

12

13 B. The Union President shall determine which elected officer of the Union
14 shall be designated for full release pursuant to this Section and shall notify
15 the Chief of Police of such designation at least thirty (30) days prior to the
16 commencement of the release time. Any member placed on full release
17 time pursuant to this Section shall not suffer any loss of salary or benefits.
18

19 C. Although the member designated to be on full, detached release duty may
20 work irregular hours and have an irregular work schedule at the member’s
21 discretion, for the purpose of determining his pay, he shall be considered to
22 be assigned to a 2nd platoon position with a 5-2 work schedule with
23 Saturday and Sunday as his regular “R” days. It is also understood that this
24 member may change his regular days off, but if he does so to perform the
25 duties related to his Union office, he will not be paid overtime for working
26 a scheduled “R” day. However, this member will be eligible for overtime
27 pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement if he performs police duties
28 on a regular “R” day at the direction of a competent police authority.
29 When working such overtime, this member will not conduct Union
30 business and will report and respond to competent police command
31 authority, unless relieved to respond to emergent Union duties.

32

33

34 ARTICLE 27

35 CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION

36

37 Section 1: Definitions

38 ‘A. Grievance - the term "grievance" shall be defined as a dispute between
39 the parties to this Agreement, involving the interpretation or application
40 of any provisions of this Agreement.

41

42 B. Days - the term “days” when used in this Article shall, except where
43 otherwise indicated, mean working days on a Monday through Friday
44 basis.

45

46 Section 2: Procedure

47 A. It is important that grievances be processed as rapidly as possible. The
48 number of days indicated at each step should be considered as maximum
49 and every effort should be made to expedite the process. However, when
50 mutually agreed, the time limits given below may be extended.

51

52 B. Failure at any step of this procedure to communicate to the Club the
53 decision on a grievance within the specified time limits shall permit the:
54 Club to proceed to the next step of the grievance procedure. Failure to
55 announce an appeal of a grievance to the next step within the specified
56 time limits shall terminate the grievance.

Page 37
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Cc.

D.

Section

In case of Group, Policy or organization type grievance, the grievance
may be submitted at Step B by the Club representative.

The time limitations set forth in Section 3 of this Article may be extended
by the mutual consent of the Club President or designee and the Chief of
Police or Manager of Labor Relations.

3: Grievance Steps
In the event of a grievance as defined in Section | of this Article, either

party shall have the right to resolve the grievance in the following manner:

Step A:

The aggrieved member, with or without a Club representative, shall
present the grievance orally to the immediate supervisor and the
commanding officer of the aggrieved within fifteen (15) working days.
An oral decision by the commanding officer must be presented to the
Club representative within three (3) working days of receipt of the oral
grievance. No resolution of a grievance at this step shall constitute a
binding precedent.

Step B:

If not resolved at Step A within five (5) working days of the receipt of
the oral decision, the Club President or designee, with or without the
aggrieved member, shall present a written grievance, which shall contain
the oral decision, to the Chief of Police or his officially designated
representative who shall within five (5) working days, discuss the
grievance with the Club President or his designee and who shall, within
ten (10) working days of the receipt of the written grievance, forward his
written decision concerning the grievance to the Club President or his
designee.

Step C:

If Step B fails to produce a settlement, a written record of the dispute by
either party, together with the Chief's written decision, shall be forwarded
to the Manager of Labor Relations within five (5) working days after the
receipt of the Chief's written decision. Upon receipt of the written record
of the dispute together with a copy of the Chief's written decision, the
Manager of Labor Relations shall, within five (5) working days, discuss
the grievance with the Club's President or designee and shall within ten
(10) working days of the receipt of the written record of the dispute and
the Chief's written decision, forward his written decision to the Club
President.

Step D:
If Step C fails to produce a settlement of the dispute, either the Club or
the City may take the dispute to arbitration upon service of written notice
to the other party of its intention to do so. This notice shall be served
within ten (10) calendar days from the conclusion of Step C. Otherwise,
the right of arbitration of such dispute shall be deemed waived and the
grievance shall be considered closed with no further appeal.

Section 4: Arbitration

A

. An arbitration proceeding shall be conducted by an arbitrator designated

and pursuant to rules agreed upon in accordance with this subdivision.
Within thirty (30) days of the execution of this Agreement, the parties
will:

Page 38
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

1. Select and maintain a panel of mutually acceptable arbitrators
who shall serve for the duration of the Agreement. Such panel
shall consist of not fewer than four (4) arbitrators. The
arbitrators shall be initially listed in alphabetical order and shall
be designated on a rotating basis to arbitrate individual cases.
Arbitrators shall be replaced by mutual agreement in the event
of resignation or any other inability to serve.

B. Decisions of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the Club, the City
and any grievant, provided said decision is within the scope of his
authority and the constraints established by this section. The arbitrator
shall have no authority or power to render a decision or award
inconsistent with Statutory or Appellate decisional law.

C. The selected arbitrator shall hear the matter promptly and will issue his
decision not later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the close
of the hearings or, if oral hearings have been waived, then from the date
the final statements and proofs are submitted to the arbitrator.

D. The arbitrator's decision shall be in writing and will set forth his findings
of fact, reasoning and conclusions on the issues.

E. The authority of the arbitrator shall be limited to matters of interpretation
or application of the express provisions of this Agreement and the
arbitrator shall have no power or authority to alter, add to or subtract
from or otherwise modify the terms of this Agreement as written. The
arbitrator shall confine himself to the precise issue submitted for
arbitration and shall have no authority or power to determine any other
issues not submitted to him. He shall confine his decision and award
solely to the interpretation and application of this Agreement.

F. Expenses for the arbitrator's services and the proceedings shall be borne
equally by the employer and the Club. However, each party shall be
responsible for compensating its own witnesses. If either party desires a
transcript of the proceedings, it may cause the transcript to be made. Each
party shall be responsible for the payment for their copy of the transcript.

The parties shall equally share the expense of the arbitrator's copy.

ARTICLE 28
GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE AND REPRESENTATION

Section 1: Club Representatives

The Club may have duly elected Representatives selected by the
membership of the Club at an election or appointed by the Locust Club President.
The City will be provided with a current list of these representatives at all times. In
the event of the absence of a particular Representative, the Club may appoint an
alternate.

Section 2: Representative Pursuance

A representative or alternate will be permitted to leave his work in
pursuance of a grievance, conditions permitting, as determined by the
representative's commanding officer, during the representative's normal working
hours. If the representative's commanding officer determines that conditions do not

Page 39
CeIAURWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

permit absence during that representative's regular working hours, the grievance
shall be pursued upon completion of the representative's tour of duty.

Section 3: Release from Assignment

For the purpose of handling grievances as provided in the Grievance
Procedure, the representative will record his time and specify to his immediate
superior the purpose of his activity before he leaves his assignment. Upon entering
the area of another commanding officer, he shall notify that commanding officer of
his presence and purpose.

Section 4: Representative with Grievance

Any representative having an individual grievance in connection with his
own work may ask for an officer of the Club to assist him in adjusting the grievance
with the commanding officer.

ARTICLE 29
POLICE LABOR-MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

A Police Labor-Management Committee shall be established for the
purpose of discussing at mutually agreeable times matters of mutual concern, but
not to include amendment of this Agreement. This Committee shall be limited to no
more than four (4) members of the Police Locust Club, one of whom shall be the
Locust Club President, and four (4) management members, one of whom shall be
the Manager of Labor Relations. The Committee shall meet at the call of the
Manager of Labor Relations or the Locust Club President.

Any expenses pursuant to said meetings shall be equally borne by the
parties to this Agreement.

ARTICLE 30
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1: Applicable Laws

It is understood and agreed by both parties that the benefits conferred by
this Agreement are subject to the applicable provisions of Law and to the
appropriation of funds by City Council.

Section 2: Savings Clause

This Agreement and all provisions herein are subject to all applicable laws
and in the event any provision of this Agreement is held to violate such laws, said
provision shall not bind either of the parties, but the remainder of this Agreement
shall remain in full force and effect as if the invalid or illegal provision had not been
part of this Agreement.

Section 3: Contract Modification

No amendment or alteration of this Agreement shall be binding unless it is
in writing and signed by the Mayor or his representative and by a duly authorized
representative of the Locust Club, Inc., as determined by the by-laws of the Locust
Club.

Page 40
COIAUEWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 4: Changes in Rules, Regulations and General Orders

All portions of any Rules, Regulations and General Orders of the
Department pertaining to the terms and conditions of employment shall be changed
through the process of collective negotiations. In the event the City desires to so
change such a Rule, Regulation or General Order, it shall give notice thereof to the
Club. The parties shall thereafter negotiate collectively over such proposed
change(s). If, as a result of the collective negotiations, the parties arrive at impasse,
the matter shall be resolved through arbitration, as that procedure is set forth in
Article 27, Section 4, of this Agreement.

Section 5: Printing of Contract

The cost of printing this Agreement in booklet form in the number of 800
copies and at a cost not to exceed $1500 shall be borne equally by the City and the
Union. Such printing shall be done by a Union print shop having a Union label.
This provision shall not apply if the City's share of the printing costs exceeds the
limit at which the City must solicit bids for the work to be performed pursuant to the
New York State General Municipal Law.

Section 6: Police Vehicles
Police vehicles will be kept in good appearance and mechanical condition.

Section 7: Lounge
The City will continue to provide a police officers' lounge in the Public
Safety Building for members of the Unit subpoenaed to Court.

Section 8: Defense and Indemnification of Police Officers

A. The City shall pay reasonable and necessary attorney's fees at rates
prevailing in the local legal community, disbursements and litigation
expenses incurred by a police officer in his defense in a criminal
proceeding in a state or federal court arising out of any alleged act or
omission that occurred or allegedly occurred while the employee was
exercising or performing or in good faith purporting to exercise or
perform his powers and duties. The police officer shall be entitled to
private counsel of his own choice, except that the Corporation Counsel
may require that appropriate groups of police officers be represented by
the same private counsel. This duty to pay for a defense in a criminal
proceeding shall arise only upon the complete acquittal of a police
officer, the dismissal of all criminal charges against him, or a no-bill by a
Grand Jury investigating an on-duty use of a weapon. Attorney's fees,
disbursements, and litigation expenses shall be submitted by the attorney
within 30 days after acquittal or dismissal to the Corporation Counsel in
the manner and form required by him, and shall be reviewed and
approved by him prior to payment.

B. The City shall provide for the defense of a police officer in any civil
action or proceeding before any state or federal court or administrative
agency arising out of any alleged act or omission that occurred or
allegedly occurred while the police officer was exercising or performing
or in good faith purporting to exercise or perform his powers and duties.
This duty to provide for a defense shall not arise where the action or
proceeding is brought by or at the behest of the City itself unless the
police officer is successful in such action or proceeding.

C. The Corporation Counsel shall defend, or may employ special counsel to
defend, the police officer in any civil action or proceeding unless the
Corporation Counsel determines that a conflict of interest exists or may

Page 41
Cou das HkwWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

arise in which case the police officer shall be entitled to private counsel
of his choice, except that the Corporation Counsel may require that
appropriate groups of police officers be represented by the same private
counsel. If special counsel is employed, or a police officer is represented
by private counsel, the City shall pay reasonable and necessary attorney's
fees at rates prevailing in the local legal community, disbursements, and
litigation expenses incurred by a police officer in his defense. Attorney's
fees, disbursements and litigation expenses shall be submitted by the
attorney promptly after the end of each month to the Corporation
Counsel, in the manner and form required by him, and shall be reviewed
and approved by him prior to payment.

D. The City shall indemnify and save harmless a police officer in the
amount of any judgment obtained against the police officer in a state or
federal court or administrative agency, or in the amount of any settlement
or a claim, provided that the act or omission occurred while the police
officer was exercising or performing or in good faith purporting to
exercise or perform his powers and duties. This duty to indemnify and
save harmless shall not arise where the injury or damage resulted from
intentional wrongdoing on the part of the police officer; nor shall it arise
where a judgment is obtained or claim settled as a result of an action or
proceeding brought by or at the behest of the City itself; nor shall it arise
with respect to non-automatic punitive or exemplary damages, fines or
penalties.

E. The duties to pay for or to provide a defense and to indemnify and save
harmless shall be conditioned upon (a) delivery by a police officer to the
Corporation Counsel of any notice, summons, complaint or any other
legal process within five (5) business days after he is served with such
document, and (b) the full cooperation of a police officer in the defense
of any action or proceeding against him or against the City based upon
his alleged acts or omissions, and in the taking of any appeals.

F. Any dispute arising under this Section shall be submitted to arbitration
pursuant to Article 27, Section 4, of this Agreement. A demand for
arbitration must be served within sixty (60) days of written notice to the
Club of a decision by the Corporation Counsel.

Section 9: Chief's Award Day

The Chief, at his discretion, may award a paid day off to any member who
has exhibited conduct above and beyond the call of duty and/or has provided
meritorious service.

ARTICLE 31
BULLETIN BOARDS AND INFORMATION UPDATE

It is agreed that the Club may use all official police bulletin boards for the
purpose of posting Club notices to Club members, provided that such notices shall
be clearly identified as Club notices.

The Information Update and the videotape system may also be used for
Club announcements, provided that the Club's use of the videotape system does not
interfere with the normal functioning of the Police Department. The Club agrees to
confine its use of the videotape system to issues of working conditions and Club

Page 42
Caorauaun—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

social events. The Chief of Police shall have final content approval of all videotape
programming to insure its professionalism.

The City agrees to maintain the Information Update for the term of this
Agreement.

ARTICLE 32
TERM OF CONTRACT

Section 1: Duration

This contract shall be for a period of three (3) years commencing July 1,
2013, and ending June 30, 2016. This contract shall automatically be renewed from
year to year thereafter, unless either party shall notify the other party in writing not
earlier than November 15th and not later than November 30th, or as hereinafter
provided for any renewal period of the party's intention to change, alter, amend or
terminate this contract.

Section 2: Negotiations

It is understood and agreed that negotiations pursuant to the above notice
shall begin not later than January 15, thereafter, unless otherwise mutually agreed to
by the parties.

ARTICLE 33
JURY DUTY

A. Members shall be granted a leave of absence with pay when they are required
to report for jury duty or jury service. A member must notify his immediate
supervisor no later than his first scheduled shift following receipt of a notice
of selection for jury duty or examination, and must provide a copy of such
notice to the office of the Police Chief.

B. Members are required to work all available reasonable hours outside of those
actually required for jury duty, or jury duty examination in accordance with
the employee’s regular work schedule. Members must request telephone
alert to the extent allowed by the Commissioner of Jurors or the Court. Ifa
member is advised to report for jury duty or examination, the member shall
inform the commanding officer of his unit immediately.

C. The City shall have the right to seek a waiver from jury duty for the member.
Members exempted from jury duty must accept the exemption or shall not be
paid by the City for such time.

D. A member on jury duty shall receive his regular pay and shall transmit to the

Employer an amount equal to any jury duty allowance received for such jury
service.

Page 43
CorIAUaWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

ARTICLE 34
PUBLIC SAFETY AIDES

The City may employ “Public Safety Aides” (PSA) and may, at its

discretion, change their name to any non-unit designation. When doing so, the
following will apply:

1.

Public Safety Aides will not respond to any call for police service, but will
be allowed to take reports in police facilities and NET offices on Tele-
Serve eligible calls as provided in General Order 460, quality of life
complaints, and to take reports of “non-priority |”calls for service or calls
for service which do not require the dispatch of a police officer to the
scene. They will not conduct investigations. They may issue parking
tickets and order the towing of illegally parked vehicles.

The number of Public Safety Aides shall not exceed 40.
The City will maintain the authorized number of bargaining unit positions
that existed on November 11, 1997 (674), except for those positions funded

and maintained as a result of federal or state grants.

The Public Safety Aide shall not be used to circumvent the payment of
overtime to any current unit member, or to replace any unit member.

The Union does not waive any current exclusivity of unit work associated
with the establishment of the PSA’s.

Page 44
COI DADHVhwWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereto caused this
Agreement to be executed by their duly authorized representatives.

FOR THE ROCHESTER POLICE LOCUST CLUB, INC.:

    

Michael D. Mazzeo RES
President
Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

FOR THE CITY OF ROCHESTER, NEW YORK:

    
    

Lovely Warren, Mayor
City of Rochester

Sharon A. Burke W /1 1

Manager of Labor Relations

PROVED AS TO FORM
CORPORATION COUNSEL

Apc Co YL

Page 45
COIDAHARWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

APPENDIX 1
DISCIPLINE GUIDELINES
&
CLASSIFICATION OF PENALTIES

The parties agree that the following are guidelines to be used in
determination of penalties for discipline.

A. Table of Penalties: Penalties may be assessed up to the maximum listed
below for infractions as classified in accordance with Appendix |:

 

 

Ist Incident 2nd Incident 3rd Incident
Class 1
3 Day 10 Day 20 Day
Suspension Suspension Suspension
Class 2
10 Day 30 Day 60 Day
Suspension Suspension Suspension
Class 3
Dismissal Dismissal Dismissal

B. The Chief at his sole discretion may assess penalties in excess of those
listed above. In the event the Chief chooses to exceed or reduce the
penalties listed above, he shall explain his reasoning, in writing to the
member, with copy to the Locust Club.

C. The Chief, at his discretion, may consider extenuating circumstances and
may impose a lesser penalty than listed above.

D. Loss of accrued time may be substituted for suspensions without pay upon
the request of the member and at the discretion of the Chief.

E. The imposition of discipline is not grievable. Appeals of discipline shall
be in accordance with Section 76 of the NY State Civil Service Law.

Page 46
OC MYRHEWN—

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.
CLASSIFICATION OF PENALTIES

MANUAL OF RULES AND REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECTION I - ORDERS and DISCIPLINE

Ll (A) Obedience to Laws,
Ordinances and Rules 3*
(B) Assist Other Persons
(C) Constitutes Violation
(D) Conviction
1.2 Familiarity with the Laws, Ordinances and Rules 1
(A) Returning from Absence
(B) Unfamiliarity No Defense
(C) Making Changes as Directed
1.3. Obedience to Orders 3
(A) Comply with Orders
(B) Geographic Limits

14 Issuance of Orders 1
1.5 Conflict of Orders 1
1.6 Insubordination 3

SECTION II - PERFORMANCE of and

ATTENTION to DUTY

2.1 General Duties 2

(A) _ Protection of Life and Property

(B) Duties
2.2 Identification 1

(A) Sworn

(B) Non-Sworn
2.3 Respond when Directed 1
2.4 Reporting for Duty 1
2.5 Absence from Duty 2
2.6 Action Required Regardless of

Assignment 3

2.7 Cooperation/Coordination 2

Page 47
Ce NAW Bw NH =

= 6

oN

14

20

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

2.8
2.9
2.10
2.11
2.12
2.13
2.14
2.15
2.16
2.17
2.18
2.19

2.20
2.21
2.22
2.23

Seeking Information Regarding Duties
Inspecting Area of Assignment
Leaving Area of Assignment
Attitude and Impartiality
Assistance to Fellow Employees
Assistance to Citizens

Medical Attention for III] Persons
Arrests

Investigations

Serving Warrants/Subpoenas
Appearance Required

Loitering or Sleeping on Duty/
Congregating
Reading on Duty

Supervisors Addressed by Title
Concealment

Performance of Duties

SECTION III - USE OF OFFICIAL POSITION

3.1
3.2

3.3

3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
3.10
3.11

City of Rochester Code of Ethics

Conducting Private Business or
Association on Duty

Use of Badge or Position for
Personal Gain

Preferment

Sale of Tickets or Donations

Soliciting Gifts, Gratuities, etc.
Recommending Attomeys

Giving Surety for Persons in Custody (Bail)
Withdrawing Charges

Communicating Information to Aid Evasion

Civil Cases

Page 48

Nw ND
Cm Ia AH BW N

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

SECTION IV - GENERAL CONDUCT

4l
4.2
43

44

4.5

4.6

47

48

4.9
4.10
4.11
4.12
4.13

4.14
4.15
4.16
4.17
4.18
4.19
4.20
4.21
4.22
4.23
4.24
4.25
4.26
4.27
4.28

Conduct

Courtesy

No Connections with Liquor
Establishment

Personal Associations
Frequenting Unlawful Establishments
Truthfulness

Malicious Rumors

Discussing Evidence
Divulging Police Information
Speeches, Statements, etc.
Membership and Organizations
Political Activity

Seeking/Accepting Compensation
for Damages

Debts

Expenditures of Department Funds

Correspondence, Letterheads

Personal Cards

Department Property and Equipment

Department Facilities & Property

Use of Alcoholic Beverages

Gambling

Use of Tobacco

Controlled Substances

Applications for Pistol Permits

Harassment

Notices, Posting, Circulation

Cooperation with Internal Investigations

Responsibility of Employees while
Suspended From Duty

Page 49

ww nn

NN WwW Ww
on Aw kw N=

10
i
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

20

21
22
23
24

26
27
28

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

SECTION V - REPORTS

5.1 Altering, Delaying or Falsifying Reports
5.2 Reporting Violations

5.3 Reporting Illegal Activities

5.4 Testimony for Defense

5.5 Information Regarding Crime

5.6 Actions Against Employees

5.7 Address and Telephone Number

SECTION VI - RESPONSIBILITIES OF
COMMANDING OFFICERS AND SUPERVISORS

6.1 Command
6.2 Subordinate Incompetency or
Misconduct
6.3 Courtesy
* SECTION I

4.1 Any violation of Sections A, B or C is a Class | offense unless the
alleged conduct constitutes a crime, then said violation is a Class 3

offense.

Page 50
aA anuU Pe wn

oo

22
23

24
25

26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

APPENDIX 2

MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE CITY OF ROCHESTER
AND
ROCHESTER POLICE LOCUST CLUB, INC.

Whereas the City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club,
Inc. have been participating in a joint Labor/Management Health Care
Committee and mutually agree to a single health insurance provider
which will eliminate the current health insurance plans as
referenced in the current collective bargaining agreement and
replace them with the Value, Core, and Enhanced plans of benefits as
developed by the joint committee:

Therefore the parties mutually agree to the following:

|. This agreement is a successor to the Memorandum of
Agreement that was in effect from September 1, 2009
through August 31, 2012 and this MOA will become an
appendix to the collective bargaining agreement. The
effective period for this Agreement is January 1, 2013
through December 31, 2015.

Il. Modify the Health Insurance provisions (Article 11) of the
collective bargaining agreement as follows:

ARTICLE 11- HOSPITAL & SURGICAL INSURANCE & DEATH
BENEFITS

Section 1: Hospital and Surgical Health Benefits
A. The City shall make available to unit members - the Value,
Core, and Enhanced plans which may be amended or
eliminated during the term of this agreement as determined

by the Labor/Management Health Care Committee.

B. It is expressly understood by the parties that a unit member
married to another unit member shall be eligible for only one
single health insurance contract in the event his or her
spouse is covered by his or her own single health insurance
contract, and further, that such member shall not be eligible
for any separate health insurance coverage if his or her
spouse is covered by a family health insurance contract, as
provided for in this Section.

Page 51
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Cc.

The Parties will continue to participate on the joint Labor/
Management Health Care Committee. The parties will make
a good faith commitment to fulfill the responsibilities of this
Committee throughout the term of this Agreement.

Section 2: Self Funding and the City’s Defined Contribution

A.

Effective January 1, 2013, the City will change from a fully
insured indemnity funding arrangement for its health
insurance program to a self-insured funding arrangement.

For Plan year 2013 (January 1, 2013 through December 31,
2013) the City will make a defined contribution in the amount
of $35,913,280.00 toward the funding of the City’s Health
Insurance Program for all active City employees. This total
amount of the City’s defined contribution is based on the
following calculation: $14,240.00 per contract for all active
City employees multiplied by 2,522 contracts.

. For Plan year 2014 (January 1, 2014 through December 31,

2014) the City will increase its 2013 defined contribution
amount by 3.75%, which equates to $14,774.00 multiplied by
the number of contracts as of September 1, 2013 for all active
City employees.

. For Plan year 2015 (January 1, 2015 through December 31,

2015) the City will increase its 2014 defined contribution
amount by 3.75%, which equates to $15,328.00 multiplied by
the number of contracts as of September 1, 2014 for all active
City employees.

. The Labor/Management Health Care Committee will have the

responsibility for determining how any differential in the
amount of City defined contribution funding and the total
annual cost of health care for active employees will be
teconciled in accordance with the Labor/Management Health
Care Committee Governance Agreement. It is understood
that the Committee must take action to reach consensus on
this funding reconciliation by September 30th of any plan
year, so as not to disrupt open enrollment or adversely affect
employee coverage.

Page 52
CIDA RWN—

i
12
13
14
15
16

25

26
27
28

29

30
31
32
33
34
35
36

37
38
39

41
42
43

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 3: Alternative Plans

Unit members, who accept health insurance coverage from a
source other than the City of Rochester shall receive $1,500 per
annum, prorated by month, based on the Health Insurance Plan year,
payable no later than 60 days following the end of the preceding Plan
year, if 1 through 49 unit members accept this option. If, however, 50
to 59 unit members accept this option by the last day of the Plan year,
the payment shall increase to $2,000 per annum per unit member. If
60 or more unit members accept this option by the last day of the Plan
year, the payment shall increase to $2,500 per annum per member.

Applications shall be made for the following Plan year at the
same time as “open enrollment” for health insurance.

Re-enrollment in City coverage is permitted during the year if a
qualifying event occurs.

Section 4: Dependent Coverage

In the event of the line-of-duty death of any active member of the
unit, the City will continue to provide and pay the cost of all health
benefits provided by this Article to the surviving spouse of the
deceased member until said spouse dies or remarries, and to
dependent children of the deceased member until such dependents
teach the age of 26.

Section 5: Payroll Deductions
The employee's share for all Hospital and Surgical health
benefits shall be paid on a payroll deduction basis.

Section 6: Life Insurance
A. A life insurance policy of a minimum of $3,500.00 shall be
provided by the City. The City agrees to pay the full premium
of an ordinary death insurance policy of $3,500.00 for all
members of the unit who may hereafter retire from service.
The effective date of the coverage shall be the first day of the
month following the date of employment.

B. The City shall make available a payroll deduction capability for
members’ purchase of life insurance, at their expense, from a
vendor selected by the Union. The Union will provide a
minimum of sixty (60) days' notice of the selection or change
of the vendor. Monthly payroll deductions will be made for
members who provide written authorization.

Page 53
oe UDKHEwWN—

BsxrSe

14

City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 7: Death Benefit

An additional $10,000 death benefit for death resulting from the
performance of a member's duties shall be provided by the City. The
beneficiary of such benefit shall be the beneficiary designated on the
life insurance policy provided for in Section 6 of this Article unless the
member designates in writing to the Director of the Bureau of Human
Resources Management a different beneficiary.

Section 8: Dental Plan

The provisions in this section remain as set forth in the current
collective bargaining agreement between the City and Rochester
Police Locust Club. However, the provisions of this section as set forth
in the current collective bargaining agreement may be reopened for
negotiation during the term of this Agreement.

Section 9: Coverage for Retirees
A. The City will provide hospitalization and medical
insurance to qualified employees who retire under the New
York State Policemen's and Firemen's Retirement System. In
order to qualify for the benefits set forth in this Section,
employees must meet both of the following conditions:

4. The employee must retire directly into and/or under the
New York State Policemen's and Firemen's Retirement
System from active, full-time employment with the City
and receive a pension therefrom, and

2. The employee must have served a minimum of twenty
(20) years of active full- time employment with the City
immediately preceding retirement into and/or under the
New York State Policemen's and Firemen's Retirement
System. For police officers who transferred to the City
from another jurisdiction and for deputy sheriffs who were
hired directly from a Sheriffs Department, prior service as
a police officer or deputy sheriff shall be included in this
20-year service requirement. For employees who are
veterans and who were hired prior to November 1, 2012,
up to three (3) years of military service shall be credited
toward satisfying the minimum twenty (20) year City
employment requirement under this section provided the
employee furnishes the City with documentation showing
that the employee has bought this additional military
service credit time from the NYS Policemen’s and
Firemen’s Retirement System. This additional military
service credit is only applicable toward achieving the
minimum twenty (20) year employment requirement; it
shall not be credited for any other purpose. The required
minimum period of time set forth in this paragraph will be

Page 54
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

waived in the event the employee is granted and receives
a New York State Policemen's and Firemen's Retirement
System disability retirement.

B. Qualified employees, as defined in subdivision A of this

Section, who retire during the term of this agreement may
elect to enroll in the Value, Core, or Enhanced Plan, as may
be amended by the Labor/Management Health Care
Committee. The City will contribute 90% (ninety percent) of
the cost of the Core Plan premium regardless of whether the
employee elects to enroll in the Value, Core, or Enhanced
Plan. For those employees who elect to enroll in the Value
Plan, the City's contribution will not exceed 100% (one
hundred percent) of the cost of the Value Plan premium. The
exceptions are as follows: for an employee who retires with
more than 25 years but less than 30 years of service, the City
shall pay 95% (ninety-five percent) of the cost of the Core
Plan premium; and for an employee who retires with 30 or
more years of service, the City shall pay 100% (one hundred
percent) of the Core Plan premium regardless of the plan and
coverage selected. For those employees who elect to enroll
in the Value Plan, the City's contribution will not exceed 100%
(one hundred percent) of the cost of the Value Plan.

1. When eligible for Medicare coverage, the retiree shall
be covered by the City's Medicare Supplemental or
Advantage Plan. It is expressly understood that the
City's health insurance does not cover any medical
expenses covered by Medicare A and B for those
being provided benefits in retirement plans. It is also
understood for those Medicare eligible retirees
participating in the City’s health insurance retirement
plans, Medicare A and B coverage participation is
required.

Section 10: Successor Agreement

If the parties fail to enter into a successor Health Care

Memorandum of Agreement prior to the expiration of this Agreement
on December 31, 2015, the City's defined contribution amount toward
the funding of the City’s Health Insurance Program for all active City
Employees will increase by 3.75% annually, using the same method of
calculation as previously referenced in Section 2 of this MOA, until
such time as a successor agreement is reached.

Page 55
City of Rochester and the Rochester Police Locust Club, Inc.

Section 11: Contingency Clause

The terms of this memorandum of agreement are contingent upon the
execution of health care Agreements by all participating members of the joint
Labor/Management Health Care Committee.

FOR THE CITY:

iron A. But
Manager of Labor Relations
City Rochester
Clu!

  

Page 56
