 

AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE CITY OF JACKSONVILLE
AND THE
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

LIEUTENANTS AND CAPTAINS

OCTOBER 1, 2011 - SEPTEMBER 30, 2014
AGREEMENT

BETWEEN

CITY OF JACKSONVILLE

AND

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

LIEUTENANTS AND CAPTAINS

OCTOBER 1, 2011 - SEPTEMBER 30, 2014
TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE PAGE

AGREEMENT ...........cccscssssssesesessssssesesesessssesesesesssesesesesessesesesesesessesesesssesesesesesessesesesesensesenenenenees 1
ARTICLE 1: F.O.P. RECOGNITION
ARTICLE 2: F.O.P. SECURITY AND CHECK OFF..
ARTICLE 3: F.O.P. ACTIVITIES ............
ARTICLE 4: MANAGEMENT SECURITY
ARTICLE 5: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
ARTICLE 6: SPECIAL MEETINGS...
ARTICLE 7: BULLETIN BOARDS
ARTICLE 8: WORK RULES.
ARTICLE 9: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
ARTICLE 10: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE.
ARTICLE 11: BILL OF RIGHTS...
ARTICLE 12: COMPREHENSIVE DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE
POLICY AND PROCEDURES
ARTICLE 13: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION ..
ARTICLE 14:
ARTICLE 15: PERSONAL LEAVE E.
ARTICLE 16: PERSONAL LEAVE P.
ARTICLE 17: USE OF LEAVE...
ARTICLE 18: BEREAVEMENT AND FUNERAL LEAVE..
ARTICLE 19: LEAVE DONATION ..
ARTICLE 20: MILITARY LEAVE
ARTICLE 21: HOLIDAYS
ARTICLE 22: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT..
ARTICLE 23: WAGES............scscsseseseseee
ARTICLE 24: FITNESS FOR DUTY EXAM.
ARTICLE 25: SAFETY AND HEALTH.....
ARTICLE 26: PHYSICAL ABILITY TESTING..
ARTICLE 27: INJURY-IN-LINE-OF-DUTY....
ARTICLE 28: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
ARTICLE 29: LIFE INSURANCE......
ARTICLE 30: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT..
ARTICLE 31: SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT
ARTICLE 32: PROMOTIONS ...............4.
ARTICLE 33: PHYSICAL ABILITY POLICY
ARTICLE 34: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS..
ARTICLE 35: SEVERABILITY.
ARTICLE 36: RESIDUAL RIGHTS
ARTICLE 37: ENTIRE AGREEMENT
SCHEDULE A...
SCHEDULE B.
SCHEDULE C
SCHEDULE D...
SCHEDULE E.
INDEX...

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

  
 
 

 

   
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

AGREEMENT

This AGREEMENT is entered into between the City of Jacksonville, hereinafter
referred to as the Employer! and The Jacksonville Consolidated Lodge No. 5-30 of
the Fraternal Order of Police, hereinafter referred to as the F.O.P. Itis the intent and
purpose of this Agreement to assure sound and mutually beneficial working and
economic relationships between the parties hereto, to provide an orderly and
peaceful means of resolving any misunderstandings or differences which may arise
and to set forth herein a basic and full agreement between the parties concerning
rates of pay, wages, hours of employment, and other terms and conditions of
employment. There are and shall be no individual arrangements or agreements
covering any part or all of this Agreement contrary to the terms herein provided.
Either party hereto shall be entitled to require specific performance of the provisions
of this Agreement. It is mutually understood and declared to be the public policy of
the Employer and the F.O.P. to promote harmonious and cooperative relationships
between the Employer and its employees, and to protect the public by assuring, at
all times, the orderly and uninterrupted operations and functions of government.

| “The Employer" means the Office of the Sheriff or the City of Jacksonville as the context may require.
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
1.1

1.2

1.3

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 1: F.O.P. RECOGNITION

Pursuant to and in accordance with all applicable provisions of Chapter 447,
Florida Statutes, the Employer recognizes the F.O.P. as the exclusive
collective bargaining representative for those employees in the defined
bargaining unit, all sworn Police Officers of the ranks of Lieutenant and
Captain (see attached Schedule A) for the purpose of bargaining
collectively in the determination of the wages, hours and terms and
conditions of employment of the public employees within the bargaining unit
unless and until recognition of such bargaining representative is withdrawn
by a vote of the majority of the employees represented. Employees shall
mean alll classified employees who are employed by the City of Jacksonville
whose Classifications appear on the attached Schedule A.

It is further understood and agreed that the President or an alternate of the
Jacksonville Consolidated Lodge No. 5-30 of the F.O.P. will be the official
pokesman for the F.O.P. in any matter between the F.O.P. and the Employer.
The alternate shall be selected from one of the officers listed below:

wo

 

Business Agent

First Vice President

Second Vice President

Secretary

Member of Board of Directors

Florida State Lodge representative (with letter of authorization
to represent Jacksonville Consolidated Lodge No. 5-30)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Any alternate designated by the President shall be designated in writing,
including the period of time covered by such designation. A written list of
the accredited officers and representatives of the F.O.P. shall be furnished to
the Sheriff and the City's Director of Employee Services immediately after
their designation and the Sheriff and the City’s Director of Employee Services
shall be notified of any changes of said representatives within five (5) days.

 
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 2: F.O.P. SECURITY AND CHECK OFF

Upon receipt of a written authorization from an employee covered by this
Agreement, the Employer will deduct from the employee's pay the amount
owed to the F.O.P. by such employee for dues. There will be twenty-six (26)
deductions per year. The Employer will remit such sums to the F.O.P. no later
than the tenth (10th) day of the month following such deductions. The F.O.P.
will certify any changes in the membership dues rate to the Employer in
writing over the signature of the authorized officer or officers of the F.O.P. at
least thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date of such change. The
Employer's remittance will be deemed correct if the F.O.P. does not notify
the Employer in writing within two (2) weeks of its receipt.

The F.O.P. will indemnify, defend, and hold the Employer harmless against
any claim made and against any suit instituted against the Employer on
account of any check off of F.O.P. dues.

An employee may revoke his/her authorization for deduction of dues,
provided the employee gives thirty (30) days notice to the F.O.P. and the
Employer by registered or certified mail. The Employer will not discontinue
dues deduction from any employee prior to authorization of the F.O.P. or the
employee. The Employer will not discontinue F.O.P. dues deduction simply
because an employee has changed from one F.O.P. bargaining unit to
another F.O.P. bargaining unit.

No dues deduction shall be made from the pay of an employee for any
payroll period in which the employee's net earnings for that payroll period
are less than the amount of dues to be checked off. “Net earnings” shall
mean “net" after required deduction of federal taxes, Social Security,
Pensions, Credit Union, and Health and Life Insurance premiums.

Should an employee's pay be insufficient to make all the deductions he/she
has authorized, deductions will be taken in the following order:

A. All legally required deductions will be deducted from the employee's
pay check. Legally required deductions include but are not limited to
deductions for taxes, court ordered deductions and F.O.P. dues
deductions when the employee has authorized dues deductions.

B. If any remaining payroll deduction slots are available on the
employee's paycheck, the slots will be used for City sponsored plans or
activities.
2.6

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

Cc. If any remaining payroll deduction slots are available on the
employee's paycheck, the slots will be Used for other F.O.P. sponsored
plans or activities that have been authorized by the employee.
Provided that if any employee requests in writing to change the priority
of his/her payroll deductions and replace an F.O.P. deduction with a
non-F.O.P. deduction, the written request of the employee will govern.

D. If any remaining payroll deduction slots are available on the
employee's paycheck, the slots will be used for any other deductions
for plans or activities that have been authorized by the employee.

In accordance with Chapter 447, Florida Statutes, Public Employees shall
have the right to form, join and participate in or refrain from forming, joining
and/or participating in any employee organization of their own choosing.
They shall have the right to be represented by any employee organization of
their choosing to negotiate collectively through a certified bargaining agent
with the Employer in the determination of the terms and conditions of their
employment.
3.1

3.2

3.3

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 3: F.O.P. ACTIVITIES

Employees shall have the right to join the F.O.P., to engage in lawful
concerted activities for the purpose of collective negotiation or bargaining
or other mutual aid and protection, to express or communicate any view,
grievance, complaint or opinion, within the bounds of good taste, related to
the conditions or compensation of public employment or its betterment, all
free from any restraint, coercion, discriminations or reprisal. There shall not be
restraint, discrimination or reprisal against any employee because of that
employee's membership or lack of membership in the F.O.P. or by virtue of
his/her holding office or not holding office in the F.O.P. The Employer and the
F.O.P. shall apply this provision to all employees.

A. On Duty Solicitation by F.O.P.

Solicitation of any kind by the F.O.P., including the solicitation of
grievances, membership, and the collection of F.0.P. monies, shall not
be engaged in during working hours.

B. __-F.O.P. Meetings
No F.O.P. meeting shall be held on Employer time.
Cc. On Duty F.O.P. Presentations

The President of the F.O.P. or the designated representative may
address any assembly or personnel of the Sheriff's Office at their
regular roll call, at each in-service training and at each recruit class at
the police academy for a period of time agreed upon by the F.O.P.
and the Office of the Sheriff.

D. On Duty Solicitation Prohibited

Employees will not be subjected to solicitation for monies or
membership by outside groups (including insurance companies or
charity groups) while on duty, including roll call.

The Employer will furnish a bank of three hundred (300) hours for use as F.O.P.
Pool Time. This time shall be used for F.O.P. activities by any member of the
F.0.P.. Approval of such time shall be authorized by either the F.O.P.
President, First Vice-President, Second Vice-President, or Secretary. Time
charged will be the actual time used. The F.O.P. may rollover not more than
500 unused hours to a subsequent year. When the F.O.P. requests time off
under these provisions, the employee that is to be off shall electronically
submit the request to the Office of the Sheriff for approval. Such leave
request must be in accordance with Article 17.2(C)(1)(2) of this contract.
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 4: MANAGEMENT SECURITY

4.1 The F.O.P. and its officers, representatives and members agree that during
the life of this Agreement, they shall not instigate, promote, sponsor, engage
in or condone any strike, slow down, concerted stoppage of work,
intentional interruption of Employer operations, or similar activities during the
terms of this Agreement. The consideration for such provision is the right to a
resolution of disputed questions. Management has the right to discharge or
otherwise discipline any or all employees who violate the provisions of this
paragraph. The only questions that may be raised in any proceeding,
grievance, judicial or otherwise, contesting such action is whether the
provision prohibiting strikes, slowdowns, concerted stoppage of work,
intentional interruptions of Employer operations or similar activities was
violated by the employee to be discharged or otherwise disciplined.

42 A. The F.O.P., its representatives, members, or any persons acting on their
behalf, agree that the following "other unlawful acts" as defined in
Chapter 447, Florida Statutes, are expressly prohibited:

(1) — Soliciting employees during the working hours of any employee
who is involved in the solicitation.

(2) Distributing literature during working hours in areas where the
actual work of employees is performed, such as offices,
warehouses, schools, police stations, fire stations, and any similar
public installation. This section shall not be construed to prohibit
the distribution of literature during the employee's lunch or in
such areas not specifically devoted to the performance of the
employee's official duties.

(3) Instigating or advocating support, in any positive manner, for an
employee organization's activities from high school or grade
school students during classroom time.

B. The circuit courts of this state shall have jurisdiction to enforce the
provisions of this section by injunction and contempt proceedings if
necessary. An employee who is convicted of a violation of any
provision of this section may be discharged or otherwise disciplined by
the Employer notwithstanding further provisions of any collective
bargaining agreement.

Cc. No employee organization shall directly or indirectly pay any fines or
penalties assessed against individuals pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
43

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

The Employer and the F.O.P. agree that the basic intent of this Agreement is
to provide a fair day's work in return for a fair day's pay and to provide
conditions of employment suitable to maintaining a competent work force.
The Employer and the F.O.P. affirm their joint opposition to any discriminatory
practices in connection with employment, promotion, training, or
assignment, remembering that the public interest requires the full utilization of
employees’ skill and ability without regard to race, color, creed, national
origin, marital status, or gender.
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 5: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

5.1 Itis the right of the Employer to determine unilaterally the purpose of each of
its constituent agencies, set standards of service to be offered to the public,
and exercise control and discretion over its organization and operations,
including the right to subcontract. It is also the right of the Employer to direct
its employees, take disciplinary action for proper cause, and relieve its
employees from duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons
by seniority provided, however, that the exercise of such rights shall not
preclude employees or their representatives from raising grievances, should
decision on the above matters have the practical consequences of violating
the terms and conditions of this collective bargaining agreement.

5.2. Whenever it is determined that Civil Emergency conditions exist, including
riots, civil disorders, hurricane conditions, or similar catastrophes, or when
such conditions can reasonably be determined to be imminent, excluding
the normal operational requirements of major civic/sporting events such as
the Super Bowl, the provisions of this Agreement may be suspended by the
Mayor and/or Sheriff during the time of the declared emergency provided
that wage rates and monetary fringe benefits shall not be suspended.

5.3. Noprovision of this Agreement shall affect the City of Jacksonville's right and
ability to classify employees as exempt from coverage by the Fair Labor
Standards Act.
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 6: SPECIAL MEETINGS

The Employer and the F.O.P. agree to meet and confer on matters of mutual
interest upon the written request of either party. The written request shall state the
matter or matters to be discussed and the reason(s) for requesting the meeting.
Discussion shall be limited to matters set forth in the request or other subjects
mutually agreed to, but it is understood that these special meetings shall not be
used to renegotiate this Agreement. Such special meetings shall be held within ten
(10) calendar days of the receipt of the written request and at a time and place
mutually agreeable to the parties. The F.O.P. shall have the right, at these special
meetings, to recommend to the Employer corrections to any inequities known to
the F.O.P.
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
7.1

7.2

7.3

7.4

7.5

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 7: BULLETIN BOARDS

The F.O.P. shall be provided partial use of suitable bulletin boards, including
at least one (1) in each division so designated by the Employer. The F.O.P.
may if it so desires, provide a bulletin board, of standard size, for its own
exclusive use in keeping with the decor of the above locations and with the
approval of the Employer. In addition, the F.O.P. will be provided with
centralized electronic posting (“electronic bulletin board”) within the JSO
system, for the same purpose.

The F.O.P. agrees that it shall use space on bulletin boards provided for in
Section 7.1 above only for the following purposes:

 

Notices of F.0.P. meetings

Elections of F.O.P. Officers

Reports of F.O.P. committees

Rulings and policies of the F.O.P.
Recreational and social affairs of the F.O.P.
Notices by public bodies

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Before they are posted, copies of all material, notices, or announcements
shall be submitted to the Employer.

No material, notices, or announcements shall be posted by the F.O.P. which
contain anything political or controversial, or anything adversely reflecting
upon the City of Jacksonville, its officials, managers, consultants, or agents, its
independent agencies, its employees, or any other labor organization. Any
proven violation of this section by the F.O.P. shall entitle the Employer to
cancel immediately the provisions of this Section and to remove that bulletin
board or the partial use thereof.

 

Notices or other information intended for the JSO electronic bulletin board
shall be submitted on acceptable electronic medium to the JSO Chief of
Personnel or designee for approval as to compliance with 7.2 before being
posted. Notices or other information intended for the electronic bulletin
board shall include a specific date on which the notice or information is to
be automatically deleted from the electronic bulletin board. Approved
materials will be posted electronically as soon as practicable.
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
8.1

8.2

8.3

8.4

8.5

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 8: WORK RULES

Reissuance of Conflicting Written Directives

On or before sixty (60) days after City Council approval of this Agreement, all
written directives issued by the Office of the Sheriff that are in conflict with
the terms and provisions of this Agreement shall be reissued so that no
conflicts exist between written directives and the terms of this Agreement.

Notice and Scheduling of In-Service Training

It shall be the policy of the Office of the Sheriff whenever possible to give at
least ten (10) working days notice to employees scheduled for in-service
training and to schedule employees on the midnight shift for such training
after regular days off (RDO’s) have been observed. It is recognized,
however, that last minute changes are often necessitated due to
unanticipated sickness, court subpoenas, family situations, etc., and such
situations may reduce the notification time in some cases.

Emergency Situation Meals

In accordance with the Master Plan for Emergency Control of the Office of
the Sheriff, employees who are required or ordered to work more than
twelve (12) hours on a single tour of duty, due to a declared emergency,
shall be furnished a hot meal on the second and each succeeding day,
within the twelve (12) hour tour of duty. The Office of the Sheriff will make a
reasonable effort to designate a safe and secure area near the emergency
area for employees to consume this meal. On the first day of said
emergency situation, a reasonable effort will be made to furnish affected
employees a hot meal within their twelve (12) hour tour of duty.

Transfers

It shall be the sole right of the Office of the Sheriff to transfer employees
between any subsections of the organization based upon operational needs.
Employees shall be notified at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the
transfer, except where the nature of a particular situation requires immediate
reassignment.

Administrative Leave Without Loss of Pay

An employee may be placed on administrative leave without loss of pay for
any reason deemed necessary by the Sheriff's Office.
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
9.1

9.2

9.3

9.4

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 9: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Agrievance is defined as a dispute involving the interpretation or application
of this Agreement. Any grievance filed shall refer to the provision(s) of this
Agreement alleged to have been violated, and shall adequately set forth
the facts pertaining to the alleged violation and the remedy sought.
Grievances challenging demotion with loss of pay, suspension with loss of
pay, or termination shall be filed at Step IV.

In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Article, the
day of the act, event, or default from which the designated period of time
begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed
shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday recognized by this
Agreement, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day
which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday recognized by this
Agreement.

Step 1:

Within ten (10) days of the occurrence or within ten (10) days after the
employee could reasonably have known of the occurrence (whichever is
later), the aggrieved employee shall reduce his/her grievance to writing, sign
it, and present it to the Assistant Chief or his/her designee. The Assistant Chief
or designee shall obtain the facts concerning the grievance and shall within
ten (10) days of receipt of the grievance conduct a meeting with the
grievant and the grievant's representative. The grievant may be
accompanied at this meeting by an F.O.P. representative. The Assistant Chief
or designee shall submit a written response to the grievant (with a copy to
the F.O.P.) not later than ten (10) days following the Step 1 meeting.

Step 2:

If the grievance is not settled at the first step, the grievant may present the
grievance to the Division Chief or his/her designee. The grievance must be
presented to the Division Chief or his/her designee within five (5) days of
receipt of the Step 1 response or, if a timely Step 1 response is not received,
within five (5) days from the day the Step 1 response was due. The Division
Chief or designee shall obtain the facts concerning the grievance and shall
within ten (10) days of receipt of the grievance conduct a meeting with the
grievant and the grievant's representative. The grievant may be
accompanied at this meeting by an F.O.P. representative. The Division Chief
or designee shall submit a written response to the grievant (with a copy to
the F.O.P.) not later than ten (10) days following the Step 2 meeting.

 
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS.
9.5 Step 3:

If the grievance is not settled at the second step, the grievant may present
the grievance to the Director or his/her designee. The grievance must be
presented to the Director or his/her designee within five (5) days of receipt of
the Step 2 response or, if a timely Step 2 response is not received, within five
(5) days from the day the Step 2 response was due. The Director or designee
shall obtain the facts concerning the grievance and shall within ten (10) days
of receipt of the grievance conduct a meeting with the grievant and the
grievant's representative. The grievant may be accompanied at this meeting
by an F.O.P. representative. The Director or designee shall submit a written
response to the grievant (with a copy to the F.O.P.) not later than ten (10)
days following the Step 3 meeting.

9.6 Step 4:

If the grievance is not settled at the third step, the grievant may present the
grievance to the Sheriff or his/ner designee within five (5) days of receipt of
the Step 3 response or, if a timely Step 3 response is not received, within five
(5) days from the day the Step 3 response was due. Within ten (10) days of
receipt of the grievance, the Sheriff or designee shall conduct a meeting
with the grievant and the grievant's representative. The grievant may be
accompanied at this meeting by an F.O.P. representative. The Sheriff or
designee shall submit a written response to the grievant (with a copy to the
F.O.P.) not later than ten (10) days following the Step 4 meeting.

9.7 Arbitration

A. If the grievance is not settled in accordance with this Article, the
grievant or the F.O.P. (on behalf of the grievant) may request
arbitration by providing a written request to the JSO Chief of Personnel
(with a copy to the City’s Director of Employee Services) not later than
thirty (30) days after receipt of the Step 4 response or, if a timely Step 4
response is not received, within thirty (30) days from the day the Step 4
response was due. The request shall set forth the specific provision(s) of
the Agreement claimed to have been violated. If the request to
arbitrate is not received by the JSO Chief of Personnel within the thirty
(30) day limit, the Employer's Step 4 response shall be final and binding
upon the grievant and the F.O.P.

B. In the event the grievant submits the request for arbitration without the
financial support of the F.O.P., the grievant shall also submit written
notice of his/her intent to pay all applicable costs of the arbitration.
The grievant shall provide the Employer with written confirmation that
sufficient funds are reserved in trust or escrow for the payment of
arbitration services before the arbitration shall be allowed to proceed.

20
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

(1) The F.0.P. and the Employer will mutually select a panel of five
(5) qualified arbitrators to serve on a rotating list. The arbitrators
selected must reside in Duval, Nassau, Clay, Baker, or St. Johns
County. The rotation sequence shall be randomly determined
by the F.O.P. and the Employer. The first arbitrator on the rotation
sequence shall be assigned to the first grievance advanced to
arbitration, with succeeding cases assigned to the remaining
arbitrators seriatim. Once the rotation sequence has been
determined, an arbitrator cannot be assigned out of rotation
unless mutually agreed by both parties. The parties may also
mutually agree at any time to remove an arbitrator from the
panel.

(2) Upon ratification of this Agreement, the F.O.P. and Employer
shall identify two (2) existing arbitrators as having four-year terms
and two (2) existing arbitrators as having two-year terms each,
commencing from January 1, 2012. Upon completing the term
limits of the two-year arbitrators, their successors shall each have
four (4) year term limits, as will all other panelists thereafter. The
parties agree that all arbitrators shall complete their panel
assignments regardless of their term limits.

(3) The F.0.P. has the right within sixty (60) days following ratification
of all F.O.P. bargaining agreements to strike one (1) of the
panelists existing as of January 1, 2012. The parties shall then
appoint the retired Fourth Judicial Circuit judge with AAA
credentials into the slot vacated by the stricken panelist. This
retired, but newly appointed arbitrator shall maintain the same
term limit as that of the vacating panel arbitrator.

Once an arbitrator has been notified of his/her grievance assignment,
the date for the arbitration hearing will be set as soon as practicable.

The parties shall rotate the administrative responsibilities for
maintenance of the arbitration system on an annual basis.

All testimony given at the arbitration hearing shall be under oath.

Post-hearing briefs may be filed at the request of either party or the
arbitrator.

The arbitrator shall render his/her decision within thirty (30) days of
receipt of post-hearing briefs or of the close of the hearing, whichever
is later.

The arbitrator shall have jurisdiction and authority to decide the
grievance, as defined in this Article. However, the arbitrator shall have
no authority to change, modify, amend, ignore, add to, subtract from,
or otherwise alter or supplement the Agreement or any part thereof or
any amendment thereto.

21
9.8

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

J. he arbitrator shall consider only the specific issue(s) submitted to
him/her in writing by the parties, and shall have no authority to
consider or rule upon any matter which is stated in this Agreement not
‘0 be subject to arbitration, or which is not specifically covered by this
Agreement.

K. he arbitrator's decision shall be exclusively based upon specific
findings of fact and conclusions which shall be the predicate for any
decision. In rendering any decision, the arbitrator shall only consider
he written, oral, or documentary evidence submitted at the hearing.

L. he arbitrator may not issue declaratory or advisory opinions. The
arbitrator shall be confined exclusively to the issue(s) presented to
him/her, which issue(s) must be actual and existing.

M. he decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on all parties,
subject to those challenges permitted by law. However, the authority
and responsibility of the Employer as provided by Chapter 447, Florida
Statutes, and the Charter of the City of Jacksonville shall not be
usurped in any manner unless specifically amended or modified by
his Agreement.

N. Each party shall bear the cost of its own witnesses and representatives.
he parties shall bear equally the cost of the arbitrator. Any party
requesting a copy of the transcript of the arbitration hearing shall bear
he cost of it. Any employee who acts independently of or in disregard
of the position of the F.O.P. shall pay his/her own share of the
arbitrator's cost and expense.

oO. Election of Remedies: It is specifically and expressly understood that
‘aking a grievance to arbitration constitutes an election of remedies
and a waiver of any and alll rights by the appealing party and all
persons whom it represents. No employee shall file an appeal under
his agreement concerning any matter that he/she has previously
appealed through the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and
Regulations.

 

Any grievance not processed within the time limits provided in this Article
shall be considered abandoned. Provided, however, the time limits set forth
in this Article may be extended by joint agreement of the Employer and the
F.O.P. (or the employee if appropriate) which is confirmed in writing. The
parties may mutually agree in writing to waive any time limits or provisions of
the grievance procedure.

22
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 10: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE

10.1 All discipline against any bargaining unit employee shall be for proper cause.
The procedure for dismissals, demotions, and suspensions shall be as outlined
in the City of Jacksonville Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations
and the Florida Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights, Section 112.532,
Florida Statutes, as in effect upon signing of this Agreement unless modified in
this Agreement. Should the Florida Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights be
repealed (Section 112.532, Florida Statutes), said repeal will not affect or
modify the provisions of this section.

10.2 A. Disciplinary Hearing Board

There shall be established a Sheriff's Disciplinary Hearing Board for the
purpose of such hearings. Said Board shall be composed of five (5)
members, with two (2) members being selected by the administration,
two (2) members being selected by the aggrieved officer; and the fifth
member being selected by the other four (4) members. The Board
members shall be law enforcement officers who are currently
employed by JSO. No member of this Board shall be a relative of the
aggrieved officer, as defined by the Civil Service Board rules. The
hearing will be informal. Neither the aggrieved officer nor the
Employer shall utilize an attorney for the presentation during the
informal hearing proceedings. During the hearing, the aggrieved
officer will be provided the opportunity to respond to the charges
against him/her, and to tell his/her side of the story. The aggrieved
officer shall be permitted to provide a list of witnesses, and present
evidence as part of a defense. Any member of the board may
request, through the chairperson, to call upon the witnesses provided
to give testimony germane to the events leading to the charges being
levied. The Board will review the information presented during the
informal hearing, and consider the JSO disciplinary standards, and
then make a recommendation to the Sheriff about the level of
discipline (if any) that it believes should be imposed in the case. The
Board's decision will be advisory and not binding upon the Sheriff. If
the decision of the Sheriff is unsatisfactory to the aggrieved officer,
he/she may appeal this decision to the Civil Service Board within ten
(10) days, or request arbitration within five (5) working days, as
provided in Article 9.6 Step IV. Itis agreed that the convening of the
Sheriff's Department Hearing Board shall be effectuated as
expeditiously as possible following the charges being levied against
the aggrieved officer. Should the accused officer request to continue
the hearing or delay its convening, then it is agreed that the officer
waives his/her emoluments in exchange for the continuance of the
hearing.

23
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

No suspension with loss of pay shall be implemented until any
requested civil service or arbitration hearing has been held and an
opinion rendered except as provided for in Article 13. (This shall not
apply to terminations).

24
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 11: BILL OF RIGHTS

11.1. Whenever a law enforcement officer is under investigation and subject to
interrogation or interview by members of his/her agency for any reason
which could lead to disciplinary action, demotion, or dismissal, such
interrogation shall be conducted under the following conditions:

A. he interrogation or interview shall be conducted at a reasonable
hour, preferably at a time when the law enforcement officer is on
duty, unless the seriousness of the investigation is of such a degree tha
immediate action is required.

B. he interrogation or interview shall take place either at the Office o'
nternal Investigations or at the office of the police unit in which the
incident allegedly occurred as designated by the investigating officer
or agency.

Cc. he law enforcement officer under investigation shall be informed o'
he rank, name, and command of the officer in charge of the
investigation, the interrogating officer, and all persons present during
he interrogation or interview. All questions directed to the officer
under interrogation or interview shall be asked by and through one (1
interrogator at any one (1) time.

D. he law enforcement officer under investigation shall be informed in
writing of the nature of the investigation prior to any interrogation or
interview and the officer shall be informed of the name(s) of al
complainants.

E. nterrogating sessions or interviews shall be for reasonable periods and
shall be timed to allow for such personal necessities and rest periods as
are reasonably necessary.

 

F. he law enforcement officer under investigation or interview shall no
be subjected to offensive language or threatened with transfer,
dismissal, or disciplinary action. No promise or reward shall be made
as an inducement to answer any questions.

 

G. he entire interrogation or interview of a law enforcement officer,
including the times of all recess periods, shall be recorded!, and there
shall be no unrecorded questions or statements. A copy of the
recorded interrogation or interview shall be provided upon request
within 72 hours following the interrogation or interview.

1 “Recorded” shall mean any of the following: taking of statement by audio tape, videotape or by a
court stenographer. However, the parties recognize that any officer conducting or observing an
interview may take handwritten notes.

25
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

H. If the law enforcement officer under interrogation or interview is under
arrest, or is likely to be placed under arrest as a result of the
interrogation or interview, the officer shall be completely informed of
all his/her rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation or
interview.

I. At the request of any law enforcement officer under investigation,
he/she shall have the right to be represented by counsel or any other
representative of his/her choice, who shall be present at all times
during such interrogation or interview.

J. The law enforcement officer who is a subject of a complaint or
allegation shall be notified in writing by the Internal Investigation
section of the disposition of the complaint or allegation upon the
conclusion of the investigation. The investigation shall be concluded
with the finding of sustained, not sustained, exonerated, or unfounded.

K. Any law enforcement officer who is the subject of an investigation or
interview has the right to review, along with his/her representative, the
complaint or allegation and all written and/or recorded statements,
regardless of form, made by the complainant(s) and witness(es)
immediately prior to the beginning of the interview.

L. Whenever practical, any officer who is the subject of an investigation
will be interviewed or interrogated after all other known witnesses and
complainants have been interviewed.

 

26
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 12: COMPREHENSIVE DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE
POLICY AND PROCEDURES

12.1 Mutual Agreement

A. The Employer and the F.O.P. agree to the promotion of a drug free
workplace through fair and reasonable drug testing methods for the
protection of the City of Jacksonville and its employees. The drug
testing policy of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office is a proactive
approach to a potentially serious problem facing all members of
society. Within the limitations, as outlined in this Article, employees
found to have drug abuse problems will be encouraged to participate
in an employee assistance program or a rehabilitation program.

B. Itis further agreed that drug use has serious adverse effects upon users
in the work force resulting in the loss of productivity, posing a threat to
the workplace and to public safety and security. Maintaining a
healthy and productive work force and safe working conditions free
from the effects of drugs are the goals of both the Employer and the
F.O.P. It is understood that drug use creates a variety of workplace
problems, including increased injury on the job, increased
absenteeism, and increased financial burdens on health and benefit
programs. Criminal justice work requires and the safety of the public
demands total mental and physical functioning of employees at all
times. The Jacksonville Sheriff's Office has a responsibility in the interest
of public safety to monitor the use and abuse by employees of
controlled substances, and other drugs/medicines.

 

Cc. The Employer agrees to establish drug testing standards to balance
the interests of the Employer, employees, and the welfare of the
general public through a fair, confidential, and accurate drug testing
program.

 

D. Employees who feel that they are abusing drugs are encouraged to
contact the Employee Assistance Program for help in overcoming this
problem. Normal agency benefits such as the Employee Assistance
Program, appropriate leave, and the group medical plan are
available to aid in the rehabilitation process. Staff assigned to the
Employee Assistance Program will support employees in this process by
providing referral to the appropriate agency suited to address the
particular need of the employee.

E. The sale, purchase, transfer, use, or possession of illegal drugs, or drugs
obtained illegally, is a violation of state and federal criminal statutes
and, therefore, may result in termination. Use or being under the
influence of alcohol while on duty or while driving a City vehicle
presents a danger to the public, to the officer involved, and to other
officers, and therefore, may result in termination.

27
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

F. In order to maintain the integrity of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office and
to ensure public safety, the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office requires that all
employees shall not:

(1) Abuse legal drugs;

(2) Sell, purchase, transfer, use, or possess illegal drugs, or drugs
obtained illegally;

(3) | Report for work and/or use Sheriff's Office equipment while
under the influence of a legal drug taken as a medication to
the extent that job performance would be affected.

12.2 Discussion

A. Drug screening provides management with a method to assist in the
detection of a possible problem so that it may be dealt with in the
proper manner.

B. Drug screening of Sheriff's Office employees is a deterrent to their
becoming involved with drugs. Additionally, it assists management in
its efforts to detect drug problems within the Sheriff's Office. Drug
screening provides an avenue for identifying a specific problem
associated with drug use/abuse.

Cc. Personnel are cautioned that drug screening is not an absolute
indicator of drug use. It is a single indicator that must be combined
with other information before a final determination is made. The drug
screening program is interwoven with established Sheriff's Office policy
as it is affected by administrative procedures, internal investigations,
Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights, criminal investigations, etc. The
final determination (e.g. no action, disciplinary action, treatment or
termination) is based on an accumulation of information and is
consistent with the best interest of the Sheriffs Office and the
employee.

12.3 Definitions

A. Controlled Substance - Any of the substances named in Schedules |
through V of Section 893.03, Florida Statutes, and any "designer drugs"
that may hereafter be proscribed by law and which are subject to
manufacturing, distribution, preparation, dispensation, and
administrative controls.

B. Employee Assistance Program - A confidential program designed to
assist employees and their families with a multitude of problems that
may affect the employee's work performance. Employees may
volunteer for the program or be referred to it by their supervisors.

28
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

Cc. Confirmation Test - An additional analytical procedure used to identify
the presence of a specific drug or metabolite in a specimen. The
confirmation test must be different in scientific principle from that of
the initial test procedure. The confirmation method must be capable
of providing requisite specificity, sensitivity, and quantitative accuracy.

D. Illegal Drug - Any drug or substance, including controlled substances,
the possession of which without a prescription is defined as a violation
of state or federal statutes; or any prescription drug that was not
prescribed to the affected employee by a person licensed to issue
such prescription.

E. Legal Drug - Any prescription medication or any over-the-counter
medication that has some medicinal value/purpose and is being used
by the person for whom it was prescribed.

F. Substance Abuse - The excessive or erratic ingestion, consumption,
inhalation, or injection of any illegal drug or legally obtained drug or
medicine not in prescribed amounts or at proper time intervals.

G. Use of Drugs - The injection, inhalation, ingestion, or consumption of
any drug, whether prescription or non-prescription, or any controlled
substance as defined under Florida law.

H. “Under the Influence” - A condition in which employees are unable to
appropriately perform their duties because of the use of any drug,
controlled substance, or alcohol. Employees shall be deemed to be
under the influence if they are physically or mentally impaired and/or
unable to perform their duties in an acceptable manner.

12.4 Responsibility for Reporting Legal Drug Use

A. — Sheriff's Office employees using drugs or therapeutic treatments
prescribed by a physician or other authorized health practitioner shall
determine from the prescribing person whether the treatment
prescribed has any effects which may interfere with the performance
of their duties. If the treatment prescribed has such effects, employees
shall inform their supervisors of that fact.

B. Any Sheriff's Office employee using legal over-the-counter non-
prescription drugs which in any way impair or affect his/her job
performance is responsible for bringing this fact to the attention of
his/her immediate supervisors on Form P-004. Information relating to
the use of over-the-counter drugs can be removed at the request of
the employee after it has been in the medical file for six (6) months,
unless the usage of such medication is part of on-going treatment.

29
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

Cc. The supervisor of any employee, upon being informed that such
employee is using over-the-counter or prescription drugs which could
interfere with the performance of his/her duties shall make further
inquiries to determine whether the employee is fit to perform those
duties. Upon consultation with his/her commanding officer, the
supervisor will decide whether the employee is fit for duty. If unfit, the
employee shall be placed on personal leave. Should the employee
and the commanding officer not concur on the ability of the
employee to perform his/her duties, the department staff duty officer
will make the final determination. Information regarding the use of
legal drugs being taken by an employee will be forwarded to the JSO
Personnel Division where it will be maintained in a confidential
medical file.

D. All Sheriffs Office employees have an obligation to inform a supervisor
or ranking officer if another employee is using drugs in violation of the
law or Sheriff's Office Rules and Regulations.

E. If any employee knowingly ingests any drug in the performance of
his/her duties, the supervisor on duty will be immediately notified and
the incident reported on Form P-004. The supervisor will see that the
employee is provided with immediate medical attention if necessary.
The employee will be placed on an appropriate duty status. The
incident will be documented with the initiation of Form P-004 to be
followed by a detailed report from the employee's commander
through channels to the Sheriff. Every effort should be made to avoid
such ingestion. Unless employees' lives are endangered, they will
refrain from the consumption, ingestion, injection, or inhalation of a
substance which may either physically or mentally be dangerous to
employees.

F. Employees knowingly subjected to the passive inhalation of a drug,
such as marijuana, will submit a Form P-004 to the supervisor on duty.
The report will indicate the substance the individual was exposed to,
the period of time exposed, and give a brief statement explaining the
necessity for the exposure. The report will be forwarded to the Sheriff
for review.

12.5 Drug Screening Program

A. The Employer shall post a notice of the department's drug testing
policy on bulletin boards in areas that are accessible to employees.

B. Urine testing of employees can be an effective means by which to
identify those in need of counseling, treatment, or disciplinary action.
The testing program is intended to supplement, not replace, other
means by which the use of drugs can be detected.

Cc. Employees will be required to participate in the drug testing program
under the following conditions:

30
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

(1) | When there is a reasonable suspicion that an employee is using,
under the influence of or in possession of illegal drugs, or is using
or under the influence of alcohol while on duty, or that the
employee is abusing alcohol or illegal drugs and the abuse
either adversely affects his/her job performance or represents a
threat to the safety of the employee, coworkers, or the public.
Reasonable suspicion drug/alcohol testing can be ordered by
any supervisor with the approval of a commanding officer
(lieutenant or above). An immediate supervisor requesting a
drug/alcohol test founded on reasonable suspicion should
consider among such facts and inferences:

(a) Observable behavior while at work, such as direct
observation of drug/alcohol use or of the physical
symptoms or manifestations of being under the influence
of a drug/alcohol.

(b) © Abnormal conduct or erratic behavior while at work or a
significant deterioration in work performance.

(c) Areport of drug/alcohol use provided by a reliable and
credible source which has been independently
corroborated with observable behavior.

(d) Evidence that the employee has tampered with a
drug/alcohol test during his/her employment with the
Employer.

(e) — Information that an employee has caused or contributed
to an accident while at work combined with observable
behavior indicating the possibility that drug/alcohol
usage may be involved.

(f) Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold,
solicited, or transferred drugs, or used or been under the
influence of alcohol, while working or while on the
Employer's premises or while operating the Employer's
vehicle, machinery, or equipment.

(2) | Following a serious accident or incident in which safety
precautions were violated or unusually careless acts were
performed and there is reasonable suspicion to believe these
actions were the result of using drugs.

(3) Routine fitness for duty: The Employer will require a drug test any

time an employee is referred to a physician or psychologist for a
fitness for duty examination.

31
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

(4) | Random Drug Testing Program: As part of the Sheriff's Office
random drug testing program each employee of the
bargaining unit will be randomly assigned a number that will be
the only source identifying the individual submitting a sample for
drug testing.

(5) Follow-up testing: Should an employee in the course of
employment enter, or be required by the Employer to enter, into
an employee assistance program for drug-related problems, the
Employer may require the employee to submit to a drug test as
a follow up to the program for up to two (2) years thereafter.

(6) | Whenan employee is found in possession of illicit drugs or when
illicit drugs are found in an area controlled or used exclusively
by the employee.

(7) | During basic recruit training and prior to completion of an
employee's probation.

(8) | When an employee is transferred into, during the assignment,
and when transferred from the SWAT Team, Bomb Squad, or any
specialized unit where, during the assignment, the employee will
be involved with narcotic investigations and/or have access to
illicit drugs.

(9) — As part of a rehabilitation program (mutually agreed to by the
affected employee and the Sheriff's Office Administration).

(10) As a result of prior disciplinary proceedings against the
employee related to the use of drugs. (Such testing shall be
conducted by the Internal Affairs Unit with the approval of, and
in coordination with, the JSO Chief of Personnel). The Employer
may require the employee to submit to a drug test as a follow
up to the disciplinary action for up to two (2) years thereafter.

12.6 Procedure for Testing
A. Drug testing responsibility

(1) | The JSO Personnel Division shall be responsible for drug testing of
employees under-going basic recruit training, probationary
PoliceOofficers, and employees selected through the random
drug testing program.

(2) The Internal Affairs Unit shall be responsible for drug testing of
any employee whom it reasonably suspects has used or is found
to be in possession of a drug, or other controlled substance in
violation of the law, Sheriff's Office orders, and rules and
regulations. The Internal Affairs Unit shall also conduct drug
testing of employees as the result of prior disciplinary
proceedings related to the use of drugs.

32
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS.
B. Confidentiality

(1) Allinformation, interviews, reports, statements, memoranda, and
drug test results, written or otherwise, received by the Employer
through a drug testing program are confidential
communications.

(2) The release of information obtained through any of the drug
testing programs shall be solely pursuant to a written consent
form signed voluntarily by the person tested except where such
release is compelled by a hearing officer, a court of competent
jurisdiction, pursuant to an appeal taken under this section, or
when required for a departmental Disciplinary Hearing Board,
arbitration, or Civil Service Board proceeding. Drug testing
information shall also be released to the Bureau of Criminal
Justice Standards and Training for the purpose of reviewing
certification eligibility.

(3) Any employee authorizing the release of drug testing
information must submit a signed communication to the JSO
Chief of Personnel advising:

(a) The name of the person who is authorized to obtain the
information,

(b) The purpose of the disclosure,
(c) The precise information to be disclosed, and

(d) The duration of the consent.

(4) The Employer shall use drug test results wnen consulting with
legal counsel in connection with actions brought under or
related to this Article or where the information is relevant to the
Employer's defense in a civil or administrative matter.

12.7. Testing Procedures

A. The Employer shall pay the cost of all drug tests which are required of
employees. Employees shall pay the costs of any additional drug tests
not required by the Employer.

B. Prior to taking a drug test, employees must advise the Employer of any
prescription or non-prescription medications they are taking. The
Employer will provide information to the employee of the most
common medications by brand or common name which may alter or
affect a drug test. Employees will also be advised of all drugs for which
the Employer will test, described by brand or common names, as
applicable, as well as by chemical names. Information regarding the
use of prescription or non-prescription drugs taken by the employee

33
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

will be presented in a written communication that will be maintained
in a confidential medical file in the JSO Personnel Division. The
ingestion of any prescription or non-prescription drug by an employee
shall not preclude the administration of the drug test, but shall be
taken into account in interpreting any positive confirmed results.

Individuals responsible for conducting drug tests are acting under the
direct authority of the Sheriff. Employees being tested shall cooperate
fully. Any attempt to alter or tamper with the specimen, its container,
or any mechanical device, instrument, or document by any individual
is grounds for termination and/or prosecution under applicable Florida
Statutes.

The Employer will establish guidelines for the collection of drug test
samples that will afford protection to the employee to include:

(1) | Specimens shall be collected with due regard to the privacy of
the individual providing the specimen and in a manner
reasonably calculated to prevent substitution or contamination
of the sample.

(2) Specimen collection shall be documented and _ the
documentation procedures shall include:

(a) Labeling of specimen containers to reasonably preclude
the likelinood of erroneous identification of test results.

(b) Specimen collection, storage, and transportation to the
testing site shall be performed in a manner which will
reasonably preclude specimen contamination or
adulteration.

(c) |The Employer shall use a chain of custody procedure to
ensure the proper record keeping, handling, labeling,
and identification of all specimens to be tested.

When an employee is required to provide specimens for a testing
procedure, the employee shall provide one (1) specimen (large
enough to be divided into two (2) separate samples at the time of
collection in order to facilitate the testing procedures).

The threshold level or cut-off limit of the analytical testing procedures
shall be established in accordance with the State of Florida Agency
for Health Care Administration in conjunction with the standards
developed by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA) regarding testing and protocol and
procedures.

34
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

G. When employees are required to participate in any of the drug testing
procedures, the initial testing specimen will be subject to an EMIT
(Enzyme Multiple Immunoassay Technique). If the results of the initial
test are negative, no further testing will be done.

(1) Employees selected for random drug testing will be assigned a
number which will be the only means available of identifying
the individual who provided the specimen.

(2) | Random numbers assigned to employees will be maintained in
a confidential file under the direct supervision of the JSO Chief
of Personnel.

(3) | Specimen collection will not be taken at any of the correctional
housing facilities and the specimen container will not reveal the
name of the contributing employee.

The Employer will use the Evidential Breath Testing Device (EBT)
to test for the presence of alcohol in an employee's system. The
test will be performed by a Certified Breath Analyzer Technician
(BAT) using a EBT approved by the National Highway Safety
Administration. If the initial test registers an alcohol
concentration of 0.02 or greater, a confirmation test will be
performed. The employee will be placed in a separate room
under the observation of the BAT for at least 15 minutes, but not
more than 20 minutes, after which he/she will be given a
confirmation EBT.

H. Random drug testing conducted by the Employer may occur before,
during, or immediately after the regular work period of the employee,
and shall be compensated in accordance with this Agreement.

I. The Internal Affairs Unit shall be called whenever one or more of the
circumstances described in Article 12.6(A) (2) comes to the attention of
members of the Sheriff's Office.

(1) Once called, the Internal Affairs Unit shall have complete
authority over the investigation.

(2) |The employee shall be advised in writing of the reason(s) for the
order to submit to the test and that failure to do so constitutes
failure to obey a direct order.

12.8 Results of Test

A. If the results of the initial test are positive, the Employer will submit the
sample for a _ confirmation test using a GC/MS (Gas
Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry) test or other method specified
by DHHS Guidelines to verify the initial test results that will be
conducted by an outside licensed laboratory capable of supplying an

35
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

analysis of drug content. When a confirmation test is necessary, the
Employer will ensure the proper storage and transportation of the
specimen to a licensed laboratory for processing.

B. After receipt of a positive confirmed test result from the testing
laboratory, the Employer shall inform the employee of the positive test
result, the possible consequences of such results, and the options
available to the employee.

Cc. The Employer shall provide to the employee, upon written request, a
copy of the confirmation test results.

D. Within ten (10) working days after receiving notice of a positive
confirmed test result, the employee may submit information to the
Employer explaining or contesting the test results, and why the results
do not constitute a violation of the Employer's policy.

 

All reports of positive test results shall be received by the JSO Chief of
the Personnel Division and maintained in a confidential medical file.

12.9 Disciplinary Procedures

A. Any employee who refuses to submit to a drug test or whose
confirmation drug test is found to be positive is subject to disciplinary
action. Such disciplinary action is subject to the grievance procedures
provided for through Article 9 of this Agreement and the Civil Service
and Personnel Rules and Regulations.

B. he employee may be either immediately suspended or reassigned
pending the results of the confirmation test for the use of illegal drugs.

Cc. Positive confirmation tests for illegal drugs shall result in the immediate
suspension of an employee which may be followed by termination
proceedings. In appropriate cases, every effort will be made to help
he employee deal with a legal drug problem by proper referral to the
Sheriff's Employee Assistance Program. However, if this effort fails or is
obviously inappropriate given the nature of the problem, appropriate
disciplinary action shall be initiated.

D. he Employer may discipline or discharge an employee on the sole
basis of the employee's first positive confirmed drug test when the
employee has either refused to participate in an employee assistance
program or a drug rehabilitation program, as evidenced by
withdrawal from the program before its completion, or a report from
he program indicating unsatisfactory compliance; or by a positive test
result on a confirmation test while participating in or after completion
of the program.

 

36
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

E. The Employer shall discipline an employee, subject to termination
proceedings, who has failed or refused to sign a written consent form
allowing the Employer to obtain information regarding the progress
and successful completion of an employee assistance program or a
drug rehabilitation program.

F. Employees participating in an employee assistance program or a drug
rehabilitation program may be considered as being in a temporary
limited duty status.

G. The Employer shall not discharge or discipline an employee solely
upon voluntarily seeking treatment, while under the employ of the
Employer, for a drug-related problem if the employee has not
previously tested positive for drug use, entered an employee
assistance program for drug-related problems, or entered a drug
rehabilitation program. However, the Employer shall terminate an
employee when the presence of illicit drugs is confirmed. Employees
who have been tested may not use this aspect of the Agreement as a
means of protection from disciplinary action.

12.10 All laboratory reports of a drug test shall include:

A. The name and address of the laboratory which performed the test
and the positive identification of the person tested (not the employee's
social security number), or if applicable, the random number.

B. Positive results of confirmation tests.

Cc. A list of the drugs for which the drug analyses were conducted.

D. The type of tests conducted and the minimum cut-off levels of the
tests.

E. Any correlation between medications reported by the employee and
the confirmation test results.

37
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

38
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 13: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION

13.1 The Sheriff, or designee, may impose an immediate suspension without pay in
advance of the conclusion of any of the procedures set forth in the
grievance and arbitration article or in the Civil Service and Personnel Rules
and Regulations in the following cases:

(1) | When an employee has been arrested on a felony charge (other than
arrests for incidents occurring in the "good faith" performance of their
duties, such as accidental shootings);

(2) When an employee fails a substance abuse test (with confirmation);

(3) When an employee fails to obey a lawful direct order from a superior
officer; or

(4) | When an employee is a danger to himself/herself or others.

13.2 The immediate emergency suspension without pay must be issued by the
Division Chief or above.

13.3. Upon request of the employee, within the next business day after an
immediate emergency suspension, the employee will be afforded the
opportunity to meet with the assigned Division Chief for the purpose of
coordinating a meeting between the Sheriff or designee and the employee
to determine any further action that may be taken.

39
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

40
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 14: FILES

14.1 Files that contain the following information will be purged on the following
schedule:

A. Formal Investigations - Cases which are unfounded, exonerated, or not
sustained - one (1) year from the date of case disposition.

B. Sustained Formal Investigations cases involving written reprimand
without suspension --three (3) years from the date of case disposition.

Cc. Sustained Formal Investigations -- cases involving written reprimand
with suspension or loss of pay - five (5) years from the date of the case
disposition

D. Formal Counselings will be purged one (1) year from the date of issue.
Official records of Formal Counseling will be maintained in the
employee's division file, and not in the Internal Affairs unit. The
employee's division file will follow the employee as that employee is
reassigned throughout the agency.

D. Officers will be notified after their cases have been purged.

Files and other materials purged pursuant to this section may not be
used as evidence by either party in any disciplinary or grievance
proceeding or hearing.

Upon completion of any internal investigation, the officer on whom the
complaint was made shall be notified. Should the internal file be
requested by any public party, every reasonable effort will be made
to notify the involved officer(s) as to who the requesting party is, and
the date and time as to when the file will be made available. If,
however, said officer(s) cannot be notified within twenty-four (24)
hours, the requested information will be provided within the limits of
governing statutes, court orders, etc. In such cases, officers will be
notified that information from their files was released. When the
Employer provides access to the internal investigation “Final Action
Report” pursuant to a public record request, the Employer will also
provide the party requesting access to the record(s) a written
definition of the terms used to describe the disposition of the internal
investigation(s). (Reference Schedule B)

14.2. The Employer will comply with applicable court orders and Section
119.07(3) (I), Florida Statutes, and until otherwise directed by court order, will
not reveal the home address, telephone number, social security number, or
photograph of active or former law enforcement personnel; the home
address, telephone number, social security number, photograph, or places

Al
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

of employment of the spouses and children of such personnel: and the
names and locations of the schools and day care facilities attended by the
children of such personnel.

It shall be the right of any officer, at reasonable times, to inspect and make a
copy of his/her personnel records, internal file, and division file. All JSO
personnel shall keep personnel matters confidential within the terms of this
Article and applicable statutes.

42
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 15: PERSONAL LEAVE E
15.1 Applicability

This article shall apply to all permanent, probationary and provisional
employees of the following categories:

A. Employees hired on or after October 1, 1968 and prior to January 10,
1989;

B. Employees hired prior to October 1, 1968, but chose not to remain
subject to former sick leave and terminal leave policies in April, 1969;

Cc. Employees hired prior to October 1, 1968, who chose on or before
September 30, 1968, to become subject to this provision; and

D. Those employees who select to use their option and participate in the
personal leave plan shall remain in said plan until such time as this
personal leave plan or policy should be changed. Then said
employees shall have the right to exercise their option as to which plan
they wish to participate in.

15.2 Leave Accrual Rates

Employees shall accrue personal leave with pay according to the following
schedule on a bi-weekly basis:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SERVICE: ANNUAL ACCRUAL:

O months through 4 years 160 hours

5 years through 9 years 184 hours

10 years through 14 years 208 hours

15 years through 19 years 232 hours

20 years through 24 years 256 hours

25 years or more 280 hours
The rate of accrual shall change to the higher rate at the start of the first pay
period of the month in which the employee's employment anniversary

occurs.
15.3 Rollback

Personal leave shall accrue to a maximum of 960 hours. The Employer will
compensate the employees on an hour-for-hour basis for any accrued
amount over 960 hours as of September 30 each year. These payments may
be as early as the second pay day in November, but shall be made no later
than the first pay day in December at the September 30 rate of pay.

43
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS.
15.4 Leave Sellback

A. An employee who does not use all of the personal leave accrued ina
fiscal year may be paid for all or part of the difference, on a
percentage basis, between the amount of leave used and the
amount of leave accrued for that fiscal year on an hour-for-hour basis.
Payments will be made on the second payday in January at the
September 30 rate of pay.

B. To receive such payment, the employee must make an irrevocable
election of the percentage to be sold. The election must be made no
later than September 30 of the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in
which the leave will accrue. Elections shall be made in accordance
with administrative procedures established by the City of Jacksonville.

Cc. Employees otherwise eligible for this option who do not elect to sell a
percentage of leave prior to the deadline will not be permitted to sell
any leave.

D. This payment will not be available to an employee who would have
less than eighty (80) accrued annual leave hours remaining after such
payment.

15.5 Using Leave to Fund Deferred Compensation

The Employer will provide employees eligible to retire the option to use leave
time to fund their Deferred Compensation Program pursuant to the terms of
this article and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations in the following
manner:

A. An employee who is within 3 years of normal retirement under the
Police and Fire Pension Plan (PFPP), and who wishes to sell back
personal leave must notify the City, in writing, of his/her intent to sell
back personal leave, no more than three years prior to the date that
the employee is eligible for normal retirement.

B. The notice of intent to sell back personal leave becomes irrevocable
once the employee makes such election.

Cc. When an employee elects to sell back personal leave, the City will
compensate the employee for up to one-third of the total amount of
accrued leave in the employee's personal leave and retirement
accounts during each of the three years prior to the date of the
employee's eligibility for normal retirement. Each year, the employee
will be compensated on an hour-for-hour basis for one third of the
hours that were in the account(s) at the time the election was made.
Leave will be depleted in three equal annual installments during the
three-year period prior to normal retirement eligibility. Payments will be
made on an hour-for-hour basis at the employee's regular rate of pay

44
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

at the time the payments are made. An employee's contribution to
all deferred compensation accounts shall be limited by applicable IRS
regulations.

D. Periods of employee election, and payment dates shall be established
by the City of Jacksonville in accordance with IRS regulations. Any
leave remaining in an employee's personal leave and/or retirement
account will be paid to the employee in a lump sum at retirement.

E. This option is not available to an employee who would have fewer
than eighty (80) hours personal leave remaining after the sell back.

15.6 Upon termination, which includes resignation and discharge not for cause,
the employee shall be paid for all accrued personal leave and all accrued
retirement leave.

15.7 Upon retirement of an employee, said employee's personal leave account
and retirement leave account shall be used or paid for on a hour-for-hour
basis up to a maximum of nine hundred sixty (960) hours in each account
under the following provisions:

A. Such leave may be taken either immediately prior to desired eligible
retirement date, which leave may then be used for the fulfillment of
time service requirements, or

B. Such leave may be taken following fulfillment of time service
requirements;

Cc. Employee on such leave may be maintained on the regular payroll,
thereby continuing to avail the employee of payroll deductions,
pension contributions and insurance deductions;

D. Upon written request to be placed on such leave, said request shall be
irrevocable;
E. While on such leave, an employee shall not accrue personal leave but

shall be eligible for legal holidays and any general salary increases but
not performance/step increases.

F. At the employee's option, such leave may either be taken or be paid
for in one lump sum on a hour-for-hour basis.

G. For the purpose of the Personal Leave Plan, retirement is defined in the
following manner:

(1) Full-time service as required by the appropriate pension plan.

(2) Early vested retirement under the appropriate provision for
vesting.

AS
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

(3) | Ten years of service with the City for those employees covered
solely by Social Security.

(4) Vested retirement with more than 10 years service with the City
for those employees who are covered by the Florida Retirement
System.

15.8 Upon the death of an employee, the employee's next of kin or estate in
accordance with the law, shall be paid for all accrued personal and
retirement leave accrued on the basis of one (1) hour's pay for each hour in
said accounts.

15.9 The Sheriff, upon recommendation of the Meritorious and Awards
Committee, shall provide an employee with commendation paid leave in
the following manner:

 

Officer of the Month One day
Officer of the Year Four days

 

 

 

 

 

46
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 16: PERSONAL LEAVE P

16.1 This article shall apply to all permanent, probationary and provisional
employees employed on or after January 10, 1989.

16.2 Method of Earning and Accruing Personal Leave:

A. Employees shall accrue personal leave with pay for straight time hours
worked in accordance with the following schedule:

Upon Completion of Continuous Hours Accrued Per Year

Service
0 months through 4 years 160
5 years through ? years 184
10 years through 14 years 208
15 years through 19 years 232
20 years through 24 years 256
25 years or more 280
B. Employees shall earn leave time based on time actually worked and

time on approved leave with pay.

Cc. Personal leave will be credited to the employee at the rate stated in
Section 16.2 (a) on a bi-weekly basis. The leave shall be credited on
the last day of the pay period.

D. The rate of accrual shall change to the higher rate at the start of the
pay period in which the anniversary date of employment occurs.

16.3 Personal leave shall accrue to a maximum of six hundred (600) hours. At the
end of the fiscal year, an employee with accrued and unused personal
leave in excess of six hundred (600) hours will be paid for, accrued and
unused personal leave in excess of six hundred (600) hours at the employee's
rate of pay at the end of the fiscal year.

16.4 Upon retirement or termination following the completion of ten (10) years of
service, the employee shall be paid for all unused accrued personal leave
on an hour-for-hour basis. Such employees shall have the option of using
accrued personal leave immediately after or prior to their desired eligible
retirement date and then be paid for the remainder of such leave at the
employee's option.

16.5 Upon termination of employment with less than ten (10) years of service for

other than retirement, the employee shall be paid for seventy-five per cent
(75%) of all unused accrued personal leave on an hour-for-hour basis.

47
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

16.6 The Sheriff, upon recommendation of the Meritorious and Awards
Committee, shall provide an employee with commendation paid leave in
the following manner:

 

Officer of the Month One day
Officer of the Year Four days

 

 

 

 

 

48
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 17: USE OF LEAVE

17.1 Personal Leave
A. Accrued Leave

When eligible and authorized, employees may use their accrued
personal leave for any reason.

B. Eligibility for Leave Use

Accrued personal leave may be taken at any time when approved by
the appropriate Commanding Officer-Supervisor. Personal leave shall
be scheduled with due regard to the employee's request with any
extenuating circumstance to be considered and consistent with the
operating requirements of the JSO.

Cc. Leave Request and Approval Procedures

(1) Employees shall request leave and the Employer shall note
approval or disapproval of such leave in a form designated
by the Employer.

(2) Except in cases of illness or emergency, requests for personal
leave of up to two (2) consecutive working/shift days must be
submitted for approval at least twenty-four (24) hours in
advance.

(3) | Except in cases of illness or emergency, requests for personal
leave of more than two (2) and up to four (4) consecutive
working/shift days must be submitted for approval at least forty-
eight (48) hours in advance.

(4) Requests for leave due to illness or emergency shall be
submitted as soon as practicable.

(5) | Charging for Leave

(a) Employees will be charged for actual leave time taken,
with a one-quarter (1/4) hour minimum.

(b) Leave will be charged only against an employee's
regular work day and shall not be charged for absences
on prearranged overtime work, unscheduled call-in
overtime work days, or holidays.

49
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS.
D. Advance Leave Scheduling Procedure

(1) Classification Seniority Priority Request

A request for one (1) or more consecutive working/shift days
may be submitted on or before February 15, of each calendar
year for the following twelve months. More than one block of
leave time may be requested. Advance scheduling of these
leave requests will be accomplished as soon as practicable
after February 15, on a classification seniority basis.

(2) Seniority Personal Leave List

Each squad, watch, zone, or section of a division shall establish
a seniority personal leave list. Employees in each classification
will select their personal leave and the employee with the most
seniority in classification shall have the right of first personal
leave choice. The employee with the next higher seniority in
classification will have the next right of choice and so on down
the list.

(3) | Scheduling After February 1

After February 1, personal leave will be scheduled on a first
come, first serve basis for available dates.

17.2 Use of Leave for Illness and Emergencies
A. llIness

Accrued personal leave may be used for absence from duty due to
the employee's illness.

Accrued personal leave may also be used in the case of serious illness
in the employee's immediate family.

The term, "immediate family", as used in this Article, shall mean: an
individual's spouse, children, mother, father, brothers, sisters, half-
brothers, half-sisters, aunts, uncles, grandparents, grandchildren,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, sons-in-law,
daughters-in-law, step-parent, step-children, and other relatives who
permanently reside with the individual. Special consideration may also
be given to any other person who has had a close, long-standing,
personal relationship with the employee where such a person acted
similar to and/or stood in the place of a mother, father, brother, sister,
or grandparent of the employee.

50
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS.
B. Emergencies

In each case where an emergency situation arises or where serious
illness exists at the home of a law enforcement officer, that law
enforcement officer shall be granted sufficient time off duty to
complete or make the necessary arrangements to alleviate that
emergency situation or serious illness. Under Personal Leave Plans E
and P, this time off duty may be charged to the employee's personal
leave time, in the discretion of the appropriate supervisor.

Cc. Extended Illness

For employees who accrue personal leave under Personal Leave Plan
E:

(1) _ If an extended illness causes an employee to use all of his/her
accrued personal leave, then such employee may use his/her
retirement account.

(2) In the event an employee has fewer than eighty (80) hours in
the employee's personal leave account, the employee may use
his/her retirement account for a bona fide illness of the
employee at the employee's option. This option may also be
used for a bona fide illness of the employee's immediate family,
if substantiated with a physician's statement that the employee's
presence is necessary.

(3) An employee who requires eighty (80) or more hours of leave
due to an extended and continuous illness, may elect to
deduct the leave from his/her retirement leave account.

(4) The above options should be submitted upon the
commencement of such leave or immediately upon returning
to duty.

D. Documentation

All employees shall be required to furnish to the Employer such
information as may be requested for the proper administration of this
section.

17.3. Unscheduled Absence
A. Notification

For unscheduled absences not requested and approved in advance,
an employee must notify the Sheriff's Office as early as possible, but no
later than forty-five (45) minutes before starting time, on the first day
the employee is unable to report for work. The employee will notify the
Sheriff's Office of the reason for the absence, and when the employee
expects to return to work.

51
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS.
Investigation

Excessive use of unscheduled leave is subject to investigation by the
Sheriff's Office. An employee will be counseled whenever a pattern
clearly develops where an employee is abusing unscheduled leave.
(Example: when unscheduled leave is combined with regular days off
more than three (3) times annually.)

Leave for illness may be charged in increments of not less than one-
half (1/2) hour for the first half-hour. After the first half-hour leave may
be taken in increments of one-tenth (1/10) an hour.

Unauthorized Absence

An employee who is absent and who fails to comply with rules and
regulations governing leave usage will be charged with unauthorized
absence.

Employees shall request leave and the Employer shall note approval
or disapproval of such leave on a form provided by the Employer.

52
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 18: BEREAVEMENT AND FUNERAL LEAVE
18.1 When Leave May Be Authorized
A. Bereavement Leave for Immediate Family Members
At the time of the death of a member of an employee's immediate
family as defined in Article 18.2, the Employer may authorize the
employee paid time off of up to five (5) days.

B. Funeral Leave for JSO Employee

An employee may be granted paid time off to attend the funeral of a
JSO employee as authorized by the appropriate Assistant Chief or

higher level official.
18.2 Definition of Immediate Family

For purposes of this Article, “Immediate Family” shall be defined as the
isted relatives of the employee and the employee's spouse.

 

“Immediate Family” Defined

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

spouse
children Including
step-children and children’s
spouses
parents Including step parents and parents-
in-law
brothers & sisters Including half- siblings, and
brothers- and sisters- in law
aunts & uncles
| grandparents
grandchildren

 

other relatives who permanently reside with the employee

Special consideration may also be given to any other person who has
had a close, long-standing, personal relationship with the employee,
where such a person acted similar to, and/or stood in the place of, a
mother, father, brother, sister, or grandparent of the employee.

 

 

18.3 Provisions Governing Leave Authorization

 

A. The JSO will not unreasonably deny a request for Bereavement or Funeral
Leave subject to the provisions of this Article.

B. he employee may be required to supply documentation of the death, as

well as of the employee's relationship to the deceased, prior to approval of
he funeral leave request.

 

53
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

(1) Needs of employees upon the death of a family member may vary
depending upon individual circumstances.

(2) In determining the amount of funeral leave to be authorized in
each situation, the JSO will take into consideration such factors as:

(a) Distance to the funeral location;
(b) Relationship of the employee to the deceased; and

(c) |The demands the death has placed on the employee for
funeral arrangements and other business matters.

An employee, who requires additional time to attend to family matters, or for
the death of relatives not included in this definition, may request to use other
accrued leave for bereavement purposes. Such requests for leave shall not
be unreasonably denied.

54
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 19: LEAVE DONATION

19.1 A. In the event an employee is forced, after exhausting all terminal leave,
holidays and personal leave, to be placed on leave without pay
status, due to illness or off-duty injury, another employee may donate
leave time (Annual Leave, Compensatory Leave, or Holiday) to the ill
or injured employee provided said donor has at least eighty (80) hours
of personal leave accrued.

Employees donating compensatory leave may donate no more than
eight (8) hour of their compensatory leave for each ill or injured
employee per six (6) month period.

In the event an illness is reclassified as a workers' comp injury, all such
used and unused time will be returned to the original donor(s).

To properly administer this plan, the donating employee will report to
the JSO Chief of Personnel and submit his/her days which will be
dated for use in lieu of leave without pay days or until such time as the
employee receiving such time returns to duty.

B. Exception to Section 19.1A: No employee who was given the option
to use accrued leave for the purpose of satisfying a disciplinary action
requiring reduction of pay and who as a result of exercising that option
is left without accrued leave may receive a donation of such leave
time for the purpose of replenishing accrued personal leave lost for
disciplinary reasons until the employee either has accrued leave
equivalent to the amount of disciplinary reduction, or has been off
work without pay for a period equal to the duration of the disciplinary
penalty. Provided that this subsection shall only apply in those cases
where a single incident gives rise to both the disciplinary reduction
and the injury that resulted in the exhaustion of accrued leave.

55
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

56
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 20: MILITARY LEAVE

20.1 Leaves of absence, re-employment and other related rights of employees
entering into the military service shall be as described under the Uniformed
Services Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA) of 1994 and
Chapter 115, Florida Statutes.

20.2. Employees who are commissioned reserve officers or reserve enlisted
personnel in the United States military or naval service or members of the
National Guard are entitled to leaves of absence from their respective
duties, without loss of vacation leave, pay, time, or efficiency rating, on all
days during which they are engaged in training ordered under the provisions
of the United States military or naval training regulations for such personnel
when assigned to active or inactive duty.

20.3. Leaves of absence granted as a matter of right under the provisions of
section 20.2 may not exceed 240 working hours in any one fiscal year.
Administrative leaves of absence for additional or longer periods of time for
assignment to duty functions of a military character shall be without pay and
shall be granted by the Employer, and when so granted shall be without loss
of time or efficiency rating.

20.4 Employees who request time off for military leave are responsible for advising
their supervisor at the earliest possible time of the dates when they are
scheduled for any training assemblies which conflict with their normal work
schedule.

Employees may request adjustment of their schedules for a military weekend
drill by written request to their supervisors. Such requests shall be submitted at
least fourteen (14) days prior to drill date. A determination under this section
is not subject to the grievance or arbitration process, but the employee may
request a review by the division chief.

20.5 Anemployee granted an extended military leave may elect to be paid from
accumulated annual leave.

57
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

58
21.1

21.2

21.3

21.4

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 21: HOLIDAYS

Employees in the bargaining unit shall observe those days established by this
Agreement and Council Ordinance which consist of the following:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

anuary First New Year's Day
hird Monday in January Martin Luther King’s Birthday
hird Monday in February Presidents’ Day
Second Friday of May Police Memorial Day
Last Monday in May Memorial Day
July Fourth Independence Day
First Monday in September Labor Day
November Eleventh Veterans’ Day
Fourth Thursday in November Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving Day after Thanksgiving Day
December Twenty-Fourth Christmas Eve
December Twenty-Fifth Christmas Day
Any day declared a holiday by Ordinance of the Council or proclamation of
he Mayor.
Whenever an observed holiday shall occur on an employee's scheduled day
off, the Employer may elect to schedule the employee to take a day off on
another date mutually agreed upon or to compensate him/her at the
straight time rate in order to equalize the observed legal holidays in Section

21.1.

Should any holiday not be used during a calendar year due to scheduling or
other reasons, then that employee shall be allowed to carry over to the next
year unused holidays. If for some reason the carry-over holidays are not
taken by September 30, of that year, the Employer will compensate the
employee for those days not taken. There will be nothing in this section
which authorizes the carry-over of any holiday for which compensation has
been made pursuant to Section 21.2 hereof.

Any permanent or probationary employee shall receive payment for any
paid holiday unless:

A. Employee has an unexcused or unpaid absence on the last regular
workday preceding such holiday or on the next regular work day
following such holiday;

B. Employee is on leave of absence or layoff on the day on which such
holiday occurs;

Cc. Employee fails to report for work without justifiable reason for such
absence having been scheduled to work on such holiday.

59
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

D. Employee is receiving workers’ compensation or supplemental
workers’ compensation pay.

21.5 When any employee is required to work on a day observed by that
employee as a holiday pursuant to 21.6 the employee shall be paid at the
rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times their regular rate of pay and shall be
allowed to take a day off at a later date.

21.6 Those employees who work a Monday through Friday work week shall
observe holidays as set forth annually in the City Employee Services Directive
on that subject. All other employees shall observe the holidays on the day on
which the holiday occurs.

21.7. Employees covered by this Article may choose, at their option and subject to
the approval of the employee’s division chief, to work a scheduled holiday
and receive another day off at a later date, provided such employee is not
paid time and one-half for that day.

 

Nothing in this Article will preclude time and one-half pay to those
employees mandated to work the holiday.

60
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 22: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT

22.1 Purpose of Article

The purpose of this Article is to define hours of work; however, nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed as a guarantee or limitation of the number of
hours to be worked per day, days per week, or for any other period of time
except as may be specifically provided herein. It is understood and agreed
that the Office of the Sheriff is a twenty-four (24) hour, seven (7) days per
week operation and that nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as
prohibiting the rescheduling of manpower to suit the needs and
requirements of the Office of the Sheriff, provided that contract requirements
regarding notification and overtime will be met.

22.2 Overtime Pay

Employees covered by this Agreement will be paid at the rate of time and
one-half (1 1/2) for all hours worked in excess of those normally scheduled in
a forty (40) hour work week, or eighty (80) hour work period. This section will
not apply to court overtime (Section 22.3).

Nothing herein prohibits the Employer from rescheduling work as necessary
to accomplish the police mission.

Nothing in this Article shall be applicable for off duty work at a city facility for
the City of Jacksonville.

22.3 Duty Related Court Appearances

When an off-duty employee is subpoenaed to court or other proceedings for
testimony, or by the State Attorney or Public Defender for pre-trial
conference or deposition arising from duties performed as a Jacksonville
Police Officer or other previously approved official duties, he/she will be
compensated for overtime in the form of compensatory time at the rate of
one and one-half (1-1/2) hours of compensatory time for each hour of
overtime worked.

22.4 A. Fact Witness

When an off-duty employee is required to appear before any hearing
board, arbitrator, or internal investigation as a fact witness (as opposed
to a character witness) as the result of receiving a subpoena or direct
order in the course and scope of employment, the employee will
receive compensatory time at the rate of time and one-half (1-1/2).A
"fact" witness is one who testifies to what was seen, heard, or observed
regarding an underlying event at issue. A “fact' witness is not a witness
who testifies to opinions, character, or similar circumstances.

él
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS.
B. Character Witness

Any employee who appears before any hearing board, arbitrator, or
internal investigation to testify as a character witness (as opposed to a
fact witness) whether or not as the result of receiving a subpoena,
must request leave during the time necessary to appear and testify.

22.5 Call Back

An employee who is required to report to work during an off-duty shift in
order to attend a meeting will be granted compensatory time at the rate of
time and one-half (1 2) for actual hours worked, with a minimum of 1 2
hours.

22.6 Authorization for Overtime Required

No employee may authorize compensatory time for himself/herself, but shall
be entitled to receive compensatory time when authorized by his/her
immediate supervisor. Through mutual agreement between the employee
and his/her immediate supervisor, the employee shall be allowed to receive
compensatory time in lieu of overtime payment.

62
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 23: WAGES

23.1. Employees shall be compensated in accordance with the pay plan
attached as Schedules D and E as follows:

A. All employees shall progress in the current pay plan, when eligible per
Schedule C, based on the employee's total years of continuous
service as a sworn officer with the department.

B. Salary rates at each step of the pay plan shall decrease as follows:

(1) A 3% salary decrease for all employees at each step of
Schedules D and E effective on January 1, 2012.

(2) A 0% salary change at each step of Schedules D and E
effective on October 1, 2012.

(3) A 0% salary change at each step of Schedules D and E
effective on October 1, 2013.

(4) There shall be a 17.5% differential between the pay rates for
sergeant and lieutenant and lieutenant and captain at each
step of the pay plan.

23.2. A qualified employee who is temporarily assigned by the supervisor to serve
in a higher class or position for at least one continuous hour shall be paid for
the period of time actually worked in the higher class at the rate for the step
of the pay grade for the higher classification which is the same as the step to
which the employee is assigned in the pay grade for his/her own
classification.

23.3 Pay Incentive Plan for College Degrees
A. The previous “Pay for College Credit” formerly contained in Schedule
B of the collective bargaining agreement will be discontinued, and will

be replaced with this “Pay Incentive Plan for College Degrees.”

B. Employees are eligible for incentive payments on the following basis:

 

PAY INCENTIVE PLAN FOR COLLEGE DEGREES
Incentives Applicable to Employees
Hired After October 1, 2006
Degree or Status Monthly
Master of Arts or Science $200.00

 

 

 

 

 

 

63
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

PAY INCENTIVE PLAN FOR COLLEGE DEGREES
Incentives Applicable to Employees Hired Prior to
October 1, 2006

 

Degree or Status Monthly

 

Associate of Arts or Science __| $100.00

 

 

Bachelor of Arts or Science $150.00

 

 

 

Master of Arts or Science $200.00

 

 

 

The following rules shall govern administration of incentive payments
for attainment of college degrees.

Q)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

A newly-hired employee will be eligible for an incentive
payment for which he/she qualifies under this Plan upon
successful completion of probation as a Police Officer.
Permanent Corrections Officers or Judicial Officers who
ransition to Police Officer shall not be required to complete
probation in order to be eligible for incentive payment.

An employee may only receive one level of incentive pay.
ncentive payments for multiple degrees or credits are not
cumulative.

Payment of incentives will be effective as of the first day of the
pay period after which the employee provides required
documentation of eligibility to the JSO Personnel Division.

o qualify for incentive pay under this Plan, an employee must
have graduated with a 2.0 GPA or “C” Average.

o qualify for any level of incentive pay, an employee must
have a minimum of 18 credit/semester hours in Criminal Justice.
For purposes of this Plan, “Criminal Justice” means the subjects
outlined in the Criminal Justice Programs of Study as published in
he catalog of Florida State College at Jacksonville.

 

Only semester hours/credits from a college or university
accredited by the Southern Association of Secondary Schools
and Colleges or equivalent will be recognized for incentive pay
qualification.

64
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

23.4 Employees assigned to work any shift other than the normal day shift shall
receive the following shift differential pay:

 

 

 

 

 

Starting Time Differential
After 12:00 p.m. 3.75% of base pay
After 10:00 p.m. 3.50% of base pay

 

23.5 Evaluations

A. Employee evaluations shall be standard and in writing.

 

B. Except as provided in subsection 23.5(C), the rater must be a certified
Police Officer of higher rank, or an appointed ranking member of the
Sheriff's staff. The rater must be a person who has been taught about
established JSO evaluation policies and procedures.

Cc. Officers who are on special assignment to the Mayor's Office, the
Office of General Counsel, the State Attorney's Office, the JEA Special
Investigation unit, and similar special assignments may be rated by a
civilian supervisor from the office where the officer is on special
assignment. In such cases, the civilian supervisor performing the
evaluation will consult with the officer's next higher level police
supervisor regarding the evaluation.

D. An employee who believes that the Employer has not followed the
proper evaluation procedure (e.g., qualification of the rater or failure
to follow written policy and procedure) may follow the grievance
procedure as outlined in this Agreement through Step IV.

E. In the event the Employer proposes to change the existing evaluation
system, the Employer and the F.O.P. agree to establish a committee,
consisting of F.O.P. and management representatives from the JSO
who will be given the opportunity to review and recommend
procedural changes in the current evaluation system prior to
implementation of any changes.

23.6 In addition to the regular wages provided under this Agreement, the
Employer may elect to establish incentive programs for its employees. If the
Employer elects to establish such incentive programs, the program may
consist of awards of cash payments or other types of awards to individual
employees or groups of employees as determined by the Employer in order
to recognize job performance improvements, improved job safety records,
suggestions or actions which result in job-related cost savings or job-related
benefits, or other similar job-related improvements which can be
documented and measured.

23.7. At the direction of the Mayor, the City's Director of Employee Services may
authorize payment of a monthly differential, in an amount determined by the
Mayor, to bargaining unit employees regularly assigned to the Office of the
General Counsel, or the Mayor's Office.

65
23.8

23.9

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

When an off-duty employee is required by his/her supervisor to be
answerable to a pager, he/she shall be compensated one (1) hour at the
regular rate of pay for each day if the following requirements are met:

The employee shall not have received a call to duty during the time he/she is
required to be answerable to a pager/cell phone

Reimbursement for Take Home Vehicles

Employees living outside Duval County, but within ten (10) miles of the county line,
shall reimburse the City $25.00 per pay period for the use of the take home vehicle.
The reimbursement will automatically be deducted from the employee's bi-weekly
pay. However, the following shall apply:

A. Should take home vehicles become inoperable as verified by the Office of
the Sheriff, the assigned employee will be reimbursed at the rate of $3.56 per
actual day worked; and

B. Employees assigned to a motorcycle unit without also being assigned an
additional take home vehicle are exempt from this subsection.

66
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 24: FITNESS FOR DUTY EXAM

24.1. The Employer has the right to require any employee to undergo a medical or
psychological examination by an assigned doctor at any time to ascertain
whether or not the employee is physically and mentally capable of
performing the duties required of the employee's classification.

24.2. This examination will be conducted on Employer time and at Employer

expense. Time spent obtaining the examination shall be considered work
time and shall be paid as such at the applicable rate of pay.

67
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

68
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 25: SAFETY AND HEALTH

25.1 The Employer agrees that it will conform to and comply with laws as to
safety, health, sanitation and working conditions properly required by
Federal, State, and local law. The Employer and the F.O.P. will cooperate in
the continuing objective of eliminating safety and health hazards where they
are shown to exist.

25.2 Protective devices, wearing apparel, and other equipment necessary to
protect employees from injury shall be provided by the Employer in
accordance with established safety practices. Such practices may be
improved from time to time by the Employer and the F.O.P. Such protective
devices, apparel, and equipment, when provided by the Employer, must be
used and the F.O.P. agrees that willful neglect and failure by an employee to
obey safety regulations and to use safety devices shall be just cause for
disciplinary action.

69
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

70
26.1

26.2

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 26: PHYSICAL ABILITY TESTING

Employees shall be subject to annual physical ability testing, in accordance
with the terms of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office Physical Ability Testing Policy
as described in Article 33.

The parties agree to the following clarifications of the Physical Ability Testing
Policy:

A. Changes to Test - The Employer is permitted to make administrative
changes to the Physical Ability Test. Examples of permitted changes
include but are not limited to: improving the surface of the test course,
removing handles from test dummy, and making similar improvements
to test equipment.

B. Concerted Police Activity - An injury that occurs while in the course of
“concerted police activity" is defined as an injury that occurs while the
officer is actively involved in police actions.

Cc. Thirty Day Grace Period - An employee who fails the physical ability
test will be given a grace period of thirty calendar days during which
he/she may retake the test. During this thirty day grace period, the
employee will be required to initiate and participate on duty in the
rehabilitation provided for in the policy. However, the disincentives
listed in the policy will not go into effect unless the employee fails to
pass the test within the thirty day grace period.

D. “Forfeiture of Annual Step Raise" - the step raise normally provided to
the employee will be delayed to such time when the employee
passes the physical ability test. Once the employee passes the
physical ability test, the annual step raise will be granted (provided
that the employee is otherwise eligible for step raise) as follows:

(1) The raise will be retroactive to the date that the step raise would
normally be provided in those cases where no part of the delay
is attributable in any way to the employee.

Examples of cases where no part of the delay is attributable in
any way to the employee:

e The test was postponed or delayed by the Employer
because the testing facility was not available and the
employee rescheduled to the next available date.

e The test was postponed or delayed because the
employee was on special assignment at the direction of
the Employer.

(2) The raise will be prospective only in all other cases (for example,
when the employee requests a postponement, or when the
employee does not pass the test.)

71
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

“Forfeiture of Take Home Car" and "Forfeiture of Police Related
Secondary Employment" means that these will be withheld until the
employee has passed the physical ability test.

Priority for Accommodations - Section 33 of the Accommodation
section of the Physical Ability Test Policy establishes a priority listing
which will be used in determining which employees will be bumped
because the number of qualifying officers exceeds the number of
available Permanent Light Duty Positions. The third priority ("officers
who are most senior’) refers to the fact that officers who are more
senior and eligible for retirement will be bumped before officers who
have not qualified for retirement.

72
27.1

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 27: INJURY -IN-LINE-OF-DUTY

An employee who sustains a temporary disability which results in payment of
a wage benefit under the Workers’ Compensation Laws of the State of
Florida shall be granted a supplemental payment under the following
conditions:

A. During the first twenty eight (28) calendar days of such disability, the
employee shall receive net supplemental pay based upon his/her net
take-home pay reduced by the Workers' Compensation indemnity
payable. In no event shall any employee receive more than his/her
net after-tax take-home pay from the City.

B. Thereafter, the Employer, may at its sole discretion (which discretion
shall not be subject to contest or arbitration), grant additional injury-in-
line-of-duty leave in increments of twenty eight (28) calendar days.
Such extensions shall be cumulative, not to exceed twenty-four weeks,
except as noted in the following paragraphs.

Any such employee injured shall be examined every twenty eight (28)
calendar days by a medical doctor(s) selected by the Employer.

In the event such employee fails to return to duty due to disagreement
between a medical doctor(s) for the employee and the Employer,
then the Employer shall select a duly qualified medical doctor who
shall resolve the medical disagreement. In resolving the medical
disagreement between the employee's doctor and the Employer's
doctor, the judgment, discretion and decision of the doctor selected
to resolve such medical disagreement shall be final and not subject to
arbitration. If such injured-in-line-of-duty leave continues through the
twenty-fourth (24th) week following the pay period in which such injury
occurred, the employee's supplemental pay shall be terminated.
Termination of supplemental pay to the employee shall also occur on
the date of any medical determination that the employee will be
unable to return to duty within the twenty-four (24) week period which
began on the first day such employee was unable to work due to
injury-in-line-of-duty. After termination, the employee's right to
compensation shall be governed by the provisions of the Workers’
Compensation Laws of the State of Florida, and by his/her entitlement
to pension rights and sick leave benefits, if any. (Note: The Employer
(Sheriff or his/her designee) in its sole discretion, which discretion
cannot be changed or modified by an arbitrator, may provide a
defined extension to the twenty-four (24) week period, not to exceed
twenty (20) days for each extension).

73
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

Cc. An employee who is temporarily partially disabled from performing the
duties of his/her classification due to a covered condition may be
temporarily reassigned without reduction in pay, in accordance with
the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations to other duties
commensurate with the employee's qualifications, his/her physical
and psychological restrictions and availability of appropriate
employment.

27.2 This Article shall be subject to and governed by the provisions of Chapter 440,
Florida Statutes.

74
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 28: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS

28.1 Employee Death Payments

In the event of an employee's death, payment shall be made for any and all
accrued overtime, vacation leave, and other terminal leave benefits which
such employee would have been entitled to receive under the applicable
provisions of law and only in the following sequence: to the wife or husband;
or to any child or children over the age of eighteen (18), or to the designated
guardian if the child or children are under the age of eighteen (18); or the
mother or father; or thereafter to the designated administrator of the
deceased employee's estate.

28.2 Reimbursement for Use of Personal Vehicle

Where an employee is required to use his personal automobile in the
performance of his duty, said employee will be reimbursed for operating
expenses at the rate per mile traveled as prescribed by applicable City
Council Ordinance exclusive of mileage traveled to and from said
employee's work location. Parking space will be provided for employees
who are required to use their personal vehicle as a condition of employment
in the performance of their duties, provided parking spaces are available.

28.3 Comprehensive Medical Coverage

The Employer agrees to provide a choice of comprehensive group health
plans from which the employee may select, including one high deductible
health plan at no cost to the employee. Effective January 1, 2012,
employees will be required to pay five percent (5%) of the actual cost of any
health plan selected other than the high deductible plan, but such a
payment shall be capped and not exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) per month.
In addition, the Employer will pay fifty percent (50%) of the cost of
comprehensive medical coverage of eligible dependents. The employee
will pay the remaining fifty percent (50%) of the cost.

28.4 Dental Health

The Employer agrees to pay the premium per month, per employee covered
by this Agreement for the purpose of providing payment of a comprehensive
dental health plan for the employees.

28.5 Payroll Deductions for Agent of Record

The Employer agrees to provide a payroll deduction process that is to be
available to employees in the bargaining unit for various employee plans.
This provision shall not be construed to compel the Employer to enter into any
contractual arrangements with third parties or to undertake any legal liability
not expressly provided for in this Agreement.

75
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

These plans shall be administered by the “Agent of Record” so designated
by the F.O.P. It is understood and agreed that the Employer may assess a
charge not to exceed four (4) cents per deduction per payroll. Further, it is
agreed that the Employer assumes no responsibility or liability to or for the
F.O.P.’s Agent of Record. Solicitation for these plans shall only be made at
times mutually agreed to by the City’s Department of Employee Services,
Jacksonville Sheriff's Office, and the F.O.P. so as to prevent loss of
productivity.

If the F.O.P. provides the Employer with at least 100 signed enrollment forms
from bargaining unit employees authorizing their enrollment in an F.O.P.
sponsored employee plan or activity, the Employer will create and assign a
payroll deduction code for that plan or activity. If, after the creation of the
payroll deduction code, the enrollment for that plan or activity falls below
seventy-five (75), the City may delete the payroll deduction code from the
City payroll system and discontinue payroll deductions for the plan or
activity.

28.6 Voting

During an election, an employee whose hours of work do not allow sufficient
time for voting shall be allowed necessary time off with pay for this purpose.
Where the polls are open two (2) hours before or two (2) hours after the
regular scheduled work period, it shall be considered sufficient time for
voting.

28.7 FOP Heart/Hypertension Special Benefit

Purpose: To provide special benefits to law enforcement officers who suffer
heart disease and/or hypertension subsequent to their date of employment,
but who are not otherwise covered under the Florida Workers’
Compensation law.

A. Coverage and Limitations
(1) Medical

(a) Employees will file heart/hypertension claims for
reimbursement of covered expenses through their City
medical insurance carrier.

(b) The City will reimburse employees for covered co-
payments and deductibles until the employee has been
off work 52 weeks due to heart disease or hypertension,
and is unable to return to work according to an
approved medical doctor. Such reimbursements shall not
exceed $3,500 per plan year and $10,000 lifetime and
shall terminate once an employee retires under Pension
Fund rules.

76
28.8

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS.
(2) Disability

(a) Upon application to the JSO Chief of Personnel,
employees will continue to receive paid leave not
otherwise chargeable for the first 84 calendar days of
covered illness. After 84 calendar days have elapsed,
the employee will receive paid leave at the rate of 2/3 of
his/her salary for the next 84 calendar days. During this
period, the employee, at his/her option, may elect to
retain full pay by utilizing sick leave or personal leave at
one-third (1/3) day for each day. Thereafter, full sick
leave or personal leave must be utilized.

(b) If an employee, due to heart/hypertension disability, is
temporarily, partially disabled from performing the duties
of his/her classification, he/she may be temporarily
reassigned without reduction in pay in accordance with
the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations to
other duties commensurate with medical and mental
fitness, availability of suitable work, and the employee's
qualifications for the position.

(c) Second or subsequent heart/hypertension claims will be
considered only if the employee has returned to full duty
for three months following the first incident. An employee
shall not receive more than 36 weeks of full pay Under this
provision.

(3) Death

In the event of the death of an employee due to heart disease
or hypertension prior to retirement, the City shall pay a death
benefit/funeral allowance of up to $2500, but not exceeding
actual funeral expenses.

(4) Disputes

Questions concerning payment of medical and pharmacy bills
under this Article will be resolved by a Special Benefit
Committee consisting of the FOP President or designee, the
City’s Director of Employee Services or designee and the JSO
Chief of Personnel.

Career Development Program

The City shall fund the tuition reimbursement program $60,000.00 annually for all
F.0.P. bargaining unit members collectively. Reimbursement requests from any
F.O.P. member necessitating funding in excess of $60,000.00 annually may be
denied or limited based upon available funding. Unused funding shall be
reallocated annually as determined by the City.

77
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

78
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 29: LIFE INSURANCE

29.1 A. The Employer shall provide and pay full premiums for group term life
insurance policy in the amount equal to the employee's yearly salary
with a double indemnity clause for accidental death for those
employees covered by this Agreement.

B. In the event that the City is unable to obtain life insurance coverage
from an insurance carrier for employees who are temporarily or
permanently assigned to the helicopter or fixed wing section, the City
will self-insure for this amount in lieu of paying premiums.

Cc. Benefits may be reduced at age 70 to 65% of the benefits under the
policy.

29.2. The Employer shall provide and pay full premiums for $250,000 life insurance
covered per seat for all helicopter and fixed wing aircraft used by
employees covered by this Agreement while on police business. Benefits
may be reduced at age 70 to 65% of the benefits under the policy. In the
event that the City is unable to obtain this coverage from an insurance
carrier, the City will self-insure for this amount in lieu of paying premiums.

79
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

80
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 30: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT

30.1. The Employer shall furnish uniform(s) to all personnel who are required to
wear such uniform(s) in the performance of their duties as set forth in the
Rules and Regulations of the Office of the Sheriff. Uniforms shall include alll
necessary equipment for the employee's performance of duty as a Police
Officer including weapons, leather goods, foul weather gear, rain boots,
cold weather gear and safety equipment, except socks and undergarments

30.2 The Employer agrees that before new uniforms and new personally-assigned
equipment are ordered, the F.O.P. will be consulted and asked to survey the
members concerning any proposed change for uniforms and equipment.
The F.O.P. may submit recommendations for the improvement of said
uniforms or equipment, however, these recommendations are not binding
upon the Employer.

30.3 Damage to Employee-Owned Property

The Employer will pay to repair or replace covered personal property that is
damaged while the employee is on duty, so long as the loss or damage did
not result from the employee’s negligence. Payments shall be subject to the
conditions set forth below:

A. Covered Personal Property

Covered personal property shall be defined as that equipment
necessary for the performance of the employee's official duties
including prescription eyeglasses/contacts lenses, prosthodontics,
and watches. Covered personal property shall include non-uniform
clothing. It shall not include telephones, pagers or electronic
devices. With the exception of watches, jewelry is not covered
personal property.

B. Payments

The Employer will make the determination to either repair or replace
damaged or lost covered personal property based upon the relative
costs of repair and replacement. Claims must be supported by
reasonable proof of loss or damage, and documentation of cost, and
shall be subject to claims-processing procedures established by the
Sheriff.

(1) | Payments authorized by this provision shall be reduced by the
amount of any insurance reimbursement received by the
employee for the loss or damage to the covered property.

(2) | Payments under this provision shall not exceed three hundred
dollars ($300.00) except that repair or replacement of watches
will be limited to one-hundred dollars ($100)

81
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

(3) The Employer shall make every reasonable effort to make
payments authorized under this Section within thirty (30) days of
the employee's submission of a claim.

30.4 Damage to Employer Property

When Employer property is damaged, destroyed, or lost as a result of an
employee's negligence, carelessness, or failure to take reasonable steps to
secure the property, the employee shall pay the cost of repair or
replacement, up to a maximum of $400, subject to the conditions set forth
below.

A. For purposes of this section, “negligence” and “carelessness” do not
include inattention caused by the employee's immediate need to
perform official duties and responsibilities.

B. Examples of failure to take reasonable steps to secure property
include but are not limited to leaving the property unattended in an
unsecured location such as an open car or unlocked building.

30.5 Clothing Allowance

A. Employees who are required to wear business attire (e.g. dress coats or
dress shirts and ties for men and civilian attire for women) during duty
hours shall be entitled to a clothing allowance of one hundred dollars
($100) paid quarterly. Quarterly reimbursements shall occur the second
pay period following the end of the quarter, provided the employee
has worked or been on paid leave at least ten (10) days in each
month of the quarter.

B. Those bargaining unit members required to wear uniforms shall receive
an $87.50 per quarter cleaning allowance during each quarter they
are required to wear uniforms.

Cc. Employees in the Organized Crime Section who are required by the
Employer to wear non-uniform type of clothing during duty hours shall
be entitled to a clothing allowance of one hundred dollars ($100) paid
quarterly. Quarterly reimbursements shall occur the second pay period
following the end of the quarter, provided the employee has worked
or was on paid leave at least ten (10) days in each month of the
quarter.

D. An officer who uses personal or retirement leave prior to retirement in

accordance with Article 15.7 shall not receive the Clothing Allowance
while on such leave.

82
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 31: SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT

31.1. The number of hours an employee may work off-duty shall be limited to one
hundred four (104) hours per month. An eight (8) hour rest period shall be
mandated between an employee's ending tour of duty and the next
beginning tour of duty. The eight (8) hour rest period also applies to the
employee's days off. The one hundred four (104) hours per month of extra
duty may be supplemented by annual or compensatory leave. During the
24-hour period encompassing an employee's scheduled work day, the
employee may not exceed 16 hours of work. The Sheriff or designee may at
his/her discretion, waive the 104-hour per month limitation.

31.2 Employees who schedule approved secondary employment who are paid a
scheduling fee shall pay a flat fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) a job per month
scheduling fee.

31.3. The employee working secondary employment (or the secondary employer)
will remit to the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office an administrative fee of $5.00 per
hour for each hour paid, not necessarily worked. A $7.00 per hour
administrative fee shall be charged for any secondary employment where
the police vehicle is utilized with the engine running and emergency
equipment in use for the majority of the assignment for traffic control during
road construction projects, and/or lane closures. The $7.00 per hour
administrative fee shall not apply to police escorts. The administrative fee
shall be in addition to the hourly rate paid to the officer or supervisor as set
forth in section 31.7 below. Fees for increments of time less than an hour will
be prorated.

31.4 Employees who intentionally evade the payment of the amounts required by
this Article will face appropriate discipline, and/or loss of secondary
employment.

31.5 Employees are prohibited from engaging in secondary employment while in
an on-duty status.

31.6 All administrative fees for a one (1) month period must be paid to JSO by the
10th day of the following month. Employees whose payments are more than
two (2) weeks late will be subject to appropriate discipline, which may
include loss of secondary employment privileges.

31.7. The hourly rate, paid to the officer, for secondary employment shall be:

Officers $28.00
Supervisors $31.00

83
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

31.8 Restrictions on Secondary Employment, as stated in applicable General
Orders, and as amended by the Sheriff's Direct Review Committee, shall
apply to the extent they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article.

31.9 Employees will not engage in secondary employment until they have been
off duty for two regular days, or worked one day following sick leave,
bereavement leave, injury on duty (IOD), light duty, suspension (with or
without pay) or administrative leave.

31.10 An employee who is denied secondary employment in violation of the

applicable General Orders may grieve the denial through Step 4 of the
grievance procedure. The decision made at Step 4 shall be final.

84
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 32: PROMOTIONS

Promotions within the bargaining unit shall be governed by the Civil Service and
Personnel Rules and Regulations, except that the "rule of 3" as provided in the City
Ordinance Code shall supersede the provisions of the Civil Service and Personnel
Rules and Regulations. Any disputes relating to promotions shall be filed with the
City’s Employee Services Department and resolved exclusively through the Civil
Service System.

85
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

86
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 33: PHYSICAL ABILITY POLICY
33.1 Policy

A. The Fraternal Order of Police (F.O.P.) and the Jacksonville Sheriff's
Office (JSO) recognize that sworn employees need to maintain a
sufficient degree of physical ability to handle the demands of the
profession. Therefore, the parties have agreed to schedule an annual
physical examination and physical ability test for Police Officers to
assure that physical ability is maintained. The parties have also agreed
to provide for a reasonable opportunity for officers who fail the
examination to gain compliance. Officers who cannot successfully
pass the physical ability examination after being afforded a
reasonable opportunity to do so are subject to termination.

B. The physical ability test is job related, and is administered to ensure
that those officers protecting the public meet minimal levels of
physical fitness and do not pose a danger to themselves, fellow
officers, or the public.

 

 

Cc. The Mission of the JSO is to protect the lives and property of the citizens
of this community, to preserve peace, and to prevent crime and
disorder. As a matter of policy, the JSO recognizes the following as
essential components to the accomplishment of the JSO Mission:

(1) An able bodied, fully staffed department whose officers can
effect an arrest and respond to emergency conditions; and

(2) Flexible staffing that grants managerial discretion to assign the
tight person into the right position; and

(3) | Recognition that the assignment of supervisors must be need
and performance based, and that assignments based merely
upon an employee's physical condition is contrary to the
fulfillment of the Mission; and

(4) Officers who are injured in concerted police actions should
receive priority recognition; and

(5) | The creation of incentives and disincentives will enhance officer
physical conditioning; and

(6) ADepartment thatis not physically fit will provide less protection
and_ less effective services at a much greater cost.

87
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS.
33.2. Administration of the Physical Ability Testing Program

A. Incentives:
In recognition of officers passing the physical ability test, those officers
shall receive:

(1) Timely step raises as provided for in Schedule C of the
Agreement;

(2) Consideration for promotion when ranked on a certified
eligibility list;

(3) The thanks of the Administration and the Community who alll
recognize that an able and fit public safety force will provide
enhanced protection and services at a lower cost to the
community.

B. Disincentives:

In recognition that officers failing the physical ability test provide less
service to the community, reduce the efficiency of the Department,
and increase the costs to the taxpayers, those officers failing the
physical ability test shall be subject to the following:

(1) Forfeiture of take home car privileges;

(2) — Forfeiture of annual step raise;

(3) | Delayed consideration for promotions;

(4) _ Forfeiture of police related secondary employment privileges.
Cc. Rehabilitation:

An officer who fails an annual physical ability test shall be given one

(1) calendar year from the date of the failure to pass the physical

ability test.

(1) During that calendar year, the officer will remain on duty but will
be required to participate in an on-duty training and/or
conditioning program which will require the officer's
participation at the training academy at least twice monthly.

he program will be personally designed to enable the officer to
ultimately pass the examination.

 

88
(2)

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

If the officer so completely fails to pass the physical ability test
that it demonstrates a more serious fitness for duty problem, the
JSO may administer such other fitness for duty testing and take
such prudent action that would otherwise be reasonable under
the circumstances.

D. Accommodation:

As to officers who have failed a physical ability test:

Q)

(2)

(3)

After the one (1) calendar year set aside for rehabilitation, if the
officer is still unable to pass the physical ability test, the officer
shall be considered unable to perform the officer’s duties and if
the officer does not qualify for accommodation as set forth in
Paragraph (2) below, the officer shall be separated from
employment as provided for in the Civil Service and Personnel
Rules and Regulations.

If the officer's inability to pass the physical ability test in a year is
a result of an ADA qualifying condition, the officer shall be
accommodated as provided in paragraph (3) below:
otherwise, the officer shall be separated from employment
pursuant to the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and
Regulations if the officer cannot be accommodated by
retirement or reassignment to non-sworn service.

An officer qualifying for accommodation in the sworn service
pursuant to paragraph (2) above shall be subject to the
following terms and conditions:

(a) The JSO shall make available a combined number of
positions for up to 1.5% of the total sworn police ranks
which will be designated as Permanent Light Duty
positions for all of those officers who either qualify for
accommodation under paragraph (2) above, or who
qualify for permanent accommodations as a result of on-
the-job injuries. Each such officer wno wishes to be
placed in a Permanent Light Duty position so designated,
must be able to perform the functions of that position with
the exception of an ability to effect an arrest and
respond to an emergency. A maximum of three (3)
supervisory positions will be included within the total
Permanent Light Duty positions.

89
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

(b) Any officer or supervisor wno does not accept an
accommodation into one of the Permanent Light Duty
positions, or who does not opt for normal or disability
retirement, or who does not accept an accommodation
to anon-sworn position, shall be subject to separation in
accordance with the Civil Service and Personnel Rules
and Regulations as a result of that officer's inability to
perform the essential functions of the job.

(c) In order to ensure the maximum availability of
accommodation for qualifying officers, officers serving in
a Permanent Light Duty position described in Paragraph
(3)(A) above, may serve in that position until and unless
the officer is “bumped.”

“Bumping” occurs when the number of qualifying officers
exceeds the number of available Permanent Light Duty
positions. The criteria for bumping shall be as follows:

(i) When alll positions described in Paragraph (3)(A)
are filled by qualifying officers, and another officer
becomes qualified, the officer with the highest
years of service shall no longer be entitled to the
position and shall be accommodated by being
provided the opportunity to retire and or resign.
Such an officer who refuses to retire and or resign
may then seek further accommodation to a non-
sworn position or shall be separated from
employment pursuant to the Civil Service and
Personnel Rules and Regulations.

(ii) — In the event all qualifying officers are not eligible
for retirement or are not in the DROP program,
entitlement to Paragraph (3)(A) positions shall be
determined first by giving priority to officers injured
as a result of concerted police action; secondly, by
giving priority to officers who are injured on-the-job;
and finally, by giving priority to officers who are
most senior. An officer who is “bumped” may seek
reclassification as an accommodation, but if no
other position is available, such officer shall be
separated from employment pursuant to the Civil
Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations.

90
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS.
33.3. Appeal:

The JSO believes that a policy implemented fairly and uniformly throughout
the Department will provide consistency and fairness in its application. The
JSO recognizes, however, that exceptional circumstances may exist which
might warrant making limited exceptions to this policy based on the
extraordinary rehabilitative efforts of an officer or for such other extraordinary
circumstances demonstrated by an officer. Therefore, an officer may
appeal to the Sheriff, in writing, for an exception to the application of any
part of this policy to that officer.

A. The officer must show extraordinary circumstances that would warrant
the granting of such exception.

B. The Sheriff shall respond in writing to the officer and the decision of the
Sheriff shall be final.

91
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

92
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 34: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

34.1 In any suit, legal action or proceeding, wherein an employee covered by this
Agreement is sued as an individual, for damages, compensatory and/or
punitive, which arises from their official duties, the Employer hereby agrees
that it will provide legal counsel for said employee in accordance with
Section 111.07, Florida Statutes. The employee shall have the right to retain
an attorney of his choice at the employee’s expense to defend the
employee in any individual claim.

34.2 It is understood and agreed that employees shall furnish written notification
of their intent to file suit against a third party in any court of law, if the suit
arises out of the employees’ official duties. Notice shall be provided to the
UnderSheriff, not less than five (5) days before the actual filing date.

34.3. Whenever any employee is involved in an accident with any vehicle owned,
leased, or rented by the Employer, and said accident is solely a result of
equipment failure or defect unconnected with any negligence or
misconduct of the employee, the employee shall not be disciplined by the
Employer for the accident or results thereof. Any alleged equipment failure
or defect must be reported at the time of the accident and included in the
appropriate report. An employee's failure to follow the Written Directives
applicable to vehicle care and maintenance shall nullify the provisions of this
section.

 

93
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

94
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 35: SEVERABILITY

In the event any Article, section or portion of this Agreement should be held invalid
and unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
apply only to the specific article, section, or portion thereof specified in the court's
decision; and upon issuance of such decision, the Employer and the F.O.P. agree to
immediately negotiate a substitute for the invalidated article, section, or portion
thereof.

95
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

96
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 36: RESIDUAL RIGHTS

36.1 The Employer retains all rights, powers, functions, and authority it had prior to
the signing of this contract except as such rights are specifically relinquished
or abridged in this contract.

36.2. All matters pertaining to terms of employment and working conditions

guaranteed by law to employees within the bargaining unit shall apply to the
extent that they are notin conflict with the provisions of this Agreement.

97
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

98
37.1

37.2

37.3

FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

ARTICLE 37: ENTIRE AGREEMENT

The parties acknowledge that during negotiations which resulted in this
Agreement each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands

and proposals with respect to any subject or mat
from the area of collective bargaining and that t
agreements arrived at by the parties after the ex
opportunity are set forth in this Agreement. This Artic
to in any way restrict parties from commencing
applicable law on any succeeding agreemen
termination of this Agreement.

Except as provided otherwise in this Agreement,
effective October 1, 2011 and shall remain in
September 30, 2014.

er not removed by law
he understandings and
ercise of that right and
le shall not be construed
negotiations under the

to take effect upon

his Agreement shall be
orce to and including

There shall be a reopener in negotiations for Fiscal Year 2011-2012 limited to

Articles 28, Employee Benefits (negotiations shal
employee benefits stated with these articles).

The F.O.P. or the City must provide the other thirty
Fiscal Year 2011-2012, but prior to the beginning of
over the Employee Benefits article. During the initia

not be limited to the

(30) days notice within
reopening negotiations
negotiation session, the

 

parties agree to pre-schedule nine (9) additional negotiation sessions, three

(3) subsequent negotiation sessions for each of
consecutive months.
pursuant to Chapter 447, Florida Statutes.

99

the following three (3)

Negotiations shall continue as needed thereafter
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

100
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

SCHEDULE A

BARGAINING UNIT CLASSIFICATIONS

Police Lieutenant

Police Captain

101
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

102
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

SCHEDULE B
SAMPLE MEMORANDUM FINAL ACTION REPORT
TO: Party Requesting Public Records Related to Internal Investigations
FROM: Jacksonville Sheriff's Office
DATE: January 1, 2006
RE: Final Action Report — Disposition

In accord with the State of Florida’s General Records Retention Schedule for Law
Enforcement Agencies, the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office maintains a “Final Action
Report” that lists the disposition of all internal investigations.

The terms used in the Final Action Report to describe the disposition of the matter
are defined as follows:

Exonerated -The internal investigation determined that the alleged actions
occurred but were lawful and proper

Formal Counseling — A formal counseling session is a discussion between a
supervisor and a subordinate in which the subordinate’s behavior and necessary
improvements are brought to the employee's attention. Formal counseling is not
discipline.

Information — Letter Sent —A review by Internal Affairs showed that an investigation
was not warranted. The complainant was sent a letter advising of this. No
discipline or formal counseling is imposed on the officer.

Information Only -The internal investigation did not result in a formal summation. No
discipline or formal counseling was imposed on the officer. A record of the matter
is maintained by JSO for documentation purposes only.

Not Sustained -The internal investigation determined that there was insufficient
evidence available to prove or disprove the allegation.

Supervisor Referral - Letter Sent -- A review by Internal Affairs showed that a formal
investigation by JSO IA was not warranted. However, the Watch Commander is
sent the information informally to review and discuss with the officer. The Watch
Commander is also responsible for contacting the complainant. The Watch
Commander has the option of formally investigating the matter or not.

Sustained —The internal investigation determined that there was a violation of
agency rules and/or regulations.

Unfounded —-The internal investigation determined that allegations are false or not
supported by the facts.

103
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

104
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

SCHEDULE C
REQUIREMENTS FOR PAY ADVANCEMENT

The JSO Personnel Division Director shall submit in writing to the City’s Director of
Employee Services the advancement in salary of each employee who has met the
requirements for pay advancement as provided herein. Provided the following
conditions are met, the employee’s advancement through the steps of the Pay
Grade to which assigned shall be automatic, beginning on the first day of the first
pay period following completion of one (1) year of continuous service subsequent
to his/her date of employment if the following conditions are met:

Conditions:

(1) | The employee is in good physical and mental health capable of performing
the duties of a Police Officer. (See Article 26, Physical Ability Testing)

(2) |The employee's performance in the job is satisfactory for the year prior to
advancement to the next step.

(3) If the performance of the employee is not satisfactory or his/her health is
such that he/she cannot perform his/her duties, the step increase may be
delayed for a period of six (6) months at which time, his/her performance will
be reevaluated. If his/her performance has not improved substantially, the
delay can be extended for another six (6) months for another evaluation. This
process will be repeated until the employee’s performance improves to the
required standard. Injury on duty will not be a satisfactory reason to preclude
advancement.

(4) The employee will be advised in writing as to the reason his/her step increase
was denied; and if the employee does not agree, he/she may use the
grievance procedure which will be inserted at Step II or may file a grievance
with the Civil Service Board.

(5) All recommendations for salary advancement within grade shall bear the
approval and recommendation of the employee's Activity Supervisor and
Commanding Officer.

(6) Those employees eligible to receive steps shall have their time of service
calculated, based on their years of continuous service as a Police Officer or
Police Recruit with the Office of the Sheriff.

(7) | Requirements for advancement within the pay grades of the Pay Plan as
specified in the above procedures shall require continuous, satisfactory
service with the Office of the Sheriff.

(8) — This Pay Plan is designated to provide the career officer with the opportunity
to advance and remain as a first-line street officer.

105
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

106
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

SCHEDULE D
CITY OF JACKSONVILLE
SHERIFF'S OFFICE
POLICE LIEUTENANT
TEN (10) STEP PAY PLAN

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PAY GRADE 13.16 13.16
MONTHLY / MONTHLY /
ANNUAL ANNUAL
BASED ON 10/1/2008 - 01/1/2012 -
STEP COMPLETION OF: 12/31/2011 09/30/2014
] 6 YEARS $6,487 $6,292
$77,844 $75,504
2 8 YEARS $6,586 $6,388
$79,032 $76,656
3 0 YEARS $6,691 $6,490
$80,292 $77,880
4 1 YEARS $6,795 $6,591
$81,540 $79,092
5 2 YEARS $6,898 $6,691
$82,776 $80,292
6 3 YEARS $6,998 $6,788
$83,976 $81,456
7 4 YEARS $7,103 $6,890
$85,236 $82,680
8 5 YEARS $7,206 $6,990
$86,472 $83,880
9 6 YEARS $7,308 $7,089
$87,696 $85,068
10 7 YEARS $7,409 $7,187
$88,908 $86,244

 

 

 

 

 

Numbers are approximate due to rounding.

107
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

108
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

SCHEDULE E
CITY OF JACKSONVILLE
SHERIFF'S OFFICE
POLICE CAPTAIN
TEN (10) STEP PAY PLAN

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PAY GRADE 13.18 13.18
MONTHLY / MONTHLY /
ANNUAL ANNUAL
BASED ON 10/1/2008 - 01/1/2012 -
STEP COMPLETION OF: 12/31/2011 09/30/2014
1 & YEARS $7,622 $7,393
$91,464 $88,716
2 8 YEARS $7,739 $7,507
$92,868 $90,084
3 0 YEARS $7,861 $7,625
$94,332 $91,500
4 1 YEARS $7,985 $7,745
$95,820 $92,940
5 2 YEARS $8,106 $7,863
$97,272 $94,356
6 3 YEARS $8,223 $7,976
$98,676 $95,712
7 4 YEARS $8,347 $8,097
$100,164 $97,164
8 5 YEARS $8,467 $8,213
$101,604 $98,556
9 & YEARS $8,586 $8,328
$103,032 $99,936
10 7 YEARS $8,706 $8,445
$104,472 $101,340

 

 

 

 

 

Numbers are approximate due to rounding.

109
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

110
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

INDEX
SUBJECT ARTICLE PAGE

ACCIDENTAL DEATH BENEFITS ......sessessesssecseeeseessresseesseenees
ADMINISTRATION OF THE PAY PLAN
AGENT OF RECORD......
AGREEMENT...
ANNUAL LEAVE
ACCRUAL (PLANE) .
ACCRUAL (PLAN P) .
APPROVAL (PLAN E)
APPROVAL (PLAN P)
MAXIMUM ACCRUAL (PLAN €)..
MAXIMUM ACCRUAL (PLAN P)..
RETIREMENT (PLAN E)
RETIREMENT (PLAN P.
ROLL BACK (PLAN E)
SELLBACK (PLANE).
SELL BACK (PLAN P).
TERMINATION PAY (PLAN E)
TERMINATION PAY (PLAN P)...
TERMINAL LEAVE BENEFITS (PLAN E)
TERMINAL LEAVE BENEFITS (PLAN P)
ARBITRATION ......
AUTOMOBILE ALLOWANC
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.
BILL OF RIGHTS...
BULLETIN BOARDS
CLASSIFICATIONS
CLOTHING ALLOWANCE
COLLEGE INCENTIVE...
COMPENSATION... ceteseeeaeesaeeseeeaeeseeseess
COMPREHENSIVE DRUG POLICY AND PROCEDURES
CONTRACT TERM ...
COURT APPEARANCE
DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM
DENTAL HEALTH PLAN u....eeseeeseeeeee
DEPENDENTS’ MEDICAL INSURANCE
DISABILITY BENEFITS...
DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE.
DRUG ABUSE POLICY AND PROCEDURES, COMPREHENSIV
DRUG DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES ......sssessesseesseeseeeseee
DUES...
EMERGENCY SUSPENSION
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS.......sssseeseees
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
EMPLOYEE EVALUTATIONS
ENTIRE AGREEMENT......
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY .
EQUIPMENT...
FILES...

 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

an
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,

SUBJECT ARTICLE PAGE

FIT-FOR-DUTY-EXAM
FOP ACTIVITIES.
FOP DUES.....
FOP RECOGNITION
FOP SECURITY AND CHECK OFF .
FOP REPRESENTATIVES......
FUNERAL LEAVE.
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
STEP |.
STEP II
STEP IIl
STEP IV
RULES ....
ARBITRATION
HEALTH, SAFETY AND......eeseeeseees
HEART/HYPERTENSION COVERAGE,
HOLIDAY PAY
HOLIDAYS ....
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT
INCENTIVE PROGRAM ..
INJURY IN LINE OF DUTY
LEAVE DONATION
LIFE INSURANCE...
LIGHT DUTY .....
MANAGEMENT RIGHT:
MANAGEMENT SECURITY .
MEDICAL INSURANCE...
MILITARY LEAVE .....
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
OUT OF CLASS PAY.
OVERTIME ....
PAY DIFFERENTIAL a
PAY INCENTIVE PLAN (COLLEGE)
PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS FOR FOP DUES.
PERSONAL LEAVE (PLAN E)
PERSONAL LEAVE (PLAN P)
ACCRUAL (PLANE) .
ACCRUAL (PLAN P) .
MAXIMUM ACCRUAL (PLAN €)..
MAXIMUM ACCRUAL (PLAN P)..
USAGE (PLAN E)
USAGE (PLAN P
PERSONAL PROPERTY DAMAGE .
PHYSICAL ABILITY POLICY
PHYSICAL ABILITY TESTING
POOL TIME......
PROMOTIONS...
REASONABLE SUSPICION
RESIDUAL RIGHTS
RETIREMENT LEAVE (PLANE) .

24.

  

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

112
FOP LIEUTENANTS & CAPTAINS,
SUBJECT ARTICLE PAGE

RETIREMENT LEAVE (PLAN P) .......--.0++
ROLLBACK OF VACATION
SAFETY AND HEALTH .....
SCHEDULE A - (BARGAINING UNIT CLASSIFICATIONS) ......
SCHEDULE B - (SAMPLE MEMORANDUM FINAL ACTION REPORT) .
SCHEDULE C - (ADMINISTRATION OF THE PAY PLAN).
SCHEDULE D - (POLICE LIEUTENANT PAY PLAN) ..
SCHEDULE E - (POLICE CAPTAIN PAY PLAN)...
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT.......++
SELLBACK OF VACATION (PLAN E).
SELLBACK OF VACATION (PLAN P).
SEVERABILITY ........+
SPECIAL MEETINGS .....sessseeseeseesseereee

SUBSTANCE ABUSE TESTING PROCEDURE
SUPPLEMENTAL PAY...
TEMPORARY DISABILITY .
TERMINAL LEAVE BENEFITS
UNIFORMS & EQUIPMENT.
USE OF LEAVE
VOTING
WAGES
WITNESS DUTY
WORK RULES
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION......:-see+0

   

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

113
