PREAMBLE

This agreement is made and entered into this 2"! day of December, 2011, by and
between the City of Fort Wayne, Indiana the “Employer” and the Fort Wayne
Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, Inc. the “Union” and under the authority of Special
Ordinance No. S-156-78 (the "Police Officers and Firefighters Arbitration Ordinance"),
currently codified in Sections 20-117/20-129.

It is the intent and purpose of this Agreement to assure sound and mutually
beneficial working and economic relationships between the parties hereto, to provide an
orderly and peaceful means of resolving any misunderstandings or differences which may
arise, and to set forth herein the basic and full agreement between the parties concerning
rates of pay, hours of employment and other conditions of employment.
WITNESSETH:

It is agreed by and between the parties hereto that the following, including
attached supplements, shall constitute and be the entire Agreement between the parties
hereto with respect to hours of employment, fringe benefits, and working conditions for
and during the term of this Agreement, and neither party shall be required to negotiate
with the other during the term of this Agreement on any bargainable issues or subjects,
unless mutually agreed to by the City and the Union, except as may be herein specifically
provided. Changes in the working Agreement may be made at any time, by agreement
between the parties, provided, however, that all changes are in writing and approved by
the Board of Safety. If changes involve compensation, Common Council approval shall
also be required.

ARTICLE 1 - GLOSSARY

Bureau: A subdivision or branch operating within a Division and responsible to
such Division. A Bureau is not to be confused with a section/unit as defined in this
glossary.

City: The City of Fort Wayne, Indiana or any other form of consolidated
government that may succeed/include the City of Fort Wayne.

Division: A major work unit within the Fort Wayne Police Department, under the

command of a Deputy Chief of Police.
Employee: A full-time commissioned police officer below the rank of Sergeant
employed by the Fort Wayne Police Department.

Employer: The City of Fort Wayne, Indiana or any other form of consolidated
government that may succeed/include the City of Fort Wayne.

Exempt Position: Assignment to, or the awarding of, a position by the Chief of
Police outside of seniority.

Factors: Wages, hours of employment, fringe benefits and working conditions.

Intra-Shift Bid: A bid within the shift the Employee holds a bid to.

Job: A specific role or function such as but not limited to: uniform patrol,
motorcycle unit, Hit-skip, K-9, Detective, Crime Scene Tech, etc.

Primary Bid/Inter-Shift: A bid to Shift in the Uniform operations of a division,
a bid to a shift in the Investigative Division, or a bid to a Specialized Section, such as but
not limited to K-9 or Hit-Skip.

Secondary Bid: A bid within the awarded Primary Bid; i.e., for the Uniform
operations of a Division, a union bid car, foot patrol, or any other defined job
classification; for the Investigative/Support Division, it will be a bid for a Section.

Section/Unit: A small work unit operating in either an autonomous fashion
within a Division or as a specialized group within a Bureau such as the K-9 section, Hit-
Skip, Crime Scene, and Motorcycle sections.

Shift: A scheduled period of work or duty.

Temporary Assignment: A job movement to any assignment which moves an
officer from his/her bid position.

Uniform Patrol Section: Uniform Employees working within a specific
Division, i.e. N/W, S/W, N/E, or S/E, in a uniform patrol capacity.

ARTICLE 2 - PURPOSE
Sei

 

m1. The purpose of this Agreement is to provide a procedure for orderly
collective bargaining between the parties, to secure prompt and fair disposition of
grievances or complaints, to set forth the basic principles concerning hours of
employment, fringe benefits, and working conditions, and to establish a basis for the
cooperative solution of problems by responsible parties to the end that a spirit of peace

and cooperation be maintained.
Section 2. This Agreement provides coverage for Employees. They have the right
to bargain collectively with the City and to be represented by a labor organization,
currently the Union, as selected by the majority of the Employees with respect to Factors.
Factors are defined as, Wages, hours of employment, fringe benefits, and working
conditions.

ARTICLE 3 - RECOGNITION

Section 1. Recognition of Union: The Employer hereby recognizes the Union as
the sole and exclusive representative of all Employees for the purposes of collective
bargaining with respect to Factors.

ARTICLE 4 - BARGAINING UNIT

Section 1. The bargaining unit to which this Agreement applies shall include all
full-time commissioned police officers of the Fort Wayne Police Department below the
rank of Sergeant actually assigned to the Fort Wayne Police Department.

ARTICLE 5 - COVERAGE

Section 1. The provisions of this Agreement shall be binding upon the City.

Section 2. This Agreement shall remain in full force and effect until a new
Agreement is signed by the City.

Section 3. No Agreement, waiver, alteration, understanding, variation, or
modification of any terms or conditions contained herein shall be made by an Employee
or group of Employees, with the Employer, and in no case shall it be binding upon the
parties hereto, unless such Agreement is made and executed in writing between the
Union, the City, and is approved by the Board of Safety.

Section 4. The Agreement expressed herein in writing constitutes the entire
Agreement between the parties and no oral statement shall add to or supersede any of its
provisions.

ARTICLE 6 - PERSONNEL POLICY
The City of Fort Wayne's Personnel Policy shall govern in matters not specifically

addressed in this Agreement.
ARTICLE 7 - POLICE OFFICER'S BILL OF RIGHTS

This Article is known as and may be cited as the Fort Wayne Police Officers'

 

Procedural Bill of Rights. These rules shall be for the government of the Fort Wayne
Police Department and shall be the Internal Police Personnel Policies.

For purposes of this Article, the term "police officer" includes Fort Wayne City
police officers on full-time active duty within the bargaining unit as defined in this
Agreement.

Section 1. Employees of the Fort Wayne Police Department hold status as public
officers in that the nature of their office and their performance of their duties involves the
exercise of the police power of the City and the State.

Section 2. The security of the City and its citizens depends upon the manner in
which Employees perform their duties. The performance of such duties involves those
Employees in all manner of contacts and relationships with the public, superior officers,
and fellow officers.

Section 3. Situations may arise out of such contact and relationships brought
about by the actions of Employees of the force. Such situations may require prompt
investigation by superior officers designated by the Director of Public Safety, the Chief
of Police, and Division Commanders or other competent authority designated by the
Chief of Police.

Section 4. Except as otherwise provided by law, no Employee shall be prohibited
from engaging, or be coerced or required to engage in, political activity.

Section 5. When, for any reason, any Employee is under investigation or
subjected to questioning by his/her commanding officer, or any other duly assigned
Employee of the Police Department, which could lead to disciplinary action, demotion,
dismissal, transfer or administrative charges, and to insure that such investigation or
questions are conducted in a manner conducive to public confidence, good order and
discipline, meanwhile observing and protecting the individual rights of each Employee,
the following rules of procedure are hereby established:

A. The questioning shall be conducted at a reasonable hour, preferably at a time
when the Employee is on duty or during normal working hours for the Employee, unless

the seriousness of the investigation requires otherwise. The questioning shall be
completed within a reasonable time after the occurrence of the event giving rise to the
investigation. Time shall be provided for personal necessities, meals, telephone calls, and
rest periods.

B. The Employee under investigation shall be informed of the nature of the
investigation or whether he is a witness or the object of the investigation, and of any
charges against him, at least two (2) calendar days prior to such questioning, unless
evidence establishing probable cause that a felony has been committed demands an
immediate investigation. All questions directed to the Employee under investigation
shall be asked by and through no more than two questioners.

C. The questioning session shall be for a reasonable period taking into
consideration the gravity and complexity of the issue being investigated.

D. The Employee under investigation shall not be subject to offensive language
or threatened in any manner whatsoever. The Employee under investigation shall not be
subjected to visits by the press or news media without his/her express consent, nor shall
his/her name, home address or photograph be given to the press or news media without
his/her express consent.

E. The complete questioning of an Employee may be recorded. A tape recording
may be made of the questioning, and the Employee shall have access to the tape if any
further proceedings are contemplated or prior to any further investigation at a subsequent
time. The Employee shall be entitled to a transcribed copy of any notes made by a
stenographer or to any and all reports, or notes, made by investigators. The Employee
being questioned shall have the right to bring his/her own recording device and record
any and all aspects of the questioning.

F. When the Employee is under investigation for the commission of a criminal
offense, he/she shall be completely informed of all his/her rights prior to the
commencement of the interrogation. If the officer chooses to invoke his/her protection
under these rights at that time, that officer shall not be subject to charges of
insubordination or failure to cooperate for that reason.

G. No Employee shall have his/her locker, desk, or other space for storage, that
may be assigned to them, searched without their consent, except in his/her presence or

unless a valid search warrant has been obtained.
H. Any Employee under investigation shall have the right to be represented by
counsel and/or any union representative of his/her choice who shall be present at all times
during such questioning whenever such questionings may result in disciplinary action or
criminal charges against the Employee, and shall be so advised prior to commencing the
interview. The role of the Union representative or legal counsel during said

representation is as follows:

1. Ascertain the charges against the Employee before the interview starts;
2. Offer mitigating circumstances and investigatory leads;

3. Question the Employee at the conclusion of the interview;

4, Consult with the Employee during the interview;

5. Object to inappropriate questions.

I. If an officer is compelled by the threat of possible job forfeiture, or discipline,
to make any oral or written statement either by direct, face-to-face order, written orders,
manual of rules and or procedures, or implied orders than neither the statement nor the
fruits of the statement may be used against the Employee in a subsequent criminal
prosecution of the officer. The officer shall be granted Derivative Use Immunity.

J. This section shall not apply to any investigation or questioning of an Employee
in the course of counseling, instruction, or informal verbal admonishment by, or other
routine contact with a supervisor.

Section 7. If an officer is ordered into Internal Affairs, Office of Professional
Standards, or the Police Department, while off-duty, to be questioned or interviewed
concerning a specific incident or action, said officer will be compensated for time spent
in the interview or questioning, in addition to one (01) of travel time.

Section 8. No Employee shall have any comment adverse to his/her interest
entered in his/her personnel file, or any record kept at his/her place or unit of employment
or any other place recording such comments by any person, without the Employee having
first read and signed the instrument containing the adverse comment indicating he is
aware that such comment is being placed in his/her personnel file or other place of
recordation of such comments, except that such entry may be made if, after reading such
instrument containing any adverse comment, the Employee refused to sign it. A witness

shall thereafter note that such officer was presented with the opportunity to read and sign
such instrument and refused to do so. Nothing in this provision shall apply to notes and
records compiled by an investigator during the course of an investigation of an Employee
provided, however, that upon completion of the investigation, the Employee shall have
access to all notes and records of the investigation.

Section 9. A Employee shall have fifteen (15) working days within which to file
a written response to any adverse comment entered in his/her personnel file. Such
written response shall be attached to, and shall accompany, the adverse comment.

Section 10. Before the questioning of any Employee as a result of a complaint by
a citizen, that citizen shall be required to sign a statement clearly stating the allegation, a
copy of which shall be provided to the officer at the time said officer is directed to report
for questioning.

Section 11. No Employee shall be required or requested for purposes of job or
other personnel action to disclose any item of his/her property, income, assets, source of
income, debts, or personal or domestic expenditures (including those of any member of
his/her family or household) unless:

A. Such information is obtained under proper legal procedure, or

B. There is probable cause that bribes or other improper inducements
may have been given to such Employees, or

Cc. Such income is public record.

Section 12. No Employee shall be given an unnatural, artificial, or make-work
assignment for the purpose of discipline or punishment.

Section 13. No Employee shall be discharged, disciplined, demoted, transferred
or denied promotion or reassignment or otherwise discriminated against in regard to
his/her employment, or be threatened with any such treatment by reason of his/her lawful
exercise of his/her constitutional rights or the rights granted under this Article.

Section 14. An Employee may inspect his/her personnel file and may be
accompanied by a designated union representative, which may include an attorney. Any
alleged discrepancies shall be brought to the attention of the Personnel Administrator for
adjustment. If the matter is still unresolved, it shall be subject to the grievance procedure.

Section 15. No Employee shall be compelled to submit to a polygraph

examination, voice stress analysis or other truth detection device against his/her will, nor
shall voice stress analysis or other truth detection devices be unknowingly used during
the course of an investigation of an Employee. No disciplinary action or other
recrimination shall be taken against an Employee refusing to submit to a polygraph
examination, voice stress analyzer, or other truth detection devices. No comment or
notation shall be entered anywhere in the investigator's notes or anywhere else that the
police officer refused to submit to a polygraph examination, voice stress analysis or truth
detection device or that voice stress analysis or other detection device was unknowingly
used.

Testimony or evidence shall not be admissible at a subsequent hearing, trial or
proceeding, judicial or administrative, to the effect that the Employee refused to submit
to a polygraph examination, voice stress analysis, or other truth detection device or that
voice stress analysis or other truth detection device was unknowingly used.

Section 16. No Employee shall have charges brought before the Board of Public
Safety without having been informed of the upcoming charges first, having been offered
the opportunity to be interviewed first, and having been afforded all Constitutional rights,
and all rights provided by this Article.

Section 17. The Fort Wayne Police Department Drug Testing Policy, as adopted
by the Board of Public Safety, shall take precedence over any language within the PBA
contract that shall read as prohibitive or contradicting to the policy.

ARTICLE 8 - PROTECTION OF BARGAINING UNIT WORK

 

Section 1. Reserve Officers and Supervisors (Sergeants and above), Non-Sworn
Civilian(s), or contracted Employee(s) may perform bargaining unit work so long as it
does not result in the displacement or layoff of a Employee as direct result thereof.

Section 2. Civilian(s), or contracted person(s) will not assume the duties of
bargaining unit Employees in such a way as to cause the displacement or layoff of such
Employee as a direct result thereof.

Section 3. The term “displace” as used above means the removal of an Employee
from a regularly scheduled shift and/or bid position and replaced with a reserve officer,

supervisor, non-sworn civilian or contracted Employee.
ARTICLE 9 - JOB ELIMINATION - LAYOFF - RECALL

Job Elimination: If an Employee's position is eliminated, the Employee will

 

exercise seniority on available, unfilled positions and have immediate bidding rights. If a
position which was eliminated is re-established within six (6) months, the Employee who
held the position shall be given first opportunity to fill the vacancy.

Should a job close through elimination of the position, the Employee shall be
given the opportunity to bump the next junior Employee in the division or section. If
there are no junior Employees, said individual shall be placed in the open job, generally
identified as B-Shift Uniform. For the purpose of this Article, a section shall relate to K-
9, Hit-skip, Motorcycle, and Crime Scene positions or any other future specialized unit.

Layoff: In the event of a layoff of Employees, the order of layoff shall be
inversely related to length of service (the last person hired shall be the first person laid
off.)

Should the City find it necessary to lay off Employees, it shall give the Union
notice not less than four (04) weeks prior to the effective date of the layoff of the initially
affected Employee. The City will inform the Union of the nature of the layoff within
three (3) working days of the notice. The City, at this meeting, shall provide the Union
with a current seniority list of the bargaining unit.

Recall: In the event of a recall to work, the order of return shall be directly
related to length of service (the last person laid off shall be the first person returned to
work.)

ARTICLE 10 - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Section 1. Recognition of Management: The Union hereby recognizes the
Employer as having the sole rights to direction of the working forces, including, but not
limited to, the right to determine the work to be performed by Employees; to employ,
promote, demote, transfer, layoff, discipline, suspend or discharge for cause; to assign
work and the number of hours to be worked, including overtime work; to increase and
decrease the working force; to establish standards and methods; to hire civilians except
for patrol and investigative field work; to transfer work or otherwise perform work as

required by the demands to maintain the efficiency of public operations.
10

The Employer, in exercising the rights set forth herein, recognizes that certain
express conditions of employment are set forth in this Agreement which limit and restrict
these defined Employer rights. Therefore, the Employer agrees that in exercising the
rights herein, nothing shall be construed or applied in any manner which negates,
modifies, or supersedes the rights of Employees, or the Union, where such rights are
expressly set forth in this Agreement. However, nothing in this Agreement shall be
construed to limit the authority of the Chief and the Board of Safety to exercise statutory
powers to discipline other than the provisions of Article 11, Section 2 and Article 07.

Section 2. Rules and Regulations: The Union recognizes that the Employer
reserves the rights to establish rules, and/or change existing rules affecting working
conditions. It is agreed that all such rules shall be reasonable in content and application.
The Union will be furnished a copy of any new or revised rules, policies, or General
Orders affecting Employees at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the effective date.
ARTICLE 11 - DISCRIMINATION

Section 1. The Employer will not interfere with, restrain or coerce the Employees
covered by this Agreement because of membership in, or activity on behalf of, the Union.
The Employer will not discriminate with respect to hiring, tenure of employment or any
term or condition of employment against any Employee covered by this Agreement
because of membership in, or activity on behalf of, the Union, nor will it discourage or
attempt to discourage membership in the Union or attempt to encourage membership in
another Union.

Section 2. The Employer and the Union agree that the employer will not
discriminate against any applicant for employment, or any present or future Employee, in
the payment of wages, assignment to jobs, seniority, promotion, demotions, training
transfer, layoff, recall, discipline, discharge, pension benefits, working hours, physical
facilities, retirement age, insurance coverage, job classification, classified advertising,
recruitment, testing, or any other term, condition, or privilege of employment, because of
race, color, religion, sex, national origin or occupationally irrelevant physical handicaps,
or the exercising of any rights under the grievance procedure.

Section 3. The Employer further agrees that any violation of Title VII of the 1964
Civil Rights Act, as well as the Equal Pay Act of 1963, Executive Order 11246 as
11

amended by 11375, and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1979, will be
deemed a violation of this Agreement and subject to the grievance and arbitration
provisions embodied in this Agreement.

ARTICLE 12- UNION SECURITY

Section 1. The City recognizes the benefit of a professional union representing its
Employees. Therefore, the police department shall be considered a “union shop."
Individuals do not have to be union members to be hired, but will be required to join the
union after a designated grace period.

Section 2. It shall be a condition of employment that all Employees covered by
this Agreement who are members of the Association in good standing on the effective
date of this agreement shall remain members in good standing. It shall also be a condition
of employment that all Employees covered by this Agreement and hired on or after its
effective date shall, on or before the thirty-first (31") day following the beginning of such
employment, become and remain Employees in good standing of the Association.

Section 3. The City recognizes as valid, fair, and equitable the Union's claim that
all Employees have an obligation to pay dues for services rendered on their behalf by the
Union, and for their proportionate part of the costs of collective bargaining, contract
administration, grievance adjustment, and other duties and services related to the Union
being the exclusive representative of the bargaining unit. The City shall inform the Union
of all Employees who refuse to sign such an authorization form or who revoke an
executed form.

Section 4. The Union, on its own and not on behalf of the City, may take such
action as it may deem appropriate to collect its dues from those Employees who refuse to
authorize payroll deductions for or who otherwise refuse to pay the dues.

Section 5. A new Employee may refrain from joining the union on the grounds of
him/her being a religious objector. The religious objector exception, as spelled out in
Section 19 of the NLRA, only applies to persons who are Employees of and adherents to
“established and traditional tenets and teachings of a bona fide religion, body or sect
which has had historically held conscientious objections to joining or financially
supporting labor organizations.” If a worker qualifies as a religious objector, the

individual will not be forced to join or pay dues to the union. However, he/she shall pay
12

to a non-religious, non-labor, charity selected by the Union Board a sum equal to the dues
and fees which are required of Employees.

Section 6. It is understood and agreed that the Union shall indemnify the
Employer from and against any liability, actions, or cause of action that may result with
respect to the provision of this Article, Article Twelve (12).

ARTICLE 13 - DUES DEDUCTION

Section 1. The Employer will accept assigned dues deduction authorization by
any Employee, covered by this Agreement, as equivalent to a continuing voucher by such
Employee in the amount of monthly dues, or initiation fees or assessments uniformly
required to the Union (certified by the Treasurer of the Union as the proper amount) and
such authorization shall remain in effect for the duration of this Agreement. However,
any such authorization may be revoked by an Employee upon his/her promotion to the
rank of Sergeant, and a written notice to the Employer with a copy being sent to the
Union.

Section 2. Deduction of Union dues shall be made on the first payday of the
month in which the authorization was received and monthly thereafter on the first payday
of the month. Deductions provided herein shall be remitted to the Treasurer of the Union
no later than the twentieth (20th) day of the month in which the deductions were made
and shall include all deductions made in that month. The Employer shall furnish, with
the deductions remitted, an alphabetized listing of each Employee for whom a deduction
is made showing the exact amount of each respective deduction made.

ARTICLE 14 - BARGAINING UNIT INFORMATION

 

During the term of this Agreement, the Employer, on a semi-annual basis, January
and July of each year, will provide the Union with a list giving name, rank, division and
unit assignment, and home address and telephone number of all Employees the Union is
authorized to represent by virtue of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 15 - UNION REPRESENTATION

Section 1. Upon notice to the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative,
authorized agents of the Union shall have access to the Employer's establishment(s) for
purposes of adjusting disputes, investigating working conditions, and ascertaining that the

Agreement is being adhered to.
13

Section 2. The Employer will recognize four (4) bargaining committeemen, one
(1) of whom shall be designated as chairman of the committee. Negotiations shall be
held during normal shift business hours of the Employer. Time spent in meetings set up
by management, for the first fifteen (15) meeting days of negotiations, mediation and
arbitration, set by Special Ordinance No. S-156-78, shall be treated as one workday for
each such meeting day. Thereafter, such time spent by these individuals shall be
compensated on an hour to hour basis. The employer will accommodate the Union with
respect to time off to participate in negotiation sessions.

Section 3. Representatives of the Union shall be chosen from its members who
are employed by the Employer for the purpose of this paragraph, "Employee" is defined
as a person who is in the bargaining unit. The Employer will recognize shift
representatives or their alternate representatives designated by the Union to the Employer
in writing. Union representatives shall be afforded such time as needed to carry out their
grievance responsibilities. Any shift representative and involved union member who
finds it necessary to leave his/her work station to transact legitimate grievance business
may do so after notifying his/her supervisor and being released in a reasonable amount of
time. The shift representatives or alternate representatives will notify the supervisor of
the legitimate grievance business. The Union agrees to make every effort in the conduct
of grievance matters to minimize interference with production and the orderly operation
of the Employer, and further agrees that alternates will process grievances only in the
absence of the shift representative.

The Employer further agrees that the Employees who file a grievance with the
Employer will not be questioned in respect thereto without advising the Employee of
his/her the right to Union representation.

Section 4. The Union shall be free to withdraw a grievance at any step of the
grievance procedure without prejudice.

Section 5. Designated Union representatives, in exercising their collective
bargaining rights as set forth in this Agreement, shall have the right to carry out their
collective bargaining responsibilities within the bargaining unit without fear of reprisal,

intimidation, coercion, harassment, or discrimination for so serving.
14

ARTICLE 16 - ASSOCIATION PRESIDENT.

Section 1. The President of the Association/Union shall be a full time position, so
he/she can conduct Union business. These matters shall include, but not be limited to,
contract interpretation, grievance matters and to further promote harmonious relations
between management and the Union. While engaged in such matters, the President shall
not suffer any loss of seniority or loss of financial remuneration.

Section 2. The President of the Association shall continue to be compensated as a
full-time Fort Wayne Police Officer employed by the City of Fort Wayne, Indiana.

Section 3. The President’s eligibility for promotional examinations shall not be
affected by his Presidential duties. His/her last evaluations used in their last promotional
exam/process, prior to becoming the Association President, shall be used for any
subsequent promotional exam he/she may take.

Section 4. The President of the Association shall complete the “Flex Schedule
Report,” and submit it to the Office of Professional Standards so an accurate account of
his/her hours worked can be accounted for. See attachment “Flex Schedule” for a copy of
the form.

Section 5. The President of the Association shall continue to participate in
weapons qualification(s) and any legally-mandated training. The Employee, President,
shall also continue to conform to Employer rules, regulations, and grooming standards
that are not inconsistent to union activities.

Section 6. The President of the Association/Union shall be allowed, if he or she
so choose, to exchange work time with full time, sworn officers of the division he/she
was assigned to prior to becoming President, in the event that shift is at minimum count,
or below, and an Exchange of Work Time form has been signed by both Employees and
the appropriate shift commander.

Section 7. Once the Employee takes office as the Association President, he/she
will remain at the pay level they were entitled to, concerning shift differentials and
special duty pay(s). However, it is expressly understood that the President shall be
entitled to any annual wage increase received by other Employees of the Association.

The President may continue to exercise his/her Bid rights, but will not collect extra
15

pay/compensation by doing so. He/she shall also continue to be afforded all rights and
privileges provided to other Employees of the department.
ARTICLE 17 - UNION TIME BANK

Section 1. The Employer shall donate one thousand-five hundred (1500) hours
annually to a Union time bank, to be used at the discretion of the Union and subject to
minimum count(s). This time shall not be carried over from one calendar year to the next;
unused time shall be revoked at the end of each calendar year. Any employee may
donate non-FLSA earned time to the bank.

Section 2. The Vice-president, Treasurer, and Recording Secretary, (Executive
Board Members) of the union may use union time bank hours even if minimum count(s)
would be impacted. This time shall not be carried over from one calendar year to the
next; unused time shall be revoked at the end of each calendar year. Employees may
donate non-FLSA earned time to the bank.

Section 3. Elected Board Members conducting legitimate union business may use
union time bank hours even if minimum count(s) would be impacted, so long as the
request for such time is made at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date(s) requested off. If
an Elected Board Member (not an Executive Board Member) needs to use union time
bank time within the fifteen day time period of the day off, it shall be subject to minimum
count(s).

ARTICLE 18 - LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

The Police Administration and the Association shall establish a Labor-
Management Committee to advance communications on matters of concern to either
party. The purpose of the Labor-Management Committee is to foster improved
communications and effective problem solving between the Administration and the
Association with regard to issues of material concern. The Committee generally serves as
an advisory rather than a decision-making body. The Committee shall meet at least
quarterly and shall consist of the Chief of Police or Assistant Chief of Police, one (01)
Deputy Chief, the Association President and one (01) Executive Board Member of the
Association, usually the Vice-president. Union counsel and the City’s labor counsel may

also attend as ex-officio members of the Committee.
16

ARTICLE 19 - BULLETIN BOARD

Section 1. The Employer agrees to furnish a sealed bulletin board located in each
of the buildings(s) where Employees normally work for the use of the Union for posting
of matters relating to Union meetings and other Union matters. All such notices by the
Union shall be signed by an authorized Union representative.

Section 2. With the increased use of electronic and technological means of
communications the Employer agrees that the Union may utilize department e-mail, in-
car messaging, and video technology to disseminate Union information.

ARTICLE 20 - UNION'S RIGHT TO ADDRESS RECRUIT CLASSES

Section 1. The Union shall have the right to address each new recruit class during

 

training. This time shall be established as a regular part of the training schedule and be at
least a minimum of one (01) hour.

Section 2. The Union shall be allowed the opportunity to address any newly-hired
Employee(s) (lateral or other) prior to, or on, the day upon which he/she is sworn in.

ARTICLE 21 - GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION

 

Section 1. Grievance Defined: A grievance shall be defined as any dispute
arising concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement or with respect to
the circumstances and conditions of employment except as otherwise provided in this
Article. Grievances may be submitted, as defined, relating to matters contained in this
Agreement. Suspensions, dismissals, and reductions in grade are not grieveable or
arbitrable. It is specifically understood that any matters governed by statutory provisions
regarding suspensions, reprimands, or dismissals shall not be considered grievances and
subject to the grievance procedure herein. When a grievance arises, an earnest effort
shall be made to settle such differences promptly in accordance with the Grievance
Procedure hereinafter prescribed.

Section 2. Grievance Limitations: If more than one Employee has the same
grievance, two (2) aggrieved Employees, representing all aggrieved Employees as
selected by the Union shall proceed through Step | of the Grievance Procedure, as set
forth in this Article, representing all Employees with the same grievance. The parties
hereto, in processing a grievance, reserve the right, upon mutual agreement, to eliminate

any of Steps 1 and 2 of the Grievance Procedure, as set forth in this Article. A grievance
17

must be filled within thirty (30) calendar days following knowledge of the action which
gave rise to the alleged grievance.
Section 3. Grievance Procedure: The Grievance Procedure shall be as follows:

Step 1. The grievance shall be orally presented by the aggrieved
Employee and/or the Employee's shift representative to his/her immediate supervisor.
The supervisor must give his/her answer within five (05) working days.

Step 2. If the grievance is unresolved in Step 1, it shall be presented in
writing by the aggrieved Employee and shift representative to the aggrieved Employee's
immediate supervisor. The Employer must give its written answer within five (5)
working days.

Step 3. In the event the grievance is unresolved in Step 2, it shall be
forwarded by the Union within five (5) working days to the Director of Personnel or
his/her successor. The Director of Personnel and the Union's grievance chairperson and
shift representative shall meet within ten (10) working days. To expedite the process,
either party may bring additional individuals, including the grievant, to this meeting.

Step 4. If the above procedure is followed and the parties are still unable
to settle the dispute, the parties shall submit the issue, within five (5) working days, to a
mutually agreed upon local hearing officer, who shall have the authority to resolve the
issue.

Step 5. If the above procedure has been followed and the parties are still
unable to settle the grievance, the Union shall, within fifteen (15) working days following
receipt of the local hearing officer's decision, notify the Employer of the Union's intent to
arbitrate the dispute.

Step 6. Within five (5) working days, the Employer and the Union shall
jointly request a panel of seven (7) arbitrators from the Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service. The Employer and the Union shall split the cost of the first
arbitration panel. Either the Union or the Employer can reject one arbitration panel and
request a new panel. If a panel is rejected, the party requesting the new panel must pay
the cost for the replacement panel. After receipt of the panel of arbitrators, the parties
shall meet within five (5) working days, draw lots to determine who shall strike the first

name from the list of seven arbitrators, and then continue striking names on an alternate
18

basis. The last remaining name shall be deemed the arbitrator by mutual consent of the
parties.

The arbitrator shall not have the authority to alter, amend or change the terms of
provisions of this Agreement, and his decision shall be limited to the particular grievance
in question. The answer of the arbitrator shall be in writing unless otherwise agreed on
by both parties.

The arbitrator's decision shall be final and binding on the parties, and in the event
either party shall fail or refuse to abide by the decision of the arbitrator, the offended
party can bring an action in the appropriate court. The court shall award the prevailing
party reasonable attorney fees in addition to any other relief adjudged.

The Union and the Employer agree that the non-prevailing party shall be
responsible for the cost of the officer/arbitrator, including any mutually agreed upon
services relating to the hearing or arbitration proceeding, such as the services of a court
reporter. However, if the officer/arbitrator finds either the grievance or the defense of the
grievance to be frivolous, groundless or unreasonable, the offending and non-prevailing
party shall, in addition to the afore mentioned cost, be responsible for the prevail party’s
attorney fees.

Section 4. Time Limitations: All time limits prescribed as set fourth in Section
3, Steps 1 through 6, may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties. Failure of the
party charged to respond within the time limits shall constitute a basis for escalating the
grievance to the next step. Failure of the aggrieved party to process the grievance to the
next step within the time limits shall constitute a basis for the party charged to deny the
grievance.

ARTICLE 22 - SENIORITY

Section 1. Seniority Defined: Seniority shall be determined by the most recent
date of continuous appointment with the Fort Wayne Police Department (FWPD) except
as provided in Section 3. Seniority for the purpose of this Agreement shall apply to
Employees of the bargaining unit. If two or more Employees have the same employment
date with the FWPD, the ranking for seniority shall be based on an alphabetized listing of

the Employees by the last name at time of appointment.
19

Section 2. Probationary Employees: All new appointees and laterals shall be
considered probationary Employees for the probationary period established by the Board
of Safety pursuant to I.C. 36-8-4-12. This period is generally understood to be twelve
(12) months in length: Six (6) months supervised probation; six (6) months unsupervised
probation where the probationary Employee is eligible to exercise bid rights.

No probationary period shall be for less than six (6) months unless the Union
consents in writing. Probationary Employees shall be excluded from the bidding
procedure during the first six (6) month period of their probation or any extension of their
field training by the Chief. This limitation on bidding does not limit the authority of the
Chief and the Board of Safety to establish periods of probationary appointments under
LC. 36-8-4-12.

Probationary Employees shall be granted time off for holidays, accrued
compensatory time, and accrued personal days under the same provisions as all
bargaining Employees.

A “lateral transfer” Employee may be moved to First Class pay status at the
discretion of the Chief of Police any time during the first year; however, such a move
does not terminate the Employee's probationary status.

Section 3. Termination of Seniority: An Employee's seniority shall be broken
when he/she:

A. Quits and is not reappointed within a period of six (6) months after
the date of resignation;

B. Is laid off for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months; or

Cc. Is discharged for just cause.

Section 4. Leave of Absence: All leaves of absence shall be governed by State
law, specifically LC. 36-8-5.

Section 5. Seniority List: The City shall provide the Union with a copy of an
updated seniority list after appointment of each new class or Employee.

ARTICLE 23 - JOB TRANSFERS, OPENINGS and BID PROCEDURES

 

Section 1. Job Vacancies: An opening occurs, for bidding purposes, through
normal attrition, promotion, or other vacancies. Eligible Employees shall be entitled to

bid on any opening in any and all divisions of the Fort Wayne Police Department and the
20

job shall be awarded on the basis of seniority, subject to the limitations of exempt
position(s).

A. Ifa bid position is vacated by an Employee who leaves to go to another
position; the vacated bid position shall be posted for bid no later than sixty (60) calendar
days after it was vacated, unless the Union is notified that the position is eliminated.

B. Uniform Patrol services within a Division are defined as the following
boundaries of the existing Area Partnerships. The Northwest Division includes police
districts A, B and C; the Southwest Division includes police districts I, J and K; the
Southeast Division includes police districts M, N and O; and, the Northeast Division
includes police districts E, F and G.

C. The City and the Union agree that at least the following patrol units shall be
standing secondary union bid patrol cars within the uniform patrol services within any
Division:

(1) Uniform Patrol services within a Division;

   

N/W. jon: NE Di mi:
“A” District = one (01) “R” District = two (02)
“B” District = one (01) “F” District = two (02)
“C” District = one (01) “G” District = two (02)
S/W Division: S/E Division:
“T? District = one (01) “M” District = two (02)
“J” District = two (02) “N” District = two (02)
“K” District = one (01) “O” District = one (01)

(2) There are three (03) Union Bid patrol cars in “E” and “F’” Districts, on
each shift, as of December 31%, 2004. The Employees bid into those cars shall be
grandfathered into Union Bid cars until they vacate their specific union car.

D. As annexed areas are brought into the City, management will agree to bid one
union bid car in any new district, for each shift. Additional units may be bid at
management's discretion.

E. Posted openings (including but not limited to K-9, Crime Scene Technician,
motorcycle, hit-skip, mounted patroll[if reinstituted], and traffic[if reinstituted]) shall be

bid within the respective unit before being bid Department wide.
21

F. Seniority bids shall be used in the Investigative Division for section work on
all shifts, except for Crimes Against Persons (aggravated battery, armed robbery, career
criminal squad, child abuse/neglect, cold case squad, domestic violence, elder abuse,
harassment, homicide, and sex crimes). However, any Employees bid into those positions
as of December 31“, 2004 shall be grandfathered into their bid position.

G. The Juvenile Aid Bureau is a section of the Investigative Division. Juvenile
Aid detectives shall work those crimes where juveniles are considered the perpetrators or
other work routinely assigned to the Juvenile Aid Section. The Juvenile Aid Section shall
be included in the Investigative Division’s “A” shift minimum count for weekend duties
and Holiday assignments only. When working weekend duty, Juvenile Aid detectives
will take on all types of investigations, not just occurrences involving juveniles.

H. All job vacancies/bids are considered to have been successfully awarded on
the posted date the new position is scheduled to begin. Bids that have been awarded and
are rescinded within fifteen (15) days of the posted start date may be awarded to the next
senior person.

I. Jobs held by probationary Employees shall be open to bid by all Employees
upon completion of the probationary Employee's field training period or any extension
thereof.

J. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent management from creating new job
classifications or extending or decreasing existing job classifications, provided each new
job classification covered under this Agreement is posted for bid (where applicable) in
accordance with the bidding procedure herein.

K. Attached hereto, as part hereof, is the Organizational Chart of the Fort Wayne
Police Department. Any subsequent changes made by the Employer shall not in any
fashion adversely affect or infringe upon the bidding rights of Employees as set forth in
the Agreement.

L. Upon a job deletion or opening by management, after one (1) department wide
bid, the more junior Employee may be required to fill the open job.

Section 2. Job Bidding: Bid Procedure: Bids shall be posted and remain open
on all Police Department bulletin boards for seven (7) consecutive calendar days for

department-wide bids, and five (5) consecutive calendar days for intra-shift bids. Persons
22

to accept bids will be the Shift Commanders. Employees must bid in person by signature
and shall receive a receipt to show that a bid has been placed. The Employee will retain
the original and the shift commander or commander of the day issuing the receipt shall
forward the copy along with the bid at the time the bids close to the Chief of Police or his
designee.

An Employee may remove his/her name from the bid by appearing in person to
the Shift Commander during working hours with his/her receipt during the seven (7) days
while the bid is open. The Union steward may act on behalf of an Employee on any
bidding procedure, provided written authorization is furnished. A bid shall be considered
awarded upon the effective starting date of the position, however a bid may also be
withdrawn anytime prior to the effective starting date.

Unsuccessful bids shall not be counted against the Employee's allowed number of
bids. An Employee may bid on more than one job, but not more than three (3) jobs
simultaneously. An Employee may not exercise bidding rights while under departmental
suspension in excess of thirty (30) days.

Employees shall exercise bid rights in a two-phased format: The Employee's
initial bid when moving from one division to another shall be a simultaneous bid for
division, shift, and/or bureau. Once successfully awarded a bid for division, shift, and/or
bureau, the Employee may exercise a secondary bid right on section or specific job
classification as herein identified.

All Employees shall have the right to an unlimited number of primary bids.
Successful secondary bids will not impact primary bid rights. It is agreed that for
purposes of secondary job bid rights, motor districts, etc., those Employees presently
assigned to specific jobs shall be grand fathered into their positions.

If two (2) Employees apply for the same opening and they have identical seniority
dates, then the system prescribed in "Seniority Defined,” based on an alphabetical list,
shall prevail.

Section 3. Bid Award: An Employee who has been awarded a bid under this
Article shall have the right, within fifteen (15) calendar days from the first day on the job
to decide whether or not to return to his/her previous primary/secondary bid/job. It is

understood that the Employer may use temporary assignments for those positions that
23

need to be filled within such 15-calendar-day period. The Employee, shall have his/her
final evaluation before his/her fifteenth (15th) calendar day, or within fifteen (15)
calendar days after successful completion of specified training as stated in the job bid. A
30-calendar-day extension shall be granted either side upon written notice, and both sides'
rights will also be extended. If, as a result of such evaluation, the Employer reasonably
believes that the Employee is not able to perform satisfactorily or is unable to perform,
the Employee will return to his/her former primary/secondary bid/job, and will retain all
bid rights. The Employee has the right to dispute management's evidence and appeal the
decision to the Board of Safety.

ARTICLE 24 - MOTORCYCLE OFFICERS

Section 1. The Employees bid into a Motorcycle position shall fall under the
command of the N/W Division’s Deputy Chief, or the Traffic Division if reinstituted.

Section 2. Openings within the Motorcycle section shall be bid within the
motorcycle section before being bid Department wide.

Section 3. Bidding: Motorcycles will be assigned to the uniform patrol sections
of the four (04) Divisions on A and B shifts and shall be bid each time as a Primary Bid
only. The motorcycles are unique positions and shall never be force-filled by inverse
seniority, or by Employees not bid into the positions. The successful bidder may be
required to meet certain specifications after obtaining the bid, such as successful
completion of a field-related school, a time commitment to remain in the job, etc. Such
specifications must be submitted to the Union for review, must be clearly stated in the bid
when it is posted, and must be relevant to the posted job. No such position shall be filled
if there is a pending grievance challenging the specifications.

Section 4. Motorcycle officers/units shall work the four (4) days on and two (2)
days off schedule, at eight and one-half (8.5) hours per shift.

Section 5. Motorcycles shall count towards the Special Assignments on the
respective shifts when assigned to do selective enforcement, etc., and are not primarily
answering radio calls for service. Motorcycles shall only be ridden from April 1 through
October 31 of each year or at any other time between November 1“ and March 31”, at the

option of the Employee assigned to that position. The Employees who are awarded the
24

bid positions shall retain their take home vehicles all year even when assigned to the
motorcycle.

Section 6. Motorcycle officers shall be required to work specific events which
fall outside their normal shift hours. These events shall include, but not be limited to
parades, specific holidays, funeral and/or dignitary escorts. Motorcycle Command shall
make every effort to notify Motorcycle personnel of any upcoming event as soon as
possible. These events, worked outside of shift, shall be compensated at a rate of time and
one-half (paid compensation). Any Motorcycle officer working on his/her regularly
scheduled day off as a result of the application of this section shall also receive an
additional day of compensatory time (8.5 hours) for each regularly scheduled day off
worked.

Section 7. If at any time during this Agreement the motorcycle positions are
eliminated the Employee(s) will be returned to the open billet, generally defined as B
shift Uniform.

ARTICLE 25 - K-9 OFFICERS

Section 1. Openings within the K-9 section shall be bid within the K-9 section

 

before being bid Department wide.

Section 2. Only Employees with less than twenty (20) years of service on the
department will be considered for a K-9 position. Employees already in the K-9 program,
or bidding for a position as a K-9 officer held within the prior year (12 months) from an
abolished position shall be exempt from sections 2 and 3 of this Article.

Section 3. Selection Process: The following shall be considered in the selecting
of a new K-9 officer.

(a) The Employee shall, as a minimum qualification, pass the ILEA
Fitness Indicator Test (F.I.T.). The F.LT. score will be used only
for bidding purposes, for K-9 positions.

(b) The F.I.T. qualification will be given to the any/all Employees
interested in bidding for a K-9 position every year. The standards
required by the ILEA F.LT. are as follows:

- 1.5 mile run: 16minutes 28 seconds or less

- 300 meter run: 71 seconds or less
25

- Push ups: 25 or more without resting
- Sit ups: 29 or more in one (01) minute or less
- Vertical jump: 16 inches or higher

This test is pass or fail; failure to meet or exceed the standards in
any one event shall constitute a failure of the entire test.

(c) The Employee must have a primary residence in Allen County,
with adequate space available for the housing of the animal.

(d) The Employee and his family shall be interviewed by a K-9
Sergeant or if none, the K-9 trainer. The interviewer shall make
recommendations, in writing, to the Chief of Police as to the
Employee’s and his/her family’s suitability for the K-9 program,
addressing any concerns about the candidate’s ability to care for
and maintain the K-9 animal.

(e) Interviews shall be conducted with the neighbors immediately
surrounding where the prospective K-9 officer lives. This is to
measure the neighbor’s reaction(s) to the Employee housing a K-9
animal.

(f) The Employee, K-9 candidate, shall be allowed to review the
report/recommendation made to the Chief by the K-9 Sergeant or
K-9 trainer. If the candidate so desires he/she may submit a
rebuttal of the report/recommendation for the Chief’s
consideration.

(g) All other matters being equal, the K-9 position(s) will be awarded
to the Most Senior Employee.

Section 4. Bidding: K-9 positions will be assigned to the uniform patrol sections
of the four (04) Divisions on A, B, and C shifts and shall be bid each time as a Primary
Bid only. The K-9 officer(s) are unique positions and shall never be force-filled by
inverse seniority, or by Employees not bid into the positions. The successful bidder may
be required to meet certain specifications after obtaining the bid, such as successful
completion of a field-related school, a time commitment to remain in the job, etc. Such

specifications must be submitted to the Union for review, must be clearly stated in the bid
26

when it is posted, and must be relevant to the posted job. No such position shall be filled
if there is a pending grievance challenging the specifications.

Section 5. At the end of each seven (7) day cycle, the K-9 officer will submit a
sheet for four (4.0) additional hours. The reason for the additional hours will be
designated as “K-9 Maintenance and Care.” The K-9 maintenance and care time shall be
paid based upon the Employee's regular hourly rate.

Section 6. The City and the Union agree that at a minimum, there shall be one
(01) K-9 officer bid for the North side and (01) K-9 officer bid for the South side of the
City, per shift.

Section 7. If at any time, during this Agreement, a K-9 position is eliminated or
abolished the Employee(s) will be returned to the open billet, generally defined as B shift
Uniform.

ARTICLE 26 — HIT-SKIP OFFICERS

Section 1. The Employees bid into Hit-Skip shall fall under the command of the
N/W Division’s Deputy Chief, or the Traffic Division if reinstituted.

Section 2. There shall be at least three (03) Hit-Skip officers/investigators.

Section 3. The normal week for the current Hit-Skip officers shall be a fixed
schedule of four (4) days on and three (3) days off at ten (10) hour shifts. Wednesday
shall be established as the pivot or swing day. However, any Employee bidding into Hit-
Skip after December, 31“ 2004 shall work a five (5) days on and two (2) days off,
Monday through Friday schedule, at eight (8) hour per shifts.

Section 4. Hit-Skip officers may be required to work specific events which fall
outside their normal shift hours. These events may include, but not be limited to parades,
specific holidays, funeral and/or dignitary escorts. Hit-Skip command shall make every
effort to notify Hit-Skip personnel of any upcoming event as soon as possible. These
events, worked outside of shift, shall be compensated at a rate of time and one-half (paid
compensation). Any Hit-Skip officer working on his/her regularly scheduled day off as a
result of the application of this section shall also receive an additional day of
compensatory time, (10 Hours) or (8.0 hours) for each regularly scheduled day off

worked.
27

Section 5. Due to the investigative nature of the Hit-Skip section, any Employee
bid into Hit-Skip shall receive the Detective bonus. The bonus shall be $500.00 per year
and added to the Employee’s regular earnings each pay period.

ARTICLE 27 - CRIME SCENE OFFICERS/TECHNICIANS

Section 1. The Employees bid into Crime Scene shall fall under the command of
the Investigative Division.

Section 2. Openings within Crime Scene section shall be bid within the Crime
Scene section before being bid Department wide.

Section 3. The normal week for the current Crime Scene officers shall be a fixed
schedule of four (4) days on and three (3) days off at ten (10) hour shifts. Wednesday
shall be established as the pivot or swing day. However, any Employee bidding into
Crime Scene after December, 31° 2004 shall work a five (5) days on and two (2) days
off, Monday through Friday schedule, at eight (8) hour per shifts.

Section 4. The successful bidder, after a department wide bid, may be required to
meet certain specifications after obtaining the bid, such as successful completion of a
field-related school, a time commitment to remain in the job, etc. Such specifications
must be submitted to the Union for review, must be clearly stated in the bid when it is
posted, and must be relevant to the posted job. No such position shall be filled if there is
a pending grievance challenging the specifications.

Section 5. Any Employee leaving a Crime Scene Technician position, during this
Agreement, for reasons cited in section four (04) of this Article, or the elimination of a
position shall be assigned to the open billet, generally defined as B shift Uniform.
ARTICLE 28 - STAFFING FOR SPECIAL EVENTS

Special Events are defined as those activities of regular occurrence that
necessitate personnel redeployment, and cannot be staffed from the use of on-duty
personnel causing the count to go below minimum.

The Chief shall bid any special events at least forty-five (45) days in advance of
the event. The Chief shall notify the Union of the identity of, dates of, and necessity for
“Special Events” scheduling anticipated for the year, by March 1“ of each year, or within

fifteen (15) days after the Chief receives notice of the rescheduling of an event if that
28

notice is received after February 18" of that year. Staffing for Special Events shall be

accomplished as follows:

A.

G.

Movement within the uniform sections shall not disrupt normal staffing.
Minimum counts of the uniform personnel will be maintained at levels
established by management and may not be increased by more than two
(2) during the time period that a Special Event is taking place.

By bidding the assignment for work.

If the procedures outlined in paragraphs A and B are inadequate to secure
sufficient staffing for the Special Event as determined by the Chief, then
department-wide union inverse seniority shall be utilized to provide
staffing levels established by the Chief.

Only the Employees working in an undercover capacity, within the Vice
and Narcotics are exempt from inclusion in the inverse seniority selection
process.

Employees who work such events, either by bid or inverse, shall receive
paid time and one-half (1.5).

Any Employee working a Special Event on a holiday will receive the
holiday premium compensation instead of the Special Event compensation
in pay.

Any Employee assigned to a Special Event by call out shall receive the
Special Event compensation pay for actual hours worked.

To determine the rate of pay for time and one-half (1.5) compensation, the
Employee's base salary, shift differential, longevity pay and specialty duty
bonuses, shall be divided by 2080.

Time off shall be granted during all Special Events above minimum
counts.

Bidding to work a Special Event shall be awarded by seniority.

In an instance where Bicycle certified Patrol officers are used for a portion
of a special event’s staffing, no more than fifty percent (50%) of the
staffing shall be bid as such. Le. if ten 10 Employees are needed for an

event, no more then four (4) shall be bid specifically for Bike Certified
29

Employees. Bicycle patrols shall always be put out as pairs and in
according to the policies and procedures of the Fort Wayne Police
Department Bicycle Patrol Policy.

K. Any Employee assigned to a Special Event that is required to work beyond
his/her normal shift will continue to receive the same compensation that
he or she was receiving during his/her shift while working the Special
Event, or as provided in Article 41, whichever is greater.

ARTICLE 29 - TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT(S)

 

It is recognized that the Employer has the right to assign work to its Employees,
and seniority shall not, be construed to restrict the Employer in requiring an Employee in
one classification from doing any work temporarily in any other classification.
Temporary reassignment of a job classification is any assignment which moves an
Employee from his/her bid position, at management’s discretion. It is further agreed that
no more than six (6) temporary assignments will be used at any one time unless agreed to
by both the Union and management in writing.

An Employee shall be permitted to serve no more than ninety (90) calendar days
on temporary assignment within any calendar year. There will be no limit on the number
of assignments so long as the total calendar days do not exceed ninety (90) days.
Temporary reassignment of a job classification shall not be used to avoid the bid system.
However, one (01) Employee shall be permitted to serve one hundred-sixty (160)
consecutive days at the Fort Wayne Police Academy for the purposes of a instructing a
recruit class. This Academy position shall count towards the restriction of six (6)
temporary assignments being used at any one time.

Temporary reassignment of a job classification among uniform personnel for
motorized patrol or foot patrol shall be accomplished with primary consideration for
coverage of patrol districts and minimum reassignment of on-duty patrol Employees to
accomplish coverage. Inverse seniority shall be the determinant factor in assigning desk
duty, supply room duty, and any guard duty unless a senior Employee requests such duty.
Unbid and/or unassigned Employees placed on a shift will always be first moved,

regardless of seniority.
30

Movements and/or reassignments within a shift to accomplish motor, guard duty,
desk duty, supply room duty, bicycle patrol and/or foot patrol are not considered a
temporary assignment. These movements or reassignments shall be done by inverse
seniority unless a senior Employee requests such duty. Bicycle patrols shall always
work, be assigned, in pairs (two officers).

ARTICLE 30 - EXEMPT POSITION(S)

Section 1. For the duration of the current Agreement, fifteen percent (15%) of the
bargaining unit may be assigned, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, so long as the
Employee accepts the position, to an exempt position within Vice & Narcotics, S.R.O.,
the Chief's Complex, NRT, and the Police Academy. All Employees assigned to positions
as an S.R.O., NRT, and in the Chief's Complex can be assigned only through the use of
exempt positions. Employees shall not be assigned to the Office of Professional
Standards, to be used in Internal Affairs capacity. The Chief shall have the discretion to
determine the number of exempt positions and the number of bid positions within Vice &
Narcotics and the Police Academy.

Section 2. The 15% number shall be determined July 1 of each year, and shall be
rounded to the next highest number in the event that the number arrived at using the
percentages allotted for each year produces a whole number and any fraction five tenths
of a percent (.5%) or greater. If the fraction is less than .5%, the number resulting from
the allotted percentages shall not exceed the whole number. This 15% number shall be
determined July 1 of each year. Any required reduction of exempt assignments shall be
completed by September | of the same year.

ARTICLE 31 - DISCIPLINE

Section 1. Employees are responsible for fulfilling job requirements and are
subject to disciplinary action for failure to do so. However, no Employee shall be reduced
in pay or position, suspended, discharged, or subjected to disciplinary action except for
just cause.

Section 2. Progressive discipline shall take into account the circumstances
surrounding the incident, the nature of the violation(s) and the Employee’s record of

discipline.
31

Section 3. In all disciplinary hearings or proceedings, the Employee shall be
presumed innocent until proven guilty. This presumption does not increase the
Employer’s burden to establish just cause in any disciplinary action.

ARTICLE 32 - JOB REASSIGNMENT/UNSATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE

Section 1. Job reassignment for unsatisfactory performance will be made based
upon documented evidence that the Employee has been counseled and assisted to
overcome any inadequacy. An inability to perform his/her bid position, which may be
causing the unsatisfactory performance, can be the determining factor for the
reassignment. If it is deemed an Employee does not have the ability to perform his/her
bid position the Employee will be removed from the position and will be move to and the
open billet, generally defined as B-Shift Uniform.

ARTICLE 33 - OUTSIDE/OFF-DUTY EMPLOYMENT

Section 1. Off-duty employment options shall take effect when an Employee
completes his/her supervised probation.

Section 2. Off-duty employment governed by the employer is understood to
mean law enforcement related off-duty employment.

Section 3. In the event an employment opportunity arises at such a time when it
is impossible to obtain the proper paperwork, outside of normal administrative business
hours, a command officer, lieutenant or above, may approve such employment. The
regular procedure for approval must be utilized when the employment is continued into
regular administrative hours where the Employee can get the proper paperwork for said
outside employment.

ARTICLE 34 - POLITICAL ACTIVITY

Section 1. The City shall not prohibit a Employee from or discriminate against
his or her engaging in political activities or campaigning while off duty, provided that the
Employee does not violate the Indiana Code concerning political activity in uniform,
IC: 3-14-1-6.

Section 2. No Employee shall be prohibited from engaging in, or be coerced or

required to engage in, political activity.
32

ARTICLE 35 - POLICE RESERVES

Section 1. The duties of the Fort Wayne police reserves shall be the same as
regular Fort Wayne police officers except that they shall not be dispatched as the primary
investigating unit for personal injury accidents, felony incidents including, but not limited
to, burglary/robbery, homicides, rapes, shootings, suicides, and stabbings. However, they
may be dispatched to secure any scene and assist the primary investigating unit.

Section 2. Police Reserves shall work out of the Uniform Division(s) and their
work may include assigned selective traffic enforcement (i.e., radar operations, etc.)
when equipment is available and only after on-duty personnel have been advised of and
fail to volunteer for said assignment in their quadrant(s). Reserves will not be used by
Vice/Narcotics Division or the NRT team(s) (i.e., John/Jane programs, etc.) unless
regular officers have been advised of, and fail to volunteer for such programs in their
quadrant(s).

Section 3. It is further agreed that the total complement of the Fort Wayne Police
Reserves shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total authorized strength of the
Fort Wayne Police Department. A copy of the Reserves roster shall be furnished the
Union annually.

Section 4. Reserve Officers shall be allowed to exchange work time with full
time, sworn uniform officers, in the event his or her shift is at minimum count, or below,
and an Exchange of Work Time form has been signed by both Employees and the
appropriate shift commander. This exchange with Reserve personnel shall be on a one
(01) for one (01) or two (02) for one (01) basis, depending on the classification of the
Reserve Officer(s). One (01) class One Reserve officer for one (01) full-time officer or
two (02) class Two Reserve officers for one full-time officer.

Section 5. It is also agreed between the Employer and Union that no member of
the Fort Wayne Police Reserves shall be permitted use of the Police Reserve uniform,
weapon, Police Reserve identification card, or Police Reserve badge for purpose of
employment, with or without pay, outside the official operations of the Fort Wayne
Police Department or for employment to provide private security to any business, group,

or individual within the City of Fort Wayne, with the exceptions of Fort Wayne
33

Community School P.T.A. functions and City Council meetings. Violations of this
section are cause for dismissal from the Reserve force.
ARTICLE 36 - HOURS OF WORK

Section 1. Except as hereinafter provided, the normal work week of Employees
represented by the Union shall consist of four (4) days on and two (2) days off at eight
and one-half (8.5) hour shifts. The uniform Employees assigned within the separate
Division’s shall be split into three standing shifts designated as A, B, and C. The hours of
“A” shift shall be 0600 through 1430, the hours of “B” shift shall be 1400 through 2230,
and the hours of “C” shift shall be 2200 through 0630.

Section 2. The normal week for the Traffic Unit, if reinstituted, shall be a fixed
schedule of four (4) days on and three (3) days off at ten (10) hour shifts. Wednesday
shall be established as the pivot or swing day. Until such time Employees bid into Hit-
skip, prior to December 31°, 2004 shall work on a four (4) days on and three (3) days off
schedule. They shall work the hours of 0700 through 1700.

Employees bidding into Hit-skip, after January 1“, 2004 shall work a schedule of
five (5) days on and two (2) days off, Monday through Friday, at eight (8) hour shifts.
The Employees shall work the hours of 0800 through 1600.

Section 3. The normal work week for “A” shift (days) and “B” Shift (evenings)
in the Investigative Division, shall be five (5) days on and two (2) days off, Monday
through Friday, at eight (8) hour shifts. The Employees assigned to “A” shift,
Investigative, shall work the hours of 0800 through 1600. The Employees assigned to
“B” shift, Investigative, shall work the hours of 1500 through 2300.

A Weekend Duty: In the event that Employees whose work week is
Monday through Friday, in 8 hour shifts, are required to provide coverage for the
weekend (Saturday and Sunday), those Employees shall take one (1) day off in the work
week prior to the weekend and one (1) day off in the work week following the weekend
at the Employee's discretion, subject to meeting minimum counts.

B Detectives in the Investigative Division working on a weekend day that is
a holiday, shall receive in addition to their regular salaries, the holiday back and be

compensated at the rate of paid double time (2.0) for the day that is the Holiday.
34

Section 4. The normal work week for the Employees bid into the Crime Scene
Section of the Investigative Division, prior to December 31°, 2004 shall be four (4) days
on and three (3) days off at ten (10) hours per shift, Monday through Friday. The
Employees assigned to “A” shift, shall work the hours of 0600 through 1600. The
Employees assigned to “B” shift, shall work the hours of 1400 through 0000(midnight).
The Employees assigned to “Mid-shift”, shall work the hours of 1900 through 0500.

The normal work week for the Employees bid into the Crime Scene Management
Section of the Investigative Division, after to January 1“, 2000 shall be five (5) days on
and two (2) days off, Monday through Friday, at eight (8) hour shifts. The Employees
assigned to “A” shift, shall work the hours of 0600 through 1400. The Employees
assigned to “B” shift, shall work the hours of 1400 through 2200. The Employees
assigned to “C” shift, shall work the hours of 2200 through 0600.

Section 5. For Employees assigned to exempt positions the hours of work shall
be at the discretion of the Chief of Police. These positions include Vice & Narcotics,
S.R.O., the Chief's Complex, NRT, and the Police Academy.

Section 6. The Chief of Police shall have the right to temporarily change normal
working hours, due to emergency situations.

Section 7. Flex time. When a problem or specific situation arises in a Division it
may be addressed by Employees working the Division by flexing their shift time. This
shall be accomplished by allowing Employee to “flex” their hours by no more than two
(02) hours either at the start or end of their shift. This shall only be done after the
Employee, Supervisor, Shift Commander, Deputy Chief, or Chief has developed a
specific plan to address the problem or situation.

The plan must be approved by at least one of the following, an on shift
Supervisor, Shift Commander, Deputy Chief, or the Chief of Police, having the authority
to allow the Employee(s) the ability to flex hours.

No make work assignments or assignments set into place only for the purpose to
allow Employee(s) to flex time, for school(s); child care, sport games, physical fitness, or
the like shall be permitted. Nor shall any assignment be allowed if they would impact

shift minimum counts. No shift time(s) shall be flexed unless the Employee(s) involved
35

specifically approves and/or accepts the flexing of their normal shift hours; it is solely the
Employee’s discretion.

Section 8. Adverse Weather Conditions: When the temperature is below
freezing, or weather conditions are such that it would endanger the safety of the
Employee, operation of the cycle units and foot patrols shall be suspended during such
period of adverse weather.

ARTICLE 37 - HIRE BACKS

Section 1. In the best interests of the Employer, the community, as well as the
safety of Employees, the Employer will a maintain sufficient number officers within the
Police Department as well as a minimum staffing level for work shifts/sections. It is
agreed to, by the Association and the Employer, that in order to achieve this goal, it shall
be necessary from time to time, to “hire back” patrol officers in order to satisfy any
minimum count level established for work shifts/sections.

Section 2. Whenever the, minimum staffing level, within the uniform patrol
section, falls below the required minimum level, the Employer shall be required to hire
back a sufficient number of patrol officers necessary to bring the staffing level up to the
minimum count. The hire backs will start at two (02) below the minimum count. When
hire backs are necessary, the Employer shall hire back for full shifts.

Section 3. The Employer shall be required to start seeking the necessary
manpower to satisfy the provisions of this Article as soon as it is evident that Employees
will have to be hired back for reasons such as, but not limited to, illness, work-related
injury, training, administrative days off, and/or bereavement leave.

Section 4. If the level of staffing shall fall below two (02) the minimum count in
the uniform patrol shifts of a Division, on a given patrol shift or for weekend duty in the
Investigative Division, staffing back to the minimum shall be filled by seniority.

This shall be done by a posted department wide bid(s) if the shortages is in the
uniform patrol sections, and known at least 24 hours prior to the need for a hire back.

If the shortage is a short term notice, less than twenty four (24) hour,
announcement(s) shall be made by use of the North, South, and Investigative police radio

channels, as well as the in car messaging system.
36

If a staffing shortage(s) occurs in the Investigative Division for weekend duty, it
shall be posted Division wide, if known at least 24 hours prior. If the shortage is a short
term notice, less than twenty four (24) hour, announcement(s) shall be made in
Investigative Division.

Section 5. Employees hired back to satisfy the minimum requirements of this
Article shall be paid at a rate of time and one-half (1.5) his/her normal rate of pay.
ARTICLE 38 - HOLIDAYS

Section 1. The following eleven (11) days shall be holidays for Employees:

New Year's Day Martin Luther King Day
Easter Memorial Day
Independence Day Labor Day

Veteran's Day Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Eve Christmas Day

New Years Eve

Section 2. For purposes of awarding holiday compensation, those Employees
who are scheduled to work on the national day of observance for Martin Luther King and
Memorial Day shall receive the holiday pay. All other holidays shall be observed on the
actual day of the holiday. Employees on regularly scheduled days off shall not be subject
to holiday scheduling. Work levels for holidays shall be as established by the Police
Chief and shall be filled according to seniority. Employees shall bid for work on such
holidays, by seniority, during a thirty (30) day period beginning forty-five (45) days prior
to the holiday. Any requests for holiday work after fifteen (15) days prior to the holiday
shall be filled on a first come-first served basis.

In the event there are not sufficient Employees bidding to work on the holiday in
order to meet the minimum staffing level as established by the Chief of Police, inverse
seniority (excluding those Employees regularly scheduled off) will be used to fill the
required level.

The Employer shall post the completed work schedule for each holiday at least
seven (7) days prior to that holiday.

Section 3. For holidays worked, Employees shall receive, in addition to regular

salaries, the holiday back and be compensated at the rate of paid time and one-half (1.5).
37

Additional hours worked on a holiday outside of the employee's regularly scheduled shift
shall be compensated at the rate of paid double time (2.0) for any such additional time
worked to the next quarter hour.

Section 4. Detectives in the Investigative Division working on a weekend day
that is a holiday, shall receive in addition to their regular salaries, the holiday back and be
compensated at the rate of paid double time (2.0) for the day that is the Holiday.

Section 5. The following holidays will be classified as Super Holidays, and shall
be compensated at the rate of paid double time (2.0) for those actually working the
holiday:

A. Thanksgiving Day;

B. Christmas Eve;

Cc. Christmas Day; and

D. New Years Eve

If a holiday falls on an Employee's regular day off, the Employee will receive
another day off.

Section 6. Holidays must be taken as a whole day.

ARTICLE 39 - MINIMUM STAFFING

Section 1. In the best interests of the Employer, the community, as well as the
safety of Employees, the Employer will maintain sufficient number of officers within the
Police Department and a minimum staffing level for work shifts. It is agreed to, by the
Union and the Employer, that in order to achieve that goal, it shall be necessary from
time to time, to “hire back” patrol officers in order to satisfy minimum count levels
established.

Section 2. Without diminishing the right of the Police Chief to establish work
levels, it is agreed that minimum staffing levels shall be posted and the methods used to
establish such minimum levels shall be explained in writing to the Union.

Section 3. On the day after Thanksgiving, the minimum count for 5-2 and 4-3
Employees shall be one-half the normal minimum count for all sections involved.
Minimum staffing levels will be provided the Union on May | and October 1 of each
year. The October 1 minimums will show any fluctuating minimum counts for the winter

months.
38

Section 5. Any Employee, covered by this Agreement, who because of service in
the National Guard or United States Reserve, over fifteen (15) days, shall not count
towards or negatively impact the shift count in their Division, Section, or Working unit.

Section 6. For uniform patrol purposes the Shift Commander shall, to maintain
minimum staffing requirements, in a uniform patrol section of a Division, on any day, on
any shift, fill uniform patrol vacancies by taking the least senior available uniform officer
from another patrol section within the uniform patrol section of another Division.
ARTICLE 40 - EXCHANGE OF WORK TIME

Section 1. All officers shall be allowed to exchange work time with other officers
the same like work, i.e. Uniform personnel/Investigative personnel, for any day, or
number of hours, except holidays.

Section 2. Any Employee inversed on a holiday may exchange with an Employee
who is on a regularly scheduled day off. An Exchange of Work Time form must be
signed by both Employees and the appropriate shift commander.

Section 3. Reserve Officers shall be allowed to exchange work time with full
time, sworn uniform officers, in the event his or her shift is at minimum count, or below,
and an Exchange of Work Time form has been signed by both officers and the
appropriate shift commander. This exchange with Reserve personnel shall be on a one
(01) for one (01) or two (02) for one (01) basis, depending on the classification of the
Reserve Officer(s). One (01) class One Reserve officer for one (01) full-time officer or
two (02) class Two Reserve officers for one full-time officer.

ARTICLE 41 - ADDITIONAL WORK/OVERTIME COMPENSATION

Section 1. Employees who are, in the course of their duties, required to perform
beyond their regularly scheduled hours of work (shift), shall receive one hour
compensatory time for each hour worked outside of shift, calculated to the next quarter
hour, unless the hour worked qualifies for FLSA compensation, holiday compensation,
Court time compensation or special event compensation.

For purposes of complying with the FLSA and particularly Section 207 (k) of said
Act, the following work periods are declared:

A. For Employees on a 4-2 schedule (8.5 hours per shift), a work period of seven

(7) consecutive days beginning each A-Shift on Sunday is hereby established.
39

For such Employees, FLSA overtime compensation shall be earned at the rate of

one and one-half (1.5) hours for each hour worked over forty-two and one-half

(42.5) hours during a single work period, calculated to the next quarter hour.

B. For Employees on a 4-3 schedule (10 hours per shift), a work period of seven

(7) consecutive days beginning each A-Shift on Sunday is hereby established.

For such Employees, FLSA overtime compensation shall be earned at the rate of

one and one-half (1.5) hours for each hour worked over forty (40) hours during a

single work period.

C. For Employees on a 5-2 schedule (8 hours per shift), a work period of seven

(7) consecutive days beginning each A-Shift on Sunday is hereby established.

For such Employees, FLSA overtime compensation shall be earned at the rate of

one and one-half (1.5) hours for each hour worked over forty (40) hours during a

single work period, calculated to the next quarter hour.

Section 2. "Hours worked" as used in the FLSA compensation base include hours
actually worked, i.e. compensatory hours used, PBA leave time for other than
conventions and seminars attended on behalf of the PBA, and paid holidays. "Hours
worked" as used in the FLSA compensation base does not include the following time-off:
vacation days, sick days, bereavement leave, or personal days.

Employees who have accrued more than 480 hours of FLSA compensatory time
shall be paid cash wages, at the FLSA rate of one and one-half (1.5) times the employee's
regular rate of pay, for overtime hours in excess of the maximum set for the work period.
However, a employee who has accumulated more than 400 hours of FLSA compensatory
time may be required to mark such time off down to 400 hours provided no employee is
forced to work a partial shift to accomplish said reduction, and the days off shall be
scheduled at the officer’s discretion, not subject to minimum counts. Compensatory hours
earned for hours worked outside of shift, court time, or other non-FLSA reasons shall not
count toward the FLSA maximum of 480 hours compensatory time.

Compensatory time, FSLA or Non-FLSA, may be taken two (2) hours at a time,
provided the minimum number of personnel on the shift is maintained.

Section 3. If a member of the bargaining unit on C shift, or any other member

directed by command, is required to bring his/her police vehicle in for repair outside of
40

normal working hours, then he/she shall be compensated for his/her time under this
article. If the repair shop is open during his/her normal hours of work, then the employee
shall have his/her vehicle repairs done during that time, or drop it off for repair and take a
loaner vehicle. For purposes of this Section, car repair includes vehicle repair, estimates
and equipment repairs such as, but not limited to, in-car computer, radar, radio, and in-car
video. In order to qualify for the compensation described in this Section, the employee
must make arrangements for repairs in advance by scheduling an appointment with the
garage or repair shop.

Section 4. Any new Employee who becomes covered by this Agreement on or
after January 1, 2012, shall not be eligible for compensatory time to compensate for
FLSA overtime hours worked. Such new Employee shall be paid one and one-half (1 2)
times the Employee’s regular rate for all FLSA overtime hours.

Section 5. Any Employee covered by this Agreement prior to January 1, 2012,
shall have the option of making a one-time irrevocable election to receive overtime pay
instead of compensatory time for FLSA overtime and also to receive a one-time payment
for all accrued FLSA compensatory time in their FLSA compensatory time banks.
Employees making such election will be paid one and one-half (1 2) times their regular
rate for all future FLSA overtime hours and will no longer be eligible to receive FLSA
compensatory time.

Section 6. Any Employee covered by this Agreement prior to January 1, 2012,
shall have the option of making a one-time irrevocable election to receive overtime pay
instead of compensatory time for FLSA overtime and may leave all accrued FLSA
compensatory time in their FLSA compensatory time banks for future use. Employees
making such election will be paid one and one-half (1 12) times their regular rate for all
future FLSA overtime hours and will no longer be eligible to receive FLSA
compensatory time.

Section 7. Any Employee covered by this Agreement before January 1, 2012 who
does not elect an option set forth in Sections 5 and 6, above, will continue the current

practice of accruing and using FLSA comp time.
41

ARTICLE 42 - CALL-OUT BONUS

If called out as a special unit, the employees shall receive a bonus of two (2) paid
hours for each call-out that both begins and ends outside the employee's shift, or a bonus
of one (1) compensatory hour for each call-out that either begins or ends outside the
employee's shift. There must be one (1) hour separating call-outs. Employees shall
receive, at the minimum, one (1) compensatory hour for additional call-outs that occur
during the one (1) hour separation.

ARTICLE 43 - COURT TIME COMPENSATION

 

Section 1. Employees who are required to attend court during hours outside of

their on-duty hours shall be compensated in the following manner:

A. Employees shall receive a minimum of one (1) hour for time spent in
Court, paid at straight time even if that actual time is less than one (1)
hour, per appearance, not per subpoena. For any additional time after the
initial first hour, employees shall be paid at double time (2.0) for the
actual time spent in Court.

B. Employees shall receive one (1) hour paid travel time. A minimum of
thirty (30) minutes must elapse between the time a court request for pay
indicates the end of one case and the time of appearance on another
subpoena for a subsequent court appearance on the same day for travel
time to be paid for that and appearance.

Cc. If a court appearance starts or ends during an employees on-duty hours,
travel time will not be paid for that appearance.

ARTICLE 44 - TRAINING BONUS

Section 1. While engaged in training, a training officer or alternate shall receive

one and one-half (1.5) hours of pay for each day of training.

Section 2. No Employee shall be ordered to train any other Employee. It shall be

left entirely to the discretion of a given Employee to train another.
ARTICLE 45 - VACATIONS

Section 1. Employees shall be granted an annual paid vacation, within the

calendar year, in accordance with the following schedule based on length of continuous

service with the City of Fort Wayne.
42

Years of Service to Be Completed Vacation Days Per Year
During Calendar Year

0 - 6 months probationary period None
6 months thru | year 7 days
1 year thru 3 years 12 days
4 years thru 5 years 18 days
6 years 19 days
7 years 20 days
8 years 21 days
9 years 22 days
10 years 23 days
11 years 24 days
12 years 25 days
13 years 26 days
14 years 27 days
15 years 28 days
16 years 29 days
17 years 30 days
18 years 31 days
19 years 32 days
20 years 33 days

Section 2. All vacation days shall be one (1) day, regardless of length of the work
shift as worked by the Employees.

Section 3. During January of each calendar year, Employees may make two (2)
individual requests for from four (4) to fifteen (15) consecutive vacation days to be taken
off during the year (“Preferential Bid”). Should two Employees submit requests for the
same consecutive vacation days, the request submitted by the most senior Employee shall
be honored. Once approved, such request shall continue to be honored regardless of
transfer, and may not be changed or rescinded without the written permission of the Chief

of Police or his/her representative.
43

A. Subsequent to January of each calendar year, annual vacation days shall be
bid by seniority not more than forty-five (45) and not less than fifteen (15) days prior to
the date requested.

B. After fifteen (15) days, vacations shall be granted on a first come-first
served basis. Vacation requests of two or more days shall be granted for the entire block
of time requested.

Section 4. Employees shall be permitted to use vacation, personal days, or
holidays (where applicable) during a year without advance notice, provided the
Employee's supervisor is notified before the Employee is scheduled to report for work,
and the minimum number of personnel on the shift is maintained. Vacation days may be
taken two (2) at a time, provided the minimum number of personnel on the shift is
maintained.

Section 5. Employees may sell back up to five (5) vacations days; however, the
officer must notify the Chief of Police in writing by April 15" of the current year of
his/her intention to sell back said time. Payment will be made the first pay period after
January 15" of the following year.

ARTICLE 46 - PERSONAL DAYS

Section 1. Employees shall be entitled to eight (08) personal days per year to use
at their discretion, subject to minimum count. Personal time may be taken one (01) hour
at a time.

Section 2. Employees will be granted their birthday as an additional day off. This
day may be used at any time during the year following the notification procedures listed
above. This day must be taken as a whole day, and if it is not used during the year it shall
not be carried over as non-FLSA time.

ARTICLE 47 - BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

Bereavement leave shall be granted as follows:

A. Eight (8) days, exclusive of days off, in the event of the death of the following

family members: spouse, child, and stepchild.

B. Five (5) days, exclusive of days off, in the event of the death of a member’s

immediate family: parent, step-parent, brother, sister, or grandchild.
c.

D.

E.

44

Three (3) days, exclusive of days off, in the event of the death of a parent-in-
law or grandparent. In the event an Employee request an additional day or
days to complete a work rotation off he/she shall be granted such time, not
subject to minimum count, when the Employee has sufficient unused personal
days, vacation days, or compensatory hours to take such days.

Time off, up to five working days, for funerals of more distant relatives such
as, aunt, uncle, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, or spouse’s grandparent. Shall be
granted, not subject to minimum count or special consideration, when the
Employee has sufficient unused personal days, vacation days, or
compensatory hours.

Bereavement leave will begin no later than the day following the death of the

family member.

ARTICLE 48 - FAMILY AND MATERNITY LEAVE

 

Family and Medical Leaves

Section 1. Pursuant to the provisions of the federal Family and Medical Leave

Act of 1993 and the regulations there under (which shall govern Employee rights and

obligations as to family and medical leaves wherever they may conflict with the

provisions of this Article), leaves of absence of up to twelve (12) weeks in any twelve

(12) months will be granted to eligible Employees who request them for the following

reasons:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

for purposes associated with the birth or adoption of a child or the
placement of a child with the Employee for foster care,

when they are unable to perform the functions of their positions
because of disability, and/or

when they must care for their parent, spouse, child, or other dependents
member of their households who have a serious health condition.

for a qualifying exigency arising out of the fact that an employee’s
spouse, son, daughter or parent is a covered military member on active
duty, or has been called up to active duty in support of a contingency

operation.
45

Leaves of absence of up to twenty-six (26) weeks in any twelve (12) month period will be
granted to eligible Employees who request them to care for a family member or next of
kin who is a member of the armed forces, including members of the reserves and national
guard components, who has suffered the illness or injury in the line of military duty.

Section 2. Unless an Employee elects to use accumulated paid leave benefits
while on family and medical leaves such leaves are without pay. The Employee’s group
health, dental, and life insurance benefits shall, be continued on the same basis as if the
Employee had not taken leave.

Section 3. Eligibility: Employees are eligible for family and medical leaves if
they have accumulated at least twelve (12) months’ employment service preceding the
request for the leave and have worked at least 1250 hours in the year, preceding the
request for leave. Eligible spouses who both work for the employer will be granted a
combined twelve (12) weeks of leave in any twelve (12) months when such leaves are for
the purposes referenced in (a) and (c) above.

Section 4. Notice Required. Employees must give thirty (30) calendar days’
notice of the need for the leave if the need is foreseeable. If the need for the leave is not
foreseeable, notice must be given as soon as it is practicable to do so. Employees must
confirm their verbal notices for family and medical leaves in writing. Notification
requirements may be waived by the Employer for good cause shown.

Section 5. Intermittent Leave. If medically necessary due to the serious medical
condition of the Employee, or that of the Employee’s spouse, child, parent, or other
dependent members of their households who have a serious medical condition, leave may
be taken on an intermittent schedule. In cases of the birth, adoption or foster placement of
achild, family and medical leave may be taken intermittently only when expressly
approved by the Employer.

Section 6. Medical Certification. The Employer may require certification from an
attending health care provider on a form it provides. The Employer may also request
additional medical opinion provided it pays the full cost required for that opinion.

Section 7. Relationship Between Leave and Accrued Paid Leave. Employees may

 

use accrued vacation, personal, or compensatory time while on leave. The use of such
46

paid leave benefits will not affect the maximum allowable duration of leaves under this
Article.

Section 8. Reinstatement. Upon the expiration of family and medical leaves,
Employees will be returned to an equivalent position within their former job
classification.

Maternity Leave.

Section 9. Any female Employee who becomes pregnant shall be considered on a
leave of absence for the period during which she is unable to work, due to the pregnancy,
provided the inability to work is certified by a licensed physician. This Article shall be
subject to all applicable Federal and state laws.

ARTICLE 49 - MILITARY LEAVE

Section 1. All Employees covered by this Agreement who are eligible to take a
leave of absence under State or Federal military leave laws shall be entitled to a leave of
absence from their respective duties consistent with those laws pursuant to proper orders
issued by the appropriate military authority with no loss of seniority, vacation or other
leave time while performing military service.

Section 2. All Employees, covered by this Agreement, who are in the National
Guard or United States Reserve personnel, shall also be entitled to leave from their duties
without loss of pay for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days or one hundred twenty
(120) hours in a calendar year.

Section 3. All Employees, covered by this Agreement, who are required to
participate in a regular scheduled Military Reserve or National Guard drill meetings, may
request to exchange their military training day(s) with a regularly scheduled day(s) off.
Employees who elect this option will be required to pay back the exchanged day(s) by
working one of their regularly scheduled days off during the work rotation prior to their
weekend military drill, meeting, and/or one of their regularly scheduled days off during
the work rotation immediately following their military weekend drill.

Section 4. All, Employees, covered by this Agreement, who because of service in
the National Guard or United States Reserve, over One hundred-eighty (180) days shall
receive the difference in their full city pay in the event the Military pay is less than their

actually City pay.
47

Section 5S. Any Employee, covered by this Agreement, who because of service in
the National Guard or United States Reserve, over fifteen (15) days, shall not count or
negatively impact the shift count in their Division, Section, or Working unit.

Section 6. Any Employee, officer, covered by this Agreement may still use their
annual allotted military days, vacation days, personal days, or accumulated overtime to
meet their military obligation(s).

Section 7. If any provision of this Article provides lesser privileges or benefits
than applicable Federal or State law, then that provision shall have no further force or
effect and the terms of the applicable law shall control.

ARTICLE 50 - EARNED TIME CARRYOVER

In the event an Employee is unable to use, or does not use, any accumulated
earned time prior to the end of the calendar year, he/she shall be allowed to carry over
such accumulated earned time. For purposes of this Article, earned time is vacation,
holiday, personal, non-FLSA compensatory time, and FLSA compensatory time.

Employees who have in excess of two hundred-forty (240) hours of Non-FLSA
hours at the end of the calendar year, to include all carried over time from the previous
year, shall be paid down to the two hundred-forty (240) hours, by February 28" of the
following year. Employees shall be paid at their current rank, but at the previous year’s
hourly rate. Earned time and the use of same shall be subjected to all applicable federal
and state laws.

ARTICLE 51 - TRANSFER OF N

 

-COMPENSATORY TIME
Section 1. An officer may transfer or receive no more than eighty (80) total hours
of Non-FLSA earned compensatory time in a calendar year, if the transfer is for donation
purposes to another Employee. In the event of a hardship the transfer of, or receipt of
more than eighty (80) hours of Non-FLSA time, must be approved by the Chief of Police.
ARTICLE 52 - SICK LEAVE/DISABILITY/COST OF CARE FOR INJURY OR
ILLNESS CONTRACTED IN PERFORMANCE OF DUTY

Section 1. Employees shall be entitled to paid sick leave, as needed, subject to the

 

 

Fort Wayne Police Department Rules and Regulations.
However, it is agreed that nothing in the Fort Wayne Police Department Rules

and Regulations will limit or reduce the paid sick leave days below 270 days.
48

Furthermore, the Chief shall have the authority to initiate a disability application
on behalf of any Employees after 270 calendar days after the first day of paid sick leave
based on a Employee’s last injury or illness, which in the opinion of the Chief, makes it
unlikely that the Employees will return to full-time uninterrupted active duty.

For purposes of I.C. 36-8-5-2 (G), a Employees shall be deemed to have
exhausted his/her sick leave one calendar year after the first day of paid sick leave for the
last injury or illness.

Employees who have been approved for a disability pension under either the 1925
Fund (I.C. 36-8-6) or the 1977 Fund (I.C. 36-8-8), and who have begun to receive
disability benefits under either Fund, shall not be entitled to any additional sick leave.

Employees who suffer an injury while performing assigned duty or who contract
an illness caused by the performance of duty shall be entitled to any and all benefits
provided by LC. 36-8-4-5.

Section 2. Employees who suffer from a job-related or a non-job-related stress
incident shall be entitled to paid sick leave as needed per this Article.

ARTICLE 53 - LIFE INSURANCE/ DEATH OF AN EMPLOYEE.

Section 1. The Employer shall provide life insurance for all active Employees
with a face value equal to the Employee’s annual salary. The life insurance shall include
a quadruple indemnity provision; i.e., payment of four (04) years’ salary, for accidental
death, whether on or off duty. For purposes of this Article, annual salary shall mean the
Employee’s base wage plus longevity for the year of death. This benefit is not available
to retired Employees.

Section 2. In the event of the death of an Employee, all accrued wages due,
including allowances for unpaid holidays, both FLSA and non-FLSA compensatory time,
vacation time and personal days will be paid to the Employee's estate.

Section 3. The surviving spouse and dependent(s) children of any Employee who
dies while on duty or acting “under the color of law” while off duty, regardless of the
Employee’s years of service, shall be provided health insurance at no cost to them paid
for by the City. The policy granted shall be the same as that carried by the Employee at
the time of his/her death. However, in the event the City discontinues the specific plan

offered, the surviving spouse shall be permitted to enroll in available plan which most
49

closely resembles, in benefit options, to the plan in which he/she was previously enrolled.
This coverage shall remain in effect until the widow/widower reaches Medicare age, and
in the case of children, until the age of nineteen (19) unless the child remains a dependent
of the surviving spouse while attending an accredited institution, in which case all
coverage shall continue until the dependent child reaches the age of twenty-five (25).
Section 4. The surviving spouse and dependent(s) children of any Employee who
dies while employed, and has reached an eligible time to retire (more than twenty (20)
years of service), shall be provided health insurance at no cost to them paid for by the
City. The insurance plan shall be the $500.00 deductible plan. However, in the event the
City discontinues the specific plan offered, the surviving spouse shall be permitted to
enroll in available plan which most closely resembles, in benefit options, to the plan in
which he/she was previously enrolled. This coverage shall remain in effect until the
widow/widower reaches Medicare age, or in the case of children, until the age of nineteen
(19) unless the child remains a dependent of the surviving spouse while attending an
accredited institution, in which case all coverage shall continue until the dependent child
reaches the age of twenty-five (25).
ARTICLE 54 - RETIREMENT/RESIGNATION

 

Section 1. Employees who retire during a year shall be granted their entire
vacation entitlement.

Section 2. Upon retirement, the Employee retiring shall receive compensation for
all vacation, accrued holidays, all personal days, and all compensatory time in its entirety.

Section 3. Employees resigning, going on an approved leave of absence, or being
suspended in excess of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days during a given year will be
credited with one-twelfth (1/12) of the total number of vacation and personal days for
which they are eligible for each month in which they have worked.

Section 4. Employees who retire under the terms of any of the recognized
retirement programs with a minimum of twenty (20) years of service with the Fort Wayne
Police Department shall have their insurance premiums contributed/paid for by the City.
The insurance plan shall be the $500.00 deductible plan and will remain in effect until the
retiree is eligible for Medicare/Medicaid. If the Employee has a spouse at the time of

retirement and that spouse is to be covered under this provision, the spouse’s coverage
50

shall continue until the spouse becomes eligible for Medicare, even if the retiree becomes
eligible for Medicare at an earlier date. Dependents of the retiree shall be covered under
the above provision as long as eligibility is maintained by the retiree. In the event the
City discontinues the specific plan in which the retiree is enrolled, the retiree shall be
permitted to enroll in the available plans and will accept the plan which most closely
resembles, in benefit options, the plan in which the retiree was previously enrolled.
ARTICLE 55 - SAFETY

Section 1. The City has the responsibility to establish and maintain adequate
safety rules and regulations and to assure the issuance and maintenance of proper
equipment to provide for the safety of its Employees.

Section 2. In the best interests of the Employer, the community, as well as the
safety of Employees, the Employer will maintain sufficient number of Employees within
the Police Department and a minimum staffing level for work shifts.

Section 3. Bicycle Patrol(s):

Certified Bicycle patrols officers shall always work, be assigned, or bid, in pairs
(two officers); for any temporary assignment, special event, or patrol duty.

Section 4. Service Weapon(s):

(a) The Employer agrees to furnish all newly-hired Employees with a

duty weapon upon their date of hire.

(b) The Employer also agrees to allow all active Employees to purchase

at Employer’s cost the same make and model firearm issued to new

recruits. Once that firearm is purchased by the Employee and the

Employee completes training with the weapon it can then become his/her

primary service weapon.

Section 5S. Ammunition:

(a) The Employer shall provide all ammunition which is needed and
necessary for the performance of duties. Ammunition for on-duty use
shall be of high quality. Practice ammunition shall be furnished by the
Employer at a rate of one box of 9mm caliber shells per Employee

every month.
51

ARTICLE 56 - SEVERABILITY CLAUSE

Section1. Should any Article, Section, Addendum, or portion of this Agreement
be held unlawful, invalid, unenforceable, or to be in conflict with applicable Federal or
State law by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Agreement and its
addendums shall not be affected thereby, and the parties shall enter into immediate
collective bargaining negotiations for the purpose of arriving at a mutually satisfactory
replacement of such Article, Section, Addendum.

ARTICLE 57 - DURATION AND CHANGE

Section 1. This Agreement shall become effective at 12:01 a.m., January 1, 2012,
and shall remain in full force and effect until 11:59 p.m., December 31, 2012. The
provisions of this Agreement shall be binding upon the City of Fort Wayne, Indiana and
any other than form of consolidated government, which includes the City of Fort Wayne.

Section 2. No Agreement, waver, alteration, understanding, variation, or
modification of any terms or conditions contained herein shall be made by an Employee
or group of Employees, with the employer, and in no case shall it be binding upon the
parties hereto, unless such Agreement is made and executed in writing between the
Union, the City, any other form of consolidated government, which includes the City of
Fort Wayne, and approved by the Board of Safety.

Section 3. This Agreement shall be binding upon the successors and assigns of all
of the parties hereto and the terms of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect
until a new Agreement is signed by the City.

Section 4. This Agreement shall survive any act in which a relevant governing
body would attempt to not recognize the Union and or this Agreement.

Section 5. The Agreement expressed herein in writing constitutes the entire
Agreement between the parties and no oral statement shall add to or supersede any of its
provisions. Addendum B attached hereto is incorporated herein by reference to the extent

it does not conflict with any of the provisions hereof.
Dated this day of

FOR THE CITY:

52

, 2011.

FOR THE PBA:

 

Thomas C. Henry, Mayor

Sofia V. Rosales,
President

 

Russell P. York
Chief of Police

Taya L. Strausborger
Vice-President

 

Carol T. Helton

Edward R. Sabo,
Secretary

Lisa Woods, Treasurer

Lynn A. Utterback,
Board Member
53

ADDENDUM ‘B”, TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE CITY OF FORT WAYNE and
THE FORT WAYNE PATROLMEN’S BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION, INC.

Section 1. Salary of a First-Class Patrolman:

 

 

An Employee shall become a “First-Class Patrolman” after completing one (1)
year of service with the Department. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, a
lateral transfer, upon recommendation of the Chief, and with the consent of the Union,
may become a First-Class Patrolman prior to completing one (1) year of service with the
Department.

Beginning January 1, 2010, the salary of a ‘First-Class Patrolman’ shall be
increased by an amount equal to 1.5% of the 2008 base salary of a “First-Class
Patrolman.” To retroactively compensate Employees for the 2010 increase, the City shall
pay Employees a retroactivity bonus equal to 1 % percent times the 2008 base rate
multiplied by 2080 hours.

Beginning January 1, 2011, the salary of a “First-Class Patrolman” shall be
increased by an amount equal to 1.0% of the 2010 base salary of a “First Class
Patrolman”. To retroactively compensate Employees for the 2011 increase, the City shall
calculate the 2011 increase on a fully retroactive basis.

Section 2. Salaries of Ranks Below First-Class Patrolman:

An Employee shall hold the rank of “Probationary Officer” for his/her first year
of service with the Department. The salary of a “Probationary Officer” shall be ninety
percent (90%) of the base pay of a “First-Class Patrolman” as established in Section 1.

Section 3. Longevity Pay:

Commencing with the Employee’s second year in rank, the Employee shall be
paid, as a rank longevity premium, $500 annually. In the fifth year, the longevity
payment shall be $1000. Thereafter, as long as the Employee retains the rank of
patrolman, the longevity payments shall increase by $100/year, until the maximum
longevity payment of $2500 is reached. The maximum longevity payment shall be $2500

even if the Employee has more than twenty (20) years of service as a patrolman. The
54

longevity premium shall be paid in the paycheck issued that covers the pay period within
which the officer’s date of rank (longevity date) falls, based upon the years in rank the
officer will achieve during that particular year. However, for Employees with a date of
rank in the month of December, they shall be paid their longevity payment on the last
paycheck in the month of December in the year that it is due. This will require the officer
to remain active until they actually earn their longevity premium.

Section 4. PERF Contributions:

In addition to any payments required under Section 1, Section 2 or Section 3 of
this Agreement, the City shall make, on behalf of each Employee, the Employee’s Public
Employee Retirement Fund contribution.

Section 5. Clothing Allowance:

Clothing allowances for Employees shall be $1200. Clothing allowance shall be
paid in two (2) equal installments each year, with the first installment paid on or before
April 30" of each year and the second installment paid on or before October 31st of each
year.

Section 6. Shift Premium:

All Employees assigned to, or bid to, B-Shift shall receive a shift premium of
$3300.00 per year. Shift premiums shall be added to the Employee’s regular earnings for
each pay period.

All Employees assigned to, or bid to, C-Shift shall receive a shift premium of
$6,300.00 per year. Shift premiums shall be added to the Employee’s regular earnings for
each pay period.

Section 7. Detective Pay:

Detective pay shall be given to all Employees who are classified as Detectives in
the Investigative Division or Narcotics Section, as well as the Hit-skip section. Detective
pay shall be $500 per year and added to the Employee’s regular earnings for each pay
period.

Section 8. Special Duty Pay:

Per Year
A. Homicide Team/Crime Scene Employees $650
B. Emergency Services Team $650
55

Cc. Bomb Squad $450
D. Critical Response Team $550
E. Fatal Traffic $350
F. Public Information Officer $350
G. Crisis Intervention Team $200

Child Advocacy Interviewers $200

(Special Duty pay is subject to prorating if the Employee works less than full year in a
particular category.)

Section 9. Health Insurance:

The City agrees that group insurance benefits offered by the City shall be
extended to all Employees. The co-payments shall be the same amount charged to non-
union City employees. Furthermore, Employees may participate in any other group health
plan available to non-union City Employees at the co-payment rates charged to such
Employees.

CATEGORY OF COVERAGE
Employee only

Employee plus spouse(secondary)
Employee + 1 primary (spouse or child)
Employee + family without spouse
Employee + family (Spouse secondary)
Employee + family (Spouse primary)

* Spouse secondary means that the Employees spouse has coverage through their
employer, and the City’s plan will pay secondary. If spouse is not covered under another
plan, the City’s plan is primary. *

Section 10. Dental Reimbursement:

The City agrees to continue to reimburse the deductible dental plan that includes
two (2) cleanings, one (1) x-ray per year, fluoride treatment(s), and full digital imaging or
X-ray of the bite for the Employee and eligible dependents.

Section 11. College Degree Pay:

A. Associates Degree $450/year

B. Bachelors Degree $900/year
56

Cc. Masters Degree $1400/year

D. Doctorate Degree $1900/year

College Degree Pay shall be paid in four (04) equal installments each year. The
first installment paid on or before March 31" of each year, the second installment paid on
or before June 30" of each year, the third installment paid on or before September 30" of
each year, and the fourth and final installment paid on or before December 31 of each
year.

Section 12. Tuition Reimbursement:

In the event the City reinstates a tuition reimbursement program during the term
of this Agreement, Employees shall be permitted to participate in any such plan as well as
maintain any/all college degree pay provided for in this Agreement.

Section 13. Retirement Insurance:

Employees who retire after January 1, 2005, may continue to participate in the
City’s group health insurance plans following his/her retirement until the retiree becomes
eligible for Medicare without making any co-payments for coverage, subject to the
following conditions:

1. The retirement is recognized as a retirement by one of the State of Indiana

police pension plans.

2. The selected plan must be the $500 deductible plan, the City's self-funded PPO

plan.

3. The Employee was a member of the bargaining unit for at least 36 months

prior to retirement or the retirement is for medical purposes.

4. The decision to participate must be made at the time of retirement.

If the Employee’s spouse, or dependent(s), are to be covered under this provision,

the spouse’s coverage shall continue until the spouse becomes eligible for

Medicare, even if the retiree becomes eligible for Medicare at an earlier date. In

the event the City discontinues the specific plan in which the retiree is enrolled,

the retiree shall be permitted to enroll in an available plan which most closely
resembles, in benefit options, to the plan in which the retiree was previously
enrolled. This benefit for retirees and/or their surviving spouse shall not be

revoked at any time in the future, once the Employee or his/her their surviving
spouse qualifies for it, unless each specific person is eligible for Medicare

coverage.

57
