HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

 

Memorandum of Understanding
between
CITY OF HAYWARD

and

HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION
July 1, 2004 through June 30, 2008

Extended through June 30, 2015

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS.
1.00 RECOGNITION.........scccsesssssssrssossesesssscsrsnsseseseensneessansessaesenstarsesecsereeesees 3
2.00 PROBATIONARY PERIOD..........:csscsssesssssssssseserseserstenseesenenes
2.01 Appointments Subject to Probationary Period.
2.02 Release of Probationer.......
2.03 Release Following Promotion...
2.04 Effective Date of Regular Status
2.05 Compensation and Benefits Upon Reinstatement.
3.00 LAYOFFS AND RESIGNATIONG..........cssssssccsssesssereessssesesssessetseseteeeseeses 5
3.01 Layoffs
3.02 Resignations...
4.00 WORK SCHEDULES - OVERTIME .........ccccscsssesssssseesssneeessessensesnenssesesen 6
4.01 Workweek
4.02 Hours of Work, all except Patrol and Traffic...
4.03 Hours of Work, Patrol Division...
4.04 Hours of Work, Traffic Bureau....
4.05 Overtime......
4.06 | Overtime Compensation
4.07 Court Appearance Time
4.08 Attendance Records. 12
5.00 MEET AND CONFER-TIME OFF FOR REPRESENTATIVES ...........2+ 13,
5.01 Representatives 113
5.02 Permission to Leave Assignments... 13
5.03 Time Off for Representatives....... 13

 

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
6.00
6.01
6.02
6.03
6.04
6.05
6.06

6.07

7.00
7.01
7.02
7.03
7.04

7.05

7.07
7.08

7.09

742
7.13
744

715

8.00

8.01

HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

BENEFIT PLANG.........sccsssssssesesssesesssssssssesesessessseatensatacensaeseneneseneceeeneaes 13

Medical Insurance

 

Dental Plan.....

 

Federal or State Health Plan...

 

Flexible Benefits Plan

 

Alternate Benefits.....

 

Vision Care.

 

Retirement Plan...

 

SALARY ADMINISTRATION.

 

Salary Administration Policy

 

Salary at Time of Employment.....

 

Eligibility for Advancement in Pay.....

 

Attaining Advancement...

 

Use of Performance Ratings in Determining Whether Step Advancement is Merited.

 

Withholding Step Advancements.....

 

Change in Pay Upon Promotion......

 

Change in Pay Upon Demotion.....

 

Change in Pay Upon Reclassification .....

 

 

Pay for Employees in an "Acting" Capacity

Special Assignment Positions...

 

Additional Compensation for Field Training Officers

 

Bi-Lingual Pay.....

 

Canine Handler Incentive and On-Duty Time...

 

 

Additional Compensation for Investigators assigned standby status.

SALARIES ........ccscsesterseeeeetseeeeneeenenseeeten eoeanaeeees sateeeeeaeeeeseetenensassesetsensseees 24

 

Treatment of Employees' PERS Contribution...

 

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 Wl
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

 

9.00 HOLIDAYS AND HOLIDAY PAY.........::scscscsesserssrestsestseterseterenes seteeneeenees 24
9.01 Holidays... ae 24
9.02 Payment for Holidays Worked... we 25

 

10.00 VACATIONS..........0:000 satsesenetereeerereseaeaneee eetaneneeneeeeenee saeseaeeeseaearseneanaeae 225

10.01 Use of Vacation Leave wee 25,

 

10.02 Vacation Accrual...

 

11.00 SICK LEAVE...

 

11.01 Sick Leave Policy...

 

11.02 Sick Leave Allowance...

 

11.03 Sick Leave Notice and Certification.

 

11.04 Sick Leave Records...

 

11.05 Medical and Dental Appointments.

 
 

11.06 Pregnancy and Childbirth ...
11.07 Payment for Unused Sick Leave...

11.08 Catastrophic Injury/IIness Time Bank...

 

12.00 MISCELLANEOUS LEAVES. ..........::cscesessessstssesseessneeeeteere siteeneeeneanseseres 29

12.01 Funeral Leave

 

12.02 Jury Leave

 

12.03 Military Leave...

 

12.04 Disability Leave...

 

12.05 Parental Leave

 

12.06 Leave of Absenc

 

12.07 Family and Medical Leave.

 

13.00 GRIEVANCES...

 

13.01 Definition...

 

13.02 Procedure.......

 

 

IV JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
13.03
13.04
13.05
13.06
13.07

13.08

14.00

15.00
15.01
15.02
15.03
15.04

15.05

16.00
16.01
16.02
16.03

16.04

17.00
17.01
17.02
17.03
17.04
17.05
17.06

17.07

HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

Jurisdiction of Adjustment Board...

 

Jurisdiction of Arbitrator......

 

Disciplinary Grievances...

 

Compensation Grievances

 

City Charter Procedure Coordination...

 

Time Off for Grievances ...

 

NO STRIKE.......cccesscsssesssesersrseocesarscsesersnsesessessesneasaneasareeseeees seteeesseeeaeaeen 34

MISCELLANEOUS ALLOWANCEG.......... seseeeeeaeseneseae seseeaseneaeseneeseeseaeee 35

Police Education Incentive Program . 35,

 

Uniforms... 20 3S,

 

Uniform Allowance...

 

35

Ammunition Allowance. 0 3S

 

Per Diem Meal Allowance...

 

SAFETY .....cccsesscsssesnsesessscsssnsssnsesssassesessenscsesssesesuareneatsusetesacsesscnenesasses 36

Safety Equipment

 

 

Accident Reports

Body Armor.....

 

Employee Health and Medical Examinations

 

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS...........-:+sese0e sasseneen stseeeeeearanserenserseenee 37

Notification of Address.

 

Disability Retirement

 

Oral Boards & Other Assessments ....

 

Notification of Promotional Examinations...

 

Acting Assignments...

 

Performance Rating Reports

 

Vacant Positions.

 

 

JULY 1,

2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 Vv
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

 

 

17.08 Restrictions on Outside Work
17.09 — Traiming.....cseccsssecssscsseccssessssecsuscssecssnecsnesascescceasseusceeccenssenserauivessnnsssunecsnsessueessnecssnecsnesesnssensessnes 39

17.10 Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA)

 

17.11 Departmental Written Directives...........scsssecsessesseseeseerssessesen

18.00 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS...

 

19.00 DEFERRAL OF VACATION & COMP LEAVE PYMTS DUE ON RETIREMENT...40

19.01 Leave Conversion Plan.

 

20.00 EFFECTIVE DATE..

21.00 DURATION ........scssscesssssssrsssssssesencsnsessssenssearsessnsesteesaraneasaceneneneanenensaenee 43
APPENDIX A. ......scscsesssssesessessnsesessenenssssnsessserseseacsessusaeeaeanensueseenentsesnennenensanarenenes 44
APPENDIX B ......sssssssssessssnsesssessescsssssnsesenesssasensansusesersesassetesousesenseessecarereneaeasens 45
SIDE LETTERS .....s.scsssscsesseesssstsnsesseneseeesterseneeesnenennensseeseseeseaeneeseassentaeeneesessensene! 47

 

Vi JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

SUMMARY OF PROVISIONS

This summarizes the provisions changed in the Memorandum of Understanding
with Hayward Police Officers’ Association, covering the period July 1, 2004
through June 30, 2008.

1. Salaries
July 1, 2004: No increase
July 1, 2005: No increase
July 1, 2006: Increase based on 100% of result of Salary Survey to a
maximum increase of 4%.
July 1, 2007: Increase based on 100% of result of Salary Survey.

2. Sick Leave Payoffs

Effective July 1, 2004, and continuing through the term of the Memorandum
of Understanding and contingent upon verification that such a sick leave
payoff plan satisfies the Internal Revenue Code and applicable Internal
Revenue Regulations, allow payoff of unused sick leave to be designated by
employee for payment of allowable retiree medical expenses.

Effective July 1, 2006, rate of payoff to be determined based on percentage
of leave balance in relation to a maximum accrual, as follows:

0 to 25%: No payoff
26% to 75%: 1% per each full year of service
76% or more: 1.25% per each full year of service

Effective July 1, 2006, to the extent allowed by state or federal law, or
regulations, if the payoff is designated by the employee for payment of
allowable retiree medical expense, the percentage rate of payoff shall be
1.5%.

3. Overtime Compensation

Effective July 1, 2006, maximum accrual of comp time to be increased from
160 hours to 240 hours.

Effective July 1, 2007, maximum accrual of comp time to be increased from
240 hours to 320 hours.

4. Maintenance of Benefits

The City shall continue all benefit and retirement payments throughout the
term of the Memorandum of Understanding.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 1
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION
Non-Economic Terms

1. Effective July 1, 2004, a ten-year vesting period is established for retiree
medical eligibility, excluding industrial disability retirements.

2. General Order on Promotion Processes added to the MOU by reference,
including requirement to consult with HPOA on any proposed changes.

3. General Order on patrol staffing to be revised to reflect nine-beat structure,
with the understanding that such revision is not intended to create a new
obligation to increase patrol positions from a budget perspective.

4. One or more Working Groups consisting of City and HPOA representatives to
address the following issues; tasks to be completed by January 1, 2005.

A. Qualifications for Sergeant, Lieutenant, and Inspector relative to
required education, training and experience. The Chief of Police will
consult with such Working Group(s) relative to the development of the
qualifications for Police Captain; it is understood that HPOA does not
represent the classification of Police Captain.

B. Career paths for classifications listed in 4A above, with similar
provision relative to Police Captain classification.

C. Standard Evaluation Guidelines

D. Maintenance of and replacement schedules for police vehicles.

5. With regard to recruitment for the Police Captain classification, although not
represented by HPOA, the City Manager will consult with HPOA prior to
determining whether it will be a closed-promotional or open competitive
recruitment. Final decision to await appointment of new Chief of Police;
recruitment process decision to occur by January 1, 2005.

6. Regarding retiree medical plan premiums, if the rate of increase in the Kaiser
North single-party rate during the term of this Memorandum of Understanding
exceeds 10% per year, the parties will meet and confer relative to an
appropriate rate. Such meet and confer to occur in the context of
negotiations for a successor Memorandum of Understanding.

7. The Side Letter dated June 30, 2000 titled “Reimbursement for On Duty
Equipment’ is rescinded.

8. The Memorandum of Understanding will be updated to reflect current
practices and to delete obsolete language and Side Letters.

 

2 JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
1.00

HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

Memorandum of Understanding
Between
City of Hayward
and
Hayward Police Officers’ Association

On the date hereinafter subscribed, authorized representatives of the City of
Hayward, herein called "City" and authorized representatives of the Hayward
Police Officers’ Association, herein called the "Association" made and entered
into this Memorandum of Understanding. It is understood and agreed that this
Memorandum of Understanding supersedes and replaces that Memorandum of
Understanding made and entered into July 1, 2001, by and between the City of
Hayward and the Hayward Police Officers’ Association.

This Memorandum of Understanding is subject to all existing state laws and the
Charter, ordinances, resolutions, Administrative Rules and Personne! Rules of
the City except as expressly provided to the contrary by this Memorandum of
Understanding.

RECOGNITION

 

The City recognizes the Association as the majority representative for the unit of
employees consisting of the following classifications:

 

Inspector Police Lieutenant
Police Officer Police Sergeant
2.00 PROBATIONARY PERIOD
2.01 Appointments Subject to Probationary Period

All appointments to positions in the representation unit shall be subject to a
probationary period. The regular period of probation shall be two years for the
classification of Police Officer and one year for all other classifications in the unit.
Extension of probationary periods up to a maximum of six months may be
approved by the City Manager in individual cases.

An employee promoted to a higher position who, at the time of promotion is
serving in such position in an acting or provisional status, may have all or a
portion of the time-continuously served in acting or provisional status credited
towards satisfaction of the probationary period for the position. Credit allowed for
this purpose, if any, shall be at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police, and shall
not affect the employee's effective date of regular status in the promoted position
as provided in Section 2.04 of this Memorandum of Understanding.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 3
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

2.02

2.03

2.04

2.05

Release of Probationer

The Department Head shall recommend retention or rejection of the probationer
prior to the expiration of the probationary period. During the probationary period
an employee may be released at any time without right of appeal. Written notice
of release designating the effective date of such action shall be furnished the
probationer.

Release Following Promotion

Any employee released during the probationary period following promotion shall
be reinstated at the former salary step to his/her former position or a position in
the class from which he/she was promoted unless the reason for his/her release
is cause for dismissal. If no vacancy exists in this class, the employee with the
least amount of time in this class shall be demoted to the most recent class in
which he/she has satisfactorily served. If any employee is caused to be released
by such action he/she shall be placed on a reemployment register for the
classification from which he/she was released. Any employee who is released
during a probationary period following promotion shall retain appeal rights to
dismissal from the City but not the right to appeal his/her release from the
position from which demoted.

Effective Date of Regular Status

Upon successful completion of a probationary period, an employee's effective
date of regular status in a classification shall be the date upon which he or she
was appointed to the classification in probationary status.

In the event two or more employees in the classification of Police Officer have
the same effective date of regular status, relative seniority shall be determined
first by rank position on the eligibility list for Police Officer, next by date of
probationary appointment to a classification outside of the representation unit
and next by lot until all seniority "ties" are resolved.

In the event two or more employees in a classification other than Police Officer
have the same effective date of regular status, relative seniority shall be
determined first by rank position on the eligibility list for the classification
involved, next by date of probationary appointment to another classification within
the representation unit, next by date of probationary appointment to a
classification outside of the representation unit and next by lot until all seniority
“ties" are resolved.

Compensation and Benefits Upon Reinstatement

Employees reinstated pursuant to the provisions of the City of Hayward
Personnel Rules shall be re-employed in regular status and shall not be required
to serve a probationary period. Reinstatement shall not entitle the employee to
resume special assignments or positions held at the time of resignation. The
effective date of employment with the city and in the classification shall be the
date of reinstatement. The names of employees so reinstated shall not be
restored to unexpired eligible registers for promotions. Participation in all other

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
3.00

3.01

3.02

HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

benefit programs and programs providing special compensation and/or
allowances shall be the same as for new employees.

Employees who are reinstated within one year from the date of resignation shall
be entitled to be returned to the salary step previously held at the time of
resignation. Time in step accumulation, if applicable, shall also be restored.
Employees who are reinstated between one and two years from the date of
resignation shall be entitled to be returned to not less than third step; when
merited for exemplary performance of duties and when recommended by the
department head and approved by the City Manager, such employees may
subsequently be advanced without regard to time-in-step.

Reinstated employees shall be allowed immediate participation in the police
education incentive program providing they meet all other conditions of
Departmental Procedure 3-304 but shall not be allowed credit for any prior
service with the City of Hayward in satisfaction of the ten (10) year longevity
requirement contained in Section IV(c)(6) of said rule.

LAYOFFS AND RESIGNATIONS

Layoffs

Whenever there is a lack of work or lack of funds requiring reductions ina
department or division of the City Government, the required reduction shall be
made in such job class or classes as the department head may designate,
provided that employees shall be laid off in the inverse order of their relative
length and quality of service, as determined by rules governing the evaluation of
service. Within each affected job class, all provisional employees shall be laid off
before probationary employees, and all probationary employees shall be laid off
before any regular employees.

Layoff to the next lower class is authorized provided that the employee to be laid
off has previously served in said lower class and whose original date of
appointment to that class predates at least one employee presently serving
therein. Employees demoted in lieu of layoff shall be placed on a reemployment
register for a period of four years for the classification held at the time the layoff
occurred. Employees laid off shall be placed on a reemployment register for the
period of two years for the classification held at time of layoff.

Resignations

Any employee wishing to leave the employ of the City in good standing shall file
with the department head at least two (2) weeks before leaving the service, a
written resignation stating the effective date and reasons for leaving. The
resignation shall be forwarded to the City Manager through the Human
Resources Director with a statement by the department head as to the resigned
employee's service performance. Failure of the employee to submit a written
resignation as provided herein shall be entered on the service record of the
employee and may be cause for denying future employment by the City.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 5
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

4.00

WORK SCHEDULES - OVERTIME

 

4.01

4.02

4.03

Workweek

Employees shall be on duty for forty (40) hours during each seven-day work
period, as provided in the following sections.

Hours of Work, all except Patrol and Traffic

The work shift for employees shall be (10) ten hours except as otherwise
provided herein.

Employees shall work four consecutive days, except as otherwise provided
herein.

Employees restricted to light duty may be assigned to eight(8), ten (10), or twelve
and a half (12.5) hour shifts.

School Resources Officers shall work Monday through Friday, with approximately
one-third of them having Monday off, one-third of them having Tuesday off, and
one third having Friday off.

When the Hayward Unified Schoo! District's high schools are not in session,
School Resource Officers shall work four consecutive days.

The days-off configuration for School Resource Officers is intended to address
the specific and special needs for deployment to the schools. Therefore, the
variation of days off, including split days off, as specified herein, is limited to the
position of School Resource Officer and shall not affect the configuration of the
workweek or days off of any other position in the police department.

Employees assigned to the Personnel, Planning and Training Bureau and the
Office of Ethical Standards shall work either Monday through Thursday or
Tuesday through Friday.

The Lieutenant of Inspectors shall work either Monday through Thursday or
Tuesday through Friday.

Approximately one-half of the Inspectors, Sergeants assigned to the Inspectors’
Bureau and Officers assigned to the Inspectors’ Bureau as detectives shall work
Monday through Thursday and approximately one-half shall work Tuesday
through Friday. Days off for these employees may rotate every three months.

Approximately one-half of the Officers assigned as Child Abuse Detectives or
Domestic Violence Detectives shall work Monday through Thursday and
approximately one-half shall work Tuesday through Friday. Days off for these
employees may rotate every three months.

Hours of Work, Patrol Division

The basic work schedule for employees assigned to the Patrol Division shall be
three 12.5 hour workdays per week, plus nine 10 hour makeup days per year.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

Basic patrol shifts and the number of positions assigned to each shift and squad
shall be set by the Chief of Police, subject to the terms and provisions of this

Agreement.
The basic work hours for patrol shifts are:
Day shift: 0600-1830
Overlap (swing) shift: 1330-0200
Night shift 1800-0630
The basic work days for patrol shifts are:
Day shift: A- Wednesday, Thursday, Friday
B — Monday, Saturday, Sunday
Overlap shift A- Monday, Tuesday, Sunday
B - Thursday, Friday, Saturday
Night shift A- Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday
B - Friday, Saturday, Sunday
Relief shift: Tuesday — Day shift

Wednesday — Overlap shift
Thursday — Night shift

Employees assigned to the day, overlap and night shifts shall change workdays
in the middle of each six month bid period so that those members working the
“A” side will change to the “B” side and those members working the “B” side will
change to the “A” side. Employees working the relief shift do not change
workdays.

Employees assigned to this schedule shall be required to make-up nine 10 hour
work days each calendar year. Make-up days may be used for training or special
projects as determined by the Chief of Police. The makeup day shall be
scheduled so that it coincides with the employee’s workweek, meaning that it
shall immediately follow the last workday or immediately precede the first work
day of the employee’s normally scheduled work week, but shall not be on a
Saturday, Sunday or holiday.

A detailed calendar of scheduled makeup days shall be prepared by the
department not later than December 1 of each preceding year showing the
schedule of makeup days for each shift for the following calendar year.

Employees shall be paid for 40 hours work at the straight time rate for each
payroll week even though the employee is only scheduled to work 37.5 hours.
Employees shall receive no additional compensation for attending the 10 hour
makeup days as these are specifically designed to repay the City for the
compensation advanced to the employees working this schedule. The City
agrees that it is responsible for keeping an accurate accounting of all hours
worked to ensure that employees are compensated and scheduled for makeup
days as necessary to carry out the objectives of this schedule.

Employees assigned to this schedule will be compensated for holidays at the rate
of 10 hours of holiday pay for each holiday. The compensation shall be paid in

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 7
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

the pay period in which the designated holiday occurs. Compensation for
employees shall be provided for each holiday worked and for each holiday which
falls on a regularly scheduled day off. If however, an employee is absent from
work in a paid leave status where a designated holiday occurs, the employee
shall receive 10 hours of holiday pay but will be required to utilize 2.5 hours of
either vacation leave or compensatory time off in order to receive the normal rate
of compensation he/she would otherwise be paid for that day.

Employees absent from work shall have an hour-for-hour deduction made to their
leave banks as appropriate to the type of leave being taken by the employee.
Thus, on 12.5 days, 12.5 hours shall be deducted. On 10 hour makeup days, 10
hours shall be deducted, unless the employee makes advance arrangements to
otherwise makeup the 10 hours. Approval of special arrangements for makeup
workdays shall be at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

All work performed in excess of regularly scheduled work hours, whether before
or after a shift, or on an employee’s days off shall be considered overtime and
shall be compensated as overtime.

Patrol Division lieutenants, sergeants, and officers available for solo patrol may
bid for their assignment based on seniority. For the purpose of bidding, seniority
shall be based upon continuous length of service in the classification of police
officer, police sergeant and/or police lieutenant with the City of Hayward. The
term of the bid shall be for a period not to exceed two years, generally consisting
of six month increments.

On each shift the officers shall be allowed to bid by seniority for each position
until the number of positions remaining on a given shift equals the number of
positions to be assigned for that shift.

The Chief of Police may assign up to 14 officers who are on probation and/or
with the least seniority to patrol squads as follows:

Day shift A squad: 2 officers
Day shift B squad: 2 officers
Overlap shift A squad: 2 officers
Overlap shift B squad: 2 officers
Night shift A squad: 3 officers
Night shift B squad: 3 officers

Within the above group, officers on probation may be subject to
assignment/reassignment of their shift, days off, and work areas when itis
determined by management that exposure to varying shifts and areas is
necessary to their overall development. In such cases, at least 30 days notice
shall be give to such probationary officer who is assigned or reassigned.

Staffing minimums shall be accomplished on a shift basis rather than by time of
day. Refer to Departmental Order 2-401 and Section 17.11 of this Agreement.

When staffing shortages or other needs of the department require a change in
shift and/or days off, such change shall be accomplished by the use of volunteer
officers. In the event there are not volunteers to accomplish the change, the

 

8 JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

change shall be accomplished by the use of inverse seniority. In such cases, at
least 30 days notice shall be give to such officer who is reassigned.

4.04 Hours of Work, Traffic Bureau

The basic work schedule for employees assigned to the Traffic Bureau shall be
three 12.5 hour workdays per week, plus nine 10 hour makeup days per year.

The basic work hours for traffic shifts are:
Day shift: 0600-1830
Overlap (swing) shift: 1330-0200

The basic work days for traffic shifts are:

Day shift: A- Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday
B - Thursday, Friday, Saturday
Overlap shift: A- Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday

B - Thursday, Friday, Saturday

Employees shall change workdays in the middle of each six month bid period so
that those members working the “A” side will change to the “B” side and those
members working the “B” side will change to the “A’ side.

Employees assigned to this schedule shall be required to makeup nine 10 hour
work days each calendar year. Makeup days may be used for training or special
projects as determined by the Chief of Police. The makeup day shall be
schedule so that it coincides with the employee’s workweek, meaning that it shall
immediately follow the last workday or immediately precede the first work day of
the employee's normally scheduled workweek but shall not be on a Saturday,
Sunday or holiday.

A detailed calendar of scheduled makeup days shall be prepared by the
department not later than December 1 of each preceding year showing the
schedule of makeup days for each shift for the following calendar year.

Employees shall be paid for 40 hours work at the straight time rate for each
payroll week even though the employee is only scheduled to work 37.5 hours.
Employees shall receive no additional compensation for attending the 10 hour
makeup days as these are specifically designed to repay the City for
compensation advanced to the employees working this schedule. The City
agrees that it is responsible for keeping an accurate accounting of all hours
worked to ensure that employees are compensated and scheduled for makeup
days as necessary to carryout the objectives of this schedule.

Employees assigned to this schedule will be compensated for holidays at the rate
of 10 hours of holiday pay for each holiday. The compensation shall be paid in
the pay period in which the designated holiday occurs. Compensation for
employees shall be provided for each holiday worked and for each holiday which
falls on a regularly scheduled day off. If, however, an employee is absent from
work in a paid leave status where a designated holiday occurs, the employee
shall receive 10 hours of holiday pay, but will be required to utilize 2.5 hours of
either vacation leave or compensatory time off in order to receive the normal rate
of compensation he/she would otherwise be paid for that day.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 9
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

4.05

Employees absent from work shall have an hour-for-hour deduction made to their
leave banks as appropriate to the type of leave being taken by the employee.
Thus, on 12.5 days, 12.5 hours shall be deducted. On 10 hour makeup days, 10
hours shall be deducted, unless the employee makes advance arrangements to
otherwise makeup the 10 hours. Approval of special arrangements for makeup
workdays shall be at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

All worked performed in excess of regularly scheduled work hours, whether
before or after a shift, or on an employee's days off shall be considered overtime
and shall be compensated as overtime.

The sergeant assigned to the Traffic Bureau and the officer assigned as the
Report Review Officer may be required to work four 10 hours days at the
discretion of the Chief of Police.

Employees assigned to the Traffic Bureau to fill grant funded positions may be
required to work four 10 hour days at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

Traffic Bureau employees assigned to 10 hour days shall work four consecutive
days and shall not be required to attend makeup days.

Traffic Bureau employees assigned to 10 hour days shall not be subject to any of
the portions of this section which are by their nature only relevant to employees
working the three 12.5 hour workday schedule.

Overtime

Overtime shall be approved in advance by the Chief of Police or his or her
designated representative(s). The Chief of Police may specify those occasions
where prior approval for overtime work is not required. The Chief of Police shall
promulgate any additional regulations required for the administration and control
of overtime.

Overtime work, other than Court Appearance Time, is defined as follows:

A. For employees on a 4-10 work schedule, after ten hours of work have been
performed on an employee's regularly scheduled work shift, all additional
hours worked shall be classed as overtime. For employees on a 5-8 work
schedule, after eight hours of work have been performed on the employee's
regularly scheduled work shift, all additional hours worked shall be classed as
overtime. As an exception to the foregoing, an employee who has completed
a regular shift and has been released for the day, and who is then called back
to work for the performance of duty assignments shall be in an overtime
status for all hours worked. A four hour minimum guarantee shall apply in
such cases. This minimum shall not apply in those instances where the
overtime worked is contiguous to the employee's regular hours of work.

The aforesaid four (4) hour minimum overtime guarantee shall apply to
employees who are called in to attend meetings.

B. Inthe event an employee works all hours in a scheduled shift, work
performed in advance of and contiguous to the employee's scheduled shift
shall be classed as overtime. Such time shall not be subject to the four hour
minimum guarantee.

 

10

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
4.06

4.07

HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

C. Any work performed by employees on regularly scheduled days off or during
a scheduled vacation shall be classed as overtime. For the purpose of this
section the use of accrued compensatory time shall not be considered a
“regularly scheduled day off.”

Overtime Compensation

Employees shall be compensated at an overtime rate of one and one-half (174)
times the employee's regular straight time hourly rate in effect at the time the
overtime is worked. An employee, within his or her sole discretion, may accrue
not more than one-hundred sixty (160) hours of compensatory time off in lieu of
overtime pay. Effective July 1, 2006, an employee within his or her sole
discretion, may accrue not more than two-hundred forty (240) hours of
compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay. Effective July 1, 2007 an
employee within his or her sole discretion, may accrue not more than three-
hundred twenty (320) hours of compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay.
Accrued compensatory time shall be used when requested by the employee and
approved by the department head or when scheduled by the department,
provided 24 hours notice is given to the employee concerned or shall be paid for
in cash at the time of separation.

The City shall compensate employees by pay for all other overtime subject only
to the availability of such funds. An amount of money shall be budgeted in order
to pay for overtime, and such amount shall be based upon previous experience
in the use of overtime work in the department. Work required to be performed in
excess of an employee's regular work day or work week by reason of change in
shift assignment shall be compensated at straight time rates.

All overtime shall be compensated to the nearest fifteen (15) minute interval.
Compensation shall commence upon arrival of the employee at the assigned
duty station. In the event of a call-back situation as defined in Section 4.05 A,
overtime compensation shall commence upon the employee's personal receipt of
notification to return to work. In no event shall more than thirty (30) minutes
overtime compensation be paid from time of notification to the time the employee
reports to work.

Under no circumstances shall overtime compensation exceed one and one-half
(1%) times the employee's regular rate of pay as provided in paragraph 1 above.
In the event two (2) or more authorized overtime assignments overlap and the
job duties for each assignment are compensable at different hourly rates, the
highest hourly rate shall apply to all overlapping hours.

Court Appearance Time

Employees who are subpoenaed to appear in court on a regularly scheduled day
off shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours pay at the overtime rate for an
actual appearance in court, or four (4) hours pay at the straight time rate if
cancellation occurs on the scheduled day of appearance.

Employees who are subpoenaed to appear in court during off duty hours on a
scheduled work day shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours' pay at the
overtime rate for an actual appearance in court, or four (4) hours pay at the
straight time rate if cancellation occurs on the scheduled day of appearance.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 41
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

4.08

This minimum guarantee shall not apply to those hours which are part of an
employee's regularly scheduled work shift.

Court overtime shall commence at the time of appearance. In the event it is
necessary to obtain evidence immediately prior to the actual court appearance,
up to thirty minutes of overtime may be authorized immediately prior to the
specified court appearance time. Court overtime shall also include the actual
time necessary to travel to the designated court location from the Hayward Police
Department or from the employee's residence, whichever is closer. Any overtime
necessary to obtain evidence and/or travel to the designated court location shall be
counted towards satisfying the minimum guaranteed overtime compensation.

No more than two guaranteed minimums shall be paid in any one day. In the
event two or more court appearance times are contiguous or overlap, only one
minimum guarantee shall apply. Should an actual appearance be required on a
case, and the employee is not released in sufficient time to appear for
subsequently scheduled cases, the subsequent cases shall not be subject to the
minimum guarantee. Guaranteed minimums shall apply only one time per case
per day unless a subpoena is issued for the same case at the behest of another
criminal justice authority for a different time of day, and provided that it is neither
contiguous to or overlaps the compensable time period of the first subpoena.

In order to qualify for minimum guarantees at the time-and-one-half rate,
employees must physically respond to the designated court location and must
remain there until released by competent authority. In lieu of physically
responding to a court location, employees may call to learn if an appearance will
actually be required. If this is not known at the time of initial contact the
employee may make arrangements with competent authority to call or be called
at a later time to learn about appearance requirements. Once having made
these arrangements an employee will be entitled to minimum court guarantees at
the time-and-one-half rate only in the event an appearance is actually required by
competent authority.

Such guarantees shall commence upon arrival at the designated court location;
the time interval between the originally specified appearance and the actual time
of appearance shall not be compensable. The Chief of Police shall promulgate
whatever additional regulations may be necessary in order to ensure that
employees are available for court appearances as required.

Attendance Records

Employees shall be in attendance at work in accordance with rules regarding
hours of work, holidays, and leaves. The department shall keep daily attendance
records of employees.

Employees who are unable to report to work for any reason shall notify a
supervisor or watch commander at least one hour prior to their scheduled starting
time. The Department Head may waive this requirement upon presentation of a
reasonable excuse by the employee.

 

12

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
5.00

5.01

5.02

5.03

6.00

6.01

6.02

HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

MEET AND CONFER-TIME OFF FOR REPRESENTATIVES

Representatives

The Association shall designate not more than three (3) employees as accredited
representatives of the Association who shall have authority to act for and bind the
Association in matters pertaining to the administration of this Memorandum of
Understanding.

Permission to Leave Assignments

Employee representatives shall not leave the duty or work station or assignment
without specific approval of the department head.

Time Off for Representatives

The City shall allow a reasonable number of employee representatives (not less
than two (2) employees) of the Association reasonable time off during regular
work hours without loss of compensation or other benefits when formally meeting
and conferring with representatives of the City on matters within the scope of
representation.

BENEFIT PLANS

Medical Insurance

The City shall continue to contract with the Public Employees’ Retirement System
(PERS) for the purpose of providing medical insurance benefits for active
employees, eligible retired employees and eligible survivors of retired employees.
Eligibility of retired employees and survivors of retired employees to participate in
this program shall be in accordance with regulations promulgated by PERS.

For employees retiring on or after July 1, 2004, eligibility for retiree medical plan
contributions is limited to employees who have completed ten years of service or
more with the City of Hayward. The vesting provision is not applicable to
industrial disability retirements.

Effective July 1, 2004, the City shall contribute up to $261.64 per month or the
Kaiser North single party rate, whichever is greater, for each active employee,
each eligible retired employee or the eligible survivor of a retired employee who
subscribes for coverage.

In the event PERS requires a minimum employer payment in excess of the
amounts recited above, the City shall pay such additional amounts during the
term of this Memorandum of Understanding only.

Dental Plan

The City shall purchase dental insurance coverage for full time employees, other
than temporary and provisional employees, and their eligible dependents. The

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 13
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

6.03

City's contribution towards the purchase of insurance offered by Delta Dental or a
successor plan shall not exceed $119.04 per employee per month, and the City
contribution towards purchase of insurance offered by United Concordia or a
successor plan shall not exceed $56.85 per employee per month except as
provided below.

Benefits under the Delta Dental Plan shall include the following: 100 percent
payment of diagnostic and preventative services; 80 percent payment for other
basic services, and crowns and cast restorations, 70 percent payment for
prosthodontics; 50 percent payment for orthodontics (adults and children).
Deductibles each calendar year shall be $25 per person with a maximum of $75
per family. Maximum benefit payments shall be $2000 per year for each patient
except for orthodontics which shall carry a $2,000 lifetime maximum benefit per
patient.

In the event the premium rate charged by the dental insurance carriers is
increased such that it exceeds the maximum contribution amounts listed above,
the City shall pay the additional amounts on behalf of employees during the term
of this Memorandum of Understanding only.

The City reserves the right to provide dental care benefits under a pian or
through a carrier of its choice. Alternate coverage may be provided through a
consortium of public agencies or private employers which may be formed for the
purpose of providing dental care benefits for employees or through a program of
self-insurance. In the event the City exercises this option the alternate coverage
shall be substantially equivalent to the coverage in effect at such time as a
change in carriers takes effect.

Federal or State Health Plan

If, pursuant to any federal or state law which may become effective subsequent
to the effective date of this Memorandum of Understanding, the City is required
to pay contributions or taxes for hospital-medical, dental care, prescription drug
or other health benefits to be provided employees under such federal or state
Act, the City's obligation to furnish the same benefits under the Medical and
Dental Plans shall be suspended and the contributions agreed to be paid monthly
hereunder by the City under Sections 6.01, 6.02, 6.04 and 6.06 of this
Memorandum of Understanding shall be reduced each month by the amounts
which the City is required to expend during any such month in the form of
contributions or taxes to support said federal or state health plan.

If, as a result of such a law, the level of benefits provided by such law for any
group of employees, or their dependents, is lower in certain categories of
services than that provided under Sections 6.01, 6.02, 6.04 and 6.06 the City
shall, to the extent practicable, provide a plan of benefits supplementary to the
federal or state benefits so as to make benefits in each category of coverage as
nearly comparable as possible to the benefits provided under said Sections 6.01,
6.02, 6.04 and 6.06. The City need only expend for this purpose the actual
amount required to achieve parity between the benefits agreed to be provided
under Sections 6.01, 6.02, 6.04 and 6.06 and the benefits provided under any
federal or state plan as supplemented in the manner hereinabove described.

 

14

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
6.04

HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

If the benefits provided under the federal or state Act exceed the benefits
provided hereunder in each category of coverage, the City shall be under no
further obligation to make any contribution in pursuance of this Section.

In the event that the federal or state government enacts a health care program
requiring contributions by employees, such employee contributions shall be
reimbursed by the City to the amount by which said employee contribution
reduces the City contribution required under this Section of the Memorandum of
Understanding.

Flexible Benefits Plan

The City shall maintain a Flexible Benefits Account for each full-time employee in
regular or probationary status who is enrolled in one of the PERS medical
insurance plans offered by the City. The City shall make monthly payments to
each employee's Flexible Benefit Account in accordance with the following
schedule:

Employee Only $ None
Employee & One Dependent $ 34.00
Employee & Two + Dependents $ 99.00

For the purpose of this section, a dependent is defined as a person who satisfies
the definition of dependent in the PERS medical insurance plan in which the
employee is enrolled. Such dependents must also be enrolled in and covered by
the plan.

In the event the above listed amounts plus the City payment towards medical
insurance premiums specified in Section 6.01 of this Memorandum of
Understanding are ‘insufficient to pay 100% of the premiums required of
employees enrolled in a Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS) medical
insurance plan, the City shall make such supplemental payment as may be
required to avoid any premium payments from employees in excess of the total
of employees’ Flexible Benefit Account and the City payment for medical
insurance specified in Section 6.01. Such supplemental payments shall be paid
for the remaining term of the Memorandum of Understanding only.

The monies in an employee's Flexible Benefits Account shall be used for one or
more of the following purposes only: (a) payment of premium charges for the
PERS medical insurance program in which the employee is enrolled, (b) payment
of premiums for the purchase of group term life insurance and/or long term
disability insurance, (c) payments on the employee's behalf to the City of
Hayward Deferred Compensation Program. For employees who elect to
purchase life insurance or long term disability insurance, the City shall forward a
lump sum each month to the Secretary of the Hayward Police Officers’
Association for the payment of premiums.

The City will not treat these monies under the Flexible Benefits plan as
compensation subject to income tax withholding unless the Internal Revenue
Service or the Franchise Tax Board indicates that such contributions are taxable
income subject to withholding. Each employee shall be solely and personally
responsible for any federal, state or local tax liability of the employee that may

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 15
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

6.05

arise out of the implementation of this section or any penalty that may be
imposed therefore.

Each employee shall notify the Director of Finance in writing during the PERS
open enrollment period each year as to how the moneys in his or her Flexible
Benefits Account are to be expended during the ensuing twelve month period.
Thereafter, no changes to designations so made shall be allowed until the open
enrollment period of the following year except for bona fide hardship conditions
which shall be reviewed and determined by a committee consisting of the
Director of Finance and the Human Resources Director (or their designees), and
two persons designated by the Association who are members of the
representation unit. A simple majority vote of the committee shall be required in
order for a change in flexible benefit designation to occur, and the deliberations
and actions of the committee shall not be subject to the grievance procedure in
this Memorandum of Understanding.

Each employee shall be responsible for providing immediate written notification
to the Human Resources Director of any change to the number of his or her
dependents which affects the amount of the City's payment to the Flexible
Benefits Account and/or direct payments made by the City for the payment of
medical insurance premiums. An employee who, by reason of failing to report a
change in dependents, receives a City payment greater than the amount to which
entitled shall be liable for refunding the excess amounts received via a reduction
in the amount paid to his or her Flexible Benefits Account. Changes to flexible
benefit payments required because of a change in an employee's number of
dependents shall take effect at the start of the first pay period in the month next
following the month in which advice from the employee is received by the Human
Resources Director. No retroactive increases to the City's payments shall be
allowed.

Alternate Benefits

Employees shall be allowed an opportunity to select certain options as
alternatives to those benefits listed in Section 6.01 of this Memorandum of
Understanding.

A. Eligibility. Eligibility for receipt of alternative benefits is restricted to those
employees for whom no City contribution is made towards premiums for
group medical insurance.

B. City Contribution. The City shall contribute $75 per month for alternate
benefits for those employees who would otherwise be eligible for “single-
party" coverage under any one of the group medical insurance plans
currently in effect, and $125 per month for employees otherwise eligible for
"two-party" coverage or greater because of dependents who would also be
eligible for coverage under said plans. For the purpose of this Section
eligible dependents are defined as: an eligible dependent as defined by the
PERS medical plan.

C. Available Benefits. Contributions made by the City may be applied by the
employee to one or both of the following options:

4. Purchase of past service credit with the Public Employees' Retirement
System (PERS). The monthly amount of such contribution shall not

 

16

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

exceed the monthly amount of benefit to which the employee is entitled by
reason of participation in this program.

2. Contribution to the Deferred Compensation Plan currently in effect for City
employees. The amount contributed must be uniform in each pay period
and shall not exceed in any one month the monthly amount of benefit to
which the employee is entitled by reason of participation in this program.

D. Enrollment Procedures.

1. Initial Enrollment. Employees must apply to the Human Resources
Director and specify (i) the number of dependents who would otherwise be
eligible (as defined in Paragraph B above) to be covered under a City
medical insurance plan and, (ii) the alternative benefit(s), to be selected
and the amount of available City contribution to be applied thereto.

The effective date of participation shall be the first day of the first payroll
period which occurs after thirty (30) days from the date application is
received in the Human Resources Department.

2. Changes in Enrollment. Employees may elect to withdraw and resume
medical insurance coverage available from the City, or request modification
of their original selection of alternative benefit(s), provided that the change
is the result of a family status change.

In addition to the foregoing, changes in enrollment status will be allowed as
required upon a change in the number of an employee's dependents,
provided such change has an effect upon his or her participation in the
program. An employee who experiences an increase in eligible
dependents, and who is already enrolled in the program, may apply for a
corresponding increase in benefit amounts contributed by the City. An
employee who experiences a decrease in eligible dependents shall be
required to report same to the Human Resources Department, and a
corresponding reduction in benefit amounts contributed by the City shall be
made after consultation with the employee. All such adjustments in benefit
amounts shall take effect on the first day of the payroll period next
occurring after thirty days from the time a change in dependent status is
reported by the employee.

 

The City Manager may, in individual cases, grant exceptions to the
enrollment procedures recited above because of unforeseen circumstances
which may result in hardship to an employee.

6.06 Vision Care

The City shall purchase vision care insurance for employees and their eligible
dependents. The plan shall require a $10.00 deductible, and shall provide for an
eye examination and lenses once per year and frames once every two years.

The City's contribution towards the purchase of this insurance shall not exceed
$17.47 per employee per month except as provided below. In the event the
premium rate charged by the vision care insurance carrier is increased such that
it exceeds the maximum contribution amount listed above, the City shall pay the
additional amount on behalf of employees for the remaining term of this
Memorandum of Understanding only.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 17
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

6.07

7.00

The City reserves the right to provide vision care benefits under a plan or through
a carrier of its choice. Alternate coverage may be provided through a consortium
of public agencies or private employers which may be formed for the purpose of
providing vision care benefits for employees, or through a program of self
insurance. In the event the City exercises this option the alternate coverage shall
be substantially equivalent to the coverage in effect on July 1, 2004.

Retirement Plan

The City shall contract with the PERS to provide the 3% @ 50 retirement benefit
formula.

SALARY ADMINISTRATION

 

7.01

7.02

7.03

Salary Administration Policy

The policy governing preparation of a compensation plan shall be that of salary
standardization, or like pay for like work.

Salary at Time of Employment

The plan may provide a flat salary rate or a salary range for each classification
with a minimum, maximum, and one or more intermediate steps. The beginning
or normal hiring rate shall usually be at the first step of the range. Every new
employee shall be paid the first step on employment except that the City
Manager or other appointing authority may authorize employment at a higher
step if the labor supply is restricted or the person to be hired is unusually well
qualified.

Eligibility for Advancement in Pay
Employees may be advanced to higher steps as merited by progressive
improvement in job skills and work performance. The following time-in-step
requirements shall apply before an employee gains eligibility for advancement in
pay.
Ss

a

lep Time-in-Step

6 months

6 months
1 year

1 1/2 years

mMmoOW>Y

If warranted for the good of the service or when an employee demonstrates
outstanding capacity in performing his or her duties, employee may be advanced
prior to completion of the above time-in-step requirements. When a pay range
consists of less than five steps the range shall be established at the higher steps
within the above time schedule. In determining time-in-step, it shall begin on the
first five days of the period, otherwise time shall begin on the first day of the next
payroll period. Advancement in pay, when approved, shall be effective at the
beginning of the first pay period immediately following completion of the time-in-

 

18

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
7.04

7.05

7.06

7.07

HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

step requirements outlined above. If an employee is on leave without pay for
more than one month, the period shall be deducted from the accumulated time-
in-step.

Attaining Advancement

An employee must demonstrate that advancement is merited on the basis of job
performance. Advancements shall not be made solely because employees are
eligible according to time-in-step requirements. Good attitude and personal
conduct, work accomplished, conscientious attendance, safety alertness, efforts
at self-improvement, and other factors of individual achievement must be evident
as appropriate to the position. The Department Head shall be notified by the
Human Resources Director of an employee's approaching eligibility for step
advancements.

Use of Performance Ratings in Determining Whether Step
Advancement is Merited

Performance ratings shall guide supervisors and department heads in
determining whether step advancements have been earned and should be
recommended to the City Manager.

Withholding Step Advancements

The Department Head has the authority and responsibility to recommend
withholding step advancements by the City Manager if they are not merited. The
Department Head shall keep employees informed about their job performance,
giving good work its proper recognition and any deficient work all possible
guidance and assistance toward improvement. The Department Head shall
notify the employee as to the reasons for withholding step advancements.

The City and the Association agree that in this Section and in Sections 7.04 and
7.05, merited shall mean being worthy of or deserving of a step increase by
exhibiting competent performance.

Change in Pay Upon Promotion

When employees are promoted, they shall normally receive the first step in the
salary range for their new position. However, if such step is equal to or less than
their present salary, or they would be eligible for step advancement shortly in
their previous position, they may receive the next step in the salary range of the
new position which is close to a 5% increase in pay. The City and the
Association agree that "close to 5%" shall be interpreted as at least 5% but in no
case shall be greater than the fifth step of the salary range for the classification to
which promoted. When no advancement in salary is granted on promotion,
employees may be allowed to carry forward time-in-step accumulation.
Employees promoted toa higher position who, at the time of promotion are
serving in such position in an acting or provisional status, shall be entitled to
have all time continuously served credited towards time-in-step requirements. In
no event shall an employee receive a rate of pay in excess of the maximum rate
of the classification to which promoted.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 19
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

7.08

7.09

7.10

Change in Pay Upon Demotion

When employees are demoted they shall be placed in a salary step in their new
class which is the same as or above the step held prior to demotion providing
said demotion is not the result of disciplinary action.

Change in Pay Upon Reclassification

When a position is reallocated to a classification with a higher pay range, and the
incumbent employee retains the position, employee shall normally be placed at
the first step in the new range. If no increase in pay results, advancement may
be made to the next step immediately above the present salary. When
recommended by the department head and approved by the City Manager,
additional advancement may be granted. If no change in salary is granted, the
employee may be allowed to carry forward time-in-step accumulation.

When a position is reallocated to a classification with a lower salary range, the
incumbent employee shall not be reduced in pay while employee continues to
occupy the position. If employee's current rate is below the maximum step of the
new range employee shall continue at the present salary and carry forward time-
in-step accumulation. If the current rate exceeds the maximum step of the new
range, employee's salary shall be frozen at its current level. When the incumbent
leaves the position, a replacement shall normally be hired at the beginning rate.

Pay for Employees in an "Acting" Capacity

An employee who is assigned to and performs the duties of a higher level
position on an “acting” basis for a continuous period of one week or longer shall
receive the salary step of the assigned position which is an increase over the
employee's present salary step, or a 5% increase in pay, whichever is the
greater. In no event shall an employee receive acting pay at a rate which is in
excess of the maximum rate of pay for the classification in which he or she is
acting. In the event said acting assignment is to a position in another
representation unit, an hourly rate shall be established which, when combined
with the City's current payment of employee contributions to the Public
Employees’ Retirement System (PERS), is equal to the salary step the employee
is eligible to receive pursuant to the provisions of this section. Acting pay so
provided shall be retroactive to the first day of assignment.

An employee who is receiving acting pay by reason of assignment to a position in
the Management Unit or Police Management Unit shall not be entitled to receive
overtime compensation during such period of assignment for overtime work
involving the performance of duties associated with the acting position. If such
employee is required to perform overtime work in the performance of duties
related to the regular position, employee shall be entitled to receive overtime
compensation based on the rate of pay for his or her regular position for time
spent performing such duties.

The Chief of Police shall authorize, on an informal basis only, the use of
administrative leave by affected employees, provided that such all other terms
and conditions relative to the performance of the acting assignment at a
management level are present. Any such informal administrative leave granted
by the Chief of Police shall be pro-rated at 1.54 hours per week based upon the

 

20

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
7.11

7.42

7.13

HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

duration of the acting assignment. Any granting of unofficial or informal
administrative leave during an acting assignment shall be at the sole discretion of
the Chief of Police and subject to review of the City Manager.

Employees who qualify for acting pay shall be compensated at their acting pay
salary level during periods of approved leave with pay which occur while they
would otherwise be performing the duties of the higher classification in which
they are acting but for being on such approved leave with pay. In the event an-
employee performing such acting assignment is absent from work because of
illness or injury, the City may replace said employee with another employee to
perform the acting assignment; or, after five (5) consecutive days of such
absence, the City may terminate the employee's acting assignment designation
and the additional compensation provided therefore.

Special Assignment Positions

Special assignment positions within a classification may be established where
duties and responsibilities are of a specialized nature by comparison to other
positions in the class. Said positions may be established by the City Council
following a report and recommendation thereon by the City Manager and the
Personnel and Affirmative Action Commission. Special assignment positions so
established will be reviewed annually by the Personnel and Affirmative Action
Commission. Selection of employees to said positions and removal therefrom
shall be made by the City Manager upon recommendation of the department
head. An employee so assigned shall receive a salary increment not to exceed
5% of his or her present salary.

Special assignment positions within a classification which have been previously
established by the Chief of Police to meet operational needs of the department
are not subject to the provisions of this section unless those positions have been
established by the City Council or are subject to additional compensation as
otherwise specified in this Memorandum of Understanding.

Additional Compensation for Field Training Officers

An employee assigned as a Field Training Officer (FTO) shall receive additional
compensation in the amount of two and one-half percent (2 1/2%) above the
employee's current salary step for the duration of his or her assignment as an
FTO. Selection of employees for FTO assignments, evaluation of employees’
performance of FTO duties, and removal of employees from FTO assignments
shall be at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police. As an exception to the
foregoing, employees who are removed from an FTO assignment by reason of
disciplinary action imposed because of misconduct shall be entitled to appeal
such removal as provided in Section 13.00 of this Memorandum of
Understanding.

Bi-Lingual Pay

Employees who are required in the performance of their duties to converse with
the public in a language other than English, and who have demonstrated their
competency in a second language to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police or
his/her designee, shall receive bi-lingual pay in the amount of $30 per pay period.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 21
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

7.14 Canine Handler Incentive and On-Duty Time

7.15

All current and future Hayward Police Officers serving in the special assignment
of Canine Handler shall receive 2.5% pay incentive based on their current rate of
pay. The incentive will commence when the officer is selected to the assignment
and is assigned a police canine. The incentive will continue during the length of
time the officer is assigned to the Canine Unit and will terminate when the officer
leaves the unit and is no longer responsible for the maintenance of a city owned
police canine. The 2.5% incentive pay will not apply to police canines that have
been retired from service and sold to handlers as city surplus.

All current and future Hayward Police Officers serving in the special assignment
of Canine Handler shall receive two (2) hours of on-duty time per week, during
their normal scheduled canine training day, for the purpose of canine
maintenance activities. The two hours per week for canine maintenance activity
shall commence when the handler is assigned a police canine and will terminate
when the handler leaves the Canine Unit. The two hours per week canine
maintenance activity will not apply to handlers who leave the unit and purchase a
retired police canine as city surplus property.

Additional Compensation for Investigators assigned
standby status.

For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:

* Detective shall mean a person holding the position of Police
Officer who is assigned to work in an investigatory special
assignment for a specified period of time.

= Inspector shall mean a person holding the position of Inspector.

= Standby shall mean the express and absolute requirement that an
employee be available during specified off-duty hours to receive
communication regarding a requirement to return to work and to
be fit and able to return to work, if required. It shall not be
considered standby when an employee is contacted and required
to return to work but have not been required to be available for
receipt of such contact.

Standby Schedule

* A total of two Inspectors and/or detectives shall be assigned to be on
standby each week.

= Supervisors and managers of the Investigations Division shall make
assignments to weeklong standby (one hundred and sixty-eight hour)
periods as much in advance as is reasonably possible, based on the
operational needs of the Investigations Division.

«  Employee-initiated changes to the assignment schedule shall be done
with reasonable advance notice to affected persons and management. It

 

22

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

is the responsibility of the initiating employee(s) to notify his/her
supervisor or manager of any such changes in a timely manner.

= The parties acknowledge and agree that unforeseen emergencies may
occasionally impact scheduling.

Availability:

* Inspectors and/or detectives assigned to standby periods shall be
available to respond to any homicide, serious crime, or serious event that
occurs during non-work hours of the week to which they are assigned.
Standby Inspectors and/or detectives shall ensure their availability by
phone, pager, or other means during their assigned standby week.

Additional Compensation:

= Each Inspector and/or detective assigned to be on standby shall be
compensated at a flat rate of $200 per week of assigned standby.

= Notwithstanding the above, if an unforeseen personal emergency or other
urgent matter that cannot be rescheduled, precludes an Inspector and/or
detective from being available for the remainder of his/her assigned full
week of standby duty, he/she shall be compensated at the rate of $28.75
for each day of completed standby duty. It is the responsibility of such
employee to notify his/her supervisor immediately upon determining that
he/she cannot complete the weeklong standby duty.

= The additional compensation due for standby duty shall be paid on the
first payday following the conclusion of the week for which the standby
duties were performed.

* Nothing in this section shall interfere with or supercede the provisions of
Section 4.03 or Section 4.04 of this MOU. Employees shall be
compensated at the overtime rate for all work performed as a result of
being called back to work under the provisions of this section. There shall
be no reduction in compensation for overtime actually worked as a result
of being on standby, and there shall be no reduction in standby pay when
actual overtime is required.

City Vehicle:

= Each of the two standby employees shall be authorized to take home a
designated unmarked City vehicle, which is equipped with critical incident
investigative materials. The City vehicle shall be used only for official City
business in the course of the assigned employees’ standby duty, and for
travel to and from work.

= Employees operating a City vehicle on standby status shall comply with
Administrative Rules 6.1 Assignment and Use of City Vehicles, Auto
Availability Allowance and Mileage Reimbursement, and 6.9 Regulations
for the Use of City Vehicles in Compliance with the Tax Reform Act of
1984.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 23
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

8.00

8.01

9.00

9.01

SALARIES

Salaries for classifications in this representation unit shall be enumerated on
Appendix A to this Memorandum of Understanding.

Treatment of Employees’ PERS Contribution

Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS) members shall be responsible for
payment of the nine percent (9%) employee retirement contribution to PERS for
any and all earnings subject to payment of an employee retirement contribution.

The City shall implement Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and
shall designate the employee contribution to PERS as an "Employer Pickup" as
defined under the provisions of that code.

The City will not treat these contributions as compensation subject to income tax
withholding unless the Internal Revenue Service or the Franchise Tax Board
indicates that such contributions are taxable income subject to withholding. Each
employee shall be solely and personally responsible for any federal, state, or
local tax liability of the employee that may arise out of the implementation of this
section or any penalty that may be imposed therefore.

HOLIDAYS AND HOLIDAY PAY

Holidays

The City's holiday policy shall provide the following holidays to be observed on
the days indicated:

New Years Day
(January 1)

Martin Luther King Day
(3rd Monday in January)

Lincoln's Birthday
(February 12)

President's Day
(3rd Monday in February)

Memorial Day
(last Monday in May)

Independence Day
(July 4)

Labor Day
(1st Monday in September)

Admission Day
(September 9)

Columbus Day
(2nd Monday in October)

Veterans’ Day
(November 11)

Thanksgiving Day
(4th Thursday in November)

Friday after Thanksgiving Day

(Friday following 4th Thurs. in
November)

1/2 Christmas Eve Day

 

24

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
9.02

HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

(one half the regular shift length

of the employee, Dec. 24) 1/2 New Year's Eve Day
(one half the regular shift length
Christmas Day of the employee, Dec. 31)
(December 25)

Payment for Holidays Worked

All work performed on a holiday shall be compensated for by equivalent time off
at a later date except as provided below.

Employees shall be compensated with holiday pay in the pay period in which the
designated holiday occurs as follows: Employees assigned to a 5/8 shift
schedule shall be entitled to 8 hours holiday pay. Employees assigned to a 4/10
shift schedule shall be entitied to 10 hours holiday pay. Compensation shall be
provided for each holiday worked and for each holiday which falls on a regularly
scheduled day off. If, however, an employee is absent from work in a paid leave
status when a designated holiday occurs, that employee shall receive holiday
pay on that day in lieu of the paid leave which would otherwise apply.

10.00 VACATIONS

 

10.01 Use of Vacation Leave

Vacation leave is a right; however, the use of same shall be scheduled by the
City, taking into account the desires and seniority of employees and the workload
requirements of the department. Employees shall take vacation leave regularly
each year and shall be encouraged to take vacation at least a full week at a time.
In order to give effect to this policy and to realize the greatest benefit from
vacation leave for both employees and the City, limitations shall be placed upon
the amount of unused vacation leave an employee is allowed to accumulate.

10.02 Vacation Accrual

Full time vacation accrual schedule:

Per 80Hr. Hourly
Years of Service Period Equivalent Annual
0 to end of 4 yrs. 3.08 hrs. .0385 hrs. 80 hrs.
5 to end of 9 yrs. 4.62 hrs. .0578hrs. 120 hrs
10 toendof19yrs. 6.16 hrs. .077hrs. 160 hrs.
20 yrs.& more 7.70hrs. .0963 hrs. 200 hrs.

No vacation shall be granted during the first six months of service.

Vacation leave shall continue to be earned during other authorized leaves with
pay. When a holiday falls during an employee's absence on vacation leave, it
shall not be deducted from employee's accrued leave. Leave time earned but
unused at date of termination shall be added to final pay.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 25
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

No employee shall be allowed to maintain a balance of unused vacation leave in
excess of twice his or her yearly allowance. Exceptions may be permitted on
approval of the Department Head and the City Manager. In the event the City is
unable to schedule an employee for vacation, and as a result the employee
accumulates a balance of vacation leave in excess of that provided herein, an
exception will be granted by the City. In granting such exceptions, the City
Manager may specify a time within which such excess vacation leave must be
used. Failure to use such excess vacation leave within the time specified by the
City Manager shall cause no additional vacation leave to accrue. It shall be the
responsibility of each employee to insure the full use of vacation leave credits
received by scheduling the necessary time off each year.

11.00 SICK LEAVE

11.01 Sick Leave Policy

Sick leave shall be allowed in case of actual illness of the employee or in the
event of illness on the part of a family member living in the employee's home and
requiring care from the employee. Sick leave shall be recommended by the
employee's supervisor and approved by the City Manager or a designated
representative.

In addition to the foregoing, use of family sick leave may be authorized up toa
maximum of six (6) days in the event of serious illness or medical condition
necessitating the employee to care for a parent of the employee not living in the
employee's home. For purposes of sick leave used to care for a parent not living
in the employee's home, a doctor's certification may be required by the
Department Head.

11.02 Sick Leave Allowance

All full-time employees other than temporary and provisional employees shall
accrue sick leave at the rate 3.7 hours per payroll period. Employees shall earn
sick leave credits in accordance with the foregoing schedule from their initial date
of employment and shall be entitled to the use of sick leave upon completion of
three (3) months of continuous, full-time satisfactory employment. There shall be
no limit upon the number of hours of unused sick leave which may be
accumulated by an employee

Sick leave records shall be maintained on an hourly basis. Sick leave shall be
taken in periods of no less than one hour. No sick leave shall be earned during
leaves of absence without pay. An employee unable to return to work after a
further period allowed on sick leave without pay may be retired for disability or
separated.

11.03 Sick Leave Notice and Certification

In order to receive compensation while absent on sick leave, employees or
someone in their behalf, shall notify the immediate supervisor prior to the time set
for reporting to work. Department heads may waive this requirement upon

 

26 JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

presentation of a reasonable excuse by the employee. Employees shall file a
personal affidavit or physician's certificate with their department head for
forwarding to the Human Resources Director, stating cause of absence. After
five (5) working days' absence, the appointing authority may require a physician's
certificate.

If employees become ill while on vacation, periods of illness may be charged to
sick leave upon presentation of a doctor's certificate stating the nature and extent
of the illness. In instances where there exists a reasonable suspicion of abuse of
sick leave, employees may be directed to file a physician's statement for each
illness, regardless of duration, and may also be required to take an examination
by a physician designated by the City and to authorize consultation with their own
physician concerning their illness. Such employees may also be required to
notify their immediate supervisor of their location during absences from the
Department. Failure to comply with these requirements may result in disciplinary
action. Sick leave shall not be granted for absences caused by intoxication,
excessive use of alcoholic beverages or substance abuse. As an exception to
the foregoing, sick leave may be authorized for the treatment of alcoholism or
substance abuse when such conditions are diagnosed by competent medical
authority.

11.04 Sick Leave Records

Sick leave records shall be maintained on a calendar year basis by Payroll.. After
an absence is approved as sick leave, it shall be deducted from an employee's
leave balance. If at time of separation an employee owes the City for unearned
sick leave, the actual time shall be deducted from final pay. Upon separation of
employees, sick leave balances for which payment has not been made shall be
canceled, and shall not be restored if a former employee is reinstated.

11.05 Medical and Dental Appointments

Employees shall whenever possible make appointments for medical, dental, and
similar purposes on Saturday or other non-work days. If this is not possible, sick
leave may be used for these purposes for a minimum period of one hour and
should not exceed four hours except in unusual circumstances.

11.06 Pregnancy and Childbirth

Employees shall be entitled to use sick leave when actually disabled for the
performance of work by reason of pregnancy, childbirth or related medical
condition.

Female employees experiencing normal pregnancy, childbirth or related medical
condition can be considered temporarily disabled for a period of six weeks.
Therefore, an employee may use up to 240 hours of earned sick leave without
providing physician certifications as to disability. In the event that a disability
exceeds six weeks and an employee has sick leave available and wishes to use
it, a physician's certificate may be required.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 27
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

11.07 Payment for Unused Sick Leave

Any full-time employee leaving the employment of the City in good standing after
having completed twenty (20) years of continuous service, or upon retirement
from the City for service or disability, or upon termination of employment by
reason of death, shall receive payment for a portion of that sick leave earned but
unused at the time of separation.

The amount of this payment shall be equivalent to one percent (1%) of sick leave
earned but unused at the time of separation times the number of whole years of
continuous employment times an employee's hourly rate of pay at the time of
separation, plus applicable incentive pay adjustments.

Effective July 1, 2006, the amount of payment for unused sick leave shall be
based on the accumulated unused sick leave balance at the time of separation,
times the employee’s hourly rate on the date of separation, times the number of
years of continuous service, times the percentage factor from the following table,
plus applicable incentive pay adjustments.

= 0% to 25% of maximum eligible sick leave accrual = 0%
= 25.01% to 75% of maximum eligible sick leave accrual = 1%
= 75.01% or more of maximum eligible sick leave accrual = 1.25%

To provide for the occurrence of anomalies in the sick leave usage patterns of
employees, when computing the unused sick leave balance used to determine
the percentage of payment as specified above, the largest number of hours of
sick leave used by the employee in any single calendar year during their
continuous employment shall be added to the accumulated unused balance at
separation. This figure shall be used solely for determining the percentage of
payout. The actual payout shall be based on the accumulated balance of unused
sick leave on the date of separation.

To accommodate the differing lengths of workdays based on the various work
schedules, adjustments are required in fairly administering this section since all
employees accrue sick leave at the same rate and those working shifts of more
than 8 hours use sick leave at a rate greater than those assigned to 8-hour days.
Appendix “B” which is attached hereto and incorporated herein details the
number of hours required to obtain the various sick leave payout percentages
based on the employee's work schedule and the number of years of service.

Effective July 1, 2006, and to the extent not prohibited by state or federal laws or
regulations, if the employee designates that the payout be designated for deposit
in an approved tax-deferred plan for use for future medical expenses, the
percentage factors shall be as follows:

= 0% to 25% of maximum eligible sick leave accrual = 0%
= 25.01% to 75% of maximum eligible sick leave accrual = 1%
= 75.01% or more of maximum eligible sick leave accrual = 1.50%

Participation in the Leave Conversion Plan established pursuant to Section 19.01
of this Memorandum of Understanding shall meet the requirements above for
designation in an approved tax deferred plan for use for future medical expenses.

 

28

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

For the purpose of this computation, an employee's hourly rate of pay shall be
the employee's annual salary divided by 2080 hours.

That portion of an employee's sick leave balance for which payment is not
provided shall be canceled, and shall not be restored if said employee is
reinstated.

11.08 Catastrophic Injury/ilIness Time Bank

Upon approval of the City Manager or a designated representative, a time bank
may be established for the benefit of an employee incapacitated by a
catastrophic illness or injury. Employees may donate earned vacation time on a
voluntary basis to another employee subject to the conditions listed below:

A. The employee receiving leave contributions must have exhausted all other
leave balances available to him or her including earned vacation, earned sick
leave and accrued compensatory time.

B. State and federal income tax on the value of leave donated shall be paid in
accordance with pertinent regulations of the Internal Revenue Service and
Franchise Tax Board then in effect.

C. The donation of leave hours shall not be reversible. In the event all hours
donated are not used for the catastrophic illness or injury, the balance will
remain with the recipient employee.

D. All hours donated shall be credited to the recipient as sick leave and shall be
subject to the provisions in the recipient employee's Memorandum of
Understanding or Salaries and Benefits Resolution regarding the use and
payment of same.

E. Donated leave time shall be changed to its cash value and then credited to
the recipient in equivalent hours at the recipient's straight time hourly rate of
pay.

F. Donating employees may not reduce their balance of earned vacation below

eighty (80) hours by reason of such donations without the approval of the City
Manager or a designated representative.

12.00 MISCELLANEOUS LEAVES

 

12.01 Funeral Leave

All full time employees except temporary and provisional employees shall be
granted funeral leave with pay as necessary but not to exceed three (3) work
days upon the occasion of the death of a close relative or a domestic partner duly
registered with the Human Resources Department as prescribed by
Administrative Rule 1.61. When additional time is desired, employees may be
allowed to take accumulated vacation leave or compensatory time due off. Close
relatives are defined as mother, father, sister, brother, wife, husband, child,
grandparent, grandchild, mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, or step parents of the employee. Additional

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 29
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

funeral leave for travel purposes not to exceed five (5) calendar days may be
granted by the City Manager when circumstances warrant the same.

Employees may use not more than one day's funeral leave for attending the
funeral of a nephew, niece, uncle, or aunt. Upon request of the City the
employee shall furnish proof of the relationship to the deceased.

Part-time employees who work a continuous schedule’of 20 or more hours per
week shall be granted funeral leave with pay as necessary on the same basis as
full time employees except that they shall be compensated at the rate of one-half
of the funeral leave allowances provided full time employees.

12.02 Jury Leave

An employee summoned to jury duty shall inform his or her supervisor and, if
required to serve, may be absent from duty with full pay. Any jury fees received
by an employee shall be remitted to the City.

12.03 Military Leave

Military leave shall be granted in accordance with the provisions of State Law
except as may be extended by the City Council. All employees entitled to military
leave shall give their department head and the City Manager an opportunity,
within the limits of military requirements to determine when such leave shall be
taken.

12.04 Disability Leave

For employee injury or disability falling within the provisions of the State Workers’
Compensation Disability Act, disability compensation at the rate allowed under
said Act shall be the basic remuneration during the employees’ period of
disability. In the case of full-time employees other than temporary and
provisional employees, additional compensation equal to the difference between
said employees’ regular pay and the disability compensation allowance shall be
granted for not to exceed one (1) year for any one period of incapacity. In the
event a waiting period is required before an employee's disability compensation
allowance is payable, his or her regular pay shall be provided during said waiting
period.

Employees injured in the line of duty while in a duty status, and who require
treatment for said injury shall be compensated as follows:

(A) For employees injured during a regularly assigned shift:

Employees requiring medical treatment shall suffer no loss in pay for any time
spent in receiving said treatment during the course of their regularly
scheduled shift.

(B) For employees injured while performing overtime work:

Employees requiring medical treatment shall receive overtime pay until they
report to the medical facility for treatment provided, however, that if they are
required to return to duty upon completion of said medical treatment they
shall suffer no loss of pay for the time required for treatment.

 

30

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

(C) For employees injured while performing departmentally registered physical
fitness activities:

Employees suffering verifiable physical injury while exercising in
departmentally registered non competitive fitness activities shall be eligible
for temporary disability under Labor Code 4850.

Departmental registration of fitness activities shall mean a detailed listing of
activities to be engaged in by the employee which the employee has
submitted for review and which the Department Head or his or her designee
has signed.

In no event shall team or competitive sports events be departmentally
registered nor shall an employee receive payments for temporary disability
arising out of any team or competitive sports activity nor from any fitness
activities not departmentally registered.

12.05 Parental Leave

A new parent may use up to 40 hours earned sick leave upon the birth of a child
or when a child begins residence with an employee who has commenced
adoption proceedings with full intent to adopt.

12.06 Leave of Absence

The City Manager, upon written request of a full-time employee other than
temporary and provisional employees, may grant for the good of the service a
leave of absence without pay for a maximum period of one (1) year. Total unpaid
leave of absence shall not exceed the equivalent of one year during any two-year
period. Examples of leaves which may be granted pursuant to the provisions of
this section include educational leaves, extended absence from work by reason
of non-occupational illness or injury and leave for any other purpose promoting
the good of the service. Premium payments made by the City for coverage of the
employee and dependents under group medical, dental insurance programs shall
be discontinued for the duration of any leave of absence. An employee may, at
his or her option, elect to continue such coverage by making necessary premium
payments to the City in a manner specified by the Director of Finance.

Any leave granted pursuant to this section shall be in writing and signed by the
City Manager. Upon expiration of such a leave, the employee shall be reinstated
to the position held at the time leave was granted. Failure of the employee to
report promptly at its expiration or within a reasonable time after notice to return
to duty shall terminate the employee's right to be reinstated.

12.07 Family and Medical Leave

City Administrative Rule 2.45 dated 7-29-95 which establishes procedures for the
requesting and granting of leaves of absence under the Family and Medical
Leave Act (FMLA) and the Moore-Roberti Family Rights Act (FRA) is hereby
incorporated in, and made a part of, the MOU.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 31
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

13.00 GRIEVANCES

 

13.01 Definition

A grievance is any dispute which involves the interpretation or application of any
provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding; or appeals to disciplinary
actions taken against employees who have satisfactorily completed their initial
probationary period following employment in a classification in this representation
unit. In those instances where an employee is afforded the opportunity for a pre-
disciplinary hearing and the employee requests same, the hearing shall be
scheduled no later than 45 days following receipt of the recommended
disciplinary action by the deciding authority. In those instances where a pre-
disciplinary hearing is held, the results shall be made known to the affected
employee no later than 45 calendar days following completion of the hearing. In
the event the city fails to observe any one of the above referenced time limits, the
proposed disciplinary action shall be deemed to be null and void. An extension
or waiver of the time limits herein provided may be agreed to by the parties.

13.02 Procedure

Grievances shall be processed in the following manner:

41. The grievance shall be presented either by the employee or by an authorized
Association representative to the designated supervisor of the employee
within seven (7) working days after the cause of such grievance occurs.

2. The designated supervisor shall have seven (7) working days from date of
receipt of grievance in which to respond. If the grievance is not satisfactorily
adjusted within this period, the grievance may be presented in writing either
by the employee or by an authorized Association representative to the
department head or to such representative as he/she may designate.

3. The department head or a designated representative shall have seven (7)
working days from date of receipt of grievance in which to respond. If the
grievance is not satisfactorily adjusted within this period, the grievance may
be presented in writing either by the employee or by an authorized
Association representative to the City Manager or to such representative as
he/she may designate.

4. If the parties are unable, within seven (7) working days to reach a mutually
satisfactory accord on any grievance which arises and is presented during
the term of this Memorandum of Understanding, such grievance shall be
submitted to an Adjustment Board comprised of two (2) Association
representatives, no more than one (1) of whom shall be either an employee
of the City or an elected or appointed official of the Association; and two (2)
representatives of the City, no more than one (1) of whom shall be either an
employee of the City or a member of the staff of any organization employed
to represent the City in the meeting and conferring process. No decision of
the Adjustment Board shall be final and binding without receiving the
affirmative votes of at least three (3) members of the Board.

5. If an Adjustment Board is unable to arrive at a majority decision or the parties
agree to waive the use of an Adjustment Board, either the Association or the

 

32

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

 

City may require that the grievance be referred to an impartial arbitrator who
shall be designated by mutual agreement between the Association and the
City Manager provided such request is made within 30 days of the
Adjustment Board or the waiving of the Adjustment Board or hearing. The
parties shall make a good faith attempt to select an arbitrator within thirty (30)
days of written notice requesting arbitration either following agreement to
waive the use of an Adjustment Board, or upon the declaration of deadlock by
an Adjustment Board convened to hear a grievance, provided however that if
the parties are unable to agree upon an arbitrator a panel of arbitrators shall
be requested from the State of California Conciliation Service. The fees and
expenses of the arbitrator and of a court reporter shall be shared equally by
the Association and the City. Each party, however, shall bear the cost of its
own presentation including preparation and post hearing briefs, if any.

6. Decisions of Adjustment Boards and arbitrators on matters properly before
them shall be final and binding on the parties hereto, to the extent permitted
by the Charter of the City of Hayward. It is the intent of this provision that
Adjustment Board and Arbitrator Awards be implemented.

13.03 Jurisdiction of Adjustment Board

No Adjustment Board and no arbitrator shall entertain, hear, decide or make
recommendations on any dispute unless such dispute involves a position in a
unit represented by Association and unless such dispute falls within the definition
of a grievance as set forth in subsection 13.01.

13.04 Jurisdiction of Arbitrator

Proposals to add to or change this Memorandum of Understanding or written
agreements or addenda supplementary hereto shall not be arbitrable and no
proposal to modify, amend or terminate this Memorandum of Understanding, nor
any matter or subject arising out of or in connection with such proposal, may be
referred to arbitration under this Section. Neither any Adjustment Board nor any
arbitrator shall have the power to amend or modify this Memorandum of
Understanding or written agreements or addenda supplementary hereto or to
establish any new terms or conditions of employment.

13.05 Disciplinary Grievances

No grievance involving disciplinary action taken against an employee will be
entertained unless it is filed in writing with the Human Resources Director within
seven (7) working days from the time the affected employee was notified of such
action.

13.06 Compensation Grievances

All complaints involving or concerning the payment of compensation shall be
initially filed in writing with the Human Resources Director. Only complaints
which allege that employees are not being compensated in accordance with the
provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding shall be considered as
grievances. Any other matters of compensation are to be resolved in the

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 33
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

meeting and conferring process and if not detailed in the Memorandum of
Understanding which results from such meeting and conferring process shall be
deemed withdrawn until the meeting and conferring process is next opened for
such discussion. No adjustment shall be retroactive for more than thirty (30)
days from the date upon which the complaint was filed.

13.07 City Charter Procedure Coordination

14) The provisions of this Section shall not abridge any rights to which an
employee may be entitled under the City Charter.

2) All grievances of employees in representation units represented by the
Association shall be processed under this Section. If the City Charter
requires that a differing option be available to the employee, no action under
paragraph (4) or (5) of subsection 13.02 above shall be taken unless it is
determined that the employee is not availing himself or herself of such option.

3) No action under paragraph (4) or (5) of subsection 13.02 above shall be
taken if action on the complaint or grievance has been taken by the
Personnel and Affirmative Action Commission, or if the complaint or
grievance is pending before the Personnel and Affirmative Action
Commission.

13.08 Time Off for Grievances

If an employee desires the assistance of a representative of the Association in
the processing of a grievance, the City agrees to permit one (1) Association
representative reasonable time off during regular work hours, without loss of
compensation or other benefits for this purpose. The grievant and/or the
authorized Association representative shall obtain the approval of their
immediate supervisor or other authorized departmental supervisor before leaving
their duty or work station or assignment for the purpose of processing a
grievance.

14.00 NO STRIKE

 

The Association, its members and representatives, agree that it and they will not
engage in or authorize any strike, slowdown, stoppage of work, curtailment of
production, concerted refusal of overtime work, refusal to operate designated
equipment (provided such equipment is safe and sound) or to perform customary
duties because of any dispute arising during the term of this Memorandum of
Understanding; and neither the Association nor any representatives thereof shall
engage in job action for the purpose of effecting changes of personnel or
operations of management or of employees not covered by this Memorandum of
Understanding.

 

34

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

15.00 MISCELLANEOUS ALLOWANCES

 

15.01 Police Education Incentive Program

Hayward Departmental Order 3-304 is hereby incorporated in, and made a part
of, this Memorandum of Understanding.

15.02 Uniforms

The city will provide each new employee at the time of hire two (2) pair of pants,
two (2) long sleeve shirts, two (2) short sleeve shirts, and the shoulder patches
for same. The city will, for all employees, replace or repair without cost to the
employee any worn or damaged uniform shirt or pants which, in the judgement of
the city, are no longer serviceable. For all other items of uniform purchased by
the employee which are severely or irreparably damaged in the line of duty, the
city will continue to reimburse employees on a pro-rated basis for replacement
items.

All new and replacement items of uniform and safety equipment purchased by
the city shall be the property of the city, and must be returned by the employee
upon separation from employment.

15.03 Uniform Allowance

An annual uniform allowance of $440.00 shall be paid to each employee in the
following manner:

1. For each eligible employee hired after January 1, 1970, a claim for payment
shall be submitted during the month in which the anniversary date of
employment with the City occurs, and annually thereafter.

2. In cases where items of uniform are severely or irreparably damaged in the
line of duty, provision is made for direct reimbursement on a pro-rated basis
for replacement items.

15.04 Ammunition Allowance

The City shall make available to each employee fifty (50) rounds of ammunition
each month for the employee's use in maintaining proficiency in small arms.

15.05 Per Diem Meal Allowance

While assigned to a training location away from the City, employees shall receive
per diem payments equal to the Peace Officer Standards Training (POST)
reimbursement rates.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 35
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

16.00 SAFETY

 

16.01 Safety Equipment

The following items shall be issued by the city to each officer and replaced when,
in the judgment of the city, they are obsolete or unserviceable.

Police Identification Card
Employee Identification Badge
Badge

Building Key

Flashlight

Portable Radio & Case

Semi-automatic pistol with three
magazines

Extended microphone for
portable radio

Handcuffs & Case
Holster
Double Magazine Pouch

Lined Equipment Belt, Baton
Ring, 4 Keepers, 1 Key
Keeper

Long Baton
Short Baton
Rain Coat & Pants

16.02 Accident Reports

Any employee involved in an accident while on the job which results in personal
injury or property damage of any kind shall report the same promptly to his/her
supervisor, and shall fill out required forms for reporting same.

16.03 Body Armor

The City will provide each member with soft body armor meeting National .
Institute of Justice Standard 0101.03 and a minimum threat level protection IIIA.
The body armor will be wrap-around style and have a multi-impact suspension
system designed to keep the vest in place on the wearer during multiple impacts.

Cap Piece
Whistle
City Map

California Vehicle Code and CVC
quick reference chart

Ten Code

SWITRS Collision Report Manual
Miranda Admonition Card

Riot Helmet and Case

Tie Tack

Parking Permit

Duty Ammunition

Oleoresin Capsicum (OC) and
case

Citation Holder
Gas mask and case

Class A & B uniform trousers,
long sleeve shirts, and short
sleeve shirts

Soft body armor replacement shall be made available to all members in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommended and warranted replacement

schedule.

 

36

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

16.04 Employee Health and Medical Examinations

When in the judgment of the department head and the City Manager, an
employee's health or physical condition may have an adverse effect on the
performance of job duties, or affect the safety or health of fellow employees, the
employee may be required to undergo a medical examination at City expense.

On the basis of authoritative medical advice, the City Manager shall determine
whether an employee is physically incapacitated for the duties of the position,
and may take whatever action he or she deems appropriate. The determination
and resultant action may be the subject of appeal to the Personnel and
Affirmative Action Commission for its review and recommendation.

Those employees designated by the City Manager shall also undergo, at City
expense, routine medical examinations. The frequency of these examinations
and the examining physician shall also be designated by the City Manager.

17.00 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

17.01 Notification of Address

All employees, including those on leave of absence, shall keep the Human
Resources Director informed as to their current home address at all times.
Failure to do so within ten (10) days after change of address may be cause for
disciplinary action.

17.02 Disability Retirement

The city shall make monthly advance payments in a timely manner for disability
retirement pursuant to Labor Code Sec. 4850.3 and Government Code Sec.
21293.1. Such advance payments shall continue for up to nine (9) months or
until such time as the employee receives his or her initial PERS warrant,
whichever occurs first. There shall be added to the advance payment issued by
the city, an amount required to be paid by the provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding to the retiree for medical coverage. The city shall notify the
affected employee prior to the effective date of retirement of his or her right to
continue the medical coverage and to obtain the city's contribution towards same.

17.03 Oral Boards & Other Assessments

An authorized representative of the Association who is not an employee of the
City may attend, as an observer, oral boards or other assessment processes
convened for the purpose of promotional examinations provided the candidate
requests in writing the presence of said observer.

No observer from the Association or the City shall participate in the interview or
assessment of any candidate nor shall such observers comment to any rater on
the observer's opinion as to the candidate's performance in the examination
process or suitability for promotion.

Upon completion of the entire testing process the observers may provide
individual feedback to any candidate who requests feedback and to no other

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 37
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

person. The opinions and observations of the observers shall not be taken into
account or otherwise be recorded for the purpose of evaluating the candidates.

17.04 Notification of Promotional Examinations

The City shall provide six months' advance written notification of the week in
which a promotional examination is scheduled. Said notification shall be posted
for a minimum of 30 days on official Police Department bulletin boards, and a
copy shall be placed in the interdepartmental mail box of each employee. The
Human Resources Department shall provide source lists for those written
promotional examinations for classifications within the representation unit,
provided source information is available. Such information shall be provided to
all applicants at least three (3) months prior the date of the written examination.

17.05 Acting Assignments

Appointments to acting status shall be made from the current eligibility list for the
classification involved except under the following circumstances:

1. Itis anticipated that the acting assignment will be less than 45 days.

2. The Chief of Police determines that the impact of transferring an eligible
employee from one assignment into an acting assignment will operationally
have a detrimental effect on the organization. In those instances the Chief of
Police may select the best qualified employee from within that existing
unit/bureau. However, if the vacancy exceeds 120 days, the acting
assignment shall be made from the current eligibility list if any employee from
the list requests the assignment. Employees who accept acting assignments
may be required to relinquish their special assignments.

3. In the event a current eligibility list does not exist for the classification
involved, then the previous list will be used, if no one from the previous list
accepts the position, the Chief of Police will select the best qualified
employee until a new eligibility list can be established. At that time a
selection will be made from the eligibility list.

17.06 Performance Rating Reports

Each employee will be provided with a copy of his or her performance rating
report. A copy of records in an employee's individual personnel file which the
City makes available for the employee's inspection may be obtained when
requested in writing up to a maximum of 25 pages. Copies of documents
previously provided and/or in excess of 25 pages may be subject to copying
charges as provided for in the Master Fee Resolution in effect at the time of the
request.

17.07 Vacant Positions

The parties recognize the City's right, as set forth in Section 17.15 of the
Personnel Rules of the City of Hayward, to determine the methods and means by
which government operations are to be conducted. The City does from time to
time face operational problems when authorized positions are vacated. In order

 

38

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

to alleviate this problem, the City will assign personnel to fill in on an overtime
basis, those authorized positions which are vacant due to a termination of
employment when, in the judgment of the Chief of Police, additional manpower is
required for day to day operation of the Police Department. The City will make
every effort to recruit for authorized vacancies as promptly as possible.

17.08 Restrictions on Outside Work

Gainful employment outside an employee's regular City position shall be
considered a privilege subject to regulation and not a right. No employee shall
engage in a gainful occupation outside his or her City position which is
incompatible with the City employment or which is of such a nature as to interfere
with satisfactory discharge of employee's regular duties. Any employee who
wishes to engage in or accept such employment may do so after having first
obtained written approval of the City Manager or a designated representative.
Violation of this section shall be cause for disciplinary action.

17.09 Training

The parties agree that sufficient training for members of the Patrol Bureau in
relevant subject matters is necessary for the effective conduct of police work in
the City of Hayward. To this end, and consistent with operating requirements,
the department shall endeavor to provide each employee 60 to 80 hours of such
training each year.

Notwithstanding the above, every six months, the Department shall schedule and
provide each uniformed officer a minimum of 12 hours of training, to be divided
between the core areas of firearms, defensive tactics, and impact weapons.

17.10 Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA)

The City and the Association recognize that the City has an obligation under law
to meet with individual employees who allege a need for reasonable
accommodation in the work place because of a disability. If by reason of the
aforesaid requirement, the City contemplates actions to provide reasonable
accommodation to an individual employee in compliance with the ADA which are
in potential conflict with any provision of this Memorandum of Understanding, the
Association will be advised of any such proposed accommodation and be
afforded an opportunity to discuss same prior to implementation by the City.

17.11 Departmental Written Directives
1. Investigation and Disposition of Complaints

Departmental Order 2-102 dated 7-17-96, Section V, Subsection C contains
provisions regarding the investigation and disposition of complaints of
misconduct.

Changes to the Section referred to above, are subject to the requirements of
California Government Code Section 3500, et. seq. Meeting and conferring
on changes to Departmental Order 2-102 shall be limited to negotiations on
this issue only.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 39
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

2. Minimum Staffing Guidelines

Minimum staffing levels for the patrol function will be established and set forth
in Departmental Order 2-401. The numbers set forth therein are subject to
change based on the staffing deployment configuration as modified from time
-to time.

Changes to sections IV and/or V A and C of Departmental Order 2-401 are
subject to the requirements of California Government Code Section 3500, et.
seq. Meeting and conferring on changes to Departmental Order 2-401 shall
be limited to this issue only. No grievance relating to staffing levels shall be
filed except by the Association and then only after first meeting with the Chief
of Police in an attempt to resolve the issues.

18.00 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS

 

Should any section, clause or provision of this Memorandum of Understanding
be declared illegal by final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidation of such section, clause or provision shall not invalidate the remaining
portions hereof, and such remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect
for the duration of this Memorandum of Understanding. Upon such invalidation
the parties agree immediately to meet and confer on substitute provisions for
such parts or provisions rendered or declared illegal.

19.00 DEFERRAL OF VACATION AND COMPENSATORY LEAVE

PAYMENTS DUE ON RETIREMENT

An employee who separates from service and is at the time eligible for early,
normal, late, or disability retirement under the Public Employees’ Retirement
System (PERS) may elect, in accordance with this section, to defer receipt of any
payments that would normally be made in lieu of unused leave. An election
under this section must be made in accordance with the following rules:

A. The election must be made when the employee notifies the City or PERS of
the date of retirement but not less than two weeks before the employee's
actual date of retirement. It may be changed or revoked, but any election in
effect one year before retirement will be applied, regardless of any
subsequent attempt to change or revoke it.

B. The election applies to payments that employees would otherwise receive
upon separation from service in lieu of unused sick leave, vacation leave,
compensatory leave, or other leave.

C. The employee may elect to defer all or any portion of the payments specified
in subsection B above. The amount deferred may be expressed as a
percentage of the total payment or as a dollar amount not to exceed the total
payment.

D. The election must specify a date on which the deferred amount is to be paid.
The specified date of payment may be no later than one year after the

 

40

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

employee's date of retirement. Only a single date of payment may be
specified. The date may be expressed as a fixed date (such as "January 1,
1996") or as a date determinable by reference to the date of retirement (such
as "12 months after retirement" or "January 1 following the calendar year of
retirement’). “

E. If an employee does not separate from service on or before the date of
payment specified in subsection D above or is not eligible for retirement
under PERS at the time of separation from service, the deferral election is
automatically revoked. A new election may be made only in accordance with
subsection A above.

F. No interest will be paid on amounts deferred under this section.

G. Upon the death of a retired employee who has made a deferral election under
this section but has not yet received payment, the deferred amount will be
paid to the beneficiary determined under the provisions of PERS.

19.01 Leave Conversion Plan

An employee who separates from service and is at the time eligible for early,
normal, late, or disability retirement under the Public Employees’ Retirement
System (PERS) may elect, in accordance with this section, to defer receipt of any
payments that would normally be made in lieu of unused leave by participating in
the approved Leave Conversion Plan.

The City agrees to contract with a third party as provider of a Voluntary
Employee Beneficiary Association (or other plan) approved by the Internal
Revenue Service and the Franchise Tax Board to administer the Leave
Conversion Plan. The City’s selection of a third party provider shall be subject to
the Association’s approval.

Upon execution of the agreement between the City and the plan administrator,
Section 19.00, above, shall be become non-operative.

Such plan shall be optional so that each employee may choose whether or not to
participate in the plan and to designate their level of participation (as a
percentage of their payout) in the plan.

Election to participate in the Leave Conversion Plan must be completed at least
90 days prior to retirement.

If the VEBA Trust allows for participation in the plan at times during employment
with the City, in addition to the period immediately preceding separation from
employment from the City, the City agrees that employees may participate in the
plan by making periodic voluntary contributions through payroll deduction to the
extent permitted by the VEBA Trust and applicable law.

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 41
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

20.00 EFFECTIVE DATE

The effective date of this Memorandum of Understanding shall be July 1, 2004
and each provision shall become effective on that date except those provisions
for which another effective date is specified.

 

 

42 JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

21.00 DURATION

This Memorandum of Understanding shall continue in full force and effect until
12.01 a.m. June 30, 2008 and will be renewed from year to year thereafter
unless either party shall give written notice to the other of a desire to revise or
terminate this Memorandum of Understanding not less than ninety (90) days nor
more than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to June 30, 2008 or June 30 of
any year thereafter.

HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

CITY OF HAYWARD

Made and entered this day of , 2006

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 43
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

 

APPENDIX A
Hourly Salary Ranges as of 7/1/2004 through 6/30/2006
A B c D E
Police Officer 33.60 35.21 36.93 38.71 40.55
Inspector 37.88 39.78 41.72 43.70 45.84
Police Sergeant 44.11 46.24 48.60
Police Lieutenant 53.40 56.00

Equivalent Monthly Salary Ranges as of 7/1/2004 through 6/30/2006

A B c D E
Police Officer 5,824 6,103 6,401 6,710 7,029
Inspector 6,566 6,895 7,231 7,575 7,946
Police Sergeant 7,646 8015 8,424
Police Lieutenant 9,256 9,707

Salary ranges effective the pay period including July 1, 2006, shall be determined
as follows: Base salary for all classifications covered by this MOU increased by
the difference between the total compensation of a Hayward Police Officer and
the average of the total compensation for Police Officer of the top four agencies
based on a survey of salary and benefits. The percentage increase shall be
determined by (Total compensation average of top four agencies - Total
compensation of Hayward Police Officer)/ Total compensation of Hayward Police
Officer, rounded to the nearest .01% subject to a maximum increase of 4%.
Hayward may be included in the top four agencies should its total compensation
so indicate.

Bargaining unit salaries effective the pay period including July 1, 2007 shall be
determined according to the above compensation survey, subject to no maximum
percentage.

"Total compensation" shall mean top step base monthly salary; employer-paid
member PERS contributions; uniform allowance; and education incentive pay
applicable to all Police Officers.

Surveyed agencies shall be: Santa Clara, Vallejo, Palo Alto, Richmond, Fremont,
Berkeley, Daly City, San Mateo, Alameda, and San Leandro.

The salary surveys shall be completed by May 31, 2006 and by May 31, 2007
and include all salaries and benefits effective on July 1, 2006 and July 1, 2007,
respectively and approved by the agency's board or council. If on October 1,
2006 and if on October 1, 2007, any of the above agencies reaches a settlement
retroactive on or prior to July 1, 2006 and July 1, 2007 respectively, thereby
changing the average of the top four agencies, a one-time adjustment will be
made to salaries to reflect that change.

 

44

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

APPENDIX B

 

Sick Leave Payout

 

Required Accumulated Minimum Balance | Required Accumulated Minimum Balance

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

OF To Obtain Highest Payout To Obtain 1% Payout
SERVICE | 8 hour day | 10 hour day | 12.5 hour day | 8 hour day | 10 hour day | 12.5 hour day
1 72.01 66.01 58.51 24.01 19.21 15.37
2 144.02 132.02 117.02 48.02 38.42 30.73
3 216.03 198.03 175.53 72.03 57.62 46.10
4 288.04 264.04 234.04 96.04 76.83 61.46
5 360.05 330.05 292.55 120.05 96.04 76.83
6 432.06 396.06 351.06, 144.06 115.25 92.20
7 504.07 462.07 409.57 168.07 134.45 107.56
8 576.08 528.08 468.08 192.08 153.66 122.93
9 648.09 594.09 526.59 216.09 172.87 138.30
10 720.10 660.10 585.10 240.10 192.08 153.66
1 792.11 726.11 643.61 264.11 211.28 169.03
12 864.12 792.12 702.12 288.12 230.49 184.39
13 936.13 858.13 760.63 312.12 249.70 199.76
14 1008.14 924.14 819.14 336.13 268.91 215.13
15 1080.15 990.15, 877.65 360.14 288.12 230.49
16 1152.16 1056.16 936.16 384.15 307.32 245.86
17 1224.17 1122.17 994.67 408.16 326.53 261.22
18 1296.18 1188.18 1053.18 432.17 345.74 276.59
19 1368.19 1254.19 1111.69 456.18 364.95 291.96
20 1440.20 1320.20 1170.20 480.19 384.15 307.32
21 1512.21 1386.21 1228.71 504.20 403.36 322.69
22 1584.22 1452.22 1287.22 528.21 422.57 338.06
23 1656.23 1518.23 1345.73 552.22 441.78 353.42
24 1728.24 1584.24 1404.24 576.23 460.98 368.79
25 1800.25 1650.25 1462.75 600.24 480.19 384.15
26 1872.26 1716.26 1521.26 624.25 499.40 399.52
27 1944.27 1782.27 1579.77 648.26 518.61 414.89
28 2016.28 1848.28 1638.28 672.27 537.82 430.25
29 2088.29 1914.29 1696.79 696.28 557.02 445.62
30 2160.30 1980.30 1755.30 720.29 576.23 460.98
34 2232.31 2046.31 1813.81 744.30 595.44 476.35
32 2304.32 2112.32 1872.32 768.31 614.65 491.72
33 2376.33 2178.33 1930.83 792.32 633.85 507.08
34 2448.34 2244.34 1989.34 816.33 653.06 522.45
35 2520.35 2310.35 2047.85 840.34 672.27 537.82
36 2592.36 2376.36 2106.36 864.35 691.48 553.18
37 2664.37 2442.37 2164.87 888.36 710.68 568.55
38 2736.38 2508.38 2223.38 912.36 729.89 583.91
39 2808.39 2574.39 2281.89 936.37 749.10 599.28
2880.40 2640.40 2340.40 960.38 768.31 614.65

      

 

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 45
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

COMPUTING THE SICK LEAVE PAYOUT PERCENTAGE

Accumulated sick leave balance at the time of separation
The number of hours of sick leave used in the single highest use year +

Compare the total to the numbers in the line representing the number of full years of
employment. Read down under the column for the length of your
workday.

If your total above is equal to or greater than the corresponding number
you will receive that percentage payout, based on your available accumulated sick leave balance.

 

 

46 JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

SIDE LETTERS

 

SIDE LETTER OF AGREEMENT

Between the City of Hayward and the
Hayward Police Officers’ Association
Winter 2005

This Side Letter Agreement is based on the March 15, 2004 Tentative Agreement
between the City of Hayward (‘City’) and the Hayward Police Officers’ Association
(“‘HPOA’):

1.

Recruitment for Police Captain Classification:

The City Manager will consult with the HPOA prior to determining whether the
recruitment process for Police Captain will be a “closed promotional” or “open
recruitment’. A final decision will await appointment of the new Chief of Police.

Retiree Medical:

If the rate of increase in the Kaiser North single-party premium rate during the
term of this Memorandum of Understanding (effective July 1, 2004 through June
30, 2008) exceeds ten percent (10%) per year, the City and the HPOA will meet
and confer relative to the City’s contribution to retiree medical. Such meeting
and conferring will occur in the context of negotiations for a successor MOU.

Working Groups:
The City and the HPOA agree to form one or more Working Group(s) to address
the following issues. Task(s) to be completed by January 1, 2005.
a. Qualifications for the classifications of Sergeant, Lieutenant, and
Inspector in terms of education, training, and experience. Although the
HPOA does not represent Police Captains, the Chief agrees to consult
with the HPOA to develop education, training, and experience
qualifications for the classification of Police Captain.
b. Career paths for Sergeants, Lieutenants, Inspectors, and Police Captain.
c. Standard Evaluation Guidelines; and,
d. Maintenance and replacement schedules for police vehicles.

General Order on Promotions: This side letter incorporates by reference the
Department’s General Order on Promotions (No. 2-305). The City and the
Association stipulate that management will consult the Association about
revisions, if any, to this General Order.

The side letter dated June 30, 2000 title “Reimbursement for On Duty
Equipment’ is hereby rescinded.

The MOU was updated to reflect current practices and obsolete language was
deleted. Existing side letters were deleted and the MOU was updated as follows:

July 25, 1984 Administrative Leave Acting 7.10
July 25, 1984 Educational Incentive 15.01
June 16, 1986 Detective Bureau 4/10 4.02
August 4, 1987 Personnel, Planning, Training 4/10 4.02
August 11, 1987 Patrol Division 4/10 deleted

 

JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008 47
HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS” ASSOCIATION

 

April 27, 1995 Investigating Lieutenant & Sergeant 4.02
May 16, 1995 Juvenile Officer 4/10 4.02
January 14, 1998 Holiday Pay 9.02, 4.03, 4.04
January 14, 1998 3/12.5 Patrol 4.03
September 14, 1998 SRO 4/10 4.02
March 13, 2000 3/12.5 Traffic 4.04
June 30, 2000 Reimbursement for Equipment deleted
July 1, 2000 Salary increase for 3 @ 50 6.07
November 13, 2003 Standby Protocol for Investigations
Bureau Employees 7.15
For the City: For the HPOA:
Jesus Armas, City Manager Date Ted Muniz, President Date

 

48 JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008
ADDENDUM TO THE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Between the CITY OF HAYWARD
and the HAYWARD POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

May 2008

The City of Hayward and the Hayward Police Officers’ Association agree to amend the
Memorandum of Understanding between the parties, as follows:

1.
Section 21.00 DURATION shall be amended to read:

This Memorandum of Understanding shall continue in full force and effect until; 12:01
a.m. July 1, 2015 and will be renewed from year to year thereafter unless either party
shall give written notice to the other of a desire to revise or terminate this Memorandum
of Understanding not less than ninety (90) days nor more than one hundred twenty
(120) days prior to June 30, 2015 or June 30 of any year thereafter.

 

2.
Appendix A shall be amended to read:

Salary ranges shall be determined as follows: Base salary for ail classifications covered
by this MOU increased by the difference between the total compensation of a Hayward
Police Officer and the average of the total compensation for Police Officer of the top
four agencies based on a survey of salary and benefits. The percentage increase shall
be determined by (Total compensation average of top four agencies — Total
compensation of Hayward Police Officer) / Total compensation of Hayward Police
Officer, rounded to the nearest .01%. Hayward may be included in the top four agencies
should its compensation so indicate.

Bargaining unit salaries effective the pay period including July 1, 2008 shall be
determined according to the above compensation survey, less 4% but in no case will
the effective salaries be a reduction in the compensation level in effect on June 15,
2008.

Bargaining unit salaries effective the pay period including July 1, 2009 shall be
determined according to the above compensation survey, less 3% but in no case will
the effective salaries be a reduction in the compensation level in effect on June 15,
2009.
Bargaining unit salaries effective the pay period including July 1, 2010 shall be
increased by 4% plus one-third of the positive difference between 4% and the maximum
percentage determined according to the above compensation survey.

Bargaining unit salaries effective the pay period including July 1, 2011 shall be
increased by 90% of the Consumer Price Index — All Urban Consumers for the San
Francisco Bay Area for the 12 month period ending April 30, 2011 plus one-third of the
positive difference between the 90% CPI adjustment and the maximum percentage
determined according to the above compensation survey. If the Hayward Police
Department is awarded full accreditation by the Commission on Accreditation for Law
Enforcement Agencies, Inc. (CALEA) by July 1, 2011, the CPI! adjustment referred to
above will be 100% rather than 90%.

Bargaining unit salaries effective the pay period including July 1, 2012 shall be
increased by 90% of the Consumer Price Index — All Urban Consumers for the San
Francisco Bay Area for the 12 month period ending April 30, 2012 or the maximum
percentage determined according to the above compensation survey, whichever is
greater. If the Hayward Police Department is awarded full accreditation by the
Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies, Inc. (CALEA) by July 1,
2011, the CPI adjustment referred to above will be 100% rather than 90%.

Bargaining unit salaries effective the pay period including July 1, 2013 shall be
determined according to the above compensation survey.

Bargaining unit salaries effective the pay period including July 1, 2014 shall be
determined according to the above compensation survey.

“Total compensation” shall mean top step base monthly salary; employer-paid member
PERS contributions; uniform allowance; and education incentive pay applicable to all
Police Officers.

Beginning with the salary survey effective July 1, 2013, “Total compensation” shall
mean the top step base monthly salary; employer-paid member PERS contributions;
uniform allowance, education incentive pay applicable to all police officers; and the
amount the employer pays for premiums for family level health coverage. The amount to
be included in the survey for health and welfare benefits for the City of Hayward police
officers shall be the amount of the family premium for the health plan in which the
plurality of the HPOA members are enrolled.

Surveyed agencies shall be: Santa Clara, Vallejo, Palo Alto, Richmond, Fremont,
Berkeley, Daly City, San Mateo, Alameda, and San Leandro.

 

Addendum to the Memorandum of Understanding
Between the City of Hayward and the

Hayward Police Officers’ Association Page 2
The salary surveys shall be completed by May 31 of each year of this MOU and include
all salaries and benefits effective on July 1, of each year of this MOU, respectively and
approved by the agency’s board or council. If on October 1, or each year of this MOU,
any of the above agencies reaches a settlement retroactive on or prior to July 1, of each
year of this MOU respectively, thereby changing the average of the top four agencies, a
one-time adjustment will be made no later than November 1“ of each year respectively
to salaries to reflect that change.

 

3.

Effective January 1, 2009, the maximum health plan premium paid by the City for active

employees will be the family rate for Blue Shield HMO&EPO or Kaiser, whichever is
greater.

If, in the future, PERS changes the availability of health plans offered through PEMHCA,
it is the intent of the parties that the City will continue to pay the full family rate for health
plan premiums which offer essentially the same coverage as Blue Shield does in 2008.

For employees enrolled in the PERSCare health plan on or before June 30, 2008, the
City agrees to continue paying up to the full family plan premium through December 31,
2008, and in 2009 the City will pay one-half (1/2) of the difference between the greater
of the Blue Shield HJMO & EPO or Kaiser family plan rates and the PERSCare family
plan rate, the employee being responsible for payment through payroll deduction of any
remaining one-half (1/2) of the difference in rates.

 

4.

The City agrees to establish an irrevocable medical trust account to fund the liability
related to retiree medical costs. The City’s funding of the medical trust account is

independent of the City’s obligation to pay the wages and other economic benefits set
forth in this MOU.

In the 2010-2011 fiscal year 1% of payroll will be contributed by the City to the retiree
medical trust if closing 2008-2009 fiscal year General Fund revenue exceeds 2006-
2007 fiscal year General Fund revenue.

In the 2011-2012 fiscal year 1% of payroll will be contributed by the City to the retiree
medical trust if closing 2009-2010 fiscal year General Fund revenue exceeds 2007-
2008 fiscal year General Fund revenue.

 

Addendum to the Memorandum of Understanding
Between the City of Hayward and the

Hayward Police Officers’ Association Page 3
In the 2012-2013 fiscal year 1% of payroll will be contributed by the City to the retiree
medical trust if closing 2010-2011 fiscal year General Fund revenue exceeds 2008-
2009 fiscal year General Fund revenue.

In the 2013-2014 fiscal year 1% of payroll will be contributed by the City to the retiree
medical trust.

In the 2014-2015 fiscal year 1% of payroll will be contributed by the City to the retiree
medical trust.

 

5.

The City and the Association agree to meet and confer on the issue of retiree medical
benefits in January 2011. Any modification to retiree medical benefits must be by mutual
agreement of the parties.

 

6.

The City agrees to settle the Association’s grievances regarding payouts at separation
for accumulated sick leave, accumulated earned vacation, and earned compensatory
time. Any employee separating from employment who is, at the time of separation,
receiving permanent “educational” incentive payments in addition to their base pay shall
receive such incentive pay on the amounts “cashed out” representing accumulated
earned vacation, earned compensatory time, and payment for unused sick leave under
the provisions of section 11.07 of the MOU.

 

7.

The City recognizes the necessity of maintaining sworn police staffing levels to
adequately serve the needs and demands of the community, to reduce the incidence of
crime, and to improve the perception of safety in our neighborhoods.

The City’s goal is to maintain current sworn staffing levels and strive, in the future, as
funds become available to increase sworn officer staffing levels, to improve our ability to
be responsive to the community consistent with the long term strategic goats of the

 

Addendum to the Memorandum of Understanding
Between the City of Hayward and the
Hayward Police Officers’ Association Page 4
department. This goal is to be attained based on the City’s overall ability to pay for such
staffing levels and within the context of staffing needs throughout the City and is directly
supportive of the City Council’s adopted priorities related to public safety.

Made and entered this ST 4 day of May, 2008.

For the Hayward P, Officers’ Association

   

 

For the City of Hayward

# # #

 

Addendum to the Memorandum of Understanding
Between the City of Hayward and the
Hayward Police Officers’ Association Page 5
SIDE LETTER OF AGREEMENT

This agreement is made between the City of Hayward (City) and the Hayward Police
Officers’ Association to modify certain provisions of the existing Memorandum of
Understanding between the parties to allow the implementation of a program advancing
sick leave and/or vacation leave to qualified individuals as defined below.

A qualified individual, for the purposes of this side letter of agreement, is a person hired
by the City as a police officer, who is currently employed by a public agency as a peace
officer with peace officers powers and who possesses a California Commission on
POST Basic Certificate.

This side letter is effective on the date of execution by the City and for a period of
twenty-four months thereafter.

10.02 Vacation Accrual

A qualified individual shall be advanced vacation leave, equal to the amount of vacation
leave he/she would accumulate as a newly hired police officer in 26 pay periods,
effective the first pay period of his/her employment with the City. For the remainder of
his/her first 26 pay periods, the qualified individual shall accrue no additional vacation
leave during that term. Beginning with the 27" pay period of employment, the employee
will begin to accrue vacation leave at the rate specified in the MOU.

Qualified individuals who are advanced vacation leave shall not be subject to the
restriction prohibiting the use of vacation time during their first six months of
employment. Qualified individuals will be given the opportunity to draw vacation based
upon their seniority with the Department, measured from their respective date of hire.

Should an employee who was advanced vacation leave pursuant to this side letter of
agreement separate from employment during his/her first year of employment, any
advanced but unearned vacation leave shall be forfeited to the City. In addition, the City
will not make a claim for reimbursement if the employee has taken more vacation time
than he/she would have accrued.

11.02 Sick Leave Allowance

A qualified individual shall be advanced sick leave , equal to the amount of sick leave
he/she would accumulate in 26 pay periods, effective the first pay period of his/her
employment with the City. For the remainder of his/her first 26 pay periods, the qualified
individual shall accrue no additional sick leave. Beginning with the 27" pay period of

employment, the employee will begin to accrue sick leave at the rate specified in the
MOU.
Additionally, a qualified individual shall be awarded additional sick leave credit, on an
accrued hour for hour basis, equal to the number of hours of sick leave earned and with
his/her most recent public agency employer, but in no event more than 200 hours, upon
presentation of proof, acceptable to the City, of his/her earned and accumulated sick
leave balance at the time of is/her separation from his/her most recent public agency
employer. No additional credit shall be granted for sick leave hours which were
advanced by the previous public agency employer but were unearned.

Qualified individuals who are advanced sick leave shall not be subject to the restriction

prohibiting the use of sick leave during their first three months of continuous full-time
satisfactory employment.

Executed on this é day of October, 2008, at Hayward, California.

For the City of Hayward: For the Hayward Police Officers’ Association:

“Jones Michael Sorensen, President
ager Hayward Police Officers’ Association
