STATE OF NEW YORK
PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS BOARD

 

In the Matter of the Compulsory Interest Arbitration

-betwéen-

BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION, INC.

~and-

CITY OF BUFFALO, NEW YORK

PERB Case No.: [A 2008-027; M2008-190

 

BEFORE:

Jay M. Siegel, Esq.
Public Panel Member and Chairman

Kevin M. Kennedy
Employee Organization Panel Member

Sean P. Beiter, Esq.
Public Employer Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

For the Buffalo Police Benevolent Association
Law Office of W. James Schwan .
By: W, James Schwan, Esq., Of Counsel

For the City of Buffalo
Goldberg Segalla, LLP
By: Matthew C. Van Vessem, Esq., Of Counsel

 

COPy

OPINION
AND

AWARD

 
 

BACKGROUND

Pursuant to the provisions contained in Section 209.4 of the Civil Service Law,
the undersigned Panel was designated by the Chairperson of the New York State Public
Employment Relations Board (“PERB”) to make a just and reasonable determination of a
dispute between the Buffalo Police Benevolent Association, Inc, (PBA) and the City of
Buffalo, New York (City).

The City covers nearly 42 square miles in the western part of the State of New
York (State). It is located on the eastern shore of Lake Erie, It has approximately 261,000
residents, making it the second largest city in the State. The City provides a full range of
services to its residents ranging from police and fire protection to sanitation, highway and
recreation,

The PBA represents all sworn police officers, detectives, detective sergeants,
police lieutenants, police captains and police inspectors. It currently has approximately
750 unit members.

The City’s officers are generally divided into two divisions, namely, the patrol
division and the detective division. The Department also has administrative and
specialized units.

The City’s officers are frequently called upon to handle violent crimes. The City
has mote violent crime than the cities of Rochester and Syracuse and municipalities in the
Buffalo suburbs. While Buffalo’s 2010 statistics show it had 1,357 violent crimes per
100,000 residents, Rochester had 1,094 per 100,000 residents and Syracuse had 947 per
100,000 residents, The suburban Buffalo police department with the closest statistics to

Buffalo had a high of 232 violent crimes per 100,000 residents,
The City has struggled economically since the 1980s. As recently as the 1980s,
the City and its environs was a hub of manufacturing. Indeed, 27% of the area workforce
was employed in manufacturing in the 1980s, This number has shrunk to 5.6% at the
present time. This has been somewhat offset by job growth in federal, state and local
government, as well as higher education, retail, banks and healthcare.

The fiscal affairs of the City arguably hit a low point in 2003. In July 2003, the
State determined that the City was in such severe financial crisis that it could not be
resolved without State intervention. The Buffalo Fiscal Stability Authority (BFSA) was
established to monitor the City’s financial plans and ensure that the City was adhering to
fiscal requirements set forth in the BFSA Act.

The BFSA began in a control period. This meant it had the maximum authority to
take actions to protect the City’s financial integrity, In 2003, the BSFA enacted serious
austerity measures, including eliminating positions, imposing a hiring freeze and closing
fire stations.

By 2004, the BFSA determined that it needed to take more severe measures. It
imposed a wage freeze on all employee organizations for fiscal year 2004-2005, The
wage freeze continued in 2005-2006 and 2006-2007, All salary increases, including step
increments, were frozen during the period of 2004 to 2007.

The PBA’s last CBA with the City governed the period from July 1, 2002 through
June 30, 2007. In the CBA, PBA members were provided with a $5,000 annual increase
effective July 1, 2002, followed by raises of 3.4% effective July 1, 2003, July 1, 2004,
July 1, 2005 and July 1, 2006. Although PBA members received the agreed-upon salary

increases in 2002 and 2003, the BFSA had the authority to take actions that superseded

 
any CBAs. Hence, the wage freezes imposed by the BFSA meant that PBA members did
not receive the 3.4% wage increase on July 1, 2004, July 1, 2005 and July 1, 2006.

In 2007, the City presented a four-year financial pian to the BFSA, It
demonstrated that the City’s severe financial crisis had sufficiently abated to permit a
lifting of the wage freeze. The City’s plan to the BFSA included requesting a lifting of
the wage freezes that were imposed on bargaining units from 2004 through June 30,
2007.

Pursuant to this plan, the BFSA lifted the wage freeze. Effective July 1, 2007,
PBA members received the 3.4% salary increase they were supposed to receive on July 1,
2004. Effective July 1, 2007, step increases and other increases due under the CBA that
were suspended the preceding three years were allowed to recommence prospectively.
Moreover, pursuant to this plan, the 3.4% salary increase PBA members were due to
receive on July 1, 2005 was paid to PBA members effective July 1, 2008 and the 3.4%
salary increase unit members were due to receive on July 1, 2006 was paid to PBA
members effective July 1, 2009. This manner of lifting the wage freeze was litigated and
ultimately deemed proper by the New York State Court of Appeals in 2011.

On or about May 1, 2007, the parties began negotiations for a successor contract
to the one that expired on June 30, 2007, However, since the BFSA was in what is
considered a “control period” where it has maximum authority to make major economic
decisions due to the economic distress of the City, the parties engaged in limited
negotiations, At a certain point in time, the parties began to actively negotiate but the
negotiations were unsuccessful. Thereafter, acting pursuant to the rules of procedure of

PERB, a PERB-appointed mediator met with the parties. Mediation was unsuccessful. On

 
or about January 30, 2009, the PBA filed a Petition for Interest Arbitration. On February
17, 2009, the City responded to the petition and filed a cross petition for arbitration.

On May 4, 2012, the Public Arbitration Panel was designated by PERB, pursuant
to Section 209.4 of the New York State Civil Service Law, for the purpose of making a : ..
just and reasonable determination of this dispute. On July 1, 2012, the BF. ‘SA determined
that the City’s financial outlook had improved to the point where it vated to move from
control period status to advisory status. Simply stated, this provided the City with greater
discretion and authority to act on issues involving its fiscal affairs. However, under the
statute creating the BFSA, the BFSA has the authority to reimpose the control period if it
determines that the City is back in the throes of a fiscal crisis at any time through 2037.

Hearings were conducted before the Panel in Buffalo, New York, on September
18 and 19, 2012, October 25 and 26, 2012 and November 9, 2012, At all hearings, both
parties were represented by counsel. A transcribed record was taken at all hearings. Both
parties submitted numerous and extensive exhibits and documentation, including written w=
closing arguments. Both parties presented extensive arguments on their respective
positions.

On March 12, 2013, PERB officially appointed Kevin M. Kennedy to serve as the
PBA Panel Member instead of James W. Panus, the PBA’s original Panel Member in this
proceeding,

Thereafter, the Panel fully reviewed all data, evidence, arguments and issues

submitted by the parties. Despite significant discussion and deliberations at multiple __

‘Mr. Kennedy attended all arbitration hearings as a member of the PBA's executive committee. He advised

that he had a complete record and was prepared to proceed with a scheduled executive session without

further delay. Neither Mr. Kennedy nor the PBA requested an adjournment or continuance in order to allow

Mr. Kennedy more time to prepare. __
 

Executive Sessions, the Panel was unable to reach consensps on an Award. As a result,

this Award represents the determination of the Panel Chair, who was joined by the City

Panel Member on an item-by-item basis.

The positions taken by both parties are quite adequately specified in the Petition +

and the Response, numerous hearing exhibits, and post-hearing written submissions, all

of which are incorporated by reference into this Award. Such positions will merely be

summarized for the purposes of this Opinion and Award. Accordingly, set out herein is

the Panel’s Award as to what constitutes a just and reasonable determination of the

parties’ Award setting forth the terms and conditions for the period July 1, 2007 through

June 30, 2009.

In arriving at such determination, the Panel has specifically reviewed and

considered all of the following criteria, as detailed in Section 209.4 of the Civil Service

Law:

a)

b)
9)

qd)

comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of employment of os
the employees involved in the arbitration proceeding with the
wages, hours and conditions of employment of other employees
performing similar services or requiring similar skills under similar
working conditions and with other employees generally in public
and private employment in comparable communities;

the interests and welfare of the public and the financial ability of
the public employer to pay;

comparison of peculiarities in regard to other trades or professions,
including specificaily, 1) hazards of employment, 2) physical
qualifications; 3) educational qualifications; 4) mental
qualifications; 5) job training and skills;

the terms of the collective agreements negotiated between the
parties in the past providing for compensation and fringe benefits,

including, but not limited to, the provisions for salary, insurance =

and retirement benefits, medical and hospitalization benefits, paid
time off and job security.
 

COMPARABILITY

Section 209.4 of the Civil Service Law requires that in order to properly
determine wages and other terms and conditions of employment, the Panel must engage
in a comparative analysis of terms and conditions with “other employees performing
similar services or requiring similar skills under similar working conditions and with
other employees generally in public and private employment in comparable
communities.”

PBA Position

The PBA stresses that the comparability is the criterion establishing the market to
be used to assess how existing terms and conditions of employment compare to similar
employees within the relevant market. In other words, it is a search for the market within
which a comparison of prevailing wages and benefits is to be made.

The PBA contends that its members should be compared with all of the police
agencies in the municipalities surrounding Buffalo, It maintains that the City’s proposal
to compare it only to other City bargaining units a few select upstate cities is a limiting
market that does not comport with the comparability criteria, To the PBA, geographical
proximity is much more relevant than limiting the group of comparables to a few select
jurisdictions as asserted by the City. In the PBA’s view, its proposed group of
comparables is most appropriate because it provides a complete picture of the full extent
of the market.

The PBA maintains that the City’s proposed group of comparables is far too

limiting and does not give the Panel a complete assessment of the prevailing wages and
benefits in the market. The PBA asserts that its list of comparables is appropriate because
itis comprehensive and neither too big nor too small,

The PBA argues that there is nothing unique about city governments that requires
or warrants a comparability analysis limited only to other cities, particularly when those
cities are located in different markets with different economic conditions than Buffalo. In
the PBA’s view, comparability requires a search for the relevant market, not a search for
governments of the same type. The PBA maintains that in dozens of cases over the years,
arbitration panels have not restricted their comparability analysis in such a way. The PBA
urges this Panel to follow the same path and adopt all police agencies in the Buffalo area
and the City of Rochester as the group of comparables.

City Position

The City insists that even though it is in a much healthier fiscal position than it
was on July 3, 2003, that its financial challenges are unique among the other large cities
in the State. While the City concedes that Rochester, Syracuse and Albany share some
similarities with Buffalo, the City stresses that its unique financial struggles make it such
that there is truly no comparable municipality in the State. The City notes that unlike the
other large.cities in the State, it is the only municipality in more than 25 years to have a
wage freeze imposed on its employees,

The City observes that it has been in a declared fiscal emergency for nine years.
This resulted in the creation with the BFSA which has the statutory authority to directly _
oversee the City’s finances. The City maintains that the wealthier suburban municipalities
near Buffalo cannot be considered comparable as none of them has contended with such a

truly unique fiscal circumstance. None of those communities were as dependent upon
state aid to fund their operations, In the City’s view, this is precisely why the closest
comparables are the other bargaining units of the City as they all had to contend with the
same unique and challenging fiscal circumstances.

To the extent that other municipalities will be considered by the Panel, the City _

 

urges the Panel to consider Rochester, Buffalo and Albany as the comparables. The City

stresses that these communities are most similar in terms of size, geographical proximity,

economics and demographics. Indeed, while these municipalities’ economic challenges

are not as severe as Buffalo, they have all had their fair share of economic struggles.
The City notes that Rochester, Syracuse and Albany all are within the range of

Buffalo in terms of size and population. While Buffalo has a geographic area of

approximately 40.5 square miles and a population of approximately 260,000, Rochester

has a geographic area of 35,8 square miles and a population of 219,773. Syracuse is 25,1

square miles with a population of 147,306 and Albany is 21.4 square miles with a

population of 97,856. ca

Panel Determination on Comparability =

The Panel Chair finds that the cities of Rochester and Syracuse are the most

appropriate group of comparables. A number of facts lead the Panel Chair to this

conclusion. First and foremost, they are similar in terms of size, population and

geographical proximity. Rochester and Syracuse are also most comparable to Buffalo =

because all three cities have been struggling economically for the past twenty plus years

as manufacturing and other traditional industries in upstate New York have either —

contracted or disappeared. All three cities have suffered fierce population declines and

have large numbers of poor residents in need of fiscal assistance. All three cities have
crime rates that are well above where anyone wants them to be. Although Rochester and
Syracuse are not as reliant on State funding as Buffalo, the fact remains that all three
cities continue to need to look to Albany for assistance.

The Panel Chair does not find Albany to be an appropriate comparable to Buffalo,
He so ruled in 2012 in an interest arbitration involving the City of Albany Firefighters
and he sees no logical basis to deviate from that determination. As the Panel Chair has
previously noted, Buffalo has nearly three times the population as Albany and is nearly
twice the size in terms of geography. They are hundreds of miles apart and in a
completely different region of the State. Their economies are completely different and
their housing markets are completely different, They do not share enough in common to
be considered comparable with one another.

To a much more limited extent, the Panel Chair finds that police agencies in the
Buffalo area and other City bargaining units should be in the universe of comparables,
Other police agencies in the Buffalo area should be considered to a limited extent because
they are located in the exact same labor market. Employees in all of these agencies
purchase homes in the same market, can compete for jobs in the same market and have
similar economic circumstances. Other City bargaining units should be considered
because the City is in a truly unique economic circumstance. Thus, the manner in which
it handles its negotiations with other bargaining units has some relevance to this dispute.

Accordingly, pursuant to the statutory criteria, the main universe of comparables
is Rochester and Syracuse. Other police agencies near Buffalo and other City bargaining

units are also in the universe of comparables to a much more limited extent.

10
ABILITY TO PAY
PBA Position

The PBA maintains that Buffalo is in a vastly different and vastly better economic
position than it has been in the past. It is in sound financiat condition and has the ability
to pay for the proposals made by the PBA..

The PBA’s evidence of the City’s ability to pay was based on the testimony and
exhibits presented by Edward Fennel, a government finance consultant who has been
examining the records of the City since 1979, The PBA asserts that the evidence offered
through Mr. Fennel conclusively establishes that the City has the ability to pay for a
substantial increase in salary and benefits. According to the PBA, Mr. Fennel’s
presentation should be accorded great weight because he is an expert in municipal
finance, he made his recommendations based on the City’s records and his testimony was
largely unrebutted.

The PBA stresses that the City’s year-end fund balance data is emblematic of the ae

 

City’s strong recovery, The PBA notes that while the City only had $17.86 million in
fund balance at the end of 2002, the City’s fund balance improved to $95.661 million in
2006 and reached a recent high of $142.94 million in 2010. To the PBA, the City’s robust
fund balance increase demonstrates how ludicrous the City’s position is. In other words,
the City’s claim that there is only $5.6 million available to fund wage increases for all —
City employees, including PBA members, cannot be given any credence.

The PBA maintains that there are other noteworthy aspects of the City’s financial oo

data that demonstrate the City’s good financial health. It cites the following:

11
« Assets of the City exceeded its liabilities at the close of the fiscal year
ending June 30, 2011 by more than $165 million.

* The committed, assigned and unassigned fund balance for the general fund
was more than $92 million as of June 30, 2011, which is 20.1% of total
general fund expenditures.

* The BFSA special revenue fund holds more than $17 million of state aid
that will be turned over to the City in the future.

* The City’s bond indebtedness has decreased in each of the last ten fiscal
years from more than $465,885,000 to $313,957,579.

* The City has set aside more than $70 million to pay for anticipated
setilements with collective bargaining units from past years that will not
affect the City’s current revenues or fund balance.

The PBA notes that set forth in the Official Bond Statement regarding the
issuance of general improvement serial bonds are matter of fact statements highlighting
the City’s outstanding recovery. Among other things, it is noted that “as a consequence of
the substantial improvement in the City’s financial operations, the city has experienced a
sizable increase in its cash and liquidity position.” (PBA Exhibit 2). The PBA stresses
that the City's financial improvement is even miore noteworthy because it has occurred
while the City is in the midst of a tax reduction plan that has reduced taxes by nearly 25%
since 2006.

The PBA stresses that Mayor Brown accentuated the City’s improving financial
condition after releasing the City’s 2012-2013 budget. Among other things he stated:
This year Buffalo earned its fifth successive bond rating increase, bolstering Wall

Street’s confidence in our City as a result of the significant and continued fiscal

12
improvements. All three top credit rating agencies graded Buffalo in the “A”
category — the highest credit rating in Buffalo history... With $750,000,000 in
_ construction now underway in downtown Buffalo, where the rapidly growing

medical campus continues to expand and a newly revitalized waterfront has
become a popular destination, investors from across the country and
internationally are talcing a serious look at Buffalo...Adding to the interest is the
support of Governor Andrew Cuomo and his promise of $1 billion in state aid to
attract new businesses and industry to our City. BS
In the PBA’s estimation, Mayor Brown’s positive outlook is corroborated by the

fact that in April 2012, the City earned an upgraded credit rating from Moody’s going

from A2 to AI. In reaching this conclusion, the PBA notes that Moody’s was pleased

with the City’s strong improvement in its General Fund balance increases and its

adherence to its financial plan. To the PBA, this objective determination from Moody’s,

coupled with the fact that the City Comptroller has conceded that the City has more than

$56 million in unspent funds, wholly demonstrates that they City has the ability to pay for

the PBA’s economic proposals.

City Position ,
The City insists that the Panel cannot ignore the fact that BFSA Act was adopted —

because the City was in a dire situation. The BSFA pronounced two essential goals,

namely, the preservation of services and the affordability of taxes. It concluded that the

failure to act consistent with these goals jeopardizes the City’s long-term fiscal health.
The City reminds that Panel that its recovery was only made possible due to the

State’s extraordinary intervention, which included the imposition of a control board that

made difficult austerity decisions, including three years of wage freézes and a hiring —

freeze, This, coupled with massive increases in State aid, helped the City begin its

recovery.

13
The City maintains that its recovery is extremely fragile because it still has a large
structural budgetary imbalance. The City insists that its recurring revenues are less than
its recurring expenses, Since approximately 80% of the City’s recurring expenses are
personnel costs, the City maintains that it has an extremely limited ability to pay for any
wage increases,

The City stresses that it relies on State aid and fund balance to balance its budget
every year. In the City’s estimation, any: economic increase awarded by the Panel must be
offset by equivalent concessions. Otherwise, the structural imbalance between the City
expenses and revenue will only be exacerbated.

The City stresses that its ability to pay is also limited by the fact that there is some
potential for a real spike in personnel costs. After all, the City’s fire department union
employees have not had a'contract since 2004, The City maintains that the cost to resolve
those outstanding years, coupled with the six outstanding years for police, as well as the
costs to address seven other bargaining units could be exorbitant, In the City’s view, any
increases in salary must be extremely moderate. Otherwise, the City risks being right
back where it was with virtually no fund balance and a deep structural budget deficit.

The City asserts that it finished the 2007-2008 fiscal year with an unreserved,
undesignated fund balance of $76.02 million. The City insists that its fund balance only

reached these levels due to the wage freeze, increased State aid and BFSA borrowing,
The City maintains that its limited ability to pay is accentuated by the fact that the City
finished fisca! year 2008-2009 with an unreserved, undesignated fund balance of $58.93

million.

4

 
 

The City opines that its fund balance has declined because it has been forced to
use substantial amounts of its fund balance in each of the more recent fiscal-years to
balance its budget. It used $12.8 million in 2010 and $12.3 million in 2011. In the current
budget, the City utilizes another $11.5 million in fund balance. The City insists that this is Po
demonstrative of a City with fiscal pressures in a challenging economic environment. In
the City’s view, its continued reliance on one-time revenue sources such as fund balance
and State aid wholly demonstrates that it has a very limited ability to pay for increases in
costs.
The City contends that given its financial circumstances, its ability to pay for any
additional wage increases beyond those already provided in 2007 and 2008 is limited to
1.5%. The City avers that it simply docs not have the ability to pay for anything beyond
that amount. It claims that its current budget cannot absorb any increases beyond 1.5%.
The City reminds the Panel that its largest source of income is State aid. The City
points out that in 2010, it received more. than $195 million in State aid. This demonstrates -"
a far greater reliance on State aid than the cities of Rochester, Syracuse and Albany.
Indeed, while Buffalo received approximately 39% of its total revenue from State aid in
2010, Syracuse received 27.9% of its revenue from State aid while Rochester received
22% of its revenue from State aid. The City contends that since State aid is unpredictable
and non-recurring that it only has the ability to pay for a limited salary increase. _—-
The City contends that the PBA’s claim that the City’s finances are not dire defies
common sense and the data in the record. The City maintains that it simply cannot afford L

the millions of dollars of retroactivity and future increases demanded by the PBA.
The City argues that its ability to grow its revenues are severely restricted. It
suffered a cut in State aid in 2010 while the State was suffering the devastating affects of
the last recession. Although the City may have implemented a plan that reduced taxes by
nearly 25%, the City still utilizes over seventy percent (71.15%) of its available
constitutional tax limit and duc to the State’s two percent (2%) cap on property tax
increases, the City’s ability to generate additional revenue through taxes is limited.
Moreover, mortgage tax receipts have dropped by 33% from 2007 to 2010, With revenue
growth remaining flat or declining in some areas, the City continues to have no choice
but to depend on State aid to make ends meet.

a While the City recognizes that its financial condition has improved, it implores
the Panel to look at the reality of its budget. It was in a uniquely troubled condition that
has taken years to pull out of. It is heavily reliant on State aid. It has a declining
population that is very poor with a median household income of $28,490. The City urges
the Panel to find that it has a limited ability to pay for any increase and reject the PBA’s
contention that it has the ability to pay for the PBA’s economic proposals.

Panel Determination on the City’s Ability to Pay

The Panel Chair has carefully considered the statutory criteria regarding ability to
pay as provided through the positions of the parties from the testimony, exhibits and post-
hearing briefs filed, forming the record in this matter.

The Panel Chair is cognizant that during the term of this Award and beyond, the
financial conditions in Buffalo showed significant improvement compared to the past.

Due in large part to the receipt of over $175 million in State aid each year, the City

16
greatly improved its fund balance, reduced its indebtedness and has become a much
better place for investment.

However, much of this positive news is tempered by some stark realities,
Personnel costs are a major piece of the City’s budget. The City arguably got back on its
feet economically because of the austere measures taken by the BFSA control board.
Three years of wage freezes and a long-term hiring freeze, coupled with increases State
aid, allowed the City to improve its financial condition. In other words, the City became
more solvent in many ways because it had three consecutive years where its personnel
costs were flat. Subsidized with over $175 million in State aid, the City’s revenues grew
while its personnel costs did not (due to the wage and hiring freezes),

When one looks at the City’s budget over the past several years, it becomes
abundantly clear that it remains challenging. The City’s revenues are heavily reliant on
State aid. In each of the past few years it has frequently received over $175 million in
State aid. This cannot be assumed to be a given each and every year. Very troubling is the
fact that State aid is a much greater revenue source for the City than property tax
revenues. The City cannot expect to significantly grow its revenue through property taxes
as property tax growth will be limited for the foreseeable future for several reasons. The
City has great incentive to keep taxes down so as to provide incentives for investment
and give members of its dwindling population both tax relief and an incentive to stay in
Buffalo, These unmistakable facts, coupled with the 2% tax cap law, make it abundantly
clear that the City has genuine limitations on its ability to increase the revenue side of its
budget each year. If there is a limit on the ability of the City to annually grow its revenue,

there must be limits on the City’s ability to pay.

17
   

The positive news is that the Panel Chair finds that the record establishes that the
City has reserved funds from prior budgets to pay for anticipated collective bargaining
increases. The City clearly can draw on money that is set aside to pay for the amount
awarded in this Award. Thus, while the Panel Chair rejects the PBA’s contention that the .
City has the ability to pay for the proposals made by the PBA, the Panel Chair finds that
the City has the ability to pay for this Award and that the City’s careful planning and
ongoing fiscal management, along with its improving economic conditions, will allow it
to maintain a positive position despite the challenging economy and the unique economic
challenges facing the City. Therefore, the Panel Chair finds that the City has the ability to
pay for this Award and that the wage and other increases awarded herein constitute a fair

and reasonable Award.

THE INTERESTS AND WELFARE OF THE PUBLIC

PBA Position _*
Inthe PBA’s view, this consideration encompasses the fact that the City’s

taxpayers benefit from having a professional, well-trained police department. In the
PBA’s estimation, this can only happen when its members’ wages and benefits are
competitive so that the City can attract and retain quality police officers. The PBA opines
that the Panel must issue an Award that allows its members to regain some ground on the
comparators who did not suffer three years of wage freezes, frozen increments and lost
retroactivity. The PBA maintains that it is in the public interest for its members to start

making back some ground on salary compared to other police officers in Rochester and

18
   

the Buffalo suburbs so as to assure that its police officers will not leave the City for a
comparable position elsewhere.
City Position

The City stresses that the Panel is obligated to consider the fact that this Award --
will directly affect the citizens and taxpayers of the City and the economic future of the :
City for years to come, It must also consider the fact that citizens in the City are
struggling to find sustainable well-paying jobs and have grave concerns about the ability
of its City government to remain on sound financial footing. These considerations, along
with the fact that the economic forecast is not bright, mandate that the Panel exercise its
power with great care and caution while fashioning its Award,
Panel Determination on Interests and Welfare of the Public and Financial Ability of

the City to Pay

The Panel has carefully considered the statutory criteria regarding the interests
and the welfare of the-public and financial ability of the City to pay, as provided through : a7
the positions of the parties from the testimony, exhibits and post-hearing briefs forming
the record in this matter. In looking at this specific issue, the Panel Chair finds that the
PBA’s argument that the public benefits by having a competitively compensated staff of
police officers must be given credence, It influences the Panel Chair’s determination on
the issues of the overall wage adjustment and longevity. The Panel Chair’s Award in the
area of salary and longevity is premised on the recognition that it is prudent for the City
and beneficial to the public for its police officers to be competitively compensated. While 7
the Panel Chair is aware that this Award will not allow PBA members to be equally

compensated with all of the comparables, the salary and longevity increases awarded

19
herein provide PBA members with the ability to remain competitive in the context of
very challenging economic circumstances.

At the same time, all of the other economic proposals advanced by the PBA have
been rejected by the Panel Chair because he is concerned about the detrimental effect that
any new long-term financial commitments may have on the City’s bottom line. It is not in
the interest of the public to significantly augment the economic package provided to

police officers as this could have a detrimental impact on the City’s budget.

COMPARISON OF PECULIARITIES OF THE POLICE PROFESSION

The Panel has also carefully considered the statutory criteria regarding the
comparison of the police profession with other trades or professions, including
specifically: (1) hazards of employment; (2) physical qualifications; (3) educational
qualifications; (4) mental qualifications; and (5) job training and skills, The PBA asserts
that the police profession is so unique that no other useful comparison can be made with ~
other trades or professions.

‘The parties do not dispute the fact that appropriate weight must be given to the
especially hazardous nature of police work and the unique training, skills, pressures and
dangers that police officers face each day. The PBA correctly stresses that the City. has
more violent crimes and more property crimes per 100,000 residents than any of the cities
and municipalities in the universe of comparables’, At the same time, the PBA observes
that Buffalo employs fewer police officers per 100,000 residents than the cities of _
Albany, Syracuse and Rochester. There is no doubt that PBA members have a

? However, as the City paints out, there has been an overall decrease in crime in the City over the past five
(5) years. —

20
challenging, difficult and dangerous job. The Panel Chair finds that the peculiarities of

the profession mandate a direct comparison with police officers.

BASE WAGES

PBA Position

The PBA proposes a fifteen percent (15%) across-the-board salary increase
effective July 1, 2007. The PBA also proposed a $5,000 across the board salary increase
effective July 1, 2007, In doing so, the PBA notes that its proposal was made prior to the
time the BFSA lifted the wage freeze and before the wage increases that were supposed
to be paid on July 1, 2004, July 1, 2005 and July 1, 2006 were paid effective July 1, 2007,
July 1, 2008 and July 1, 2009. In other words, the PBA recognizes that its initial proposal
may need to be modified downward.

Nonetheless, the PBA insists that additional and significant salary increases are

~ warranted for a number of compelling reasons. First and foremost, while the BFSA

eventually lifted the wage freeze and paid PBA members what they were entitled to
receive, none of the raises due were paid retroactively. The PBA observes that the City’s
failure to retroactively pay its members what they deserved collectively cost its members
tens of millions of dollars. In real dollar terms for individual PBA members, the PBA
presents charts showing the losses for specific job titles. According to the PBA, a PBA
member on Step 3 in the 2003-2004 fiscal year lost more than $29,000. According to the
PBA, members in positions of detective, lieutenant and captain lost wages ranging from
$12,500.00 to $15,695.00. According to the PBA, when FICA and pension savings are

added to the equation, it shows that the City saved between $25,000.00 and $35,000.00

21

 
for a majority of PBA members. The PBA contends that the impact to its members as a
result of the wage freeze can only begin to be rectified with a wage increase during the
term of this Award that is well in excess of 5%.

The PBA stresses that the wages i has lost over the past several years has resulted
in its members losing significant ground when compared to the universe of comparable
police officers. Whereas in 2003, PBA members were paid more than most officers in the
universe of comparables, as of July 1, 2007, PBA members lost significant ground. At
that time, they received less pay over a 26-year career than officers in Orchard Park and
Cheektowaga. When total compensation is considered, the PBA argues that it presents an
even more dismal picture for PBA members showing that they earn less than all of the
officers in the suburban Buffalo police departments. To the PBA, this injustice cannot be
allowed to continue, given the dangerous crime and challenges that PBA members are
presented with each and every day.

The PBA stresses that it still fares poorly when it is compared to Rochester, the
closest and most similar city to Buffalo. The PBA asserts that as of July |, 2007, its
members earned between $6,000.00 and $7,000.00 per year less than-police officers in
Rochester with five years, ten years, fifteen years and twenty years of service. In other
words, a raise of approximately 9.1% is required and justified to allow PBA members to
be competitive with Rochester, the most relevant comparator,

The PBA presents a comparison showing how its wages will fare against the
comparables if a 5% wage increase was granted. It contends that it will not do enough to

rectify to disparity in its wages with its comparators.

22

 
 

The PBA stresses that the competiveness of its members’ wages becomes even
more dire when one analyzes the wage comparisons in 2008 and 2009. To the PBA, its
objective wage comparison charts show that a wage increase well in excess of 5% for the
term of this Award is mandated because its members will still struggle to remain
competitive even if its proposal was granted by the Panel,

City Position

The City notes that it initially proposed a wage increase of 5% effective July 1,
2007 followed by a 0% increase effective July 1, 2008, The City contends that its
proposal is no longer applicable because it was made prior to the time that the wage
freeze was lifted and the 10.2% in wages was paid to PBA members. In addition, the City
maintains that its proposal was premised on receiving comparable concessions, including
health insurance premium contributions, plan changes and certain productivity measures.
Hence, the City now proposes a wage increase cumulatively totaling 1.5% over the two
years of the Award.

The City reminds that Panel that wage increases are recurring expenses that must
be funded each year. The City stresses that until July 1, 2012, it remained in a State-
declared fiscal crisis. In the City’s view, one of the main reasons for the crisis was the
City’s structural budget deficit. While the structural budget gap is ina much better place
than it was several years ago, it still rernains. Hence, any increase to wages must be _-
extremely conservative so as to not exacerbate this ongoing and challenging issue for the
City. To do otherwise, may very well result in the BFSA going back to “hard” oversight —

status fiom its current “advisory” status.

23
 

The City contends that any consideration of monies lost by PBA members is
outside the scope of this Panel’s authority to address. The City points out that the subject
of the wage freeze, back pay and how frozen increases would be implemented after the
lifting of the wage freeze are addressed in the BFSA Act and have been sanctioned by the
New York State Court of Appeals after litigation.

The City contends that it has a genuine revenue problem. All of the evidence
shows that it does not generate enough revenue to meet its financial obligations, The City
concedes that it can only pay its bills due to the State’s generous assistance.

The City asserts that the most recent BFSA report highlights the challenges facing
the City. It notes that the City’s expenses in the most recent year rose approximately
4.4% due to increases in pension and health insurance costs. It also warns the City about
its use of fund balance to bridge its budget gap because the City is using a non-recurring
revenue such as fund balance to fund recurring expenses. The use of fund balance,
coupled with a one-time spin up in State aid, is the only reason the past year’s budget did
not cause the City undue strain. ‘However, the BFSA noted that the enhanced State aid is
not recurring and presents a further funding challenge for the City in future years.

The City insists that Ed Fennell, the PBA’s financial expert, conceded that the
City faces a challenging structural budget problem moving forward, In the City’s
estimation, this is precisely why any wage increases must be paid for with commensurate
savings in health insurance and other productivity measures.

The City notes that its budget director testified that the City built a 1.5% salary --

increase into this year’s budget. Thus, any increase above 1,5% without commensurate

24
concessions will require the City to utilize reserves or implement service cuts in order to
fund the Award.

The City observes that the PBA’s financial expert disavowed the PBA’s initial
proposal for a 15% wage increase. He conceded that anything close to this amount was
not tenable for the City. Given the City’s budgetary challenges and the limited ability it
has to raise revenues in the foreseeable future, the City urges the Panel to Award an
increase no greater than 1.5% over the two years of the Award. Anything more will
expand the City’s stracturaf budget gap and could represent a real setback to the City’s
recovery.

For all of these reasons, the City urges the Panel to reject the PBA’s demand.

Panel Determination on Base Wages

The Panel Chair has carefully considered the statutory criteria balancing the
reasonable economic needs of the City’s police officers, with the obligations of the
City in the context of what is fair and reasonable in the context of the City’s challenging
economic conditions,

Wages are one of the most important elements in any labor agreement. Employees
have the utmost concern about the wages they will be paid, and wages represent the
greatest expenditure for the City. When base wages increase, the City’s costs for
employee pensions, overtime, court time, holiday pay, ete., all increase,

The record contains data that supports both parties’ positions. The City faces
genuine economic concerns. It has had to contend with flat revenue streams and an

economy that is fragile. These are genuine issues that cannot be ignored.

25
aoe eh nearrancetan tnt oe 80 ETN eg i)

The City’s limited ability to grow revenue in the near term raises the greatest
concern to the Panel Chair and is the most compelling reason for the PBA’s salary
increase to be far less than it has proposed. Several factors lead to this conclusion.
Buffalo’s population has been declining. This means fewer taxpayers and less revenue.
The City’s mortgage tax income has been declining for the past several years, This means
less revenue, The City is in the midst of a tax reduction plan that is intended to provide
tax relief to the City's residents and attract more businesses to the City. While this is
arguably improving the City’s economic climate, the City will not capture revenue
growth from this in the irmediate future and it certainly does not add revenue at the
present time. The 2% tax cap law also restricts the City’s ability to grow revenue,

The general state of the economy in Buffalo and the State of New York overall
and the unique challenges facing the City on the revenue side of the budget leads the
Panel Chair to conclude that the wage proposal made by the PBA must be significantly
moderated. The Panel Chair determines that the appropriate salary increase to award is
1% effective June 30, 2008, i.e., on the last day of the first year of this Award. The Panel
Chair also determines that on the last day of the second year of this Award PBA members
shall receive an additional salary increase of 2%. By deferring these salary increases to
the last day of both years, the City will save more approximately $2 million dollars in
retroactive money.

Although ali of the police units in the universe of comparables have gained
ground on Buffalo’s police officers, the salary increase awarded by this Panel will aliow
PBA members to remain competitively compensated. The data clearly supports this

‘conclusion, PBA members also enjoy a competitive package of benefits and time off.

26
 

Moreover, PBA members still have several additional retroactive years to negotiate. The
amounts awarded for these two years move PBA members in the right direction.

This is an economic step forward for PBA members, While itis far less than the
PBA demanded, the more modest approach is a necessity so that the City can continue to :
keep its economic house in order and continue to work toward a brighter future with a
more booming economy. Of significant note to the Panel Chair is the fact that while the
police officers in comparable jurisdictions received greater increases in 2007 and 2008
than the amount awarded herein, all of the police officers in the universe of comparables
work in jutisdictions that are significantly less reliant on State aid than the City of
Buffalo. ,

In the Panel Chait’s view, the City is in the midst of making changes geared
toward significantly improving its economic prospects in the future. However, it is not
out of the woods, The City has structural budgetary issues that have required it to use
more than $10 million in fund balance in each of the past three years. Since the City has
real challenges on the revenue side of its budget, the personnel side of its budget can only
grow in a modest and conservative way so that the City can manage its resources
carefully and limit the impact of this Award on its taxpayers by maintaining services and
limiting tax increases.

The Panel Chair is cognizant of the fact that the City has set aside approximately
$70 million in funds to pay for-retroactive settlements of collective bargaining disputes.
While the PBA insists that this justifies a wage increase beyond what is being awarded, :
the Panel Chair disagrees. He notes that the retroactive costs of this Award are nearly $10

million, The PBA has four additional years of retroactive years to negotiate over, This

27
will put a further dent in the $70 million of funds. In addition, the City has not had an

agreement with its firefighters since 2004. The retroactive costs to resolve outstanding

contracts with the firefighters will undoubtedly take a large bite out of the $70 million

because it will cover a large number of years, Hence, the Panel Chair determines that this
Award is the most appropriate way to handle salary increases for the PBA unit at this
time.

At the same time, the money that is set aside for settlements convinces the Panel
Chair that it is appropriate to render an Award that is beyond the amount proposed by the
City. This is important because the wage increases awarded by the Panel will allow City
officers to retain their relative standing vis-a-vis the universe of comparables. The Panel
Chair finds it to be important for City officers to maintain their standing relative to other
officers in the universe of comparables to the best extent possible. If the Panel awarded
the salary increase proposed by the City of 1,5% overall, which is well below the average
amount received by officers in the universe of comparables, the Panel could jeopardize
the relative standing of the City’s police officers, ,

In reaching the conclusion that salary schedules shall be increased by 1%
effective June 30, 2008 and 2% effective June 30, 2009, the Panel Chair finds that the
City has the ability to pay for a fair increase in wages overall.

Accordingly, and after careful consideration of the statutory criteria, testimony,
exhibits, documentation, and post-hearing briefs filed, forming the record in this matter,
the Panel makes the following:

AWARD ON BASE WAGES

ARTICLE 4- BASE WAGE

28
   

Effective June 30, 2008, the current wage scales shall be increased by 1%.

Effective June 30, 2009, the June 30, 2008 wage scales shall be increased by an

 

additional 2%.

. Ka 4fp13 J i 13 i
Concur Dissent Coneur Dissent i
Kevin M. Kennedy ~ Sean P, Beiter, Esq. ti:

: Ve
LONGEVITY
PBA Position

The PBA proposes to adjust the years of service steps when longevity would be
granted and to increase the current amount of longevity being provided to officers.
Currently, each PBA member receives a longevity payment of $125.00 for each
completed year of service up to a maximum of 25 years. Thus, a PBA member with ten
years of service currently would receive $1,250.00 for that year anda PBA member with —
20 years of service would receive $2,500.00 for that year. The PBA proposes that the

longevity schedule be changed as follows:

Years Amount

0-5 $1,000.00 .
"6-10 $2,000.00 —_
11-15 $3,000.00

16-20 $4,000.00

Over 20 $5,000.00 —

_ The PBA asserts that its currently longevity schedule lags the market substantially
at all of the service levels. It maintains that its officers received fair compensation vis-a-

vis the comparables in 2003 but that its rank has greatly worsened over time to the point

29
 

where its overall compensation for employees with 20 years of service ranks last among
the local, relevant police jurisdictions. To the PBA, the disparity in overall earnings must
be addressed with. significant increases to longevity as part of an overall package. The
PBA notes that officers in Amherst enjoy a payment of $3,850.00 for longevity at the 25"
year while PBA members receive $3,125.00 per year at the 25" year. In the PBA’s view,
when the danger of the job its members perform is compared to officers in Amherst it
becomes abundantly clear that significant-increases toward longevity are warranted.

To the PBA, the evidence demonstrates that longevity payments and overall
compensation to senior officers is well below market rates.

City Position

The City insists that the PBA has failed to present any support for this demand. It
asserts that its police officers receive competitive longevity payments and that there is no
compelling reason to further increase these payments. It points out that in virtually all of
the municipalities cited by the PBA, Buffalo officers receive greater longevity payments
than officers in wealthier suburban Buffalo police departments.

In the City’s view, increases to longevity are unwarranted in these difficult
economic times. The City stresses that while its finances are in a better place than they
were in 2003, the fact remains that any wage increases beyond 1.5% will have to be paid
out of this year’s City budget. In other words, if the Panel Awards a base wage
adjustment of 1.5% in total over the course of two years, any longevity payments would
be beyond the ability of the City to finance without potential service cuts or other
economic concessions. Since longevity payments add up over time, the City stresses that

the Panel should not increase the City’s liability on this already expensive payment.

30

 
 

Panel Determination on Longevity

The Panel Chair finds clear support in the record for an increase to longevity.
Police officers in Buffalo are paid the same or less than many of their counterparts in
suburban areas when base wages and longevity payments are factored in, Over the past
several years, PBA members clearly have lost ground in terms of their overall
compensation. Within the context of what is affordablé, a modest increase is warranted so
PBA members can maintain their relative standing.

Accordingly, and after careful consideration of the Statutory criteria, testimony,
exhibits, documentation, arid post-hearing briefs filed, forming the record in this matter,
the Panel makes the following:

AWARD ON LONGEVITY

Longevity shall be modified effective June 30, 2009, so that thereafter, each
permanent cmployee who has completed one (1) year of service-shall receive annually, in
addition to their salary, one hundred fifty-five ($155) longevity payment for each

completed year of service, to a maximum of twenty-five years.

kh r-a-13 X 7/318

Concur "Dissent Concur Dissent
Kevin M. Kennedy Sean P. Beiter, Esq.

HEALTH INSURANCE ~ ELIMINATION OF COSMETIC RIDER
City Position

In addition to proposing that employees share in the cost of their health insurance,
the City has also proposed the elimination of the cosmetic surgery. rider, It insists that this
rider is highly expensive and far too great a luxury for the City to be providing while it

tries to avoid severe financial distress. It asserts that this rider is for elective cosmetic

31
surgery. Hence, this is not a proposal to eliminate cosmetic surgery deemed medically :
necessary. Rather, it is a beriefit that is purely for elective procedures.

The City stresses that this rider alone has cost the City between $1 million and
$1.5 million in claims in recent years. In actual premium costs, the City contends that
eliminating this rider will save the City approximately $335,000 per year, more than .5%
in terms of overall salary.

The City argues that this elective rider does not truly benefit the entire PBA
membership, that the costs of this benefit are not justified, and that this expensive benefit
has outlived its usefulness. In the City’s estimation, numerous ‘interest arbitration panels
have recognized the need for employees to make concessions on health insurance. To the

* City, this concession is warranted and justified,
PBA Position

The PBA contends that the multiple changes proposed by the City regarding
health insurance must be rejected. The PBA stresses that the record shows that the City
has had multiple breaches of the CBA regarding health insurance. The PBA maintains
that it has prevailed in grievance arbitrations to preserve its health insurance benefits after
the City inappropriately breached its contract.

The PBA maintains that this is neither the proper or fair time for the cosmetic
rider to be eliminated. The PBA asserts that it has retained health insurance experts so
that it could find ways to secure cost savings while preserving benefits. In the PBA’s
view, the City has been less than forthcoming with information. Thus, while the PBA is

open to discussions about cost saving measures in the future, it insists that the cosmetic

32
rider should not be eliminated because this should occur, if ever, in the context of
comprehensive negotiations.

The PBA stresses that concessions on health insurance should not occur ona
piecemeal basis, The PBA maintains that eliminating the cosmetic rider at this time will
undermine its efforts to effectuate comprehensive change.

Panel Determination on the Elimination of the Cosmetic Rider

‘The parties have a long and active history disputing the issue of health insurance
premium contributions, the plans offered by the City, and its overall costs. The City has
proposed several cost containment measures in the area of health insurance that are not
being granted as part of this Award. Significantly, in consideration of the award on
wages, this Panel is rejecting the City’s proposal to require contributions toward the cost
of health insurance. Further, the Panel denies the City’s proposal to increases in
deductibles paid by employees and for fundamental changes to the health insurance plans
offered by the City to PBA members. The City projects that these changes would save the
City hundreds of thousands of dollars on an annual basis for the PBA unit alone.

The PBA objects to the City’s proposals in their entirety, It claims that it has won
many of its current health insurance benefits through hard fought collective bargaining
and through grievancé arbitration awards. Moreover, the PBA expresses grave concern
about the City’s unwillingness to provide it with accurate and detailed data regarding
health insurance. It claims that it has retained a health insurance expert who was hired to
analyze the current data and offer recommendations for changes to the health insurance

plans that would be cost effective while preserving benefits for PBA members.

33

 
 

Throughout this interest arbitration process, the parties have spent significant time
discussing the issues raised by both parties regarding health insurance. Comprehensive
changes are not being imposed by this Panel and are not recommended by the Panel
Chair primarily because this can only occur after the PBA has ‘been provided all of the
relevant health insurance data from the City so its experts can provide it with a
comprehensive analysis ofthe status quo and be able to make recommendations for the
future. In order for the parties to have productive discussions regarding health insurance
cost containment, the first step is for the City to provide the PBA with the necessary data.
Once this occurs, the PBA has expressed a willingness to grapple with these issues. If the
PBA is well informed, it may be able to make its own recommendations and/or proposals
regarding health insurance and provide a win/win for both parties.

The other reason why the Panel Chair is not imposing comprehensive health
insurance changes is because this should occur in the context of a long-term overall
agreement. In this interest arbitration award, the Panel has authority only for two years
covering the dates July 1, 2007 to June 30, 2009. The Panel Chair is of the opinion that in

~ order for comprehensive changes to be considered by the PBA, the City will need to
come to the table with some quid pro quo economic improvements in the area of salary in
exchange for cost saving and/or containment measures regarding health insurance. It is
the Panel Chair’s sincere hope that the parties will take this recommendation to heart and
that the City will provide the data requested by the PBA. Thereafter, they should engage
in negotiations for a long-term settlement of their ongoing dispute regarding salary

improvement in exchange for health insurance concessions.

34

 
However, the Panel Chair is of the opinion that, in exchange for the salary and
longevity increases being granted as part of this Award, the City should be provided with
some cost saving measures as a quid pro quo. The cosmetic rider for the traditional plan
should be eliminated because it is a luxury that is expensive for the City and no longer
makes sense, The Panel Chair is not aware of any compatable group of employees other
than City Board of Education employees that enjoy this benefit, Although it is possible
that the cosmetic rider benefit is being provided to some public employees somewhere
else in the State, there is no evidence of this in the record in this case. and the Panel Chair
is not aware of any bargaining units in any other jurisdictions that receive such an
extraordinary benefit. When the Panel Chair considers the lack of comparable employee
units enjoying this benefit and the Panel Chair considers the interests and welfare of the
public at large and the fact that he is fairly certain that a majority of taxpayers in the City
do not have this benefit, it becomes quite clear that this benefit should be eliminated.
Simply stated, the taxpayers of the City and State should not be paying for this “Cadillac”
benefit in these challenging economic times. If PBA members want cosmetic procedures
that are completely elective and not necessary to maintain their health they can do what
everyone else does, namely, pay for such procedures out of their own pocket.

After balancing the statutory criteria, the Panel rejects the City’s proposal to have
all employees pay for a share of their health insurance and concludes that the elimination
of the cosmetic surgery rider is the appropriate quid pro quo for the salary and longevity

improvements that are being awarded as part of this Award.

35
 

Accordingly, and after careful consideration of the statutory criteria, testimony,
exhibits, documentation, and post-hearing briefs filed, forming the record in this matter,

the Panel makes the following:

AWARD ON HEALTH INSURANCE ~ ELIMINATION OF THE COSMETIC
RIDER

Effective June 30, 2009, after providing thirty (30) days prior written notice to the
Union, the City shall have the right to eliminate the cosmetic rider from the
waditional health plan offered to active employees and anyone retiring on or after
the date the City implements the elimination of the cosmetic rider benefit. It is
understood that the City may not rétroactively implement the elimination of the

 

cosmetic rider benefit.

= Lael sis -
Concur Dissent Coricur Dissent
Kevin M, Kennedy : Sean P, Beiter, Esq. —

SEMI-ANNUAL MANPOWER ADJUSTMENTS
City Position
The City currently has the right to review and adjust manpower levels annually.
The City formerly had this right twice a year and the City wishes to again have the right
to adjust manpower levels more than once a year. The City contends that this proposal
will give it greater flexibility in assigning officers and control unnecessary and

substantial overtime costs: By having the right to adjust manpower levels more than once

per year, the Police Commissioner will be able to even out manpower across City police : —

districts so that an adequate number of officers are assigned to the appropriate shifts in

the appropriate districts.

36
The City stresses that Police Commissioner Derenda testified that bi-annual
manpower adjustment would permit him to respond to retirements or injuries that occur
after January 15 in any given year. Under the current system, if a single district or shift
has an inordinate numberof injuries or retirements after January 15, the City is prohibited
from adjusting manpower levels until the following January 15. This creates difficult
operational issues and creates unnecessary overtime.

PBA Position

The PBA does not strongly oppose this proposal. It recognizes that the proposal
will provide the Commissioner with greater flexibility. The PBA contends that this
proposal should only be adopted in conjunction with the PBA’s enhanced pay proposals.

Panel Discussion Regarding Semi-Annual Manpower Adjustment

The Panel Chair is persuaded that the City’s proposal should be granted. The City
has a'valid and compelling operational need to adjust manpower levels twice a year. The
current system of allowing manpower adjustments once a year is overly restrictive and
prevents the City from being able to adjust its manpower levels when situations arise that
are out of the City’s control such as police officer retirements or injuries. The City’s
proposal is reasonable and should result in more prudent police coverage and reduced
overtime costs.

Accordingly, and after careful consideration of the statutory criteria, testimony, —
exhibits, documentation, and post-hearing briefs filed, forming the record in this matter,
the Panel makes the following:

AWARD ON SEMI-ANNUAL MANPOWER ADJUSTMENTS

Modify the manpower adjustment provision by changing it to read as follows:

37
     

The parties mutually recognize that there may be a need from time to time to
adjust manpower levels in response to retirements and other personnel changes.
The City shall have the right to review and adjust manpower levels semi-annually
on January 15 and July 15.

Mia? ! 7/3) =

 

Concur Dissent Concur Dissent
Kevin M, Kennedy Sean P, Beiter, Esq.
|
i
. q
REMAINING ISSUES :

The Panel has reviewed in great detail all of the demands of both parties, as well
as the extensive and voluminous record in support of those demands, The fact that those
demands have not been specifically addressed in this Opinion and Award does not mean
that they were not closely studied and considered in the context of terms and benefits by
the Panel members. These proposals were considered by the Panel in light of the statutory
criteria, testimony, exhibits, documentation and post-hearing briefs filed. However, in the
process of anriving at an Award, the Panel was unable to arrive at an agreement on any of
these other propodals, In interest arbitration, as in collective bargaining, not all proposals
are resolved, and not all contentions are agreed with, The Panel, in reaching what it has
determined to be fair result, has not made an Award on all of the demands submitted by
each of the parties.

AWARD ON REMAINING ISSUES _—

Except as set forth in this Award, the City’s demands are hereby rejected.

Except as set forth in this Award, the PBA’s demands are hereby rejected. -

Kee Isl

Concur Dissent Concur Dissent
Kevin M. Kennedy Sean P. Beiter, Esq.

38
   

RETENTION OF JURISDICTION
The Panel Chairman hereby retains jurisdiction of any and all disputes arising out
of the interpretation of this Award.

KI Fah 3 X TBS

Coneur Dissent : Concur . Dissent
Kevin M, Kennedy Sean P. Beiter, Esq.
DURATION OF AWARD

Pursuant to the agreement of the parties and the provisions of Civil Service Law
Section 209.4(c)(vi)} (Taylor Law), this Award is for the period commencing July 1, 2007
_ through June 30, 2009, The terms of this Award shall be effective on such dates as set
forth herein and payable to any. unit member working during such award term. Payment
of any retroactive wage and/or longevity adjustment shall be made no later than 60 days
after the execution of this Award.
Accordingly, the Panel, after consideration of the record evidence and after due

consideration of the statutory criteria, executes this instrument which is our award.

  

JA SIEGE . jale
Publi Panel Member and Chairman

SP Bi Taft
SEAN P. BEITER, ESQ. Date
Employer Panel Member

Employee Organization Panel Member

  

 

39

 
 

STATE OF NEW YORK)
COUNTY OF PUTNAM) ‘ss.

On this | tay of July 2013 before me personally came and appeared Jay M.
Siegel, Esq., to be known and known to me to be the individual described in the
foregoing Instrument, and he acknowledged the same to me that he executed the same.

     

KATHLEEN DUFFETT
Notary Publio, State of New Yorte
No. 020U6128192
Quallled In Putnam County

STATE OF NEW YORK) Commisslan Expires 06/08/20

COUNTY OF ERIE) ss.+

On this ¥ day of July 2013 before me personally came and appeared Sean P.
Beiter, Esq. to be known and known to me to be the individual described in the foregoing
Instrument, and he acknowledged the same to me that he executed the same.

 

TAMMY L. SWATSWORTH a

STATE OF NEW YORK) Nein Pub Sn few Yow -
COUNTY OF ERIE) ss.: My Commissnn Expos tareh $6.3, 0/9

 

On this| 2 Way of July 2013 before me personally came and appeared Kevin M.
Kennedy, Esq. to be known and known to me to be the individpal described in the
foregoing Instrument, and he acknowledged the same to me that he executed the same.

 

sonnuucct

Lio. ROYCABO20149- —

Notary PribilesState of ‘New York 7
Qualified In ERIE COUNTY

My Oominiewon Bupires 10020 )

40
