 

POLICE

BENEVOLENT _

ASSOCIATION

CONTRACT
AGREEMENT
I.

Memorandum
Single Page
May 9, 2003

 

od
 

 

 

 

MEMORANDUM
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES
65 Niagara Square, Room 1007 City Hall

Buffalo, New York 14202
(716) 851-5904 ¢ Fax (716) 851-4968

 

   

Leonard ‘A. Matorese
Commissioner
TO: FILE

FROM: Leonard A. Matarese
DATE: 9 MAY 03
RE: Collective Bargaining Agreements / Police & Fire Unions

— esse wenn

Note that the last written CBA between the City and the Police Benevolent Association
dates to 1992. The last written agreement between the City and the Firefighters Union
was compieted in 1988. Both unions have historically refused to enter in discussions to
produce new written agreements. :

Since those dates all amendments to the agreements occurred through the binding
arbitration process. The recent negotiated settlements with both unions include a
commitment to produce a written agreement between the parties.

Once we have completed the current budget cycle we will commence work on
producing these written agreements.
I.

2002 - 2007

 
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN

THE CITY OF BUFFALO

9 AND

THE BUFFALO POLICE
° BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION

 

Dated 19 MARCH 2003

 

 

 

 

 

Ne

ANTHONY M. MASIELLO, Mayor ROBERT P. MEEGAN, JR., President
ROCCO J. DNA, Commissioner, Police JOHN J, JUSZKIEWICZ, ist Vice President
LEONARD A. MATARESE, Commissioner, Humun Resources RANDIE J. JOSEPH. 2nd Vice President
LOUIS R. GtARDINA, Director, Labor Relations RAYMOND A. FIELDS, Recording Secretary
MICHAEL B. RISMAN, Corporation Counsel WILLIAM J, MISZTAL, Treasurer

 

SEAN P. BEITER, Attorncy JAMES SCHWAN, Attorney

 
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE CITY OF BUFFALO
AND
THE BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION

The City of Buffalo (“City”) and the Buffalo Police Benevolent Association
(“PBA”) have reached agreement for a successor collective bargaining agreement:

1, The parties agree to a successor collective bargaining agreement for the period of
July 1, 2002 to June 30, 2007 and it shall automatically be renewed from year to
year thereafter unless either party shall notify the other in writing sixty (60) days
prior to the termination date that it desires to modify this Agreement.

 

2. The parties agree to implement a one-officer patrol car system as is generally
described in the Policy Statement attached hereto.

3. The parties agree to continue and maintain the ten-hour schedule for Police
Officers assigned to Patrol with the schedule being:

 

 

 

 

 

Shift 1 2400 - 1000 hours
Shift 2 0600 - 1600 hours
Shift 3 1000 - 2000 hours
Shift 4 1530 - 0130 hours
Shift 5 2000 - 0600 hours

The above new ten-hour day schedules apply to the Patrol Division including
Traffic and Flex Units. Lieutenants in Patrol will be assigned to the 0600-1600,
1530-0130 and the 2000-0600 shifts. Captains will be assigned to the 1000-2000
and the 2000-0600 shifts.

Detective Sergeants, Detectives, and personnel assigned to headquarters shall
have no change in their schedule.

Shift bidding shall be consistent with the current practice of in house posting for
shift and shall be by seniority within the District.

Overtime call ins for Police Officers in the Patrol Division shall also be by
District seniority.

The parties agree that in the absence of an Assistant Chief, the functions and
duties performed by that classification can be reassigned elsewhere within the
bargaining unit to employees holding the rank of Detective or above. The
Assistant Chief classification shail be eliminated only through attrition.

The parties agree that the Department can reassign Inspectors as Duty Officers.
They would be assigned to the 1000-2000 and the 2000-0600 shifts by seniority.
 

 

 

It is agreed and understood that in the absence of an on duty Inspector, the Senior
Captain in Patrol for the 1000-2000 and 2000-0600 shifts shall be responsible for
responding to serious incidents outside his/her assigned district until the situation
is resolved or he/she is relieved.

Until such time as the number of sworm officers in the Police Department has
been reduced to 675:

(A) The City agrees that no PBA bargaining unit member shall be laid off.
The reduction in the current number of sworn officers and/or the number
of positions within the existing ranks and/or classifications shall be by

attrition.

(B) ‘The PBA agrees not to object to the reduction in the size of the force and
agrees that the parties have fully and completely bargained over these
issues and waives its right, if any, to further bargain over the reduction in
the numbers of sworn officers or the impact thereof, and further waive its
right, if any, to submit any issues relating to the reduction in the numbers
of sworn officers or the implementation and/or impact thereof to
Compulsory Interest Arbitration

tis expressly acknowledged by both parties that the reduction in the
number of swom officers in the Police Department to 675 may not be
accomplished by June 30, 2007, and the agreements set forth shall
continue past the expiration of this Agreement until that reduction is
achieved.

Once the number of sworn officers in the Police Department has reached
675, the agreements set forth in (A) and (B) above shall terminate, and the
parties shall revert to whatever rights they had with respect to these issues
prior to this Agreement.

In consideration of this Agreement, the PBA shall withdraw its pending Petition
for Compulsory Interest Arbitration regarding the impact of the prior layoffs. The
PBA shall withdraw its Declaration of Impasse regarding the contract period
subsequent to June 30, 2002. The Union agrees that the parties have fully and
completely bargained over the implementation and impact of the matters and
subjects of this Agreement and the Union waives any right to further bargain over
the implementation and/or impact of these matters and subjects or the impact
thereof, and further waives the right to submit any issues relating to the
implementation and/or impact of these matters and subjects to Compulsory
Interest Arbitration. [t is agreed and understood that the Union has not waived its
right to grieve disputes arising under this Agreement and to submit such disputes
to arbitration under the grievance and arbitration procedure set forth in the

collective bargaining agreement.
tid

a

 

 

 

Il.

It is agreed that no officer shall be reduced in rank or classification as a result of
the reduction in the size of the force agreed to as part of this Agreement.

The parties agree to compile a successor written collective bargaining agreement
incorporating agreements reached since the July 1, 1986 to June 30, 1988 CBA as
well as since issued compulsory interest arbitration awards by April 1, 2005. -

In recognition of the significant improvements in productivity resulting from this
Agreement, particularly the implementation of one officer cars, the alteration of
shift starting times, civilianization of certain positions, and the ability to utilize
exempt positions in command of the Districts, the City agrees to a retroactive
$5,000 across the board increase in base wages or salaries effective July 1, 2002.

Tn addition to the foregoing, the following salary or wage adjustments shall be
implemented:

Effective . Percentage Increase

71/03 3.4%
TH4 3.4%
TOS 3.4%
7/1/06 3.4%

The City agrees that it will not make any reductions in the rank of Detectives until
all Detectives demoted on July 1, 2002 have been re-appointed and/or their right
to re-appointment based on the existing preferred list expires,

The City agrees that it will not make reductions in the ranks of Captain and
Lieutenant until the current vacancies for those ranks (1 for Captain, 2 for
Lieutenant) have been filled by permanent appointment within thirty (30) days
from Common Council approval and PBA ratification.

The City agrees that it will not make reductions in the rank of Police Officer until
the four Police Officers currently working for the Erie County Sheriff's
Department are recalled. These officers shall be recalled within fourteen (14)
days of the Common Council approval and PBA ratification of this Agreement.

During the term of this Agreement, the City agrees to maintain a minimum
number of officers h rank as is set forth in Appendix A. The City shall, at
all times, employ a mum of 450 Police Officers. In the event the minimum
for a rank position falls below the stated minimum, the vacancy shall be filled
within 45 days of the created vacancy. It is agreed that individuals hired as Police
Officers, who are either academy cadets or-who are awaiting assignment to the
academy shall be included in the number of Police Officers employed by the City
for the purpose of this section.

   
 

/

12.

13.

4S.

16.

In consideration of the productivity improvements generated by this Agreement
and the significant changes in departmental operations that will result from this
Agreement, the City agrees to reimburse the PBA during the term of this
Agreement for its actual, out-of-pocket expenses incurred for the operation of the
“On-Duty Emergency Legal Assistance Program”. It is agreed and understood
that this Program covers legal assistance in connection with an initial statement
and consultation in the event that an individual is injured or killed by the actions
of an officer, on duty, in the performance of his/her duty. It does not include a
criminal defense. The PBA shall submit documentation of its actual, out-of-
pocket expenses as received to the Commissioner of Human Resources, and the
reimbursement payment to the PBA shall be made within 45 days.

The parties mutually recognize that there may, from time to time, be need to
adjust manpower levels in response to announced retirements, From July 1, 2003
to June 30, 2007, the City shall have the right to review and adjust manpower
levels semi-annually on July 15" and January 15" due to reductions in manpower
caused by retirements. Thereafter, the City shall have the right to review and
adjust manpower levels annually.

It is agreed that the photographer, property office, court liaison, quartermaster,
and public information officer positions may be civilianized by attrition. It is
further agreed that the City shall have the right to assign the work of transporting
prisoners to and from the cell block to the Erie County Sheriff's Department.

It is agreed that the City shall have the right to utilize an exempt, non-union
position (Chief or Commander or alternative title) as District or Division
Commander to be taken from the Lieutenant or above ranks.

During the period of this Agreement the City agrees not to merge or consolidate
the Buffalo Police Department with the Erie County Sheriff's Department without
the PBA’s written consent. With the consent of the PBA, the City shall have the
right to transfer limited duties or activities to the Erie County Sheriff's
Department or other law enforcement agencies in order to achieve the reduction in
force described in the above paragraphs. This provision shall terminate at
midnight on June 30, 2007, and shall not continue in effect past that date,
regardless of whether a successor agreement or Compulsory Interest Arbitration
Award is in place. The parties shall revert to whatever rights they had with
respect io these issues prior to this Agreement.

The parties recognize that, from time, to time disputes may arise as a result of the
implementation and application of this Agreement. The parties agree to
expeditiously resolve said disputes. To do so, the parties agree to formulate a
committee comprised of an equal number of City and PBA representatives. In
addition, the Commissioner of Human Resources shall act as a non-voting Chair
of the committee. The committee shall be charged with the responsibility to
attempt lo resolve all disputes at the lowest possible level. Nothing shall preclude
the parties from also utilizing the grievance / arbitration procedures.

18. The parties acknowledge that the City is currently unable to fund the initial costs
9 associated with this Agreement without assistance from the State of New York,
the County of Erie and/or the United States Government, and this agreement is
contingent upon receipt of such assistance by May 31, 2003. The parties agree to
aggressively work together to obtain such funding. Both parties recognize the
benefits this Agreement will provide to the residents of the City of Buffalo, and to
9 the members of the Buffalo Police Department.

19, This Agreement is subject to approval of the Common Council and PBA
membership ratification.

FOR THE CITY FOR THE PBA

5f ) MAYO

   

MISSIONER OF HUMAN

1O RESOURCE
| Date

APPROVED AS TO FORM
; “a

CORPORA Y iON, PA. SEL
Date:

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

93

Title / Classification
Police Officer
Detectives
Photographer

9 Detective Sergeant
Lieutenants
Assistant Chiefs

o ‘ ) Captains

Inspeciors

 

APPENDIX A

Minimum Permanent Positions

450

90

18
 

 

 

 

Me

 

 

BUFFALO POLICE DEPARTMENT

PATROL UNITS CALL FOR SERVICE RESPONSE POLICY

 

One-officer vehicies/units have always been a feature within the Buffalo Police
Department. Historically, and to this day, supervisors, traffic cars, motorcycles, radar,
K-89, AIU, bicycle patrols, etc, operate with only one person in the vehicle, Traditional
areas of operation for these vehicles have been traffic control, fire duty, accident calis,
cover calls, crossing details, funeral escorts, report taking, tagging, etc. These duties
can be expanded to increase operational efficiency without jeopardizing officer safety.

The Police Commissioner, or the Commissioner's designee shall determine when and
where one-officer units and two-officer units are assigned.

The Department has taken various steps to ensure Officer safety in support of the one-
officer manned vehicle:

* A policy is in effect for officers receiving 911 calls to call on scene and to cail
back in service upon completing the call. Fhe Radio Dispatcher is required to
monitor calls and obtain a status report from officers who have been out of
service on a call.

e Training in the effective use of Chemical Agent Projectile (CAP) Spray has been
and is made available, as well as the spray itself, to all patrol personnel.

« Patrol vehicles are equipped with Mobil Computer Terminals in which officers
have been trained in procedures to cail in at scene.

© All personnel have been equipped with bulletproof vests and portable radios. -

One-officer units may be designated primary responders to answer calls without
limitation, with CAD being programmed to dispatch such. CAD will also be programmed
to assign two one-officer units to selected calls. See attached CAD call types
designating 1 unit and 2 (tunit) or 1 (2 unit) responders.

Responsibility of Radio Units

A. A radio unit shail mean any member or members of the Patrol Division who have
been assigned to a mobile patrol unit and whose primary responsibility is
responding to calls for service.

B. Upon receipt of a call by a broadcast (i.e. either by MCT or police radio) from the
Radio Dispatcher, the unit shall immediately acknowledge receipt of that call. All
units shail acknowledge the call by use of the voice radio and MCT. All catis must
be acknowledged within one minute from the time they were originally
transmitted.

C. After receipt of the call, the unit shali immediately proceed by the most direct
route, to the location of that call. As soon as the unit arrives at the location, the
arrival will be acknowledged by using the MCT.
 

 

 

PATROL. UNITS CALL FOR SERVICE RESPONSE POLICY
Page 2 of 4

The unit will not leave the patrol vehicle without first advising Radio Dispatch of

 

his or her exact location, and a brief report, (i.e.) registration number of any

vehicle involved, occupants, anticipated length of time out of the vehicle, etc. He
or she will not leave the vehicle until acknowledgement has been received from
the Radio Dispatcher. While at the scene, the unit shall take appropriate police

action.
For designated calls requiring two one-unit responders, the first unit on the scene

will exercise extreme caution and will give the radio dispatcher a preliminary

assessment from a safe distance of the circumstances (e.g. fake call, additional
assistance required, ambulance needed, etc.). The backup officer will work as
the partner to the officer originally responding to the call. The backup officer will
remain at the scene only until his presence is no longer needed at which time
he/she will call back into service. The initial unit assigned the call by the
Dispatcher will be responsible for taking all appropriate police action following
this initial assessment.

Upon completion of the call, the unit shall immediately notify the Radio

, Dispatcher and enter the call’s disposition through the MCT. Units must notify the

Radio Dispatcher that they have either completed the call or that additional time

is required.
Units shall maintain a complete, legible Radio Log Sheet (P-1124), recording the

time a call was received, the type of call, the time of arrival on scene, the time the

call was completed, and the disposition of each call. The contents of each
simulcast shall also be recorded on the Radio Log.
Units must respond to all transmissions from the Radio Dispatcher whether or not

, they are currently handling a cail for service. A unit may be required to leave a

call of jower priority in which they are currently involved in order te respond to a

higher priority calt.
Units shall not leave their assigned area of patrol during their tour of duty unless
they are involved in police business, have first obtained permission of a superior

officer and they have notified the Radio Dispatcher.

. Units must inform the Radio Dispatcher whenever they leave their mobile patrol

unit.
Units not assigned to a particular call and who are in close proximity may assist

, the unit to which the call was assigned, but only after informing the Radio

Dispatcher.
For crimes in progress calls, responding units shall coordinate their response

: through the use of the police radio and or the MCT. The backup officer will work

as the partner to the officer originally assigned the cail. The officer will remain at
the scene only until his presence is no ionger required. The backup officer will
then clear the scene and join in the search of the area for the suspect.
 

 

Qa

 

 

PATROL UNITS CALL FOR SERVICE RESPONSE POLICY
Page 3 of 4

Supervisory Responsibilities

A. Patrol Lieutenants in command of a work shift shall continuously monitor the
police radio and respond to, and assume command of, all serious incidents,
including car and foot pursuits.

B. Patrol Lieutenants will be responsible for the safety and actions of their
employees and direct accordingly while notifying Radio Dispatch.

C. Patrot Lieutenants will monitor radio communications and the status of officers
out of service and correct deficiencies within their own command.

D. Patrol Lieutenants will monitor calls for service and backlogs in their respective
districts via MCT and consider redeployment of sector units within their district.

Radio Dispatcher Responsibilities

A. Apatrol unit will not be dispatched to a call designated for 2 units until a second
unit is available.

B. The Patrol Lieutenant must be advised when units are sent to a radio call
requesting two units, and acknowledgment must be received.

C. The Radio Dispatcher must monitor to ensure that patrol units advise the Radio
Dispatcher of their exact location at all times when leaving the patrol vehicle and

the reason for leaving.
D. In all circumstances, where any doubt whatsoever exists as to the nature of the
call (i.e., unknown trouble), two patrol units must be dispatched.

—. For crimes in progress calls, the dispatcher will give the units responding to the
call air priority in order for the responding officers to coordinate their response.

911 Lieutenant Responsibilities

A. The 911 Lieutenant will monitor all radio calls and ensure that proper procedures
are being followed by the Radio Dispatchers.

Single Unit Implementation Plan
Training

A. The Inspector, Captains, Lieutenants and designated patrol officers from the first
district where one-officer units will first be implemented will be sent to the City of
Rochester to receive familiarity training with one-officer units. One-officer units
have been in existence in Rochester since 1978.

B. Radio Dispatchers will also be sent to Rochester to be trained in dispatching to

ainnta cinttn
 

 

 

 

 

PATROL UNITS CALE FOR SERVICE RESPONSE POLICY
Page 4 of 4

C. All remaining patrol districts will receive familiarity training from already trained
personnel assigned to the districts where single units have been implemented.

D. All Patrol Officers will be trained in the proper techniques for vehicle stops. This
training will be through video instruction offered via the Law Enforcement
Resource Center (Vehicle Stops and Officer Safety).

E. Shotgun training will be provided to all patrol officers.

 

Impiementation

A. B District will be the first district where one-officer units are to be utilized. The
district will phase one-officer patrol units into the district until the entire district is
equipped with all one-officer patrol units. This process will take up to sixty days.

B. The next district where one-officer patrof units will be implemented (to be
determined) will follow the same process as the B District. However, before any
officer is assigned to a single unit, he/she will receive on the job training in B
District.

C. Each of the remaining districts will also follow the same process initiated in B
District and officers will be trained in those districts that now have single units.

Steering Committee

A. Throughout the implementation process, a steering committee comprised of
Police Department managers, union representatives, goverment officials, (i.e.
Council members), community representatives, participating key personnel such
as, a911 Lieutenant, Radio Dispatcher, District Patrol Captain, Lieutenant,
Inspector, etc. This committee will meet at least bi-weekly and will evaluate the
implementation process, and will make changes and recommendations when

necessary.
 

 

 

State of New York
Public Employment Relations Board

Sr tr nt ne ne ne te ee ee oe Opinion and Award

In the Matter of the Interest Arbitration between

 

      

: PERB Gase‘No,
Buffalo Police Benevolent Assotiation - 7A. 201-003;M.200:238 -
Louw Me Petitioner Be
* sands ye
City of Buffalo, New York

é Respondent

 
 
        
   

' Panel designatéd by the? New ‘York State Public Entployiit aati
Board (PERB), pursuant to Civil Service Law Section 209.44-0n-July17, -
‘2001. The ‘petitioner is the Buffalo Police Benevolent ' ‘Associations
hereinafter referred to variously ‘as "the PBA". "the Employees", "the
Union", "the Officers" or “the Petitioner”, The respondent is ‘the City of ~
Buffalo, New York, hereinafter referred to variously as "the Employer", "the:
City", "Buffalo", or “the Respondent.” The PBA and the City were parties:
to a Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) the term of which expired on
June 30, 2000. The “parties entered into negotiations for a successor
agreement on October 23, 2000 and following a number of Untruitfal
-negotiating sessions, filed a joint Declaration of Impasse. On December 6,
2000, PERB designated a mediator who conducted an unftuitful mediation
session between the parties on January 12, 2001. The parties determined that
further mediation sessions were unlikely to be productive and the PBA
petitioned for Compulsory Interest Arbitration on April 6, 2001. On July 17,
2001, PERB, over the signature of Richard A. Curreri, Director of
Conciliation designated the Public Arbitration Panel in this matter. The 2»
panel’s jurisdiction is for two contract years; namely, July 1, 200 theougl?
June 30, 2001 which is referred to hereinafter as “Year 1” or ce t year’, oh

and July 1, 2001 through June 30, 2002 which is referred to herginaibaasn
So ae

 

 

 
 
 

—_

addition to any other relevant factors, the following:

“requiring similar skill3-wiider similar working conditioiis and:
“employees genéfally publi rivate. emplo} i
‘communities, .

public employer'té pays?" *

2

“Year 2” or “the second year”. As the Award in this matter will issue after

the close of the second year there is need to refer to the next succeeding year

-even though that year falls beyond the panel’s purview and the scope of the

record before it. When such reference is made, that succeeding year is

referred to as “Year 3” or “the third year”. eo . .
oy . a,

Civil Service Law, Section 209.4 (v) directs the panel as follows:'

(v) the Public Arbitration panel shall make a just and’ reasonable
determination of the matters in dispute. In arriving at such determination, the
panel shall specify the ‘basis for its findings, taking into" consideration, in

a, compatison of the wages, hours and conditions Sf employment of
‘the Employees involved in the arbitration proceeding with*wages, hours, and
conditions of employment of other empléyees ‘performing Bimilarservicei

 

 
  

ublic and ‘private employmetit in

. .b- the interest and: welfare of the public and thé-finaticial
we Pn Sie

 

&. comparison of peculiarities in regard to other trades of professions," -
including specifically, (1) ‘hazards of employment; (2) pliysical’ :
qualifications; (3) educational qualifications, (4) mental qualifications; (5) “
job training and skills; : .

d. the terms of collective-agreements negotiated between the parties in:

” the past providing for compensation and fringe benefits, including, but not

limited to, the provisions for salary, insurance and retirement benefits,
medical and hospitalization benefits, paid time off and job security. .

The panel conducted hearings at the Hyatt Regency-Hotel in Buffalo, New
York on November 7 and 8, 2001, November 8, 2001; December 4, 2001,

. February 12 and 13, 2002, and March 19, 2002 at which time the parties
were afforded unfettered opportunity to prevent testimonial and

documentary evidence, to examine and cross-examine witness, and to offer
arguments in support of their respective positions, At the close of the
hearing the parties opted to exchange and file post hearing briefs on or
before May 6, 2002 which day was subsequently briefly extended by mutual

  
   
3
consent, whereupon the briefs were timely filed. The Panel-met in executive
session at the Radisson Suite Hotel Buffalo on July 25, 2002.

: Appearances were as follows: °

For the PBA

 

 

Tames W. ‘Schwan, Esq. — PBA Counsel .
Schwan, Sammarco'& Sammarco : go.
Buffalo, New York.

Bdward Fennel _ "Finance Cohsuitant
Wynantskill, New York " . es

ay

 
 
 
   

John Juszkiewiex | a

   

Inspector, Buffalo Polic

 
 

e ‘Raymond Fields

Randie Joseph as PBA Witness
'. Lieutenant, Buffalo Police Department . .

For, the City

| oo Sean P. Beiter, Esq: =~ ' Employer Counsel
i) ' + Jaeckle, Fleischman & Mugel, LLP : :
Buffalo, New York .

 

| Anthony Masiello , City Witness
1 Mayor, City of Buffalo, New York

‘James Milroy City Witness
Director of Budget and Management
City of Buffalo, New York

 
  

 

 

. Rosco Diina
. Police Commission
City of Buffalo:
* :The:parties jointly submitted 20:Exhibits aiid in conjunction wit of
-- the testimony of witriesses’ the PBA: submitted 13, and the: City'submitted
15 Exhibits. All were admitted without objection. and as they-are thoroughly: .. +

Ann Forti-Sciarrino City Witness

. City Accountant and
‘Deputy Comptroller, City of Buffalo

Kathleen O'Hara; - : City Witness
Commissioner of Human Resources Hu

City of Buffalo &

Susan Wheatley — : City Witness
Assistant Corporation-Counsel

City. of Buffalo :
Matthew Van Vesseuii City Witness
Assistant Corporation-Counsel ve ' AB
CityofBuffalo oo:

  
  

  
 
  

ity Witness.

   

 

 

identified in the transcripts, we-omit a redundant listing here.

. IL Background

In its petition for Compulsory Interest Arbitration the PBA presented 23 -
proposals, the first and: probably most significant one of which (PBA

- Proposal 1) was a proposal for salary increases of not less than 6 percent -to

be increased if the CPI plus 2 percent exceeded 6 percent in a particular
year. The proposed salary adjustment formula was the same for both the
first and second year, A number of other proposals were very significant
and along with the Salary issue are discussed subsequently herein. The City,
in its response to the petition, dated May 22, 2001, stipulated that it did not
agree to any of the PBA proposals, and was in tum proposing 14
modifications. With respect to the PBA's Salaries and Hours of Work
proposal it counter proposed (City Proposal 5) wage increases of 2.5 percent
in each of the two years. Subsequently, on October 4, 2001, the City filed an
amended response modifying its Proposal No. 5 now proposing that no wage
increase be forthcoming in either of the two years. ”

 
XY

 

 

 

 

PBA Proposal 5 wherein the Union sought to amend Article XI, Settlement
of Disputes, Section 11.1 was subsequently held to be a nonmandatory

subject.

Both parties here involved are experienced in puiisuing their options through
Compulsory Interest Arbitration. Their last :written and neégotiated.CBA
terminated on June 30°1988 and since then six successor agreéinents. have
been implemented -- “two through Memoranda of Agreemeiit and’ four
through Arbitration. Historically, the PBA's central thesis was that its
members were being denied benefits and rewards being receivéd by fellow
officers in comparable jurisdictions which represent the true and fair miarket
value of Buffalo-PBA inembers' services. The City, though chdlienging the
reliability “of some Wanion ‘statistics, has: heonsistently emphasized its
preédtious' fiscal position constraining its aBility to pay.: In‘the present
$ and arguiments‘vontinued to: prefail and this

The Union asserts the established comparable Jurisdictions relied upon-in

past compulsory interest arbitrations are: three contiguous towns namely:
Amherst, Cheektowaga, and Tonawanda. All three are not only contiguous
to Buffalo but also constitute the three largest towns in Erie County. The
Employees offer a comparison on 4 "monetary" basis; i. e., a basis which
includes longevity pay, shift differentials, sick incentives, holiday pay,
shooting incentives and the like on both an annual compensation and per
hour rate basis. They assert Buffalo officers, on an annual monetary basis,

’ fall short of the average of the comparable communities by 9.7 percent, 9.3

percent, and 9 percent, at the 5, 10, and 15 year longevity levels, (On an
hourly basis they claim these differentials drop to 8.1 percent, 5.7 percent,
and 6.6 percent, respectively, at the same longevity levels. The Union
further emphasizes that these comparisons exclude uniform allowances
wherein the $100 per year compensation paid its members fall short of the
average comparable communities by nominally $1000 per annum.
Additionally, the PBA asserts, since their members are paid less than their
colleagues in the contiguous comparable communities they also receive

  
 

 

‘resulting from line ¢f duty. injuries.: Thése etirees:: recive opaid. .
» health/hospitalization ingurance: but do mot teteive niajor niedicalcove:

“provide paid-majot thedital coverage atid all éxistirig/riders tipon tetiremi
~*~ The Union seeks'to justify this’ propodal/om the: ‘basis that it is provided
"comparable employment in-the. Towns: of «Amherst; Cheektowaga ‘and’

- Tonawanda. * Bea

6

relatively inferior retirement benefits. Moreover, it asserts the
disadvantageous Buffalo position is exacerbated for its Tier Il employees
(employees hired after July 1, 1973) as Buffalo does not provide the one
year final average salary option for its retirees as do both Cheektowaga ‘and
Tonawanda. The one year final average option would effect raises:in Buffalo
retirement pensions by 8:percent, Boge nd ay :

The Employee's seek (PBA Proposal 1) an .across the board’ incréase
equivalent to the increase in a previous year’s.Consumer Price Index (CPE
all urban consumers series plus 2 percent or a total of 6 percent, whichever is
higher in each of the two‘years. With the benefit of hindsight, the proposed
across the board increase‘is 6 percent in each of the two years, = =

The PBA is seeking two*dignificant improvemeits in-‘HealthInsurance. The
first rélates fo officers who retired since July 1y!1986‘with 20 or #liore years
of Buffalo department séivice or those who have taken disability xetirement

 

  
    

prescriptidndiugs with'a$5 genericvand a
‘the City

 

and the:drug rider‘entitling them’ 5 y ’
$10 brand name co-pay obligation. _ PBA: Proposal 14, calls: fo

   
  
  

 

 

, The second health/hospitalization related proposal (PBA Proposal.15) is for

the City to upgrade its present GHI Spectrum t Plan dental coverage to GHI
Preferred Plus dental coverage. It bases this proposal on a claim that there

. arédess than 30 participating-dentists providing service under the Spectrum

Plan when there are in excess of 300 dentists accepting patients covered by
the GHI Preferred dental coverage. As GHI Spectrum is being phased out in
favor of its Preferred Plus program, the Union pleads the replacement is
necessary

The Union challenges the validity of the Employer's claim that it is burdened
by a severe inability to pay which absolutely supports a determination that
no wage increase should be forthcoming in either the first or second year,
The PBA asserts that Buffalo entered the first year of our concem in very
sound fiscal condition. Its unreserved general fund balance as of June 30,
2000 was nominally $15.5 million which represented an improvement of
nominally $1.4 million over the find balance at the conclusion of the
 

 

 

7

preceding year on June 30, 1999. In that preceding year the Union notes that
its members received a base pay increase of 3 percent and significant
improvements in longevity pay. The base pay increase induced a further
cost increase in certain pay benefits like oliday pay, overtime pay, and .
court pay among others. The City, it contends, was not only able ta: absorb
the incurred increased, costi'in the.1999 — 2000 contract:year,. but iniaddition
accumulated a nominal. $1.4 million fund balance increasé,. Méreover,
during that year, the Buffalo Board of. Education revenues exceeded -
expenditures by nominally‘$8.85.million and its accrued surplus surpassed, .-
the City’s. Finally, as of- June 30, 2000, the Union notes no principal or
interest on City indebtedness was past due, and that since then none has
become. past due and Buffalo has never. defaulted on the ‘payiient of
principal or interest on any ‘indebtedness. o : wey te

Buffalo;.the Union urges, :was clearly on-fisoally:'sound ground asiof June
30, 2000:with its conibined:General fund and Boatd of Education fiinds and ~.
‘working ‘capital having improved‘inyeach.of -theipreceding: five, fiseal ye: £3: -).
ending dime 30; 20002 Specifically,.it offers,th: June .30;: 1996 assets:
exéeedédviiabilities by] 5.2:percent whereas:on 0; 2000 the extess h

 

   

 

  
 

 

ee ontends‘the Eittployer habitually understates expected ‘revenues -~
“and overstates expected. expenses creating: phantom: projected-deficits when"
in reality, substantial surpluses. evolved. . For the first year of our -
jurisdiction, July 1, 2000 through June 30, .2001,:the PBA reports that the -
City had projected ending with a nominal $3 million surplus whereas, in
fact, it ended the year with an undesignated fund balance of nominally $9.7

‘ million or’ approximately -$7:. million mote: than it had ‘conservatively .
‘estimated, In that year the City expenditures fell nominally $89 million
under budget while ‘its revenues fell short by only $2.7 million creating a
budgetary surplus of nominally $6.3 million. The PBA contends the City.
had set aside in the first year budget, funding to provide a3 percent across
the board increase to the PBA and that in keeping with generally accepted
accounting practices, that finding is treated as already expended in the
financial statements and that there is therefore no justification .for
withholding payment of the fully funded 3 percent across the board increase,
and urges the panel to award same.

The Union focuses on the cash flow aspect of the City's position. It notes
that at the commencement of the second year, the City was in possession of
nominally $109 million in cash coming from the proceeds of a $120 million

 

    

 
8

RAN issue, state and federal aid, sales tex receipts, real property tax
receipts, and other receipts balance against nominally $130 million in cash
disbursements. In the Union view, Buffalo should tiave had enough cash to -
last for several months, yet, by October, it was claiming it would run-out of
money by the end of Noveniber, 2001. This, the Union notes, did.not‘occur ~
and. it cites: the City's démeanor. as yet.-another example yof the, City. -.
promoting an unwarranted image of poverty: when- negotiations are pending

’ orin progress. ab . : ce i ‘

Buffalo, the Union asserts, in the fiscal year ending June 30, 2001 realized
accumulated fund balances for both the City.and School District exceeding:
expectations. The initial projected budget. deficit for the second year was,.
the Union acknowledges, $31 million. However ‘it notes that a SS thillion:
reduction ‘was obtained through reductions in retirement system costs and
further reductions were aécomplished by spending freezes, laydffs of -
seasonal-and temporary: workers, the closing
:* basis,rand:avoidance ofovertime.and sim
- héaring inithe present procedure, tie:U 1
reduced to'$4.3 millionc Thus in-a‘span ofifive ‘moriths: thé Employer had:
tedticed its. projected deficit fom $31 million’to‘less than:$5-inillion, The
’ PBA urges:that the ptojected deficit has already:taken into aécourit:across.
. thé board sdlary increases for bargaining units'that‘have:not settled.:<These:
-monies have been:set-aside as though they; hadvalready -been: spent and they:

. include at Jeast a 2.5 percent across the-board ‘increase according to the -
°) . testimony of the City's Budget Director and possibly 3 percent in the’

- testimony of the PBA's financial expert. Hence, a Award providing for a

| . minimum of a 2.5 percent and possibly as. much as a 3. percent across the

. board increase in each of two years will, it is urged, not adversely affect the.
residual projected deficit. : Looks :

 
 
  
   
   
  

  
   
 
   

The Union further proposes that projected budget shortfalls are not unknown
in Buffalo, In 1994, it attributes to the current mayor a warning of a $31
million deficit only to have the fiscal year end with a nominal $6.25 million
surplus. In a fiscal years ending June 30, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2000 and 2001
there were similar budgetary surpluses though in the fiscal year ending June
30, 1999 there was a small operating deficit, The Union sees no reason to
expect that the City will not end the second fiscal year in the black. It notes
that in the first year the City Tax levying margin was nominally $20 million
but that in each year since the fiscal year ending June 30 1997, the
homestead tax rate has decreased and is now less than it was in 1997. The
PBA further contends the City, in the past year, made a $22 million one-time

 

 

 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  

9

\ contribution to settle litigation involving the Board of Education. It will not
be required to make such extraordinary one-time payments in the second
fiscal year and it cites a pronouncement by the Commissioner of Police that
the department is expected to complete the fiscal year $4 million under
budget. A further source of potential revenue;- accerding to the Union: lies -

"inthe retizement-and réetuitihent programs: As officers :retire they are not ~
being: replaced and their duties are being assumed by the: temAining »
complement.. This imposes%jadditional. work burdens on the remaining
officers and leaves undisbursed, money which would have been expended -

: a8 salaries.had the retired officers -remained on active-duty, providing at

x, once justification: for improved compensation and the means. with which to .

payforsame. 2 ot : pet. : % .
The Union’-supports its’ optimistic: forecast for closing :the secondsyear
budget gap-and generating ansactual:surplus in the courseiof the-fiscaliyear -:.

i. by, assertingithat the central biisiness:district-vacancy;rate has been-relatively -

:Stable sincéh99 Liwith incremehtal va

quotes extensively: fronrthexOfhi

2001--whieh® eniimerates: vario

=

  

 
 
     

 

     
    

B,_Gity Position on Salary and Health: Related Issues... :

The City in reviewing its budgeting procedures telating to-salaries informs.

‘that though it had.proposed a 2 1/2 percent wageiincrease for both-year. one .-

7 and year two that it actually set aside money to-fund an award or negotiated :-

Doo : raises in the range of 3 percent for the:first year and 2.5 percent for the

| second-year. It notes, however, that the City was prepared to settle for these
amounts on the basis of two assumptions; namely, (1) that sufficient State

. Aid would be forthcoming and (2) that Buffalo would obtain adequate health
insurance concessions in return. The City offers that in the wake of the
disaster of September 11, 2001, its State Aid anticipations were drastically
altered and it found itself confronting a multi-million dollar revenue shortfall
prompting the submission of the Amended Response to the Petition for
Compulsory Interest Arbitration in which it withdrew its salary proposal and
substituted a proposal for zero percent increase in each and other two years.

 

 

The Employer asserts the PBA refuses to acknowledge the seriousness of the
City's financial position in both its cash flow and total revenue
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

10

}. considerations. It refuses to acknowledge that the budgeted 3 and 2.5
percent increases were effectively nullified when the State was. unable to
provide the $31 million aid increase. So far as Buffalo is concerned, the
money to pay these increases never actually existed within its resources and
“now, never will. Thé¢ Employer believes that the 3 pefcent increase‘for the

~ first year'standing.alone would cost the.City nominallyiMk,7--millionifor the. .

- first year and another nominallys$1.75 ‘million in the second-year and thé
‘City does not have that money arid is not in any position to obtain it, Aa
Award of 3 percent for the first year and 2.5 percent for the second, each
‘effective at the commencement of the contract year, would cost the City:
-nominally $5.9. million when it is-already facing a $9 million budget gap.
‘The City urges that it is unabletto respond positively. to the PBA wage
‘proposal as is absolutely unable 16: fimd it as it (1) cannot obtain more State
Aid, (2) is extremely unlikely that it could borrow therequired. funds, (3)
‘cannot raise taxés to: fund the proposal. without severely jeopardizing the
‘City's bond ratiiig, arid (4) is facitig a negative.cash position im the secorid

eat, renderingdit uBable to: findnce any-‘portion of the proposaleut ‘of

  

The-City urges. the. Panel to discount: testimony by.
expert that $3.2 million of undesignated reserves was available presumably
for funding ‘any awarded salary increase in the June 30, 2000 financial audit.
It notes that the City, in addressing its year two and year three problems, was
already planning to utilize available fund balances to close the gap between
expenditures and revenues. It calls attention to City: Exhibit 10 which was
placed in evidence on February 12, 2002 consisting‘of a financial statement
_for the City as of June 20, 2001 which showed an undesignated unreserved
fund balance of $9.7 million. The Employer offers that those dollars are not.
available for funding increases as $2.7 million has been allocated to gap
closure in the second year, and the remaining $7 million has been allocated
to the third year, All that money therefore, has been targeted and spent and is
: no longer available for funding PBA salary demands, Buffalo, it is argued,
i clearly lacks the financial ability to pay for any increases in either of the two
4 years within the purview of the panel's deliberations,

In addressing the specifics of the PBA comparisons, Buffalo notes that the
contiguous towns have already settled their 2000-2001 CBAs in which they

 

the: Union's. financial a“
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
    

 

 

  

11

awarded wage increases of approximately 4 percent per annum (Amherst), 3
percent per annum (Cheektowaga) and approximately 2.5 percent per annum
(Tonawanda), and that the Buffalo PBA members do not lag far behind,
The City bases its comparison on. the current wage of top step police officers
: Which shows a lag of only about I percent behind Amherst,-and nominally
- 5.3 percent behind: Cheektowaga. However-ituemphasizes; thati:"simitar
- public. employees working: undersimilar conditions" is only one factor ‘and
that the panel must in addition consider. whether the City of Buffalo withdts
budgetary and cash flow problems, its credit rating, its shrinking tax margin,
- its declining population, its lower per capita income, its declining property

. Values; and its work rules is comparable to the more affluent communities

cited bythePBA.- ss me “s

: . : . ae

In fact; the City pleads; there is‘no "comparable" for it}in the second year.
No other municipality. has. theesevere. problem of bsing at its practical
«maximum withirespéct to propeitty tax revenues... Moreaver Buffald ‘has ito
easonito foregast asharp vise inisales tax revenue and:tlie prdspect for State
yAdd is: foriit toxbe Alat!iat -bes! repottsithat: it hasinoi resirvés dnd ittis |
5 4 i orrowrmoneys ati firtherpredictsat will
ne. ihe comparablercotitighousicémraunities*relied
is‘argued,‘are: not-constidindd bythe wanie-financiél -
limitations: and they can afford increasesiwhiclivare beyioid-Buffalo's Teach, :

 

  
  
 
 

 

- They employ, far fewer police officers and-are:noty: according. to ‘the’ City, .

bumping-up against a constitutional tax: limit nor are they faced.with bond
ratings which are in. jeopardy. Comparisons ‘with: these.:communities,

- Buffalo asserts, is wuly unfair.

: The City urges that the PBA calculation of total ‘compensation for police

‘officers in-the compatable communities may be afflicted. with computational *
problems;. Moreover it challenges the validity of the assumptions supporting
these calculations such as, for example, the subtraction of the cost of health
insurance contributions for Buffalo but not for Amherst and Cheektowaga.
The City urges that the PBA comparisons are totally selective and should not
be considered in evaluating the parties' positions. .

Finally, with respect to the salary issue, Buffalo argues that there is no
statutory requirement or suggestion that its officers must be paid wages
exceeding or equal to those in Amherst, Cheektowaga and Tonawanda. The
small margins by which PBA members fall short of their colleagues in these
contiguous communities is putatively, not of such magnitude as to outweigh
the statutory admonition to accord weight to “ability to pay” concerns. The

 
   
 

 

 

 

 

  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

ane

 

payment for-igeneric, «brand same, .and:: non-formbjlary :ipresoriptions}

 

' -of ifs control.and'that it'does not'accrue to’ the Employerltadvantage:in any
“respect, ':It-seeks “a determination from™the. panel: that’ its.continuing: -

12

City offers that the time to argue for lockstep compatibility will come when
the City has recovered financially and is on a sound basis. Future panels can
implement the appropriate corrections if and when that happens, but the City
urges that the current panel must avoid relying upon comparable practice ta
award ‘benefits which the City, intits present strained condition, is unable té-
fandecws. bio ae pow atk dee BL dl i

  

 

% L 5 oe ; at 0 abe vo! : wok

The City's first health refated proposal (City Proposal. 17) grows out of a ©
‘change in the prescription drug coverage benefits provided by the City's
‘Health Maintenance Organization:providers. Prior.to the change, scheduled
to take:effect on July 1,2002, individuals being-served by the Independerit
Health provider paid a $7 dollar:per prescription co-payment but, aftér the
change, became’ obligated to pay a $7/$15/$30 co-payment: for genericy
brand aame, atid non-formulary prescriptions respectively. Those covered:
by the Univera‘#ealthcare paid # $5 co-payment per piesoriftion and the
new three-tier prescription rider will assess a.$5/$15/$3 Seper prescription co#

formed it-ediild nollonger-obtailt

 

respectively. The City relates thatit was:

   
    

  

ingle tiet "prescription tider aiid it plealls-thit sinoilongel
able, toscontinud:therprior benefits: of thex"singlé tier" rider. ‘The!Einployér

‘urges the Panel‘icvrecognizé:thatthis changes obcutring oroceurred-outside:

 

obligation is only to provide a prescription drig-benefiteas offered: by the

providers.’ Buffalo seeks a CBA provision insulating :it fiom liability for

increased ptescription drug co-payments arising out of the implementation
of three tier co-payment plans by the providers, The City does not provide
an estimate of the increased costs which will arise as a result of the three-tier
implementation, but does indicate that it considers-the significance of their
being'insulated from absorbing same to be of a very‘high order. .

A second City health-care related proposal (City Proposal No. 12) would
affect employees hired prior to July 1, 2000 who currently pay twenty-five
percent of the difference in cost between the second lowest cost HMO and
either of the two more expensive plans; namely, Blue Cross and Blue Shield
or Community Blue for single coverage, and 15 percent of the difference for
family coverage. Employees hired after July 1, 2000 who elect the more
expensive coverage, pay 100 percent of the difference and the City proposes
that this requirement be extended to all employees irrespective of the date of
hire. The Employer advises that this change would reduce its very high
health care premium costs by approximately $410,000 per annum. It advises
13

that only 249 out of 862 bargaining unit members currently subscribe to one
of the more expensive coverages. Most of the savings would come from
increased contributions by the 179 members who subscribe to traditional
Blue Cross and Blue Shield coverage. Their individual annual contributions

- would rise to nominally $1650:for single coverage, and $2800 for family
coverage which the . Employer. concedes .is::a substantial . burden, sithe .
imposition of which is designed:to create a significant disincentive to select
high-cost coverage. Be oe : « s

. . : . ‘pt AE
A third City. health-care relatedyproposal (City. Proposal No. 13) relatessto
.» Hew hires who currently make mo out-of-pocket contribution if they select
either of the: two lowest price HMO options. The City proposes that tiéw
‘ employees henceforth be requitied to contribute 25 percent of the-cost'of
single coverage, and 15 percentiof the cost of family coverage of the lowest
» ptice option.:\Buffalo states the:intent of this proposaliis to:institutionalize
» the notion of -health imsurane® costs savings. going! forward with new
imployees.”-LiAdditionally, thé Employer: beliey plémentation will
strongly encéurage:employees te select'thé-teast expelidive cdveragey Atithe
seit -costJevel <indvassuiningian average off20 newiemployées:per year,
e City caleulates:this: changewould-save $14,500 ipér-antiuer and: would
‘growsin successive-years:to‘riseito possibly:0.13 percentief:wages-at‘theénd
_ | Ofsfive-syears: The City: describes this-a8'aimindr concession; .and urges
. "simplementation- proposing that even’ smath incrementalsavings'may.not-be |

overlooked in -view of its severe fiscal problems, «=: so ee

7

 
   
  

    
   

 

A fourth City health-care related proposal (City Proposal No. 14) relates’ to
retirees. . At present retirees continue to receive, HMO coverage without
- making contributions and in this proposal Buffalo seeks to assess them for:
i . coverage on the same basis as new employees,.as outlined in the discussion -
3 : of City Proposal No, 13, supra. -Buffalo believes'the implementation of this
| _ amendment to the CBA would provide savings of about $14,500 per year at
.the inception with the possibility that it might increase if-there were a
number early retirements. Lo

ty
: IV. Opinion on Salary and Health-Related Issues

The salient consideration in evaluating the Salary and Health related
proposals is the question of ability to pay. We believe the Union correctly
Oo bet asserts that Buffalo's financial position as of June 30, 2000 did not preclude

: the possible adoption of improvements in wages and other terms of
employment. The City itself proposed across-the-board salary increases of

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

14

2.5 percent in each of the two years. - Subsequently, it budgeted for a 3
percent and 2,5 percent sequence, albeit with the hope and expectation of
achieving some reduction in health insurance premiums. However, Buffalo
‘suffered a severe reversal of fortune following the historic disaster of -
September 11, 2001 which led to a: traumatic: reduction of $31: million in

- expected State Aid.. This adversely affected both.gross revenues:and:cash

-flow. The: Union understates the magnitude of the "gap" yet to be closed at +
the time of the last hearing, placing it at $5 million whereas the Budget
Director's undisputed testimony placed it at $9 million (the earlier reported .
sum of $7 million plus an additional'$2 million in indebtedness incurred by
an unusually severe snowfall). Moreover, undisputedtestimony supporis the |
conclusion. that the $22°millioh Board of Education: appropriation was not
siphoned out of the City’s regular revenue stream and therefore, we should
not ‘expect: #: likes sum ‘to betome available on antundesignatdd: basis in :
succeeding: years because: thafexpenditure was a one-time évent. me i
: va bse wo ot S one or ie oe

   
 

   

   

i “Anticipation Notes “(Ru
ANS): which indirectly affect its ability’ t

-revenue-stream té-fitiaioé underwriting and:interest’charges.: “Phe PBA: in’
“its -arguments, suggests that the: prevalence of ansadequate- cash flow

evidences an ability to pay. In reality, it is more precisely related to how ©
well income and expenditures are coordinated tirne wise. The true measure

‘of ability to pay-is the ratio of the magnitudes.of available income to .

necessary expenditures. Excesses. of: income ‘over expenses generate:
surpluses. which appear in the fund: balance,-and the PBA cites the accrual of

* a $1.4’ million fund balance in the 1999/2000 budget year which grew to

$9.7 million in the 2000/2001 budget year as persuasive proof of improved _
fiscal stamina and positively enhanced ability to pay. The Budget Director -
confirmed that he has consistently striven to increase the fund balance in an
effort to provide a margin of reserve to cope with contingencies and reduce
dependency upon borrowing to meet cash flow shortfalls. We support the
City's assertion that undesignated fund balances are not necessarily available
to fund employee benefits. These monies may be required to achieve a
balanced budget in the next succeeding year without raising the tax levy.
However, even the fund balance is carried forward and regenerated, perhaps
with some augmentation, in the succeeding year it continues to contribute to

the Employer's ability to pay by reducing underwriting and interest expenses

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

- allegedly readily‘absorbed. The fact:is that the Police. Department opeiating :
costs haveirisento now-censutne nomtirially 62.percéritof the. City's totil real:

 

15

which might otherwise be incurred. For cities as for individuals, a lender's

position is preferable to 2 borrower's. We are unable to support the implied

thesis that an employer's ability to pay has not reached its limit so long as

any positive fund balance is being maintained. We take further exception to

the Union assertion that the Employer's past claims-of inability to paytwere * :
without merit-ass#t was.ablé:to. absorb costscgenerated: by substantidliipast.» 2+

‘salary and. fringe benefit improvements without: adverse effect as i our:

finding, there has been a significant cumulative effect, This is illustrated

graphically.in Panel Chart I (page 16) which plots Buffalo expenditures for -
public safety functions as a percent of its total:revenues from real estate and .
sales taxes: The:chart indicates the percentage for the Police Department to ;
have been.relatively stable into the 1997/98 budget year after which it began —
rising at first somewhat modestly and then, rather sharply from 1999/00; the +
year cited by. the PBA as'the one in which it:reoeived 3 percent'base sulary ©.
increase atid "significant ittprovement" in longevity spay whichi* was ©

 
  

  

State andiwales daxrevenuest. Public ‘Safety -costéaltave -tis
‘ evlevelae This meaiis that Buffalo: withi

 
  
   

 

soe

‘foregoing indicates the severity of the:Cityls financial:plight, one, . ~

 

- should not erroneously infer that this unhappy. circumstance arises because

the PBA has enjoyed lavish increases. That would be far from the truth as
the fact is that the total compensation package of Buffalo officers continues
 

 

%0'0r

 

%O'O9

    

  

  

%0'08

  

sanuaney Xe] SajeS oad

3y jo ese ye5png, Wewupedag eoyod eau
Senueney xel sere:

Snid 34 Jo 9% & se JeBpng ajeg oneal

 

%0°001

     

  

 

%0'08 |.

%O00e
17

to lag behind those of similarly employed colleagues as it appears to have

done historically. Panel Chart II (page 18) plots Buffalo Tax Revenues and

Margin levels since 1993. For the recent period in which the sharp increases

occurred in Chart L we find sharp declines in the City's share of the real
- estate tax. levy as welkas in its Real Estate Tax plus the Sales Tax revenue, . - /
« The sharp:rise shown-in the tax margin:plot isanisleading’as:it dtises outofasc ¢

= faulty: formula issuedsby New Your. State in the 98/99 tudgéttyear which

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

was corrected the next-year. Were it not for this error the plotwould have
followed approximately the dotted line between 1996 and 2000.= :

 

The most basic and vital employer responsibility is to provide effective
Public Safety services. If those services falter, .a city will#decline and: -
ultimately... cease functioning. A city may offer good schools. and
recreational facifities,zbut if-the public cantiot acéess aiid enjoy them .in
safety, they are of littlevalue.. The Budget Ditectoriin his testimony outlined

, ich.the Public Safety function are the last .
calpel anditis oleat.thatithe Hiagnitdéof  -
‘Options. he: Mayor'é' testi

 

   
  
   

  

4 ay 0/01; ‘SiatetAidvittialls

at oritinally millions. In ‘most of thi

. period; the property tax levy hovered:around: [SO-million per annum, ‘but by
the-year 2000/01 the full value average dropped andthe City was compelled
to. reduce the rate in order to retain the:tax: margin: It was compelled’ to
repeat this procedure for the year 2001/02. The City continues to be faced
with declining fortunes and though everyone.concemed undoubtedly hopes .
the Union's optimistic.forecast materializes and enriches the City's coffers,- © - -
one may not consider that: prospect has augmented: Buffalo's ability to pay
until it is actually realized. Buffalo budget development is a high wire act
executed while hovering over insolvency and grasping state aid as a
balancing pole. The Mayor testified to his frequent and continuing
pilgrimages to Albany to solicit State Aid and it does appear that duty will
continue to be a prominent presence in his job description.

          

   
 

 

We do not concur in the Union view that available money has been
concealed in the past and that the practice continues at this time. The
Employer may have engaged in a bit of hyperbole, but itis clear that Buffalo
has not accumulated obscene fund balances and there has been no suggestion
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

000‘on0'azs
oo0'oo0'ors
000'000'09s
000'000'oes
000'C00'00L$

ono'ooo'azes

 

SIBOG
 

 

 

 

forthcoming:in-the next fiscal year in-the:immediately preceding-fiscal
--At some point in history, Buffalo-was first authorized. to‘do this:and-

19

.the City has frivolously appropriated funds to other projects which more
responsibly should have been devoted to Public Safety.

The City had reserved funding of $1.7 million to support a 3. percent
increase in the first year, and $3.28 million.to fund the catty forward of the.3

- epercent plus angdditional 2.5 percent increase insyear:hwo. These. monies

were in,the budget\data presented to the panel when the Financigl
Statement as of June 30, 2001 (City Exhibit 10) was introtluced,. showing an
undesignated, unreserved fund of $9.7 million. $2.7 million of that‘amount
had already been:allocated to the second-year in the process of "gap" closing
for that year. The remaining $7 million was allocated 16 the third year, a
“year which lies heyond the jurisdiction of this panel.. While City Exhibit 7,
which is in evidence, does discuss the third fiscal year, its inclusion in:the

: document is nofthe equivalent of a budget presertaticit which has been
‘subjected to adversarial examination; and debate: :., The: allocation of $7

ality to Bi cation
ye

 

year $19 million: was booked twice. If no further action were taken; $19-
million would not have been forthcoming in the next year with payment on-
schedule being reinstituted in the third or next occurring year: However, .
that did not occur, presumably because the City. could not do without-the $19 ~
million in the second-year, as another "spin-up" was ‘authotized:- That:
procedure continued sequentially until the cutback was implemented in the
2001/02 budget year. The Mayor, under cross-examination, was asked
whether the 2001/02 withholding represented a permanent revocation of the
benefit or merely an action which would synchronize payments’ with the
budget year in which they actually become due. The witness responded that
he was not certain about whether the payments would be restored on a
timely basis or were being permanently withdrawn and further opined that
he thought the latter likely to be the case. Clearly, the restoration or non- :
restoration of the former "spin-up" may be very significant but since it
would presumably occur during the third year, this Panel would be unaware
of it and both unable and unauthorized to factor it into its thinking,

 

 

     

 

in-that. -
20

5 As we comprehend it, the statutory requirement to weigh-in “ability to pay"

, does not imply a binary choice between "pay" and “no pay". We perceive
we are obligated to limit the magnitude of costs to maintain them within the
Employer's reasonable reach whereas comparability, standing alone, would
justify greater ‘payments. This could of course lead to awarding a zero .

.-increase but that is-clearly only“one. option-in theimattet! at hand: We have «- e:.--

considered thatoption-but sought to identify other possibly more equitable ~
solutions consistent with respecting the fiscal straitjackett ‘Encasing the City,

 

We are ‘directed to consider among others,. prevailing working conditions

9 . . and earnings it private employment in comparable communities. Panel

: Chart HI (page 21) plots the relationship between Erie Céunty private sector

| annual earnings?and the CPI U for Erie County per City Exhibit 2. This

‘> indicates that the earnings of ‘private sector employees ‘have nit only kept

> pace with the €PI, but actually Tose“at a slighthy: ‘hightr rate in-the last .
+ several years, Pie ‘ing upon City. Exhibit 2, and viewingth first and

ds y, we find8PT iitereasts: of 8:6 an it:

 
        
   
 
  

 
 

: private seétor ‘tnd allethe-’
_vaffluent. Buffalé regrettably, 3
“reality that-employees :share:in:the“poverty of their expos Bi

non members have lagged. behind similarly employed colleagues in. siore’affluent

JO : communities, and it is surely not-.realistic to expect that those. differentials

can be narrowed in a period when the jurisdiction is withstanding a $31

million reduction in State Aid. The significance of this reduction becomes

sharply defined: when-one considers that the scheduled ‘State Aid’ equaled:

. more than twice the City's revenue from the property tax levy. We: have

) sought to devise a proposal which will only minimize any broadening of the
: compensation differentials without exceeding Buffalo's ability to pay.

  
  

 

 

 

We have established that the City continues to hold in reserve sufficient
funds to support a 2.5 percent increase in the second-year but has not
reserved any money to fund an increase in the first year. We conclude an
equitable resolution of the salary aspect can be reached by awarding a2 1/4
percent increase in each of the two years,

 
 

 

00S)

Oo0SE

o0cor

ooo0s

 

SJB]}O

 
22

| Accordingly, our award will provide as follows: : +

1. Effective July 1, 2000, all salaries shall be increased
by two and one quarter (2 4%) percent. .
2. Effective July 1, 2001, ail salaries shall-be increased .

 

 

a by two-and one quarter.,(2 4%) percent: BEN het aeee yg.
3. ‘The following chart (page 23) shall. be “Ppeniiod ts to : : :
‘ithe Agreement: it :
3 *

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

23

see

  
     

 

” wARANE oy
rin mo i: in Sci
| fouccomomerer: |" mas |
e203 ;
| Pouiceomimesrers | sisaa [aman | suis | sam |
| Foucromem stars | sisson | mao | sega | saat |
| Fouceomicmsters | sess | mss | :

 
       
  

 
 

   

Our focus at this juncture is on the funding of the 2 1/4 percent awarded for
the first year. Each 1 percent of salary aggregates to $571,000 per annum.
Hence, the cost of financing a 2 1/4 percent increase will equal nominally:
$1,285,000 for a each of the two years, It may be necessary to fund this
increase through staff reduction to effect an offsetting saving. Utilizing the
 

 

 

 

  

We face-aisecond: problem invadopting this: remedy:is

24

Budget Director's figure, of $60,000 per year per position, this would lead to
a reduction of 21 positions. Thus, the choice we perceive is between
retaining a force of nominally 815 officers who are likely to respond to a
zero-salary adjustment with diminished morale and esprit de corps, and
retaining a force of nominally 790 officers :Wwhose ‘resentment against a
compulsion. to work.harder may be mollifi the knowledge that :the:
‘employer has, under.extremely: difficult circumstances, attempted, with less-
than - complete success, to maintain their compensation Status vis-A-vis
colleagues in the region at large. We recognize that-this' poses a dilemma.
Neither choice is a happy one and reasonable-people: may readily differ in
identifying the less desirable option. We believe a:lay-off, should it be
requiréd, though not always desirable, is the preferable course of action at
this point this situation, Beyond helping tox maintain: morale, it.
eficourages ihe parties to innovate and vine tod ivy in improvements:
The i inbrease 3

 

 

  
 

may not be. ‘retroactively applied, and the two-year: term of this ‘panel’s
jurisdiction has ‘already expired. As noted earlier, the retroactive. first-year.
salary’ amounting to nominally $2.57 million will need to be paid in the third
year in addition to the ‘monies reserved to pay a.2.5 percent second-year.,
increase, “We are not privy fo the resources which'may. be available in the
third year and we acknowledge that if the cost is to bé offset solely through
staff reductions, it may be necessary to borrow. Such action would be in
lieu of seeking sharper staff reductions in an- effort to recoup funds required
to discharge an obligation incurred over a two-year period in a‘shorter period

of time.

The PBA proposes (PBA Proposal 14) that the City commence providing
fully paid major medical coverage and all existing riders upon retirement.
We deny that proposal as, at best, only a very small margin of ability to pay
is available, and it should be allocated to higher priority proposals,

    
   
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

25

The second health-related PBA proposal (PBA Proposal 15) is for the ©
upgrade of the GHI Spectrum One Plan to the GHI Preferred Plan, We
Support this proposal with an effective implementation date of June 29,
2002. The cost of this upgrade is just shy of $300,000 per.annum and is
therefore the equivalent of nominally 1/2 percent of salary. ‘The City:-has.
prepared for.a 2:1/2-pércent increase insthe second-year. arid vis. we haves. .
awarded 2 1/4 percent. there exists a residualed/4 pércent which may be.’,
employed to defray half-the cost of the dental program upgrade. ‘There is, of
course,: no retroactive cost associated with this benefit as it functionally.
takes effect with the inception of the third year.The Award will provide for
the inclusion of the following in a successor CBA: 2+), -
ArticlesXXI, Section 21.3 Dental Insurance. :

id paragraph one to read’as follows: .

#

  
 
    

Amen

      

 

 

. The City's first health-related proposal (City Proposals
from responsibility or liability: to absorb costs arisini ‘as. a‘ result iof-the
implementation of ‘the “three-tier” prescription drug rider “by “tle HMO
providers, The purpose of' co-payments is to sensitize consumers to the cost
of: services.and products. thereby to encourage prudent purchasing where .
possible. It is therefore appropriate to burden consumers with:increased: co-
pay charges, We therefore support the City's petition and the Award: will
provide for the inclusion of the following in the successor CBA:Article XX

Section 21.1
Add fourth paragraph in blue book (7/1/86-6/30/88) CBA to read:

Effective June 30, 2002, changes in the co-pay
prescription drug requirement arising out of
implementation of the three-tier prescription co-pay
provisions by the HMO (Health Maintenance
Organization) health care providers shall be the
responsibility of the individual subscriber,

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

26

There is a second outstanding issue relating to the co-payment change which
is limited to coverage provided by the Univera HMO plan which scheduled
its adoption of the three-tier arrangement on July 1, 2001. This change
precipitated a grievance against the City by the PBA which is currently
awaiting:resolution in arbitration. This award willxprovide for the withdrawal -
ofthat. demand: for-arbitration:and ceding adjudicative responsibility t to.this 2.
panel as:a a matter of retnined jurisdiction, . isa Boos

 

The PBA shall withdraw its demand! for ‘arbitration
concerned with possible co-payment responsibilities of
subscribers to. the Univera HMO plah for ithe period
commencing July 1, 2001 to June: 30, -2002 with
adjudicatory authority, over that matter being ceded to
this Panel as a matter of fretained jurisdittion. 8

  

  
 

 

    

id Maintenance .

   

uniform allowance of One Hundred and Fifty (6150
' 4 Dollats.: Such: payment: shall: be made: on! or: befor ‘
' September 30” of each year. *

 

 

aE

Buffalo's second health-care related proposal (City Proposal 12) is to
require all employees subscribing to the more expensive options to pay 100
percent of the difference between the cost of that option and the second
lowest cost plan. This would affect employees hired: prior to-July :1,.2000
who are now contributing only 25 and 15 percent for individual and family
coverage, respectively. The added charge would be the equivalent of a 3 to
4 percent pay cut an affected employees. We believe that would be °

inequitable and the proposal is denied.

The City's third health-care related proposal (City Proposal 13) is for newly
hired people, who currently make no out-of-pocket contribution if they opt
for coverage under the two lowest price HMO plans, be required to
contribute 25 percent of the cost of single coverage and 15 percent of the
cost of family coverage of the lowest price option. We support the City to
the extent of implementing this requirement for the first four years of
27

employment after which the benefit will be provided on the same basis as for
people employed prior to the implementation of this new provision. -
Accordingly, our Award will provide for the inclusion of the following i in

’ the successor agreement:

if

. Article XX! ection 21. L st edhe obs

   

ha “ at

Add the following Provision OO a

Alkemployees hired on or after June 30, 22002,-shal
pay twenty-five (25%) percent of the monthly
premium:for the “core coverage” for individuals and
fifteen (as %) percent of the: monthly piemiuni: for
thé “core coverage” for family coverage. “Core.
. coverage? is understood to consist of: the ileast.

 
   
 

 

oes Upon: completion: of-four: @: years: of's servicesavith:

. anniversary dates being:calculated on the same basis .

as for longevity entitlements, an employee's coverage -

. shall become the same as for employees hired prior .-”
ta, to June.30, 2002.: . .. Nok

 

vy

rey The City's fourth health-care: related proposal (City- Proposal. 14) would
require new retirees who heretofore continued to receive HMO coverage
without making contributions to commence doing so on the same basis as
new employees. ‘We believe the proposal violates at least an implied social
contract between the retiree and the City under the terms of which the retiree
rendered service with the reasonable expectation that he/she would be
provided fully paid HMO coverage in retirement. We therefore deny the

proposal.

seemed

 

 
28

V. Other Proposals Included in Award

Funeral Related Expenses BA Proposal 9): ah, .

ia The Union-has petitioned-forsa provision whichhwouldiobligate the Employer es
‘provide as much 45°$15,000 to be used for funeral-related expenses incurred «
in connection withithe:interment of an officer killedsin the:line of duty. In
such tragic circumstances the parties are partners in. grief-and we think it
appropriate ‘that their. partnership. extend to funding:a tribute. This :panel,
provides forthe establishment of a jointly-funded reServe of. $25,000- to be:
funded by: equal’ contributions by the Employer and..the . Union,
Accordingly the successor 7 Agreement: shall be amendedito include the.

‘following: + * %

 

  
  
 

 

 
 

- thedinevofidity:2 tiie ‘and the PBA shalk:contxibute:
to the. Fund «with payments of twelfth thousatid:five
hundred -dollars -($12,500) each which Fund shall: be.
: administered ‘by the PBA. The money shall -be
to: maintained in.a separate interest-bearing account with..° ..
the: Police Credit Union. The PBA shall promptly «
Bo, . advise the City. of any withdrawal from the fund and. -

, shall provide accounting upon request: -Expended

. funds shall be replenished by the City and the PBA
with equal contributions by each, within thirty (0)
calendar days following disbursement. Any dispute
regarding the Fund shall be submitted to expedited
arbitration.

  

 

 

 

ao Longevity Alowances (PBA Proposal 8)

CO PBA proposes an officer become entitled to a pro rata share of his/her
: longevity allowance in his/her final year of service where employment
terminates efore the individual’s anniversary date, We conclude the proposal
29

' "is supportable only as it relates to severance occasioned by retirement. This

does not impose a cost burden on the City as an individual delaying until
his/her anniversary date would collect the full increment. More significantly
however, a retiring senior officer who may be drawing over $2,000 per.
annum in longevity allowance will be replaced by a‘new recruit who-at that.
“moment will not.have:qualified fora longevity-alloivance.. The. granting of...
this proposal should in fact provide. Buffalo with a small annual saving and:
the successor Agreement shall be amended to include:the following:

 

Effective: July 1, 2001, an Employee whotis retiring.on
: ameffective date: prior to‘his/her anniversary date, shall
’ reéeive longevity pay pro rated on-a monthly basis to

"Article XXII (E)“Longevity
ee oh .

. betcalculated by multiplying one twelfth (4/12 th) of the
full anniial,; entitlement by. the numiber of. fully:

 
  
             

    

Z.

 

 
    

. «Uniform MaintenancéePBA: Proposal.11) : fs
: + The expired:Agreement provides.for the payment. of:$100xpercannom:to
used for the care.and: cleaning: of uniforms.. PBA pleads:that this-allowance: -
is grossly inadequate, ‘having ‘become effective in September 1989. :The :
PBA proposes an ‘increase to $675 per annum and seeks to justify its
proposal on.the basis of comparable practice in other jurisdictions. . The. City
contends this money.:is:intended only for washing and. cleaning of the .
Officer's uniform and: that it is therefore, entirely:reasonable, =The. City
po asserts the PBA Proposal would add about $565,000 to its annual cost which
is the nominal equivalent of 1 percent of wages. A panel majority does not
subscribe to the notion that an allowance established in 1989 continues to be
“entirely reasonable" but neither can we subscribe to the Union proposal
which is clearly much too costly. We have settled on a nominal adjustment
of $50 raising the allowance to $150 per annum effective July 1, 2001. This
will add a modest $40,000 per annum to be accommodated in a budget of
over $70 million. Accordingly, the successor Agreement shall be modified

to state as follows:

 

 

 
30

: Article XIX, Section 19.1-Uniform, Equipment, and Maintenance

 

     
 

Allowance
19.1 Allowance
wi ten OR ws Efletiive ily +2001, the. City shall jan. annual: nF ne :
roe ‘uniform allowance of One: Hundred and ‘Hifty ($150) .
Dollits. Such payments shall be made on‘ or before
September: 30th of each year. &
Paychecks (@BA Proposal ye aR

The Union Bkoposes that each officer" 'S paycheck ber placed j in a sealed
snivelope' prio€ to distribution in order to prevent disclosure éf confidential --
ryotie- viewing the table on which the‘bhecksiare deposited
for pick-ip.. ‘The City sre the O the’ ‘PBA‘has not showh a trus need for this.

   

       
   
 
   

it. uC
itlement We have farther determined: lat the stu
may. be foldett overland: ‘stapledconcealing the persotial inférmationiwhile: .
’ Ieaving:the payee's*identifvoation: fully visible.:.The: successorAgreementi: #1:
|. es c0 will therefore providé forthe delivery of paychecks with the-stub folded:and: <-
2 +. s+ stapled or otherwise:sebured, Accordingly, the successor Agreement shall’:
incorporate the following? . .

   

 

 

Article II, Section2: 1 ©

 

 

 

Pay checks shall be delivered with the flap. folded and °
stapled to conceal fhe amount of the check and
deductions and the nature thereof.

 

Lo } Detailing (PBA Proposal 18)
: Detailing in the present context refers to the practice of assigning an officer
outside of bis patrol district. While some detailing has long been
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

{2

» The PBAsclai

= jnore'thati5, 000:
-« to rescind: the: Ral t
«> Panel’s determination evolved ‘after: extensive drgunientuin: the hearing:

. process and latersin:éxeoutiversession, : Itargues: that itiwas:welkuriderstood «+

31

permissible, Buffalo sought to broaden the number of permissible conditions
for resorting to detailing. The Union opposed any extension of the
Employer's options, contending it would be used io make long-term
assignments and implement wholesale transfers- instead of maintaining
staffing levels. :‘This issue was addressed - in very substantial detail in an

. -Axiard bysa Compulsory Interest. Arbitration. pang(PERB GaseiNo IAnS6-: ». .

035;.M 96-297).chaired by Robert Rabin which iMreferted-ta as the Rabin - a
Award, «This Award denied the City the absoluté right to-detail. officers :
between Districts, but it did extend the City's options im recognition of the
need for greater‘flexibility in the deployment of its personnel. The Award
delineates specific guidelines for detailing officers of any rank between
Districts. The “Award further specifies that' the“language: provided is fo...
constituteca provisional solution under which:the Gity's utilization would be be
monitoreil:and provide a basis for proposed fiitureithanges admonishing‘any +
futute intérest arbitration panel.to- "consider the pdities' experience with this
languages! ab 4 : i é a

ang dee a ay “aa

ity. has ‘abused:thé provision and:

‘grievance arbitration before “Arbitrator!
vances have: been filed-and itipetitiondthe present panel
i phovisional: award; The City argiivsdthatstheiRabi

   
  
   

    

  

     
 

have'dorieiso

that the City's effort was-aimed: at improving its ability-to-allocaté manpower

- and: reduce -overtime -expenses: . If.further charges that the-PBA -has

consistently opposed expanding the detailing rights in an-effort to increase
overtime opportunities and of course, attendant..costs.: - The. City .: °
acknowledges: that 1,561 grievances have been filed-but. asserts that the
primary dispute is over-the purpose of the detailing and argues that the filing
of grievances is not, in and of itself, evidence of abuse. It argues that the
one case brought before an arbitrator led to a ruling in the City's favor and’
pleads that if the City were to lose or be curtailed in its ability to deploy
manpower, most likely, shortages in certain districts would need to be filled
onan overtime basis or be neglected, Buffalo argues that it cannot afford

- more overtime and it should not be expected to neglect its responsibilities,

The single arbitration decision to which both parties refer appears in the
record as PBA Exhibit 9. In it arbitrator Pohl did deny the grievance on the
basis that there was insufficient evidence from which to conclude the City
violated either the CBA and/or the Rabin Interest Arbitration Award. The
 

32

fundamental difficulty, as we perceive it, is that the Rabin Award has not
been tested in arbitration despite the fact that more than 1500 grievances
await adjudication. This problem arises because the parties’ arbitration
process has broken down. This panel is not empowered: to address the
probleni’but it is obvious-that it is sorely in need’bf attention. Other issues

- before vis: were deniedbasically because:.the proposals: relating thereto...
presuméd an atcess. to a working arbitration proctiss. Itis itnportant for the ~

parties to-establish:a resurrected effective and efficient arbitration process.
In dealirig with the-detailing problem we do. notifind sufficient.support for
revocation of the Rabin provisional language. Arbitral resolutions of but a
few of the 1500 grievances should, we believe, flesh out the skeletal
provisiotis of the provisional language. We therefore urge the parties to re-

establisiva working arbitration system and.hold that thé Rabin:provisional .
latguagé: should be extended xin fall fore and effect’ in the successor B

Agreement, Yr

  

‘Under the expired: grooeient overtime misst be offered? t ptain:

‘Inspectors on’wiseriiority: basis: “The Employer contendstthis'linitseffectiv

" supervision-as.for ‘example :where there may have. been athomicide requiring
the call-in of a:Captain and: the City would be required to call-in =the most
senior Captain‘ rather than ‘the homicide Captain. Similarly, if there is a
special situation in a particular district and the overtime involvement of the
Inspector is required; the City cannot call-in the Inspector from. that:district
unless he/she coincidently happens to be the most senior Inspéctor. Rather,
the City is required to offer the overtime to the senior Inspector from another
District in the City who will not subsequently be involved with the problem.

The Union protests, stating that it has gone to arbitration several times to
enforce the relevant provision in the expired Agreement and‘claims that
Buffalo has yet to pay the grievant, a command officer, pursuant-to the last
. award. The Union charges the City Proposal would serve to give the.
Commissioner of Police total discretion in awarding overtime. It insists the
provision which the City proposes to . change has been in the CBA since at
least July 1, 1986 and it ensures that senior officers, if available, are given
the first opportunity to work available overtime -- a fair and workable

 
 

 

 

 

ye
I

 

33

procedure. The more important assurance, it elaborates, is that it thwarts
Commissioners from rewarding friends to the detriment of others.

’ We find the City's logio.to be compelling. Relying upon seniority as a sole .

and absolute standard for assigning senior officers; namely,.: ‘Captains -and~

Inspectors .whd are-theidepartment's functionalechiefs, withoutiregardutos:;
specialties and regular assighments indispitablyimpedes efficient operation -

and weisupport the City's proposal in principle, ‘Accordingly, t the successor

‘Agreement shell include: ‘the following: mo

Artle a Section 2.6 @ ay %

 

wn fhe event the Commissioner: of Police ‘ letermines ke
Sovertime is required for the: :Chief of sDetectives,
* Professional: ‘Standards Division Inspector, Professional

 

ons: ‘Narcotic Captainy i “theldspective:
taf the available: over tine shalbihe. firsts

 

as provided: above, i ine nthe event of ‘tHe necessity
to replace a’ Captain or. Inspector, the most séenicr:
officer, of the rank to be filled within the assignment, .
shalisbe given the first opportunity to work overtime).+
~and*said: ‘opportunity ‘shall likewise. pass-through. the:
: applicable ‘rank: based on seniority. -If the overtime is }
«not ‘accepted pursuant to this Section, the least senior
officer within the applicable rank shall fill the vacancy... ©

The terms "in their respective assignments" and "within the assignment"
are intended to lead to the distribution of overtime consistent with the
Following illustrative and non exclusive examples: .
When an overtime need arises related to a homicide, it should be
assigned to the Major Crimes Unit Captain; if related to a narcotics
operation, the narcotics Captain should bé assigned ; if the assignment is

 
 

 

 

34

in “CO” District, it should be filled by the Inspector in “C” District; if a
meeting i is called with citizens af “A” District to address concerns about a
crime wave there, the “A” District Inspector should be assigned. If “B”
District is building a new headquarters, the “B” District Inspector should
be assigned overtime. required to attend a x meeting relating thereto,
wkd AG oe ah kaw fhg erties. 4 a wit
Vi Dispondon of Other roposss before hePane

Si wt +

Death Benefit @BA Proposal 2) .
- The PBA proposes a substantial increase in the $25, 000 “double indemnity

life insurance. coverage’ Award by a prior panel. (Cogali) i in the event of a

Line of Duty death..

og 4 : . ji

We find the ‘provision im: “the expired: Agfeement to be reasonably:

comparable 16 prevailing practice ‘elsewhere. :(We decline to supportthis:.
. proposal which would tnnecessarily add te to >the Employer 's ‘cost st burde
= proposal i is dented ‘hg

   

 

%

 

 

We find ‘more ‘generous shift differentials to be in éffect elsewhere but ina
period .of austerity, we do not view this as.a high priority item and are not
disposed to: add to thes Employer’ 's cost burden. The Proposal f 18  dertied.

Vacations BA Proposal 4
The PBA proposes an increase in vacation time, "and further that employees.

be permitted to take vacation in half-day units. It argues that Buffalo.
officers currently receive substantially fewer vacation days than- do
- counterparts in Amherst and Cheektowaga, The City responds that Buffalo
officers work a ten-hour day on a 4-on/3-off/4-on/4-off cycle under which
they may already take three scheduled off-days plus 4 vacation days plus 4 -
scheduled off-days, thereby enjoying 11 sequential days off the job, while
drawing down only four vacation days. :

We find that other jurisdictions do provide longer vacation time, But we
also find that Buffalo while lagging behind Rochester in early years,
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

  
   
 

 

|
q
i
1
Ve

35

compares favorably in later years. In comparison with Syracuse, Buffalo
lags for the first 10 years, but surpasses thereafter. Moreover we find merit
in the City's point that the ten-hour shifis and cycles results in an officer
working approximately 195 days per year and:receiving:170- days off from

‘work; whereas people working traditional eight-hour five-day: weeks work

260.days»per yearvand receive:only 105 daysloff. AWe-are-persuaded:that

‘Buffalo offfgersvenjoy-a distinct advantage in that they receive 65 more:days
off per year-than people working a more conventional. éight-hour five-day
week: In ‘light of that consideration and ‘the City's! limited. financial

resources, we conclude this proposal should be:denied: ne

 

Settlement of Disputes (BA Proposal5) B : so

‘The City urges that the Panel is barred froth considering: this proposal:

‘* ‘pursuant toPERB Order 089;. ok te oy

seh, Bor lt he : a

hours and as noted earlier declines'to eo
‘ on we Le

  

 
   

  
  

 

de ee fa : ay
‘thisyproposal on the-‘samebasis

a

Vacation Increments (PBA Proposal 7) eo
The PBA-proposes that-an officer be permitted. to talee vaoation-days in five
hour -increnients.and further that officers be -provided:.the ‘option of
converting unused: vacation time and personal leave time to sick leave
accumulation. ! ’ :

We deny the latter two on the basis that they were not discussed or debated
in the hearing process, and we deny the-former on the basis that we have |
already found the vacation provision not to be inadequate,

Education Stipend (PBA Proposal 10) .

The PBA proposes extensive improvements in educational allowances on the
basis of comparable practice. The City argues that this would add nominally
$556,000 to its educational stipend costs, nearly doubling the present
expenditure.

  
  
36

) The Panel, while believing education monies to be well spent, agrees that it
Cannot support an increase in this item at a time of austerity and the proposal
is denied

' Holidays (PBA Proposal 13,.City Proposal 6) Boge oD ys :

« ThesPBA proposestiticreasing:the: 60 holirs:f holiday: paysprovidedtunder ai,

* the expirediAgreement to 120 hours per‘annutiion tht basis ofvomparability © -
with*comparable communities. This benefit: was achieved’ in the Rabin

Award whith added -12 hours of holiday pay: to prior practice. The City -
proposes revocation of the Rabin toward andifeverting to pay straight time

oO . for thie designated holidays for employees orivactivetduty on the payroll at

’ the tine of the specified holiday while exchiding entitlements by persons on

leaveof absence, suspension, or administrative leave. Buffalo estimates it
woul save! $270,000 ‘perannum through Adoption of its: propdsal, In
proposing-revocation of the:Rabin panel's modification, int effect
propising-alwage cut: ThecUnion, on thé oftiér hand; %

“hours; is se

 

     
      
   
 

 

   

: - accused of'enpaging'in criminal conduct that allegedly ioccuired in the
p> course of performance of his/her duties and where thereafter'the-charges are
i , . favorably disposed of, shall be entitled to reimbursement for attorney fees,
: ‘disbursements and-other:litigation: expenses. The City opposes the proposal
stating that could be very costly and that it would’ impede:-the: City's own
investigatory procedures which would generally be involved in-reaching a

1 vs se
: decision to seek indictments. 3

 

 

The Panel was initially, favorably disposed. toward this proposal but, in
executive session, concluded the matter was more complicated than initially
understood, Furthermore, it presented potential administrative problems for
which solutions were not readily apparent. This proposal is denied,

 

Sich Leave Sell Back BA Proposal 17)

: The PBA seeks to increase the number of unused sick leave days which an
wtoos, officer may sell back upon retirement. It bases this proposal on cited

prevailing comparable practice. The City opposes the proposal which, if
> ~ tthe Social

 

 

 

37
adopted, would allegedly more than triple the existing cost of sick leave
buyback,

The Panel views sick leave arrangements to be insurance policies which
ensire employees. against salaried losses fori specified.total number of days

» 1whidn theysaremnablé to work-due to iHnesssiThe Employers a selfinsurer. .

-andilike any insurer,: it doesnot: anticipate tat every covered:individual will
make a claim, let alone a maximum claim. Buyback practices have evolved
out:of a desire to dissuade workers from abusing their entitlements and;
regrettably, they have grown into a common fractice. But that does-not alter
the:fact that a sick day entitlement is not tit equivalent of a vacation day
. entitlement. Especially in the present cireum$tances;:where.we have bumped
up teainstthe limits of ability to Pay, this Proposal m must be denied.-:.:

 

Disability: Retirement @BA Proposal 19) & Yo Site
Theé.PBA is-seeking for alkofficers granted accidental x retirement piirsuant:to
jcourity: provisions:-as: a-resultzof disabilityy:inourred:in :the,
: <performante of duty,: continued supplemental spaysienteby thes Gityxto
oY tain‘ dabome at-full salary atid benefits until sichilifine’ts he/shevreaches:

'. smahdatoryisersicé:tetitement age, This:is atienefititnjoyediby:Buffalo Fire
: ‘Fighters.and the Union:argues that its membérs shouldbe erifitied to-the..:

‘same benefits as-other-public safety employees.“ ie: Citys ‘reiterates that: it:

3

 

  

 

7 cannot afferdito- pay:individials-who are‘not work fhemit:isstniggling to ~ a. nen ge

pay current offices. wlio aré working their salaries:and:benefits. It-further
urges that the State Retirement and Social Seourity programs«provide for
accidental ‘retirement, and that the City contributes significant st ‘sums to the
State Pension Fund:to finance those protections. - os

 

The Panel views sit. as: wot eniirely fair and probebly unfair, to. deny a police
officer a benefit which the City provides and presumably recognizes to be
justified, to firefighters, However, upon determining the potential cost of this
benefit, we were dissuaded from a more thorough review of the merits as we
concluded the likely costs are substantial and i irrespective of merit, place the
provision out of reach at this time.

Work Schedules (PBA Proposal 20) .
The PBA is seeking a changed work schedule through the implementation of

a 4-on/4-off/ 10 hour schedule. It argues that the City is refusing to ‘increase
pay and is proposing give-backs and that the officers therefore, should not
have to continue to work the current schedule. The adoption of the proposed
schedule would reduce annual work hours but, the Union contends, it would

 

 

   
 
  

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

‘ svosing 55 full-time officers...

- The Panel first holds that the Union's fundamental: rationale. is flawed as the

- have' in-éfféet insofar asitiotification: “provisionsafeeoncerned. «The ‘term + «5

2" digeiplin
“5 offficer:h:
The Cityiasstrts2 conference:is not considered to:bevdisciplinaryzactionvand

38

-have very little impact on the patrol district, The City disagrees that this
‘would have very litile impact, claiming that the adoption of the proposed’
schedule would reduce the schedule workdays to about half of the days in a

. year. The employer contends the new schedule would add over $104,000

worth of lost time to the departments br burden and would be the east lent of -

   

Re a %,

Ce

 

officers are in fact receiving some added:ibenefits aad have been spared

préposed: give-backs, Secondly while there may be some unproductive te
redundaney arisinig.in the existing scheduling atrangementthe answer inour . te
: view is tofind productive uses for that times! This proposahis.denied. ae
Conferences (PBAProposal 21); + we. oe :

  
    
  

The PBAsstates.ithere secks to:formalize ain understonding it is supiposed to.

"canferenves':: refers: to vsupervisory -disdussionsieperhaps :borderingy:on .- -
the: Uaionasserts it-should be notifisdswithine®4 heursaf an i:
en fconferencéd”: along with détailsiabattiwliat-transpired>*

   

   

there is no-oompelling need forthe Union torknow‘ofainy-donference’ ‘Within i

} 24-hoursétMorebiversthie’ Employer maintain’, -there'is'noxeompellitig-reason +.
for notifying the: Union-since there is no impediment to the-affected officer .

doing so if he'wishes'to invoke: Union involvement, In fact:the Employer -
claims, there may be mstances where the member. chooses not: to share this

information with the Union: Se hae

 

The panel finds: the. City's argument that the. atfected: officer is free. to
communicate information to his Union most persuasive, and the proposal is

denied.

Indemnifi cation (BA Proposal 23)
This proposal is similar to PBA Proposal 16, Defense of Criminal Charges,

but it here seeks reimbursement of PBA incurred costs. Proposal 16 has
been denied and the present matter is disposed of similarly.

Messages (PBA Proposal 24)
This proposal is for a provision barring the Department from internally

publicizing pending disciplinary actions or circulating information on
actions taken against an officer except on a "need to know basis". The City
 

 

 

 

> whien: ‘thes fontdstiate tifmvailable, :

39

maintains the officer is already protected by New York State Civil Rights |

Law ‘section 50-(a), and that the City is legally bound to comply with that
section.

, ie reviewing this matter, we conclude the partis do not, analy disagree. We -
: therefore tale noastiomot, nthis: proposal Ps ead

 

“ty.

Salaries ‘and. Hours of Work (City Proposal 1) - .
The City proposes to change work schedules of the shifts of. each. of 3
separate groups; namely, (1) Captains and Inspectors;.(2) Detectives, and (3)

. Péisonnel assigned: to headquarters. In eaclicase it:seeks to convert from. the

10: hour 4-3/4-4.schedule. which. requires 1946.6 work. hours per:year over.
195 days.to an 8-hour work day on a 5-2/5:2/4-3-schedule which would-also

constitute 1946.6 work:hours per year butyspread:over 243 ratherthan:195

days. Inzeach case,.thesEmployer arguesathat ithe affected. empliyees: are

3 assigned: ‘oxduties: vawhich: regularly. soquire thérsto- initeract swith :ether . :

 
 
 

a h:tHesetother:persons bedauséithey;
donate coordinate cwiththe. conventional torkdays;;
and inefficiéncies;:Lhe: police personnel:cann

 

We are. firmly Jnolined ¢ to support the City's proposal-in-that we. view, / the.

implementation of enhanced productivity to be vital to the Jong-term
interests of both parties. We have proposed adoption of the-City's proposal,

contingent upon -the: payment of a salary differential:to compensate the-
. affected employees-for reporting to work on approximately. 48-more days per

year than was required when working the 10 hour schedule. We. had
proposed a 5 percent differential which the Employer rejected advising that
it views any requirement for a differential to be unacceptable, but contends
the - schedules should be interchangeable without further salary
considerations because both require the same number of work hours
(1946.6) per year. Yet, the City in its opposition to PBA Proposal 4,
Vacations, offered a most persuasive argument in asserting that the 10 hour
schedule is a very valuable benefit as people working that schedule are
required to report on only 195 days per year as opposed to 243 days as do
people working a normal 8 hour five-day schedule. Buffalo emphasized that
10 hour people can readily and repeatedly enjoy 13 sequential days off duty
while having only 40 hours charged against their vacation entitlements,

 

 

 

 
 
 
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 

 

 

 

40.

However, in promoting its Proposal 1, the City denies that days work per | ,

year should be the standard and proposes that the more rational standard
should be hours worked. This is a complete reversal of its prior persuasively
argued rationale and we are constrained to conclude-that a petition to switch
‘personnel from the 10 hour schedule to a:five-day 8 hourschedule without

sproviding some: differential j in recognitionof the: diminished benefit must be:.:

lonieds 8

Salaries and Hours of Work (City Propoial 2)-

The City is seeking contractual license to!aidjust:manpower levels. four times

per year where: it is currently restrictedito making.-such sadjustments only:

énce per year. -The City asserts it shouldtbe able to-adjust manpower levels. .
te account for seasonalidemand like incréased waterfront.activity:in summer: ;

as well as to: make adjustments for rétiremeitts or illnessesisor injuries

 

y iaueto besbased on transfers to ‘available:

 

developmesit factors as determined by the Commissionier.:It-contends that for
this latter group, seniority is not even a determining factor but one of at least
four factors, including the non-specific supervisory, operational: and career

development factors. In effect, the Union asserts that-the: City's i is proposing -
- to replace a seniority system which has been in place since 1967 with

reliance upon:the Commissioner who can:then exercise: preference. and place
friendly individuals into desirable positions and preferred. shifts. ‘Tt further
protests that the City is seeking to empower the Commissioner to adjust
manpower levels on afl shifts and within all departmental units. The
Commissioner, it argues, already is endowed with contractual power to
adjust manpower levels more frequently due to do exigent circumstances. It
charges that the City is now seeking latitude within which the Commissioner
may adjust manpower and shifts to avoid overtime or other contractually
required compensation such as court time pay.

The panel supports the Union Position respecting this proposal. It does

appear that the Commissioner is already empowered to adjust manpower .

levels to address exigent conditions and it does appear that the additional

impacting @ particular district or shift. ‘The City: vemphasizes thattit proposes.

“seniority, supervisdry, - operational sand: Career -

  
     

ction proposing that: «
i tfurther: «

 

 

 
41

} criteria which the City seeks to employ in determining qualification are
subjective and very difficult to define on a reliable basis. City Proposal 2 is .
therefore denied

» Court Time (Gity Proposal 4) a 2 ,

+ The-City:seeksto impose a:minimum guarantee. of twachouts,peisappearance
= instead of the four heurs provided in :the expired: Agreement. .: It estimates
this change would reduce the City's Court Time expense by. nearly half.
That expense amounted to more than $3.2 million in the 2000/01 fiscal year.

he ‘City is proposing a minimum paytof two hours with the: officer being
paidsfor-the actual time spent in court iftit exceeds two-hours..- What is being
eliminated, inthe City's view, is the paiy. that officers receive for not-being ‘in
court as when an officer appears for 30%minutes and continues:to receive pay.
for the next.3 1/2 hours after which Ke or she has left court; The Union

i: responds that Buffalo’s allowances arevalready, substan c ,
no justification: for the. a City. Proposal. i

    

  

+ 2
3B
%

 
  
 

oa

    
 
 

    
 
 
  
  
 

    

 

di 3uffalols Gourt itn payments to: baibslow Hosesof the cointigizous

leas. tise oftsoine-cities#thougti:bath Rechestérands use.
i um 6; we'tonchideltheBniifale allowance
é eidontext.dd:comparable
practicetand: cottion-elements of ‘its omens struchire. Sansequenty.
a roposahdsis i :

 

     

Os Perfect Attendance Incentive (City Proposal 2D “
The Employer pays a perfect attendance incentive:of eight hours pay for
- each: two-monily- ‘period of perfect attendance commencing with July.1 of  .
' each’ contract year, The City now proposes to pay“based on each threes - +
| month period of-perfect attendance. Buffalo asserts-it isseeking to protect
. » ttself from paying an employee who is suspended, the eight hours pay forthe +
three-month period during which the suspension occutred. It justifies its
. proposal on the basis that a person who has been suspended has made
” him/herself unavailable for work due to misconduct and that individual
therefore, should not be awarded a bonus for Perfect attendance, :

 

we

 

‘
|

Contrary to the City's claim that its objective is to avoid rewarding
employees who may have been suspended, it clearly is also seeking to
extend the prior qualifying period of two months to three months. The City
: 3 (4) has presented no evidence of failure of the existing system and we therefore
| ‘ deny this proposal, -
42
j Disciplinary Action (City Proposal 8)
The City is seeking to modify Article XII, Discipline and Discharge, section
12.1 which petmits removal transfer or disciplinary penalties only where
competency or misconduct, or the commission of a felony or crime
involving moral turpitude is involved and:then, only after'a-hearing upon.
stated:.charges. » «Phe: permissible . disciplinary. action under. :the-. expiredsix.
agreement is a reprimand, a monetary fing not to exceed-$100, ‘suspension .
not to-exceed 60 days, demotion in grade or title, or dismissal from service.
The proposed revision would permit disciplinary action upon & showing of 3 4
% misconduct essentially based upon dite process andijust cause. It would also 2.
add disciplinary:.options, including: transfer-and/or changing shifts’ and f
probation.:. Fhe PBA argues that the current:procedure lias been-in effect -t
with onlyvone niodification since the first. negotiated CBA, and. that the &
Employer continues to: enjoy substantial ‘disciplinary power pursuant: to‘.
Section 75. of CiviliService Law. THe Union farther. assérts!thie clause iri-the =
expired agreementihas served to-withronly. a:minor. change fat 35.years, «4:
hendig ébeén:modifiéd only:‘once bythe Prosper Panel Awatth “whi granted = a

ioniiw Tighitito. appeal a ‘decision 1

       

 

    

    

ityibutwalsobelieves that an Intérest: “Arbitration: Panel is ‘held: to.
making. minimal: modifications. We therefore: deeline to-alisestablish the
.. Hearing Officer arrangement and substituts-empowering the:Commissioner -
‘to act. under az “just cause" standard, subject to review: in arbitration. We.
-believe this matter is deserving of more thorough study; and that-it is. likely
the disciplinary options’ should be extended.. However,.the workability of .
proposed ‘or available alternatives depends vupon:having-in place, an- efficient
functioning arbitration mechanism. As noted earlier herein, there prevails a -
glaring absence of such a vehicle in this jurisdiction, and we are therefore .

constrained to deny City Proposal 8.

 

 

Disciplinary Action (City Proposal 9)
This City proposal is concerned with procedures for imposing and appealing

disciplinary actions, The City pleads that the current system simply takes

too long, and by way of illustration cites the March 2, 2000 arrest of four

. narcotics officers by the FBI for a variety of different.charges which led to
Coy L. their suspension. The trial concluded two years later during which time the
: City was compelled to suspend the officers with pay. During that period one

of the arrested officers retired, and one was acquitted in federal court but

1
|
|
|
 

 

 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 
  
 

ac.

 

. the existing system inefficiently selects a Hearing:Officer:and preserves the!

. release time for union representatives to-a:maxinium:of:1948 hours-per year.

43

remained suspended and is awaiting departmental charges. The remaining
two were terminated pursuant to their felony .convictions. The two
terminated officers were suspended for over two years during which period
they received full pay. The City cites another case in which charges.
punishable:by discharge were levied on an. officer in‘1996-and did not come
. to hearingeunti: December 2000.:s.After.thevexpirationvofihisibrief.aniti
suspension, the:officer was«placed back om-.street: patrol while awaitin;
hearing. Thus, except for the brief:suspension period, he was working for
four-years ‘between charges and thé disposition thereof. Buffalo maintainse

  
   
 

 

   

least desirable parts of both, the Civil Service Law, Section:75 and voluntaryzi
atbitration. Buffalo proposes. that these impediments should be removed bys:
the adoption of a:“just-cause" systém wherein recognized: vehicles such asé:
PERB panels, AAA panels, or FMCS panels are employedsexpeditiouslyito
reach just conclagions.:. The Uniow relies upon itsxresponsétto City Proposals;

 
 

  
 

 
  
 
   

a
‘City*is-proposingto-henceforth allow
‘Wniork president and! the first vice: president; ati

 
  

or linitall: other -paid-

 

 

It: argues’. that under the expired agreement: the =Gity sis compelied to
appropriate the equivalent of nominally three fulltime employees to
‘investigate and process grievances, attend meetings; and perform-other union

 

- business; : It.pleads that the City can no: longer afford-to retain officers who:
* are .not:-working, claiming that.the cost of paid: Union time-off has been:

escalating. The Union cites the Rabin Award which denied a prior City:

.Proposal and. pronounced. the provision. in the expired agreement sound,

workable and free of abuse. The Union maintains the City has advanced no
reason for disturbing the Rabin Award.

We are in substantial agreement with the Union position respecting City
Proposal 10, and therefore deny same.

Printing of Contract (City Proposal 15)

The Commissioner testified that an updated agreement would facilitate the
functioning of all concerned and Buffalo proposes that the parties agree to
cooperate in compiling and printing a Contract/Agreement which
44

incorporates all the provisions of the CBA up to and including the settlement
of the current negotiation. The City further proposes that the cost of printing
be divided equally between the City and the Union. They further propose a
‘meeting procedure which must culminate in 2 mutually acceptable written
document within three months. The City seeks: to specify that: any <
‘unresolved. sdifferehsesabout::contract Janguage:..shall.,es.immediately .
submitted:to an arbitrator after:the expiration oftthe three-month period. «The 1
Union‘offers that ten years ago the parties undertook to compile and print an .;
up-to-date Agreement and that the effort disintegrated, allegedly because the
City was deleting:provisions, moving provisions from one-article to another 1 A
and redacting language. It agrees there is merit in having.a-comprehensive x’
documented. agreément, but believes, the Gity on its owninitiative should 3
draft the decument-and present it to the Union for review and:approval. The
PBA rejects the proposal: for submitting matters to an arbitrator, arguing-that “
5 a “itis not an arbitratér’s function: to craft language which maxtichange intents,
. » and asserts that differences about contract: ldnguage are:ifér the. parties to «.
résolve but adds3-that it does: not foresoe ukelihood i !

 

  
   
 

 

  
    

‘wariows: themordnda~ ‘and -arbitration awards; isv- ccutly ware of -the
“ithpédimentssiwhich' should be removed: :by:thedraftiketof'a.-coherent’ +
. - Agreemetit. We believe itis incumbent:upon the Gity to compose and
j a submit-a- copy*to-the Union for discussion, ifnecéssary; and approval. We
view the submission of the issue before this Panel as being at least untimely
inthe absence: of such-a recent prior. effort. It appears that much initial
‘progress could: be made ‘hy merely assembling a compendium of changed -
and new: provisions which have appeared in: Memoranda of Agreement .
and/or Compulsory Interest Arbitration Awards since the last printing.

    

ww

 

VIL Award

’ The undersigned, constituting the duly designated Compulsory Interest
Arbitration Panel, with two members concurring and one dissenting, find

and award as follows:

 

 
45

ey j A. Salaries

     

 

9
: 1. Effective July 1, 2000, all salaries shall be increased
: a ’ by two and one quarter @ 4A) percent. -
Qo gh gees aPoadn wh at
Ht : 2. Effective July 1, 2001, alll salaries shall be increased : &
i : by two and-one quarter (24%) percent - Pe W
” : : . a . 2
9 a
no oo B The following chart (page23 and ‘page 46) shal be cs
at “ appended'to the:Agreemien s 8

   

 

 

 

 

|
|
|
46

1 9701-200 S07.

  

      
   
      
 

of ea etd saan .
| | etter oimcen star See eet

 

 

 

  

CAIRN OF ADMIN, SERV.
& POLICE INSTRUCTOR,

    

CHIEF OF HOMICIDE &
POLICE CAPTAIN

 

 

 

 

y
 

 

47

B. Dental Insurance
Article XXI, Section 21.3 Dental Insurance

   

He

. Amend p

oa otk. et alan, f OO HE ° boat
Effective-June 30, 2002, the City shall provide; -at no
cost to -the employee;- GHI preferred - Dental
Coverage. + ” : ns

  

C, Prescription Drug Co-pay . :
Add fourth paragraph incbine book (7/1/86-6/30/88)(CBA tovread:

 

Effective’ Jue’ 30,2002, changes in the b-pay

The PBA ‘shall: withdraw its demand: for arbitration
concerned with possible co-payment responsibilities of
subscribers to the Univera HMO plan for:ithe period
commencing July 1, 2001 to June 30,::2002 with
_ adjudicatory authority over that mattet-being ceded to
this Panel as a matter of retained jurisdiction. Retention

shall be for one calendar year following the date of this .-

Award and if the matter is not resolved or submitted in
that period of time, it shall be considered to have been
abandoned.

7)

      
48

E. Health Tngurance .

 

N Aasticle XXI- ‘Section 211 a aa Se . 8
Add the following provision: ,

All employees hired on or + after June 30, 2002, shall
pay twenty-five (25%): percent of ithe monthly
premium for the “core cdverage” for individuals and:
' fifteen (15%) percent of the monthly :premiuin for
2 +. . the. “cote céverage” for family coverage. xfCorée:
: foveraue? ist understood to. .consist sof 3 :

 

Upon completion of four @ years: of services: “with

anniversary dates being calculated on'the:same basis:

as for longevity entitlements, an employee's: coverage -

. Shall become the same as for ‘employees: ‘hired prior
to June 30, 2002.

F. Funeral — Fund
Artiole XXXI- Funeral Expense Fund

The City and the PBA shall establish a Funeral
Expense Fund of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000) to be used to defray funeral expenses and
a directly related costs which may be incurred in the
4 : interment or in paying respect to an officer Kdlled in
: the line of duty. The City and the PBA shall contribute
to the Fund with payments of twelfth thousand five

 

 

 
   
49

‘hundred dollars ($12,500) each which Fund shall be
administered by the PBA. The money shall be
maintained in a separate interest-bearing account with
the Police Credit Union. The PBA shall promptly

_ advise the City of any withdrawal from-the fomd and
‘shall provide: accounting. upon request... Expended  «::
funds shall be replenished by the..City andjthe PBA; .
with equal contributions, by each, within thirty (30) . :
calendar days following disbursement, Any dispute ue :
regarding the. Fund shall be submitted to oxpealifed
arbitration. 4 .

 

 

    

G. Longevity Allowance
Article X10. Le viLongevity

 
    

   

: eoaleted twonthe 0 of service commencing
" ‘anniversary date and. concluding: with: the: effective ‘date’

   

 

HX. Uso ” Maiitonence
Article xx Section 19, 1-Usiform, Equipment a ‘and Maintenance
Allowance:

19.1 Allowance

Effective Jaly 1, 2001, the City shall pay an annual
i : uniform allowance of One Hundred and Fifty ($150)
: * Dollars. Such payments shall be made on or before
i . September 30th of each year,

 

 

 

 
50

‘|. Paychecks
Article IL, Section2.1 (G) :
"Pay checks shall be delivered with the flap folded and

stapled: to-:conceal.the ‘amount of the: checkand 9 5 ae
deductions and. the nature’ thereof. es ‘ ne :
: J. Detailing

The Rabin Panel Award respecting Detailing -shall be
preserved oni the existing provisional basis~ in the
successor ‘Agreement. * .

 

   
 

 

Ri Overtime Provedues Captains and Inspectors

dvertimiestis: required for the Chiefxof -Detectiv
on Professional Staridards Division Inspectir}Professi
-) Standards: Division ‘Captain, » Major: +@ases
Captain;;or Narcotic Captain. in theirin
assignments, the available overtime shall be: first
offered to said individual. Said individual(s) shall not
be eligible for any other rank-overtime unléss all other
eligible individuals have declined the * Opportunity to
work that overtime. :

 
 
    
  

 

 

Except as provided above, in the event of the necessity:
to replace a Captain or Inspector, the most senior
officer, of the rank to be filled within the assignment,
. shall be given the first opportunity to work overtime,
{ / and said opportunity shall likewise pass through the
: applicable rank based on seniority. If the overtime is
not accepted pursuant to this Section, the least senior
officer within the applicable rank shall fill the vacancy.

 

 

The following ancillary explanation of the intent of the
above language shall be included in the agreement as a
  
 
  
   
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 

 

}
j

Delmar,:New York
- September .5 , 2002

Swo:

  

footnote or appended and referenced in the body of the

document.

The terms "in their respective assignments" and "w
_ are intended to,lead to the disttibution of rertime consistent vith the.
. following: ilustrativeand non exclusiveexamp| x” tee
a » When an overtime need. arises related to’ a , homicide it ‘should be
assigned to the. Major Crimes Unit Captain; if related to & narcoticé -
operation, the narcotics Captain should be assigned ; HE the assignment is
in “Cc” District, it should be filled by the Inspector in “C” District; if ix
meeting is called with citizens of “A” District to address:concerns about i
crime wave there, the “A” District Inspector should be: assigned. If “BY
District is building anew headquarters;.the “B? District Inspector should
be assigned overtioe: required to wattend ¢ a meeting relating thereto. a

State of New York)

County. of bay)

ithin the assignment"

   

nag’ sidered a: and addressed every: i pasdliplace before it 8
which. are motrinclud ‘the Aw

  

 

  
 

is & S _ day of September, 2002

ousltfed in malay rcauty 200
Gommussion Expires Sept. 03, -——
    
       
   

   

State of New York). .

ARR

OAL
Robert P, Meee

 

    

een WA
PBA Designated Pe

Conourting= 25 Desaimed

Member

  

 
Ht.

1998 - 2000

 
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT

The City of Buffalo (“City”) and the Buffalo Police Benevolent Association (“PBA"}
hereby agree upon the following terms for a new collective bargaining agreement for the
term July 1, 1998 to June 30, 2000.

1. Increase base wages by 3.0% retroactive to July 1, 1998 Gncluding
retirees).

2. Increase base wages by 3.0% retroactive to July 1, 1999 (including

 

retirees).
3. Article XXIII (Longevity)

Amend Paragraph (A) as follows:
(A) Effective July 1, 1999, each permanent
yf } employee who has completed one (1) year of
~ service shall receive annually, in addition to
their salary, one hundred and twenty-five
dollars ($125) longevity payment for each
| completed year of service, to a maximum of
ry twenty-five (25) years.

4. All employees hired after 6/300 shail be required to contribute to
the cost of health insurance as follows:

i a. Either of the two (2) lowest cost plans - No contribution;

 

i ‘ b. Employee shall be required to pay the full cost of the
difference in premium cost between the second lowest cost
plan and the higher cost plan sélected by the officer.

 

5. The City may change both shifts and scheduled work days/days off

Gncluding WV days, PL days, and vacations) for educational and training purposes as

 

follows:
a. Lieutenants - Supervisory Training as mandated by New York
State;

b. SWAT, HMT, URT, and Honor Guard for training exercises,

    
 

All subject to ratification in its entirety by the Union and then approval by

the Mayor and Common Council.
DATED: December 22, 1999
FOR THE UNION

FOR THE CITY OF BUFFALO

$60154.1

  

j
i
d
i
SALARY AND WAGE SCHEDULE "C"
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 1998

GRADE STEP1 STEP2 STEP3 STEP4 STEP 5

35,079 38,161 41,249 44,334 47,426
49,160
50,847
51,417
54,913
58,788 -
62,914
69,230

BVO Wh

THE ABOVE SCHEDULE iS EFFECTIVE RETROACTIVE TO JULY 1, 199&

These schedules are applicable to uniformed members of the
Police Department - Local P.B.A. .

SALARY AND WAGE SCHEDULE "C”
EFFECTIVE JULY 7, 1999

 

of}
pod GRADE STEP1 STEP2 STEP3 STEP4 STEP 5

36,131 39,306 «= 42,486 «45,664 48,849
50,685
52,372
52,960
56,560
60,552
64,801
71,307

ON OGhWN a

PO THE ABOVE SCHEDULE IS EFFECTIVE RETROACTIVE TO JULY 1, 1998.

These schedules are applicable.to uniformed members of the
Police Department - Local P.B.A.

 

 

Salschedols
IV. .

1996 - 1998
Rabin

 
 

 

State of New York
Public Employment Relations Board

ttt

Interest Arbitration between

City of Buffalo

and

Buffalo Police Benevolent Association

No. |A96-035; M96-297

 

Before:

Robert J. Rabin, Public Member and Chairperson
Edward G. Piwowarezyk, Employer Member
Robert P. Meegan, Jr., Union Member

Decision and Award of Panel

This Interest Arbitration Panel was appointed on March 18, 1997. Pre-hearing
briefs were filed, and evidence was taken and arguments presented at a hearing on
July 1 and 2, 1997, in Buffalo, N.Y. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs at the
end of August, The Panel members met in Executive Session on October 23, and
subsequently exchanged positions in writing and by phone.

Issues

The primary issue in this dispute is economic. {tis closely tied to several
demands raised by the City for greater efficiencies and cost savings in the deployment
of personnel, in the handling of disciplinary matters, and health insurance. The Panel
will discuss the economic issues before turning to the demands pressed by the City.

This dispute covers a two year contractual period of July 1, 1986 to June 30,
1998. The PBA seeks a salary increase of 6% in each year, or a cost of living
adjustment plus 2% in each year: The PBA also seeks a host of ather economic
improvements in areas that will be explained. The City proposes a salary freeze for
both years. While it opposes a salary increase, it says that any increase awarded by
the Panel must be tied to the cost saving resulting from its demands regarding
 

9

 

 

3

deployment, discipline and health insurance.
Economic Issues

The economic data, particularly as set out in the City's pre-hearing brief at page
25-40, compares police salaries in Buffalo with those of several nearby jurisdictions
used historically as comparisons, such as Amherst, Cheektowaga, Hamburg,
Tonowanda and West Seneca, as well as Rochester, the closest large city. Whether
you look at the annual salary or the average hourly rates, the figures for 1996 and 1997
show that Buffalo police salaries are roughly equivalent to those in the comparison
districts (tables at pages 37-39 of City brief). Since the Buffalo police officers have not
had an increase for the last two years, for purposes of comparison the Pane! assumed
an aggregate 6% increase in the Buffalo police salaries for that period. With such an
adjustment, the hourly rate for the highest Buffalo patrol officer would be in line with
those of the comparison districts in the nearby area (p. 39), The same adjustment
would bring the highest police officer salary to $45,563, above the listed 1997 salaries
in the comparison localities for 1997 (p. 38).

The PBA points out that Buffalo police salaries have run a sporadic course over
the last 15 or so years (p. 16 of PBA presentation of Joseph Madison), and that the
increases in the last two years, 2% and 1%, were especiaily low. But while the
aggregate increases over these years may be slightly lower than the comparison
districts, Buffalo salaries still wind up at or near the top of the comparison group. As
the next section indicates, the City of Buffalo is not well off financially, and the
comparison cities probably have stronger economic bases. For this reason, the Panel
concludes that the salary of Buffalo police officers is competitive with the neighboring
units,

The PBA does not dispute the salary comparison, but argues that the true
picture must take into account the total compensation package, including such items as
night shift differential, education pay differential, holidays and personal days, vacation
allowances, uniform provisions and vision care. When ail these figures are put
together, Buffalo police lag about 6% behind their counterparts, as. shown in the table
at page 4 of the Madison presentation. The City does not dispute these figures as far
as they go, but asserts they should be offset bythe additional income an officer
receives in Buffalo from overtime and court duty, as well as by the savings to the officer
of not having to contribute to any health insurance premiums.

The Panel concludes that the most effective mode of comparison is to treat
salaries ag one item, and other etonomic benefits as a separate item. The salary
increase should keep pace with the increases in the comparison districts. The other
economic items will be discussed separately.
 

Oo

 

 

y
2

Economic Constraints on the City

The Taylor Law requires the Panel to consider "the interests and welfare of the
public and the financial ability of the public employer to pay (Civil Service Law Sec.
209(4)(C)(v))." As the PBA correctly points out, the City does not plead inability to pay
in this proceeding, nor, most likely, could it do so, But the facts do back up the City's
assertion that it has only a limited ability to pay.

The evidence shows that over the years the percentage of state aidhas +
decreased, putting more and more of a burden on the property tax to carry the load of
financing city operations. At the same time, residential property values are decreasing.
Meanwhile, police and fire protection consume an increasingly large share of the
municipal budget. This means the individual taxpayer pays more and more for this ~
vital service, and, with a relatively static budget, receives fewer and fewer other
services, such as street repair and maintenance. The City has room under its
constitutional ceiling to increase property taxes, but the wisdom and fairness of such an
increase is a different matter. As the City’s budget director points out, as you raise
taxes without improving services, residents realize they can get a better deal
elsewhere. This creates an incentive for the better off to move, leaving behind those
least able to afford to support the City and the most in need of its services. An indicator
of the tax squeeze is that the City had to rely on a garbage user fee to take some of the
pressure off the property tax.

The City has enjoyed comfortable fund balances of up to $30 million in the past,
but suffered through years when the fund balance dropped to $20 million in the hale.
The current fund balance is a modest $10 million, much of which is already
encumbered for other purposes than salary. Use of the fund balance is at best a one-
time cure, for if it.is used to fund a salary increase it simply pushes the financial
pressure into the next year. Recognition of the City's poor financial condition is found
in the City's low bond ratings, which jeopardize its borrowing powers.

The data suggests that some of the comparison cities, especiaily the smaller
surrounding townships, have a stronger base of economic support. See Appendix IV,
tab D, of City pre-hearing brief.

The City points out that it has budgeted 3% for a salary increase for the first year
of the agreement. But it contends that even with that budgeted amount, the funding of
the full PBA proposed salary increase will take an additional tax increase of 4.3% (City
post-hearing brief p. 51). The tax increase required to fund the full set of PBA
economic demands is considerably higher, about 8.8%.
Oo

 

 

 

 

 

 

Current comparison settlements

In the Panel's judgment, a salary increase is required if the Buffalo police
officers are to remain in the comparison ballpark. This increase must be in the range
of the current settlements in the comparison area. The data on settlements for 1997
and 1998 is very thin. Further, it is not always possibie to determine their true worth,
for they don’t always indicate what concessions and adjustments may have gone into
the salary figure.

The Panel concludes that current settlements are in the 3-4% range, including
Amherst, Cheektowaga, Tonowanda and the State troopers. The City has settled with
its blue and white collar workers for 3% annually for this period.

The Public member agrees with the City that the amount of the salary increase.
should depend in some part on the extent to which the City is able to gain cost savings
through the other demands that it has placed on the table. The Public member also
agrees with the PBA that the normal expectation of a public employee is thata
substantial salary increase is needed to compensate for the removal of a valuable
existing contract right. ,

However, when the Panel met in executive concession, the PBA strongly
opposed those demands that might result in significant cost savings. The validity of
the City's demands and of the PBA’s opposition to them will be discussed in a
subsequent section of this decision. Suffice it to say that as a result of the discussions

. in executive session it became apparent that the opportunities for cast savings through

these approaches were limited.

Since the Panel award will not result in the magnitude of cost savings hoped for
at the outset, the salary award will be in the middle of the 3-4% range. The salary
increase will be 3.5% of the base salary for each year of the agreement.

The City has budgeted 3% to cover the costs of an increase for one of the years
in question. The balance of the cost must be met through other budget savings, or, if
necessary, through tax increases. But given the City's estimate of the salary increase
that would be required to fund the PBA’'s full set of demands, if any tax increase is
necessary to fund this more limited award, it should be modest.

Other economic adjustments
.
In his initial correspondence with the other Panel members, the Chair indicated
that some adjustment should be made for other econamic benefits where Buffalo
officers are behind the norm. The PBA Panel representative indicated the priority of

4
 

 

 

its demands. Based on this, and on the relative significance of the items in question,
the Panel awards as follows:

4. Optical insurance. This is a benefit enjoyed in several comparison units, and
is of major importance to the membership. The annual cost of this benefit is about
$75,000. This benefit is administered through the PBA, and under this award the City
shall reimburse the PBA for this payment. -

2. Holidays. Officers are somewhat behind their counterparts in this area,
though the shortfall is offset by the fewer work hours assigned. The holiday benefit,
which now calls for 48 hours of annual holiday pay, should be increased by 12 hours.

3. All holiday pay should be prorated upon retirement.

While there may be merit to some of the other fringe demands, only a limited -
economic adjustment can be made, given the economic circumstances.

As a practical matter, these benefits, for the most part, cannot be implemented
retroactively. The changes in the agreement that will result ir. cost savings to the Gity
can be realized prospectively only. The panel concludes that the most equitable and
expedient resolution is to make the cost saving changes and fringe benefit
improvements on a prospective basis only. With respect to the fringe benefits, this
means that:

1. For the calendar year 1998 and thereafter, the City shall pay $75,000 for the
annual cost of optical insurance. :

2. The 12 hour increase in holiday pay shall be in effect for the calendar year
4998 and thereafter.

3. The holiday pay proration for retirees shall be in effect for the calendar year
74998 and thereafter.

City demands that would result in cost savings

__
Seniority

The City made a number of demands that would give it greater flexibility in
making assignments. The Commissioner testified persuasively that in a modern,
effective police force, he needs to be abie fo place the best people in key positions.
The PBA strongly opposed these demands, which it sees as dangerously jeopardizing
the traditional role of seniority in the assignment of officers. In executive session the
City winnowed its demands to four, all of which it deems essential.
Oo

4
j

 

The basic seniority provision in the current contract (Section 12.2. of City's
version) says that:

“The department recognizes the importance of seniority in filling
vacancies and shall make every effart to adhere to this policy, provided
the senior applicant has the ability and qualifications to perform the work
involved." :

The existing provision is not crysta! clear, since the "make every effort" clause
may give the City some leeway to depart from seniority, and because there is a core
requirement ef “ability and qualifications" before the applicant may invoke seniority.
This open-endedness may invite litigation. However, the numerous awards submitted
by the PBA tend to uphold the senior bidder in almost all contested cases, suggesting
that the principle of seniority is fairly clear.

Command officers

Two of the City's demands cover the City's command and investigative positions
(inspectors, certain Captains, Lieutenants, Detectives, Detective Sergeants, and
officers assigned to Spécial Units). One such demand would permit the City to make
overtime assignments within this grouping on the basis of qualifications, training,
experience, job responsibilities and seniority. It says "if the other considerations are
demonstrably equal, the most senior employee should be offered the overtime
opportunity."

The other City demand would allow the City to make and change permanent
assignments of officers in these positions on the same basis as the assignment of
overtime, that is, with seniority governing assignments only if the other considerations
are "demonstrably equal."

In the Public member's judgment, in the long run the City should be permitted to
take into account an officer's qualifications for a key assignment, and where those
qualifications are demonstrably superior, they should be allowed to trump seniority. In
a labor relations climate of trust, appropriate language would protect the principle of
seniority, and would insure that departures from-seniority are based solely on
demonstrable merit, and not on favoritism. In executive session the Public member,
proposed language that would require the Commissioner io give great weight to
seniority, but would allow him to consider other objective and demonstrable factors that
measure ability for the job. In other words, the burden would be on the City to depart
from seniority, while under the City's proposal it is the other way around, The Public
member also suggested that this departure from the current language should initially
apply only to a smail group of officers.
 

?

 

 

The PBA continued to object even to these more modest proposals. The
primary basis for its resistance is its claim that historically promotions in Buffalo have
been based on political factors and favoritism. As a result, the PBA has been forced to
spend considerable money to protect its contractual rights through arbitration. The
PBA submitted a packet of arbitration awards that it claims show that the City is not
henoring the present contract language. Without repeating the details of these
awards, it is sufficient to state that the language of some of the arbitrators shows that
there is a real problem of trust.

The PBA's objections are significant. First, the parties will get nowhere with a
marked departure from the current principles of seniority uniess there is a better climate
of trust. The new language demanded by the City may very well iead to an increase
in the already large volume of arbitral litigation about seniority, and that is not good for
labor relations or for saving money.

Second, interest arbitration is an essentially conservative process. Substantial
changes should come about as the result of give and take at the bargaining table. The
parties have a much greater familiarity with the history of this issue and its potential
pitfalls than any third party can gain through this brief proceeding. An imposed award
could do more harm than good. Nor is an arbitrator in a position to determine whether
and to what extent acceptance of the demand requires additional compensation in the
economic package. These, are matters better resolved at the bargaining table.

While the award does not incorporate the City's demands, the Public member
suggests that now that the City has narrowed down its demands, this provides a good
beginning for constructive discussions in the upcoming negotiations. Until the parties
come up with solutions that permit greater flexibility in deployment, the economic
settlement will not be at the higher end of the range. There has to be some incentive
for the PBA to work constructively with the City towards meeting a mutual need.

All officers
The City placed two other demands on the table in executive session that affect
all officers, not just those in command positions. .
Detailing for educational purposes
This demand would allow the City to

"detail an officer, regardless of seniority, from one shift to another for
educational and/or training purposes."

The City points out that under current practice the training programs are usually offered
on the day shift. This means that an officer on any other shift not only gets overtime
r for the shift in which he is trained, but may be too fatigued, after serving the earlier
4 y shift, to get the most out of his training.

S The City's concern is legitimate. Its proposed Janguage would allow it to offer
training on a more rational basis, without running into overtime costs. This demand
does not jeopardize the larger principle of seniority, and the potential for problems is
limited, given that it is confined to training and education.

Other detailing

The second City demand, as framed during the Panel discussions, allows the

 

City to

“detail an officer between Districts within the same shift by inverse order
of seniority within that officer's district."

Under an existing agreement, the City has the right to detail officers to cover
3 short term absences. The language provides:

| "The parties agree that the Department shall have the right to detail
+ officers of any rank on the basis of seniority. Detailing may be used by
. the Department to cover for short term absences such as personal leave,
ome ) vacation time, sickness, blood days, etc. !t shall be the intent of the
: Department to detail on a shift by shift basis and within the officer's
division." .

The parties advise that in addition the City has the right, in emergency situations, to
OQ reassign officers within their shift even without regard to senicrity.

In its presentation in the interest arbitration, the City gave several grounds for its
various proposals on detailing. Neither the specific language of its proposals, nor their
| actual impact on the members of the bargaining unit, was discussed in much detail in
Bs the arbitration, though, as agreed during the arbitration hearing, this was addressed by
the Panel members in their correspondence. —_--

As the Panel understands it, the City seeks the right to make these changes in
advance of an emergency, and for a broader array of reasons than now permitted
under the contract. It asseris that its proposal will save some overtime costs, as
officers from a lighter district may be moved to cover needs in a heavier district.

 

 

The PBA strongly opposes these proposed changes. The PBAis concerned
that the City will not use this provision in good faith, but will make wholesale, long term
 

 

transfers that undermine the assignments officers have obtained through seniority.
The PBA says that if the City can readily transfer employees, it will not face up te the
pressing need to hire more officers to meet the City’s overall law enforcement
obligations.

The Public member agrees with the City that-it should be allowed greater
flexibility in making these assignments. These proposals do not jeopardize the larger
principle of seniority that the PBA has assiduously protected. The City contends in its
brief that most of the comparison jurisdictions have greater flexibility than Buffalo in
deploying its officers. A review of the contracts submitted in evidence indicates that
for the most part this is so, particularly in view of the managements’ rights clauses in
several of these agreements. A recent interest arbitration award for the City of
Rochester (Selchick, 1995) recognizes the need for greater flexibility in the deployment
of police personne! as we enter the 21st century.

At the same time, the Public member concludes that the City's rights in this
regard should be specifically limited and defined. As with the other City deployment
demands, a lack of mutual trust prevents a constructive approach to greater flexibility in
detailing. Further, this is another area better suited to resolution at the bargaining table
than through interest arbitration. Therefore the award supports only limited changes in
this area.

The Panel does not agree that the City should have the absolute right, as
asserted in its initial demand quoted above, to detail officers from one District to
another. Rather, the City's right to detail between districts should be limited to two
specific situations:

1. To cover short term absences.

2. To cover specific everits, such as sporting events, concerts, demonstrations and the
like, as represented in the City's pre and post-arbitration briefs.

In-order to insure that these assignments are temporary and meet specific
needs, detailing on this basis may not exceed 15 working days.
ee
Further, the language should recognize the current practice of allowing senior
officers to accept the assignments on a voluntary basis.

To accomplish these objectives, the Panel awards the following language
change:

“The City may detail officers of any rank between Districts within the same
3

 

 

 

shift by inverse order of seniority within that officer's district for the following:

4. To cover short term absences such as personal leave, vacation time,
sickness, blood days, etc.

2. To cover specific events, such as sporting events, concerts,
demonstrations and the like.

This detailing may not exceed 15 working days

Except in cases of emergency, the City shall offer the assignment to :
another District to officers in seniority order. In the event that the
assignment is not voluntarily accepted, the least senior officer (s) shall be
assigned to the other District.

This language is to be viewed as-a provisional solution to the problem. The
parties may monitor the City's utilization of these provisions and propose changes and
modifications in the upcoming negotiations. In any future interest arbitration, the panel
should consider the parties’ experience with this language.

Health Insurance

The City proposes significant relief in its health insurance costs. The City
presently pays 100% of the costs of health insurance coverage for all employees in the
unit. The data shows a variety of patterns in comparison districts, with some officers
paying for a portion of their health insurance costs. As a result, Buffalo police officers
enjoy a substantially greater benefit than officers in some comparable units. Further,
the City asserts that it needs savings in this area to fund a salary increase.

As a preliminary matter, the PBA gontends this matter is not properly before the
Panel. However, the Panel observes that the City had placed a demand for relief in
health insurance costs on the table. That proposal has been modified, but the
modification is not more burdensome on the employees, nor does it change the basic
nature of the demand. Hence the Panel concludes it has the authority to deal with this

issue. _—
Fhe City proposes to approach this issue in a way that it says is relatively easy
for officers to absorb, The City is willing to continue to pay the full premiums for both
single and family coverage for the two current plans, both HMO’s, that presently have
the lowest premium costs. It proposes fhat covered officers then pay the full amount of

the difference between those premiums and the premiums of the more expensive plan
the officer chooses. If an officer does not want to pay this additional premium, he may

10
 

 

 

a

 

elect the less expensive plan. The City saves money by not having to pay the full
premium costs of the more expensive plan. The City points out that the majority of the
employees have chosen the less expensive HMO plans, indicating they are competitive
with ihe more expensive plans.

While the proposal has appeal, there are obstacles to it.

First, the cost of the choice is high. The numbers in the City's brief (p. 38) show
it could cost an officer more than $1,200 for a single plan and over $2,200 for a family
plan. The officer who wants to remain with the current plan has to pay an enormous
premium —the equivalent of perhaps a 5% pay increase -- just to maintain his current
coverage.. This becomes a very expensive give back.

Second, because there has not been a lot of discussion at the bargaining tabie,
the PBA has not been in a position to assess the benefits of the various plans. The -
best solution would be for the City to persuade the PBA at the bargaining table that ali
the members will have adequate coverage under the less expensive plans.

Third, there is no control over the less expensive plans. If they prove to be
inadequate, officers may be forced into the more expensive plans. In executive session
the City proposed to correct this risk by agreeing to take any savings resulting from a
cut back of benefits and purchasing new benefits with them.

The Panel concludes that the City’s proposal has merit because more officers
will have an incentive to move into the less expensive plans. However, it does not
take an additional charge of over $2,000 to encourage an officer to change plans. In
the Panel's judgment, a much more modest premium differential should be enough to
persuade the officer to move to the less expensive pian, If the benefits are relatively
similar, as the City contends.

The Panel concludes that an officer should be required to pay 25% of the
differential between the premium of the second {owest of the lowest two plans and the
higher cost plan ne elects, for single coverdge, and 15% of the differential for the family
plan.

_

While the Panel cannot be confident that this differential will move a substantial
number of employees out of the more expensive plans, this determination is at least a
start In the direction of greater cost savings in health insurance plans. The experience
in the next few months shouid give the parties a better data base if they revisit this

issue in the next round of negotiations.

The City should make this change during an open enrollment period as soon as
practicable after this Award is finalized.

11
 

 

 

 

Disciplinary matters

A third area if which the City seeks relief that may result in cost savings is in the
handling of disciplinary matters. As matters now stand, the City may not terminate an
employee or suspend him for more than 30 days without affording the officer a hearing.
The present provision calls for the hearing to be before a hearing officer, with the costs

borne completely by the City.

The City asks for the right to discipline an employee without any prior hearing,
with the employee having the right to challenge that discipline through arbitration. The
PBA raises substantial objections to this proposal. >

First, the PBA argues that requiring officers to give up their statutory and
constitutional rights to a pre-discipline hearing should only come about through
voluntary agreement by the union, and not through an imposed award. Whether or net
this position is mandated by the Constitution, it reflects a solid principle for interest
arbitration. The Public member views interest arbitration as an inherently conservative
process, in which significant changes should whenever possibile be made at the
bargaining table. In the wake of the concern aver the Gilmer case and the general
waiver of statutory rights, the Public member is reluctant to impose a new procedure on

the parties.

Second, the PBA pcints out that the use of arbitration will impose significant
costs on its treasury, as the PBA will have to share in the costs of the proceedings.
This means officers must now pay, through their union dues, for the right to challenge
disciplinary matters.

The Public member sees no problem with the City imposing discipline prior to
hearing if it does not result in suspension or termination. _ In these cases, the
individual's rights are adequately preserved through a hearing after the discipline is
imposed. But even here the shifting of these challenges to arbitration hits the PBA's
treasury. . The Public member made some suggestions to the panel members for ways
‘of resolving these cases without immediate arbitration, with the PBA reducing its
objections to writing, and saving adjudication for a later day, if and when the officer is
suspended or discharged. However, the parties were unable to come to agreement on
this. The Panel makes no change on this issue. The Public member observes that
this is another area that deserves intensive discussion in collective bargaining.

Other City Demands
The City had a several other demands on deployment of officers on the table,

including the changing of rotations. These demands were subordinated to the four that
the City pressed in executive session, and no further award is made in this area.

12
The City also demanded a reduction in union release time, which currently
involves as many as three union officials who devote their full time to labor relations
matiers. There should be no change in the current system. The system works, and
there is no evidence of abuse. This is a large unit, with complex labor relations issues,
and cutting back on union service may actually make relationships worse.

Indemnification

The PBA made a demand for indemnification where an officer is acquitted after
he defends a criminal charge that arises in the line of duty. The demand is generated
by an actual recent situation. By law, the City is required to indemnify officers in civil
maiters.

 

While the demand may appear to be equitable, further investigation in executive
session reveals that this is a safeguard that is rarely found in collective agreements. -
And when it does appear, there are some preconditions to its usage. Following the
precept that interest arbitration is not the place to pioneer contractual provisions, the
Panel does not grant the PBA’s demand.

Dated:

; December /s”, 1997

 

Robert P. Meegan, Jr., Union Member

 

 

 

 

 

13
 

 

 

 

 

ut dal

STATE OF NEW YORK )
COUNTY OF CWay/Owaeg =) 8S.:

Onthis 22 day of December, 1997, before me personally came and
appeared Robert J. Rabin, to me known and known to me to be the individual
described in the foregoing Instrument, and he acknowledged to me that he executed
the same. .

fee Logi ——__

Nofary Public :

JAMES K. WEEKS
Rotary Pubtic, the St, of New York
Qualitied in Quon, Co. oo 0
ion Exp. Mi jude
STATE OF NEWYORK +?) *y Gommession Exe WA Sr

COUNTY OF ) $8.

On this 23 day of December, 1997, before me personally came and
appeared Edward G..Piwowarczyk, to me known and known to me to be the individual
described in the foregoing Instrument, and he acknowledged to me that he executed

ihe same.
Notary Public
Notary Pe, Sate ssw Yor
Quatified In Eria County
STATE OF NEWYORK) GammisenEees ost 14
COUNTY OF ) 55.
Onthis ~  dayof December, 44997, before me personally came and

appeared Robert P. Meegan, to me known and known to me to be the ifdividuat
described in the foregoing Instrument, and he acknowledged to me that he executed
the same.

ee

Notary Public

14
V.

1995 - 1996
Cugalj

 
3 STATE OF NEW YORK
PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS BOARD
CASE: IA 95-020; M95-165

 

ey . * * : *

5°

In The Matter of Interest Arbitration AWARD

- between - * OF
9 .
CITY OF BUFFALO ARBITRATION

QO - and - * AND

BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION OPINION
‘> * * * *

4 APPEARANCES

| 1

aye oy

Of .4r the PBA

W. James Schwan, Esq., Spokesman :

Joseph J. Madison, Economic Consultant, Witness

Edward Fennell, Government Finance Consultant, Witness

3 John Juszkiewicz, PBA lst Vice President, Witness
James F.Cudney, PBA Recording Secretary, Witness

For the City

Peter J. Hurtgen, Esq., Spokesman

James N. Schmit, Esq. Spokesman

Honorable Anthony Masiello, Mayor, Witness

Barbara Slominski, Ass’t Director of Laber Relations, Witness
James B. Milroy, Director of Budget, Witness

Joseph J. Tanzella, Commissioner of Assessment (retired), Witness

 

 

For the Panel

 

>. Samuel Cugalj, Chairman and Public Panel Member
/’ 7 can gd. Stocker, Public Employer Panel Member
° ‘act P, Meegan, Jr., Employee Organization Panel Member
9

 

 

 

 

BACKGROUND

The City of Buffalo (“CITY”), located in Western New York
state, is the second largest city in the state with an estimated
population of 328,100. The Buffalo Police Benevolent Association
(“PBA”) represents approximately nine hundred (900) sworn police
personnel in the CITY, excluding the Commissioner and three (3)
Deputy Commissioners. This bargaining unit includes police
officers, detectives, assistant dispatchers, police photographers,
detective sergeants, lieutenants, captains, inspectors, among
others. ,

Their three (3) year Collective Bargaining Agreement expired
on June 30, 1995. The PBA submitted its proposals for a successor
agreement on or about January 17, 1995. Pursuant to Article XXvI
of their now expired collective bargaining agreement, when one
party submits contract proposals to the other party, the latter has
thirty (30) days from said receipt in which to submit its
proposals. Thereafter, the parties must meet and commence
negotiations within thirty (30) days for ‘a successor collective
bargaining agreement. On February 17, 1995, the PBA filed a class
action grievance protesting the CITY’s failure to timely submit its
contract proposals under Article XXVI.

The CITY’s Director of Labor Relations position was vacant
from early December 1994 through February 21, 1995. On or about

February 28, 1995, the CITY offered its contract Proposals to the

.

2
 

 

 

 

 

PBA which the latter rejected as being untimely. No negotiation
sessions were held. On March 7; 1995, the PBA filed a Declaration
of Impasse with the New York State Public Employment Relations
Board (PERB). The parties, thereafter, agreed to submit the above
referenced class action grievance to expedited arbitration before
Arbitrator Eischen. On June 30, 1995, this Arbitrator ruled:

“1, The City of Buffalo did violate the 1992-95 Collective Bargaining

Agreement when it ailed to submit ite proposals to modify that contract by
February 17, 1995.

2. As a consequence of the City’s failure to submit its proposals in a timely
manner, it may nok compel negotiations on its Februacy 27, 1395 proposals
for modifying the 1992~95 agreement.

3. Negotiations for changes, if any, in the provisions of the 1992-95 Agreement
shall commence forthwith on the basis of the proposals submitted by the PBA
under date of January 16, 1995.”

[Referenced Joint Exhibit 1,2)

The Eischen Award was confirmed in State Supreme Court on August
28, 1995. On July 27 and 31, 1995 the PBA again requested
mediation services from PERB, and mediation sessions were held with
a State Mediator on August 23 and September 6. No progress was
reported. The PBA filed a Petition for Interest Arbitration on
September 11, 1995, and on October 12 PERB designated this three
(3) member Public Arbitration Panel to resolve their impasse.

Hearings were held in Buffalo, New York on December 27 and 28, 1995
and on January 23,1996. A stenographic record of the proceedings
was made available to Panel members. The Panel met in Executive
Session on November 28 and prior to the Hearing on December 27 to
discuss the impact of the Eischen Arbitration Award and the Taylor

Law’s procedural requirements. The Panel determined the CITY was
 

 

precinded from presenting its proposals for “at least” the first
year because of (a) the Eischen Award, which the Panel had no
Jurisdiction to alter, and (b) the cITY did not submit its
Proposals to PERB in its 9/26/95 response to the Interest
Arbitration Petition as required under Section 205.5 {b) of the
Taylor Law. The CITY disagreed with the Panel’s determination. The
Panel also. directed the parties to brief the issue of a one (1) or
two {2) year award herein.

At the Hearings, the Panel received extensive material
including Héaring Briefs, seven {7) Joint Exhibits, five (5) CITY
and ten (10) PBA Exhibits. The parties were given full opportunity
to present argument in support of their Positions on the open
items, introduce evidence and witnesses, and to engage in their
examination and cross~-examination. They were given the opportunity
to file Post Hearing Briefs and both were postmarked by the agreed
upon date of March 5.

Panel members independently reviewed the Exhibits and Hearing
transcripts extensively, then met in Executive Sessions on March 4,
19, 21, 25 and 28. The Panel fully discussed the merits of their
arguments, the evidence submitted, and structured this AWARD in
view of satisfying Section 209.4 (iii through vi) of the Taylor Law

as follows:

"(v) the public arbitration panel shall make a just and reasonable determination
the matters in dispute. In arriving at such determination, the panel shall

Specify the basis for its findings, taking into consideration, in addition to any
ether relevant factors, the following: .

a. comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of the employment of the
employees involved in the arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours, and
conditions of employment of other employees performing similar secvices or
requiring similar skills under similar working conditions and with other employees
generally in public afd private employment in comparable communities;
b. the interest and welfare of the public and the financial ability of the public
employer to pay;

¢, comparison of pecullarities in regard to other trades or professions,
including specifically, {1) hazards of employment; (2) physical qualifications:
{31 educational qualifications: {4} mental qualifications; {5} job training
skills.

d. the tecms of collective agreements negotiated between the parties in the past
providing for compensation and fringe benefits, including, but not limited to, the
Provisions of salary, insurance and retirement benefits, medical and
hospitalization benefits, paid time off, and job security.

{vi) the determination of the public arbitration panel shall be finei and binding
upon the parties for the period prescribed by the panel, but in no event shall
such period exceed two years from the termination date of any previous collective
bargaining or if there is no previous collective bargaining agreement then for a
period not to exceed two years from the date of determination by the panel. Such
determination shall not be subject to the approval of any local legislative bady
or other municipal authority.”

  

 

AWARD

 

ISSUE -_ARTICLE XXVI_ (Term of Contract)

The term of this Agreement shall be from 7/1/95 through

6/30/96.
3 ISSUE 1 - ARTICLE II, SECTION 2.1, (Salary)

a) Effective 7/1/95, the 1994-95 wage schedule shall be

increased by two (2%) percent.

i Effective 1/1/96, the wage schedule in effect on this

 

 

 

date shall be increased by one {1%) percent.

 
XY ISSUE 3_- ARTICLE II, SECTION 2.11, (Night Shift Differential)

DEMAND DENIED.

ISSUE 5 - ARTICLE XI, SECTION 11.1 (b) (Settlement of Disputes)

DEMAND DENIED.

ISSUE 6 - ARTICLE XX, (Group Life Insurance)
A) A $25,000 payment upon the death of the insured;

B) An additional $25,000 payment if the cause of death is
accidental;

C} A maximum payment of $10,000 for limb dismemberment
according to a schedule of payments in the current policy
providing this coverage.

) D) A $5,000 payment upon the death of the current spouse;
E) A $2,500 payment upon the Geath of each dependent child
from age fourteen (14) days to age nineteen (19) years,
or to age twenty-three (23) for a full time student.
F) A waiver of premium and conversion privilege.
These changes are to be effective May 1, 1996 if this

insurance coverage is not put out for competitive bid, or June i,
1996 if coverage is put out for bid.

 

ISSUE 7 ~ ARTICLE XXI, SECTION 21.7, (Health and Dental Coverage)

} DEMAND DENIED.

 

 
ISSUE“ - ARTICLE XXIII, (Longevity)

Amend Paragraph (A) as follows:

(A) Effective duly 1, 1995, each permanent employee who has
completed one (1) year cf service shall receive
annually, in addition to their salary, seventy-five
($75) longevity payment for each completed year of
service, to a maximum of twenty-five (25) years.

(Note - There is no change in sub-sections (B), (C) and (D).

ISSUE 10 - Education Incentive — (New)

DEMAND DENIED.

ISSUE _1i - ARTICLE XIX, (Uniforms and Equipment)

DEMAND DENIED.

ISSUE _13 - ARTICLE III, SECTION 3.2 (Holiday Pay)

 

i DEMAND DENIED.

 

 

i INCLUDED AS PART OF THIS AWARD ARE “ADDENDUM A”, SUBMITTED BY
| THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION REPRESENTATIVE, AND A DISSENTING
: OPINION FILED BY THE EMPLOYER REPRESENTATIVE.

ALL OTHER ISSUES AND DEMANDS BROUGHT UP AS PART OF THESE
NEGOTIATIONS ARE HEREBY CONSIDERED NULL AND VOID FOR THE
TERM OF THIS AGREEMENT.

 

|
|
|
Le
tr
 

 

 

 

 

 

STATE OF NEW YORK }
COUNTY OF ERIE } ss:

On this ao day of April 1996, before me personally came and
appeared Samuel Cugalj, to me known and known to me to be the
individual described in, and who executed the foregoing instrument,
and he acknowledged me that he executed the same.

  
 
   
  

laren 7% Cerrenne’

b CUGALT °
Public Panel Member and Chairman

Co:
mene KAREN R. KOVACEVIC
NOTARY PUBLIC, State of New York

ualified in Evie County
iy commision Expites Me aD/ ar

STATE OF NEW YORK
COUNTY OF ERIE } SS:

On this day of April 1996, before me personally came and
appeared Norman J. Stocker, to me known and known to me to be the
individual described in, and who executed the foregoing instrument,
and he acknowledged to me that he executed the same.

Vacrnan f feelers . Cero’ j lary, AE

NORMAN J. OCKER

Employer Panel Member . CAROL J. CZYZ
Dissents OTARY PUBLIC, STATE OF HWY YORK
‘QUALIFIED IN ERIE COU
wvootscon oes 922/98

STATE OF NEW YORK }
} ss:

COUNTY OF ERIE

A .
On this AS” day of April 1996, before me personally came and
appeared Robert P. Meegan, Jr., to me known and known to me to be
the individual described in, and who executed the foregoing
‘.) ent, and he acknqwledged to me that he executed the same.

ROBERT P. , Sf) ott
Employee Organizatiotr P Member (A he Lbizfrg
MARIETTA ADYMY

Concurs
8 Notary Public, State of New
Cuuaifed in Ele COUREY
My Commission Expires eal?

  
  

 
 

 

 

Oo

 

 

CHAIRMAN'S OPINION

In determining the preceding AWARD, the Panel did take
into account its statutory responsibilities under Section 209.4 of
the Taylor Law. For each issue, the,discussion below summarizes

the positions of the parties and the Panel’s rationale.

ISSUE - ARTICLE XXVI, (Term of Contract)

 

The PBA sought a two (2) year agreement. They argued that
since the inception of the Taylor Law, every negotiated or interest
arbitration award involving this bargaining unit has been for at
least two (2) years. The PBA’s initial proposal to the CITY in
these negotiations was a two (2) year proposal. Furthermore, the
PBA believes the Eischen Award precluded the CITY from advancing

its proposals for a two (2) year period.

The CITY’s position is that a one (1) year AWAFD is most
appropriate. They argue that there is a need for the perties to
return to the bargaining table as soon as possible, because there
are critical issués the CITY needs to discuss with the PBA. A two
{2) year award would put off these critical discussions for an
additional year, placing additional and unnecessary strain on CITY

finances and operations. They interpret the Eischen Award az
 

 

Oo.

 

 

 

denying the CITY from compelling negotiations on their proposals

for one (1) year.

A Panel’s majority gave greater weight to the need to returm
to the bargaining table as soon as, possible. This is more
consistent with the intent of the Taylor Law emphasizing collective
bargaining. It is also in the public interest to encourage
collective bargaining, where possible, on mutual needs and
problems. The CITY’s oversight in its untimely response to the
PBA’s initial proposals should not result in a windfall for the PBA
by denying the CITY’s proposals for two (2) years. Buffalo, and
other municipalities, are undergoing budgetary Problems for a
variety of reasons. These problems impacts their operations and
bargaining units, and to deny the CITY access to collective
bargaining for two (2) years is overly harsh. On the other hand,
the CITY cannot realistically expect a windfall in terms of having
no change in wages/benefits for the PBA. Effective police services
are critical to the CITY’s quality of life. The maintenance of
quality police services stem from a motivated police force. A
Panel majority believes it has struck a balance between the

competing objectives of the parties.

io
 

 

'
i
i
4

 

 

 

 

ISSUE 1 - ARTICLE II, SECTION 2.1 (Salary)

The PBA sought wage increases equal to the cost of living
index change. plus two (2%), or a six (6%) wage schedule increase,
whichever is higher, in each of two {2) years. Their comparable
communities include the Towns of Amherst, Cheektowaga, Hamburg,
Tonawanda and West Seneca, and the City of Rochester. They believe
PBA wages are $2,200 to $4,400, on average, below these
comparisons. Furthermore, it takes police offers 5 years to reach
the maximum wage, while comparable communities take 3.3 years.

The PBA argues the CITY is not filling bargaining unit
positions being vacated. The result is a decrease from one
thousand forty-one (1,041) police officers in 1988 to current
staffing of eight hundred ninety-five (895), directly impacting
productivity of the bargaining unit. Meantime, they point out that
civilians in the department increased from one hundred thirteen
(113) to one hundred thirty-four (134).

The PBA counters the CITY’s claim of an inability to pay.
They believe Federal aid has increased annually since 1991, and
between 1992-94, State aid increased from $57.1 million to
$63.7 million. However, this is a reality the CITY shares with
most communities in the state, including the comparison
communities. The PBA believes the CITY’s Property tax base is not
as depressed as alleged, by showing there has been a fifty (50%)

increase in the CITY’s total assessed valuation over the last ten

il
 

 

9

3

 

 

~

(10) year period. The PBA discounts the CIty’s predictions of
budgetary shortfalls by showing a pattern of similar claims by CITY
officials in the past, only to be followed by a positive end-of-

fiscal year fund balance.

The ‘CITY offers no salary increase. They argue they are
unable to pay such increases because of declining State aid,
continuing budget deficits, and declining property tax base. Not
only is the property base declining, but forty-five {45%} of City
property is tax exempt. The CITY depends on Property tax revenue
to a greater extent than Rochester and Syracuse because the latter
two share greater county sales tax revenue. While Buffalo is at
80.2% of its constitutional tax limit, Rochester at 68.3%, and
Syracuse at 51.1% of its taxing limit. They argue Buffalo is
forced to rely more on property taxes than Rochester and Syracuse
because it receives less sales tax revenue. Median 1989 household
income in the CITY is $18,482, Rochester reported $22,785 and
Syracuse at $21,242.

The CITY’s list of comparable communities includes the towns
of Amherst, Cheektowaga, Tonawanda and the cities of Rochester,
Syracuse, Niagara Falls, and the Erie County Sheriff’s Department.
The 1994-95 average base wage for PBA members is $42,979, and
including other cash payments increases the average to $53, 528. The
CITY believes these averages compare favorably with their

comparison group. The maximum base salary in Amherst is $39, 679,

12
 

 

 

 

3

 

 

 

Cheektowaga $42,229, Tonawanda $38,625, Rochester $41,753, Syracuse
$36,484, The CITY maintains PBA. base salaries increased ninety-two
and six-tenths (92.6%) from 1986-95, while the cumulative CPI
increased thirty-seven and nine-tenths (37.9%).

As to the staffing argument of the PBA, the CITY argues they
work within their budget, maintaining a ninety-eight (98%) vacancy
control rate. From 1984-85, all ether departments in the CITY
experienced a decline of approximately twenty-four (24%) in the
number of employees, while the PBA has experienced a decline of
approximately five (5%). The increase in the numbers of civilians
in the department is compensating for the reduction of PRA
personnel as recommended in the report, Policing Buffalo in the
Nineties, submitted by the International Association of Police
Chiefs (“IAPC”). The CITY argues that their population has
declined four and six-tenths (4.6%) since the 1990 census, They
believe crime statistics have shown a more favorable, declining

Pattern,

The Panel recommends using the same wage comparison group
recommended by the Prosper Interest Arbitration Panel in 1992,
d.e., the cities .of Rochester and Syracuse, and the Towns of
Amherst, Cheektowaga and Tonawanda. That Panel’s rationale is
still meaningful and its use provides continuity. Excluding the
Town of Tonawanda, which has not settled its 1995 police

negotiations, a comparison of total annual pay (base, longevity,

13
 

 

shift differential, etc.) shows that at Step 5, Buffalo is $3,100
below Rochester, and $3,300 below the comparison group average. At
Step 21, Buffalo is $4,104 below Rochester, and $4,185 below the
group average. 1995 wage settlements for the comparison group
averaged 3.67% (mean) and 4.08% (median). Justification for the
wage improvement in this AWARD clearly exits, but is tempered by
overall CIty finances.

The work load for police officers has not lightened. While
the decrease in the number of police officers is less than the
decrease of other CITY department personnel, fewer police officers
and continuing high incidents of crime also provide meaningful
justification for the changes awarded herein. Latest available
crime statistics show a modest decrease in total crime incidents
from 1992 to 1993, but the change is too modest to be meaningful;
Crime remains high and exceeds Rochester and Syracuse levels. The
public’s identification of crime as one of its top concern is not
Surprising. This concern supports the CITY’s need to maintain a
police force which is highly motivated, trained and responsive to
the needs of this community.

The CITY relied heavily on State Aid in the Past, and there is
little argument that recent trends are not encouraging for the CITY
(and other communities). From 1991-95, State aid decreased 19.6%,
and Federal aid increased 0.8%,

To its credit, the cIty has been persistent in

continuing to encourage housing and retail development. Major new

14
 

 

 

 

home construction is advancing in many neighborhoods, and more than
1,000 new homes are planned (Prospectus). From fiscal year ending
6/30/94, taxable property increased $8.3 million (State Comptroller
Report) . Full valuation increased from a 1993-94 fiscal year
reassessment of $6.8 billion to $7.8 billion for 1995-96
(Prospectus). While not reflecting dynamic growth, it does reflect
modest growth in property values.

“In recent years, sales tax revenue in the Buffalo area has
grown at a higher rate than the rest of the State due to the
increase of Canadian trade and Western New York shopping”
(Prospectus). Earlier this year, it was reported that the CITY’s
portion of 1995 County Sales Tax revenue was $50 million, an
increase of approximately $800,000 over anticipated revenue. The
City School District received $25 million, Separate from the CITY’s

share.

The Panel took note of the CITY’s showing that cumulative
poiice wage increases have outpaced the cumulative CPI over a ten
(10) year period. However, this data must be tempered by. the
starti.g point 10 years ago. More importantly, though, is how
police w:ges compare presently.

Some cudgetary data presented by parties represents a snapshot
in time, as funds are routinely transferred to and from accounts in
the normal cviurse of business. With that in mind, it is noted

that the CITY paid $2.3 million less for the PBA’s 1995-96 pension

'

15
 

 

 

costs than were budgeted. Unreserved/undesignated funds in the
budget were estimated between $1 million - $2.9 million. The
current budget funded 919 officers, while staffing is at 898. No
increase in staffing is planned for this budgetary year. Finally,
the wherewithal for funding the AWARD can be realized by canceling
other unnecessary expenditures that need not be made or by
reallocation of budget lines. and expenditures. It is acknowledged
that some police budget accounts exceed funded amounts, but these
are subject to management’ s control. However, strong
budgetary/ financial controls by CITY officials resulted in Positive
general fund balances of $10 million (6/30/95), $13.3 million
(6/30/94) and $7 million (6/30/93). A Panel majority was
encouraged by this pattern. This AWARD will not disturb this
regularity. While the financial environment is challenging, the
CITY has the wherewithal to fund .this AWARD. It is very much in
the public interest to maintain a motivated police force, and the
changes herein are important to that desired objective.

The change in wages is an effective two and one-half (2.5%),
with an estimated cost of $986,715. With the FICA roll-up
approximately $75,484, the combined increased cost is 2.69%. The

CPI for the Buffalo area was 2.9%.

16
 

wD

 

 

 

 

ISSUE 6 - ARTICLE xx, (Group Life Insurance)

The PBA seeks to improve current life insurance coverage for
police officers from $5,000 to $50,000; an additional $50,000 for
accidental death; spouse coverage from $5,000 to $10,000; child
insurance from $1,000 to $5,000; and $10,000 for limb

dismemberment.
The CITY’s pleads an inability to pay.

A Panel majority believes the PBA were not competitive in this
area. Given the nature of police work, the forward cost of this
benefit, and modest cost for benefits received, the AWARD is a
needed improvement. Estimated cost is $76,571, or 0.19% of
Payroll. Competitive bidding should be effective in keeping the

additional cost to a minimum.

ISSUE _8 - ARTICLE XXIII, (Longevity)

The PBA seeks to improve its current longevity schedule by
adding a new step ene (i) full year of service at $100.00.

The CITY’s position is an inability to pay.

A Panel majority supported a reduced longevity improvement

from the original PBA demand because they were not competitive with

17
 

O

 

. April 25, 1996

  

the comparison group. After six (6) years, Buffalo police officers
received $275 less annually, and by the twentieth (20) year,
Buffalo was $320 less than the comparison group. Additional cost
of this change improvement is estimated at $383,285, or 0.97% of

Payroll,

OTHER DEMANDS

The following demands were also Presented to the Public
Arbitration Panel by the PBA, and were examined, evaluated and
denied: Night shift Differential, Settlement of Disputes, Optical
Plan-New, Education Incentive, Uniforms and Equipment, Holiday Pay.
While some of these demands had merit, overall it was inappropriate

to include them as part of this AWARD.

 

Buffalo, New York CHAIRMAN AND PUBLIC’ PANEL MEMBER

ce: Richard A. Curreri, Director of Conciliation, PERB
Charles Leonard, Supervising Mediator, Buffalo PERB

STATE OF NEW YORK
COUNTY OF ERIE
i, Samuel Cugalj, do hereby affirm upon my oath as

Arbitrator, that I am the individual described in and who executed
the enclosed instrument, as Chairman of this Interest Arbitration

Panel, on April 25, 1996.
“raf Fb
Date

Arbitrator

 

18
 

 

ADDENDUM “A”

 

2%
THISS

   

      

Hour Rate
THIS

   

% Hour Rate
41196 : 1196

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

   

Police Officer Step 1__| 31,477.40
Police Officer Step 2 34,243.74
Police Officer Step 3 37,015.08

 

 

16.16
[17.58
19.00

  

    

34,586.17
37,385.24

 

  
       

Police Officer Step 4 39,783.14
Police Officer Step § 42,557.78
Detective 44,113.36

      

 

20.42
24.85

    

 

40,100.94
42,983.35

 

 

      

 

44,554.49

 

   

{Assist. Radio 45,627.25

Dispatcher &

Police Photographer)

 

        

46,083.52

 

 

Detective Sergeant

 

46,138.55 | 24.88

46,599,953 | 23.92

 

 

{Police Lieutenant &
Polygra: h Examiner) -

49,276.30

   

25.30

49,769.07 | 25.65

 

   

(Assist.Chief of
Detectives, Chief of

52,753.82

27.08

53,284.36 | 27,35

 

 

 

Administrative Serv.,

 

   

& Police Instructor)

 

    

{Chief Homicide &

Police Captain)

56,456.14

28,98

57,020.70 | 29.27

 

62,123.75

 

 

 

M.89 | 62,744.99 | 42.24
a —

 

 
VI.

1992 - 1995
Contract Settlement

 
        

July If 1992 thru June 30, 1995

     

    

2% across-the-board increase rolled, into’ the:
base. .

‘e770 us 3

     
 
  
      
  
  
   
  
  
         
   

= 10.5% repér'ting . time based on annual salary,
effective 06/20/92 rolled in the base,

- 2k one’ tine productivity stipena paid based on”
base _ ay! ae of duly 1, 1993,

 

   
  
    

- 24 “aoroadthe-boara increase rolled into th
base. . .

 

 

07/01/54 - 55 across-the-board Amerease rolled into the
sob base.
MONBTARY ca; NB

 

Hourly Rate - pivide the annual salary by the. “numb

- of-nxegilar .hours in the work’ year
. Calculation of hourly rates, consistant
with hours worked per year’ and the FLBA

 

- Heurty. ‘Fate will be used for ‘calculation:
of: all payments,. except overtine, such::
as Court, Time. .

    

   

y Ovartine Rate ~ .itcirly rate plus add-ons such as shift”
* “differential times 11/2.

oo | Bwentysix (26) equal’ Paychecks.

 

 
   
   
        
            

 

 

 

 

-

cet

 

   

 

‘The regular hours.-of. daily work ‘shall be consecutiv
. except for interruptions 4 for luneh.

(a)

. Net working in Pretinets or consolidated divisions):

* schedule, -

’ three (3). months, following ratification, .

 

 

 

         

 

         
  

 

4 (on), 3 {att)” followed py 4 (on), 3,
followed by’: 4°; (on); 4 (off) ~= ten (20)
schedule. (443,423, 4-4, (10)]. a

  

Qt LR. bther unit titles not’ addresadd
above, including but not limited to Special ‘Frauds,
, Correspondence,. and. Extradition, Internal Affaira,,
* Administration and the Detective. Bureau (detectives

   

shall work'a 5-2, 5+2,. 5-2, 5-2, a3 8 hour.

 
  

  

‘Implementation:: plementation of the Andy 493,45
4, ten (16) .hour;-schedule, and the (5-2 ' 4-3, .
eight (8) hour.schedule. shall occur not Later than

 

Schedule as of os 791 £95 :
1) Consolidated /pivisions (and left over

Precincts): 4-3, 4-4, 10 hour schedule. The’ :°
city may "consolidate," at its discretion, any ne
remaining Precincts as of O1/01/95.. .

2) other uittas

In considerat: on ‘of the aforegoing ‘schedules, “thé”
PBA shall ‘cooperate with the city: in its”
gonsolidation-~ efforts. Accordingly, - the’. PBA’
president ( of his designee) shall have a ‘standing

nvitation .. ell committee. meetings where
> conaoiidacion, is’ “planned, discusded_ or: implemented. -
fhe Department ‘agrees to send the PBA. -president
notice of an: such meetings in advance.. a4 their
occurrence: -

 

(5-2)4, (4-3)2, 6 hour schedules

  

 

   

 
  
    
   
     
 
 

   

(3) pirer TEMERL :

6:45 am

      

0645 ~ 1645
4:00 pm “am 1600 ~ 0200
“3200 pm to 7:00°am'? 2100 = 0700 +

 

c+ .,The,Gommissioner shali"have, flexibility im scheduling 'p héuz
Shift personnel assigned to, Weadquarters by scheduling first shift’

“employeeste begin no earlier, than 0600 hours or later than 1000"
- hours consistent with current! practice. an ° ty

".6) BRIER prpprye:

.. Unit-members within each Precinct, Department, Unit, Division, .

+ Bureau,..or Section shall -bid'on an-available shift. In determining oO
the placement of unit members regarding shift preference, seniority’.

will be determining | factor... 5,’ . sot

 
  
  
   
   

   

r

    

 

 

 

. (1), The Commissionér of police, or his designee,

wo djust manpower levels annually on ali shifts and withd:
41 departmental units..
‘manpoyer levels may ‘be’
‘exigent circumstances.

 

 

 

Notwithstanding the aforegoing
adjusted more frequently due to!

     

 

 

-@) (The currant agreenent! between the .city and. the PHA
regarding the assignment: of Probationary Officers shall.

continue. . : _ : mo

w.

  

  

 

 

and replace with the follewirig:

 

. The value of the reporting time paid for the 1992-93 contract:
“year {07/01/92 - 06/30/93) shall be rolled into the ‘schedule:
“ veffective 07/01/93 at a value of ten and one-half (20 2/2) °

percent. a : to

 

   

  
  

By io PERIOD: -

 

The first 15 minutes ofeach shift time noted in -(5) above
“shall. be designated as briefing times. Employees must ‘be |”
‘ Present daily for briefing time unless otherwise excused’ by.

their, commanding -officer. ot kos

 

   

2
OVERTIME conpensario: ° coe
"4. Whenever any employee represéntéd by the Union is reyiired’to’
" * “remain on duty or report, for duty in excess of a regular work’ '*
> shift,- such employees shall be compensated at the rate of time!
sand one-half (1 1/2) for the time worked in excess of the
regular work shift. . : .

 

       

dime shall consis f all work performed in excess of.
eight (8) hours in ony eight (8) hour tour of duty. or in

i excess of ten (10) hours in any ten (10} hour tour of duty or

i . in excess ef forty (40)'hours per week. Overtime. shali bes .
yt vy earned in multiples of, fifteen (15) minute periods. | .

 

    

   

 

  
  
   
    
   
    
   
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

1)
. Consolidated divisions,

 

 

“be eligible to work
overtime procedures.

 

  

‘tine.

 

‘the Union in a proce

  

oat

PB DIPPERENT

“Révise article :
shift times.

hired by. the
“Shall be granted .vacation in

‘Schedule A below

   

8 Hour..Séheduie”
Da : _Hours
"ee

2 0
3 °
2 1
3 2.
3 3
3 4
4 0
4 i
4 2. 2
. a7 3
oy - 4 -4
iB and-over ‘5’ °

  

 

«vacation time in half units.
: “a,

 

, have been an employes of the City

[Article 21, sectidh’ 2.6 "shall be amended to’ reflect’

© 2)" Unit members who utilize dick and/or IoD time shall not.
= Overtime (except when all other
ave been.exhausted) for a fourteen
+ '(24) day period from'thedr return from such leave. The
. 14 day period noted -above is a “rolling period" which is |
. Saloulated upon return following. use of sick and/or IoD",

“ Court Time shall not be paid to any officer subpdéehaed b
eding for the Union's interest.

Employees must appear in full uniform or with a‘ sport
coat, dress slacks or'suit and tie (or the equivalent, for.
female, Police Officers) for any appearance’ in court. -

ity before July 1, 1984, ‘af

for at least one year
gach
corresponding to his/her years of: servi

"80

120
12a
136
aaa

“152

160
166
176
1o4
192
200

‘In those situations where an enpléyea is entitled te les:
» “(than a full tour, in accordance with the above schedul
‘such employee shall be entitled to take

 

  

the said hours.as

   
 
 
 
 
  

 

  
   
   
  
 

 

 

 

Completed | 8 Hour: Schedule -, 20 Nour schequze
: So ‘ou for . Tours .
oan 2" . 4
3-6 .
+789
10-15,

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Employeas hired °
“shall be granted

 

 
  
 
  
  

an . The Commissioner

specific instances which follow: 4

employee to

 

duties:

6) Revise Section 4:6. (Wéekly — vacation (WV) .days

“se 4.6 Use i

(10) ) individual.

 

following ‘Schedula. nD: .

 

(Sf) The commissioner, requesting - oy

“An employee.

t tial Vacation {A=V)_Days « Employees
may use at his/her option.up to ei%jh (B) single A~-V. days.
for ten (10) hour-employees (ten (10) single A~V-days. for

.- . @hght. (0) hour. employees}, one at a time; au: Re
.. Donths of June,.July and August.a These eaght (gy. Tor

   

by the ‘City on or after July 2, 1984,

‘vacation entitlements pursuant to the -

  

 

his/her” vacation

Mearest hale. 0 Dn

-shall.allow vacation Carryover in the

 

forege scheduled vacation in order that

Said department may provide and maintain adequate
Service to the public. not .

 

being: injured in the discharge of ‘his-

  

 

en
sdays may be taken in addition to. an

 

other scheduled summer vacation, provided they: are’ not
taken in consecutive jynits. The current Precedure as “
“Bpplied to the application and granting of such single

A-V days shall continue. :

7). Revise the vacati

‘a ten (10) hour work -schedule.

on entitlement chart to correspond with

   

  
 
 
  

   

 

 

 

 

14). SIOK AND INJURY

, 1)"; Delete the following -provisions from the: expired:

 

 

 

 

contract: Lo : . “

. qq) 2) In instances of disability due to illness
Which lasts three’ (3) shifts or less, an employee may”
xeturn to duty without the written certification of a,
physician, provided notifieation is given by the employe
. te his captain. . . ae Ts

 

. 2] In distances of disability due to ilinése:
which lasts more than three (3) shifts, an employee must.
obtain the written certification of a physician: and/or

‘- "the Department surgéon before that employee may return to -

* disciplinary action.

 

 

“duty,

 

. 3) “In instances of disability due to an off-—
duty injury or accident, the employee must obtain written
"certification -of a physician and/or the Department:
surgegn before that employee may return te duty. This’

‘+ vequirement may. be waived by the Commissioner of Police: .

 

- 2)t

| VEmployees villsbe eligible for sick leave. only when

 

Current sick leave entitlements. Employees who-request’ .

of his designee. |

oo. (I) It shall be the responsibility-of the émployee-
to maintain and- moniter an -accurate account ef his

and receive sick leave‘in excess of their entitlements

 

“subsequent pay period.

“2 (7) All absences, due to illness are to be reported. .
to the Commissioner of Police or his designee on or
before the first day of such absence, and the
Commissioner -may vreguire reasonable proofs of illness.
In the event of: a.failure to comply with the’ notice’
:requirements in-this article, the employee’s absence may, ~
“be consideed as unauthorized:leave. Abuse of sick leave
‘privileges may be- cause for disciplinary action.: .- -

Replace the’ above deleted provision with the following.
* provisions: : . re

 

suffering from an.illness or off-duty injury that would,
Prevent the performance of their duties. Employees who
misuse or abuse sick lenve privileges may be subject to

All absences due to illness or injury ore to be reported
‘to the Commissioner or his designee on or before the
first day of such, absence, and the Commissioner may
require reasonable proofs of {liness (or injury). In the
“event of a failure to comply with the notiee-requirements’.
in this Article, tle,employee's absence may be considered

, 8S unauthorized leave.. Abuse of sick leave privileges

 

may be cause for disciplinary action.

 

 

 

yshall have an équal number of hours’ deducted ina

 

 
obi} on ee on c O ve to

‘Home or in Place of Confinement ~ shift Only.

(A) Unless | authorized | by the commissioner: or hi:
designated . representative, a member of the.

     

‘ on . residence or place of confinement except for:

{1) obtaining professional medical treatment;

 

27 (2) perferning™ exercise presoribed in writing bi
his physician which is part of his recovery

 

commencing. such exercise. .

* /(B)” Permission to”Leavé the residence for reasons other
. than cited above’-must be documented by the

, Commanding officer, Duty Officer, or IAD. ”

 

*Commissioner may grant a waiver of confinement for.

determination shall he made on a Sase-by-case
Basis, : . . ‘ :

“.45) norzee

“16) @ LI: 8 Top

\ Officers who, while on sick or Top leave status, are required
by the city, the District Attorney's Office, any court or
administrative agency to appear for any reason which relates

“, to an-incident, action or event involving the officer acting
within the performanca of his duties as a Duffale Police

  

 

- oo ' Officers ‘who have had “perfect attendance for each two (2) °
wt month period (beginning with July L'of each contract year)

(1.e., have not taken any sick or IoD time} shall xveceive, on

‘ or before dune 30 ef each: fiscal year, eight (8) hours credit’

“} Stake the credits in cash, for, at his/her optibn, may bank the’
entire credit amount. -officers who elect cash shall, be paid
fy -“at, the then contractual straight~time rate. officers who.
” . elect to have such credits banked may cash them in at the time,
of retirement, resignation or @eath at the then (Straight-time:
rate, « ’ sos . . .

 

 

 

 

Department on sick or IOD leave will not leave his’.

treatment, a copy of which must be submitted"
to the Commissioner or his designed, prior to -

(¢) For employees on an \inichallenged IoD leave, the.

 

so all or part of such leave. The Commissionerts .

Employees who anticipate being absent from worl due to injury”
or-dllness must make every reasonable effort to give notice to

Officer (not while employed by another employer) , must, appear: -

Oo 4£ medically able). “Such officer shall be considered as
wee . ‘werking en such day(s), entitling the officer to court time, °
+ ot If. the officer is medically unable to appear, reasonable.
fo, advance. notice of such fact must be given to the authority
” . ‘requiring his/her presente. . .
. 27)" PERPROT ATTENDANCE INCENTIVE °
i)

for.each such two (2)’month perlod. The officer may:eithar -

 
 

 

 

 

 

_ ARTICLE DB (LEAVE oF AngRYce WrrnouT pay . .
' Change title of sectiéa 0.3 to-read: "Maternity/Paternity
Leave," (This leave shall also include adoption of a child’
under 2 years of’ age.) : . .

 

t

 

  

BE) TY : . .
By, side letter, exempting a captain in administration and",
Communications ‘-from the application of the. seniority,
provisions. we .

   

    

LEMENT OF 0:

     

Incorporate currerit Memorandum of Agreement reached’ by the’ “et
-parties on February 27, 1992 into the contract. . :

;) 22) BBA Hetense rane . : ;
“"~ Incorporate Ppa Release Time Agreement datea December 31, 1994,
inte the contract. : . : :

Se 22k pewtan | 7 Sa

The City shall provide’the GHT Spectrum Plus Dental Program‘to

+. unit embers. The City reserves the right to change ‘carriers.

. or to self insure at anytime; with the PBA's consent, so. jong?
Soe te as’ the benefits by the new carrier or by self insurance are w

| Lo -overal), equal to or'better than those “provided by the:

* ", + existing carrier.- Reasénable advance notice shall be provided

 

   

oO.. sO . to the PBA President in advance of any such change. The PBA. .
—e . shall: not unreasonably withhold its consent te such proposed
“, @Hange. : .

 

ao. J. cnivthe event any dispute arise between the parties concetning,
. the above, either party may submit the dispute to expedited”
arbitration. ny - . .

 

 

y 23)° Pu LE BPE Agcot

 

“ / . The City and the PBA may negotiate the terms of a flexible”.
sSpending-account plan.. The purpose of the plan shall be to..
o Provide unit members which more benefit selections and’ pre-tax
ale so dollar opportunities while at.the same time helping the City: |
wr. . .** . te contain its benefit. costs.“ Administrative fees associated
: with the plan shall be pald by the City.. Monies may be used,'~
O +: On a pre-tax basis, for health benefits, dental benefits, life
. - insurance and dependent care expenses to the extent allowed by
i: law. .

 

 

 

 

 

ihe tee

 

    

 
  

: er ‘Ya-state ‘the parties" Agreement to comply with -
_ the Prosper Interest,.Arbitration Award concerning one/two -
officer patrols with the following provision:. my

    

L 4X +. Each party to this Agreement pledges its best effort’ towards:,
9 . ; moving to a one/two officer patrol system. . woe

25)" BVALURPION OF UNte Menietis
fhe parties shall negotiate tarms and conditions “associate i
with the evaluation: of,PBA unit members. Either party ‘thay’,

. Submit unresolved issues-to interest arbitration not earlier}
than.3 months following ratification of the 1992-95 Agreement.

   
    
  
  
  
    
     
   
  

 

26)” STVrLraNrgnrton . . : Fi

       
  
  
 
   
  
  
 
   
   
  
  
   
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  

The:PBA agrees that the Department may civilianize (partially
or-“completely), at the City's option, the following areas:

Desk duties in the Precincts or Districts.

Gell Block attendants
Dispatching (by attrition) .

 

(No: unit’ employee sali be iaid off BS a result of the. city'é
civilianization efforts: noted above, o

 

arties agree to.enter into negotiations for a drug.
alcohol testing program:as soon as possible after the signing}
‘ofthis Agreement. This”clause shall net be interpreted as-a:
(vétver.of whatever legal rights the parties may possess -in

 

 

  
 
 

 

H TPEND

he following:

 

vag Me™ Af

; res * :
Effective July 1,°Tos2, eligible employees shall-receive
he. following stipend: .- . nn

   

ay Employees possessing an associate's degree or: 60 .
college credits shall receive $3250.00 in addition
to regular salary and longevity amounts. :

   

Employees possessing a bachelor of arts aor
- bachelor.of:science degree or 120 college credits’
shall receive. a $700.00 stipend in addition
* regular salary and longevity amounts. Lee

Employees possessing a master of arts or.a master
:of science degree or a ‘higher degree shall vecelve
‘a $900.00 stipend in addition te regular salary and,

longevity amounts. :

 

 

 

   

 

vance

 

  
 

 

 

 

25)

26)

27)

28)

ONE/TWO OFFICER PATROLS

 

er ré-state the parties' Agreement to comply with
the Prosper Interest Arbitration award concerning one/two
officer patrols with the following provision: .

Each party to this Agreement pledges its best effort towards
moving to a one/two officer patrol systen.

EYALDATION OF UNIT MEMBERS

The parties shall negotiate terms and conditions associated
with the evaluation of PBA unit members. Either Party may
submit unresolved issues to interest arbitration not earlier
than 3 months following ratification of the 1992-95 Agreement.

CIVILTANTZATION

The PBA agrees that the Department may civilianize (partially
or completely), at the City's option, the following areas:
1) Desk duties in the Precincts or Districts.

2) Cell Block attendants

3) Dispatching (by attritian).

No unit employee shall he laid off as a result of the city's
Civilianization efforts noted above,

RUG ALCOHOL TES

The parties agree to enter into negotiations for a drug and-
alcohol testing program as soon as possible after the signing
of this Agreement. This clause shall not be interpreted as a
Waiver of whatever legal rights the parties may possess in
this area.

EDUCATION STIPEND

Add the following: 30 Pm ALAA

Ig FEN

(A) Effective July 1, ‘Is32z', eligible employees shall’ receive
the following stipend:

i) Employees possessing an associate's degree or 60
college credits shall receive $350.00 in addition
to regular salary and longevity amounts.

2) Employees possessing @ bachelor of arts or a
bachelor of science degree or 120 college credits
shall receive a $700.00 stipend in addition to
regular salary and longevity amounts.

3) Employees possessing a master of arts or a master
of science degree or a higher degree shall receive
@ $900.00 stipend in addition to regular salary and
longevity amounts.

adtesS ssuOl ss MMOS tmdor:
eets 198 siz!

 
 

 

 

(B)

{c)

(D)

General rvles pertaining to degree or stipend payment:

1) All credits and degrees must have been obtained and
earned at a college accredited by the New York
State Department of Education.

2) For employees seeking the foregoing stipend as a
result of credits earned, courses must have been
passed with a grade of "c™ or better, or, for
pass/fail courses, a passing grade.

3) Employees requesting the foregoing stipend must
present the Commissioner or his designee with an
official transcript, together with a completed form
as agreed upon by the City and PBA.

A) Employees shall only be eligible for one payment in

any category described above. Furthermore,
payments pursuant to these categories shall not be
cumulative. Thus, an employee having two

bachelor's degrees and an associate's degree shall
be eligible for only one stipend 6 +00.
about Fly 7 WPT HA
Payment: Eligiblef employees Shall receive a lump sun
payment on or-before—tune-soth of each year ina full or
pro rata amount, whichever is applicable, provided they
are on the payroll on this payment date.

In the event an associate degree is required for entry
level employment (for future recruits), said recrnits
shall not be eligible for associate degree stipend.

29) DETATLING

(a)

(8)

The parties agree that the Department shall have the
right to detail officers .of any rank on the basis of
seniority. Detailing may be used by the Department to
cover for short term absences such as personal leave,
vacation time, sickness, blood days, etc. It shall be
the intent of the Department to detail on a shift by
shift basis and within the officer's division./;. spt oat
Tye
Based on the aforegaing, the PBA withdraws all detailing
grievances together with any related demand(s) for
arbitration.

30} HEALTH/HOSPIPALIZATION

See Attached

BEER 188 Sct

82120 Jeuolssiuwostwgoere !zO-25-5
   

. . MEBALTN AND DENTAL CARE COVERAGE
4O- 2d Nenlth Insurance :
a The City ‘shall provide, at'-it expense, health and medical coverage

for all:employees under the:Blue cross Hospital, Medical/Surgical.
Traditional 90-91 Plan with.the following riders: 5

     

      
  
   
   

 

   
   

Unlimited. Major Hedical: Expense Rider (BCMH-7), with:
prescription drug benefit, with a $100/$200 deductibl
he City ‘may -self-fund above the $100/§200 to
$500/§1, 000 deductible using a third party administrato

  
  
 
  
  
  

Rider 4 (Emergency Outpatient EXG)
Rider .14 (Psychiatric Rider)

‘Inerease the current prescription drug rider to a $s.o
generic)/$10.00 (brand nama) co-pay. ae .

nt. the City elects to self fund as described above, ‘it!
shall -previde reasonable advance notice to the PBA President jiny
,edvance.of such change. The PBA shall not unreasonably withhold!
.consentito.such proposed charge. In the event any dispute aris:

the parties concerning such self funding, either party may.
he dispute to expedited arbitration. | oO .

    

       
  
  
  

 

  
   

   

evant the city sel ds above the $100/$200 level then no
_Participant's expenses shall-exceed the $100/$200 level. :

 
 
 

Employeés,, who retire duringithe life of this agreene or until ay
. , Successor Agreement is executed by the Mayer or imposed by interest}
= + 7 7 arbleration with 20 or more, years of service with the Buffalo? —

i Police Department, or who take a disability retirement resulting;
froma: njury sustained in:the line of duty shall be entitled to’
receivé’paid health/hospitalization (less major medical coverage)’
twith a.$5.00 (generic)/S$10.00 (brand name) drug rider. This shal.
be.a lifetime benefit for those retireas who retire during the temm
of, this Agreement. ton . aot ae

24.3 ‘Dental znsuranco

See Paragraph 22 to ‘main packet captioned "Dental".

21,4" Yistification or statug

 

 
 
 
  
  
 

  
  
  
  

    

 

i *  "" cukrent “(2sn6-00) contract language. : a

 

- a « } . . ,
eet limenever a $5.00/$10.00' co-pay is listed in this Article, the: :
‘ . “City. may, at Lts option, substitute a $9.00 drug co-pay pending
po) . Spproval.of- Blue Cross's application for a $5.00/$10.00 compay -

. provision said.§9.00 co-pay,shall include contraceptives. +0

: so

   

 

 

 
 

. (B} General rules pertaining ko degree or stipend payment:

i) + All credits’ and degrees must have been obtained and “
. earned at a college accredited by the New York :
ahea” State Department of Education. . .

2) ° For employees seeking the foregoing stipend as a
. + Yesult of, credits .earned, courses must have ‘been
,passed with a.grade of "Cc" or better, or, for.

! pass/fail courses, .a passing grade,

   

3) Employees requesting the foregoing stipend must’ -
~ present the- Commissioner or his designee with an - | .

mo official transcript, together with a completed form’ +
° as agreed upon. by the City and PBA.” :

so 2 4) Bmployees shall only be eligible for one payment dn

any category described ‘above. Furthermore,
Toe payments pursuant to these categories shall not be .
'  oumlative. Thus,, an employee having . two’

. bachelor's dégrees arid an associate's degree ahall -
. be eligible for only one stipend of 0-00, = oe
ao abeat Tely PEI KFPR
(C) Bayment: Eligible/ employees Shall receive a Lump sum
payment on or-before—Sene-suth of each year in a- full or
pra rata amount, whichever: is applicable, provided they
“7 @re on the payroll.on this payment date. .

 

   
   
 

   

(3) In the event an aédotiata deyrea-is regiizea for entiy:
level employment (for future reoruits), said recruits
-shall not be eligible for.associate degree stipend.

  
 
    
  

* DETALLING

The parties agree:that the Department shall have. the.

“right to detail. officers of any rank on the basis of.
. | Seniority. Detailing may be used by the Department to °"

“gover for short term absences such as personal, leave
vt. ¢ Vacation time, sickness, blood days, etc. It shall b

‘the intent of the Department to detail on a shift by -
. Shift basis and within the officer's division.: .

 

 

  

  

Based on the aforegoing, the PBA withdraws all detailing
grievances together .with any related demand (s) fo
» arbitration. - .

 
 

 

See Attached

wee

 

   

   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

No employee shall .ba entitled to
/insurance Coverage-at City expense XL
~ eligible for coverage under another comparable healt!
‘+ Ansurance or dental-plan. This ban on duplicate health"

. or dental coverage also applies where both spouses and/or,
woos family members are-employees of the ‘city. o

health or. dental. .
£ the ‘employee. is

 

     
  

   

(2), Employees subject to the no au
: above shall
«of coverage:

plication ban noted in (a)’:
be entitled to the following waiver in Lieu .

     

 

 

*“ (8) $2,000 for waiver ‘of the health
. . ~ (family coverage) (or §500 for waiver of single
Po. coverage) following a ful12 Year of waived health’:

imsurance. Pro rata amounts shall-be paid for each*!
‘full month of, health insurance waived. .

insurance Plan

   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
   
  

  
   
 

    

- ‘ “
{B) .An employee whois entitled to dent;
woe elect to -wadve such coverage.
. waiving coverage will receive the sw
month ‘(up to $150.00 per year).

 

    
   
 

“7 (8) The city wil. not Provide dental coverage for any
7 employee whose spouse has comparable or superior.
goverage as the result of employment . in city
service, said employee shall

$10.00 per | (up te $120.00 per year).

 

   
   
   
  

 

ent - Retirees: The city shal
. i L or hospital’
- regardless of the type of plan, for

is: eligible for coverage under another
comparable health insurance plan. Retirees heréunder:

> shall be entitied- to an annual waiver fee of $720.00 o:
‘@-pro rata sum of..i/12th for aach full month waived
‘ayment shall be made on or before June 30 of each year.

 

 

For purposes of’ this Acticle, a‘ ful.
@ as July 1 of one year to gune 30 0

 

 

Payments for’ waived insurance under this * .
1 be made on or before June 30 of each year. wt
Re- ty!
retiree’s alternate health or dental Goverage be
; .Berminated for any resson, such employee yill be entitled
: “ "to coverage undem+the City's health and/or dental plan
a, ‘herein, . provided the employee notifies the City, in
vweiting, immediately following -the loss of alternate,
coverage, and provides proof thereof. Coverage shali be
sreinstated as soon as possible, but in no event dater
“than the first day.of the month following the city's: |
"receipt of the above notification. . :

  

 

  
    

   
 

    

 
Lo aan

a + BiG Dlternate fealth Insurénco coverage
‘Current (1386-08) contract 4 '

 

 

 

 

 

 

ta

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
     
     
 

‘. 0. | S228 AGREED By aND BETHERI rag PARrrEs THAT ANY. PROVISION or
- RIS | AGREEMONT REQUIRING LUGISLATIVE ACrroN’ To PERMIT Irs

(+ ZMBLEMENTATION BY AMENDMENT OF LAW OR BY PROVIDING THE ADDITIONAL

\" “UNDS THEREFORE, SHALL NOP BECOME BFTECTIVG UNTIL THE APPROPRIATE
IGISLATIVE BODY HAS GIVEN APPROVAL. :

 

 

vs IN WITNESS WHEREO?, the parties have set their hands this
2949 day of april, 1993 a

TOR THE BUrrALO ‘PBA FOR THE CITy oF BULFALO-

  

G, Director of ~ ‘

     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2g Ye

    

 
VIL.

1990 - 1992
Prosper Award

 
 

 

STATE OF NEW YORK PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS BOARD

In The Matter of The Interest Arbitration Between

 

BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION, INC.

t
q
1
i
'
J |
AND Lowes . t
1
1
THE CITY OF BUFFALO, NEW YORK {

{

PERB Case No. IA91-010; M91-041

 

The Public Arbitration Panel members are:

PUBLIC PANEL MEMBER Peter A. Prosper

AND CHAIRMAN: Union College at
Department of Economics
Schenectady, New York 12308

PUBLIC EMPLOYEE Robert P. Meegan, Jr., President
PANEL MEMBER Buffalo Police Benevolent Associ
74 Franklin Street
Buffalo, NY 14202

-PUBLIC-EMPLOYER Joseph L. Randazzo, Esq.

FINAL AND BINDING

OPINION AND AWARD

OF TRIPARTITE

ARBITRATION PANEL

jation

PANEL MEMBER: Flaherty, Cohen, Grande, Randazzo and Doren |

135 Delaware Avenue
Buffalo, NY 14202

APPEARANCES: For the Police lent Associati

W. James Schwan, Esq.

Wyssling, Schwan and Montgomery

1230 Delaware Avenue
Buffalo, NY 14209

Richard H. Wyssling, Esq.

Wyssling, Schwan and Montgomery

1230 Delaware Avenue
Buffalo, NY 14209

For the City of Buffalo
Dennis J. Campagna, Esq.

Flaherty, Cohen, Grande, Randazzo and Doren

135 Delaware Avenue
Buffalo, NY 14202

wht

poh
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pursuant to the provisions of Civil Service Law, Section 209.4, Pauline R,
« Kinsella, Chairperson of the New York State Public Employment Relations
Board, designated the undersigned on August 21, 1991, as the Public Arbitra-
tion Panel for the purpose of making a just and reasonable determination an the
matters in dispute between the City of Buffalo ("City") and the Buffalo Police
Benevolent Association, Inc. ("PBA or Association’).
The City of Buffalo is located in Erie County, on the shore of Lake Erie.
It has a population of approximately 324,000, the second largest city in the state
of New York. Itis also the county seat and the major metropolitan area within
the county. The Buffalo Police Benevolent Association, Inc. represents a
bargaining unit consisting of all sworn police officers employed by the City
police department except the Commissioner and the three deputy commission-
ers. Total number of sworn police officers in the bargaining unit is approxi-
mately 998. Of this number, 754 are police officers, 67 detectives, 16 assistant
dispatchers, 3 police photographers, 20 detective sergeants, 104 police
lieutenants, 23 police captains, 6 police inspectors, S directors or chiefs (police
training, administrative ‘services, homicide, detectives), and one polygraph
examiner.
‘ The prior Collective Bargaining Agreement between the parties covered
the period from July 1, 1986, until June 30, 1988. Negotiations in 1988 for a

successor agreement were unsuccessful, and impasse was declared, After
 

- chairman. The arbitration pane! issued its award on September 5, 1989,

3

mediative efforts failed, the PBA filed a petition for compulsory interest
arbitration. An arbitration panel was designated, with John Sands, Esq., as
covering the period from July 1, 1988 through dune 30, 1990. .

The parties began negotiations anew for a successor agreement in early
1990, with a combined total of fifty-nine Proposals submitted by both parties.
On April 10, 1991, the PBA filed a declaration of impasse with the State of New
York Public Employment Relations Board. A mediator’s efforts were unsuc-
cessful, and the PBA filed a petition for compulsory interest arbitration. The
Chairperson of the Public Employment Relations Board designated the above-
named arbitration panel to resolve the dispute. Hearings were held in Buffalo,
New York on Wednesday, November 20, 1991, Thursday, November 21, 1991,
Friday, November 22, 1991, and Saturday, November 23, 1991, at which time
both parties were provided opportunity to introduce evidence, present
testimony, summon witnesses, cross-examine witnesses, and otherwise support
their respective positions on the outstanding issues. The parties filed post-
hearing briefs and reply briefs. i

At the hearing the parties agreed to submit approximately eight issues
each for evaluation and decision by the arbitration panel. Those issues are:

Shifts; Vacations; Sick Leave (Confinement); Sick Leave Incentive; Sick Leave

Abuse; Discipline and Discharge; Overtime; Seniority; Uniform Allowance;
 

e
4
«-Man Patrols; Health Insurance Coverage; Maintenance of Benefits Article;
Dental Insurance; Reporting Time; Longevity; Educational Incentives
' All issues and their attendant support submitted by each party were
carefully considered, as well as the responses by the opposing party.

The Public Arbitration Pane} met.in exécutive session on April 30, 1992,
and deliberated on each of the outstanding issues, carefully and fully consid-
ering all the data, exhibits and testimony received from both parties. The
results of those deliberations are contained in the AWARD, which constitutes
the Panel's best judgment as to a just and reasonable solution of the impasse.
Those issues presented by the parties which are not specifically dealt with in
detail in this AWARD were also carefully considered by the Public Arbitration
Panel, but rejected in their entirety. For each issue, the discussion below pres-
ents the positions of the parties and the Panel's analysis and conclusion.

In arriving at the determination contained herein, the Public Arbitration

Panel has considered the following statutory guidelines with which it was

charged by Section 209.4:

e

(v) the public arbitration panel shall make a just and reasonable

determination of the matters in dispute. In arriving at such

‘determination, the panel shall specify the basis for its find-

ings, taking into consideration, in addition to any other
relevant factors, the following:

a. comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of
- employment of the employees involved in the arbitration
proceeding with the wages, hours, and conditions of
employment of other employees performing similar services
or requiring similar skills under similar working conditions
5

and with other employees generally in public and private
employment in comparable communities,
:
b, the interests and welfare of the public and the financial
. : ability of the public employer to pay;

c. comparison of peculiarities in regard to other trades or
professions, including specifically, (1) hazards of employ-
ment; (2) physical qualifications; (3) educational qualifica-
tions; (4) mental qualifications; (5) job training and skills;

 

d. the terms of collective agreements negotiated between
9 thé parties in the past providing for compensation and
fringe benefits, including, but not limited to, the provisions
for salary, insurance and retirement benefits, medical and
hospitalization benefits, paid time off and job security.

3 (vi) the determination of the public arbitration panel shall be
final and binding upon the parties for the period prescribed
by the panel, but in no event shall such period exceed two
years from the termination date of any previous collective
bargaining agreement or if there is no previous collective
) bargaining agreement then for a period not to exceed two
‘ years from the date of determination by the panel. Such _
determination shall not be subject to the approval of any
local legislative body or other municipal authority.

TERM OF AWARD

 

 

 

 

| Both parties are in agreement that because of the date of this Award and
pursuant to the provisions of Civil Service Law Section 209.4(vi), the Public
Arbitration Panel is limited to a maximum of a two-year Award, the term of this

Award shall be from July 1, 1990 through June 30, 7992.

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

6
SALARY

Average annual salaries, exclusive of longevity but including step increment,

of police officers for the City of Buffalo currently in effect are:

Police Officers : $29,755
Ranks Above Police Officers $34,958
Average For Unit $31,033 -

When longevity payment are included, the average annual base pay,

including longevity is:

Police Officers $30,182
Ranks Above Police Officers $35,846
Average For Unit $31,573

In addition to the salaries above, provision is made for payment of

reporting time, night shift differential, court time, holiday pay and uniforms.

Positi Poli enevolent Associatio

The PBA seeks a salary increase of twelve (12%) effective July 1, 1990,
and a twelve (12%) salary increase effective July 1,°1991. The City makes no
salary proposal. The Association supports its proposed salary increases on the
bases of comparable salaries received by other police officers in similar
jurisdictions, the hazardousness nature of the work performed by police officers,

and the pattern of salary increases received in the past in comparison with
 

 

 

 

7
police units in other cities and in other employee units employed by the City of
Buffalo. t

The PBA maintains that the proper comparables are those used by
compulsory interest arbitration panels in previous years, specifically, the Sands
panel. Those jurisdictions used by the Sands panel for comparison of salaries
and other benefits are the counties of Nassau and Suffolk, the cities of New
York, Syracuse, Rochester, and Yonkers, and the towns of Amherst, Cheek-
towaga and Tonawanda.

A comparison of the Sands panel nine-unit average salaries with Buffalo
police salaries reveals that Buffalo police salaries are substantially lower.
Salaries for Buffalo police officers are $10,331 lower than the average of those
of Suffolk County, Nassau County, New York City, Syracuse, Rochester and
Yonkers, which is equal to a 33.6 percent difference. Comparing Buffalo’s
salaries with those of the towns of Amherst, Cheektowaga and Tonawanda, a
deficit of $3,923 is experienced, resulting in Buffalo police officers salaries being
approximately 12.8 percent less than the average of those towns.

: The PBA arques that, "...a Buffalo police officer is seriously underpaid
whether compared on a thirty-three municipality basis, using the comparables
found appropriate by the Sands panel, or using even more limited comparables
[the Cities of Rochester and Syracuse and the largest suburban towns of
Amherst, Cheektowaga and Tonawanda]. This is true whether a comparison is

made on the basis of total annual earnings or tatal cumulative career earnings.
 

 

 

9

9

 

8
When the thirty-three municipality comparables are used, the disparity, on

average exceeds twelve (12%) percent. When the Sands panel comparables are

- used, the disparity exceeds, on average, twenty-four (24%) percent. When a

more limited five municipality comparison is done, the disparity exceeds eleven
and one-half (11.5) percent” [PBA Post-Hearing Memorandum, pp. 26-27]. The
PBA asserts that its proposed increase in salary is not only equitable, but fully

justified as well.

Position of the City of Buffalo
The City of Buffalo contends that the comparables used by the PBA in its

argument for salary increases are inappropriate. Stating that its use of the
criteria of geographical proximity, population and union representation, its
selection of comparable units are (a} Erie County cities and towns of Buffalo,
Amherst, Cheektowaga, Depew, East Aurora, Town of Hamburg, Town of
Lancaster, Village of Lancaster, City of Tonawanda, Town of Tonawanda, and
West Seneca; (b) Niagara County cities of Lockport, Niagara Falls, North
Tonawanda; and, (c) other large cities in Western New York of Rochester and
Syracuse.

The City resists a salary increase on the grounds that the City is simply
unable to pay. According to the City, “Buffalo is currently struggling for
economic survival" [City Post-Hearing Brief, p. 8]. The City of Buffalo is heavily

dependent on state aid. Over one-half of the City’s budget was State funded
 

 

 

9

in 1991. The proportion of State aid fell in recent years,.and the decrease has

created a shorifail of over $13 million, which the City has made up by

. increasing the property tax by 9.5%, deleting 117 funded jobs, elimination of

53 positions in the police department, and increased the use of the attrition
factor from 3.0% ta 3.5% on all jobs for all departments in the City. Even with
these measures, the City comptroller projected an $11.7 million budget
imbalance by the end of the 1991-92 fiscal year.

If the budget deficit grows, it would create additional fiscal and financial
problems including higher costs incurred in issuing long-term debt and other
financia! obligations.

in addition to the loss in state aid, adverse economic conditions which
the national economy has experienced has fallen particularly hard on the City
of Buffalo. Unemployment applications filed in Erie County have reached 6.9%,
coupled with an additional net loss of 9,100 jobs. The number of bankruptcies

were at a record high in recent years, with 4,000 in 1990, and 4,409 in 1991.

Discussion on Salary .

The issue of appropriate comparable police departments must be,
addressed first. Both parties use some of the same cities and towns for
comparison purposes, but their general concepts differ. The PBA chose the
units used by the Sands panel, which includes New York City, and two counties

(Suffolk and Nassau) and one city (Yonkers) in the Greater New York Metropoli-
 

 

 

 

 

10

tan Area. Apparently, the Sands panel selected on the basis of size of
departments. The City, on the other hand, chose cities, towns and other
political subdivisions in the Buffalo area, including Erie and Niagara Counties,
as well as the upstate New York larger cities of Rochester and Syracuse. .

A selection of units for wage and salary comparisons must be based on
meaningful criteria. In the instant case, police departments of other jurisdictions
must be comparable in significant ways to the Buffalo police department. Most
labor economists and other labor practitioners would agree that one critical
criterion of comparability is geographical proximity, that is, the relevant labor
market area for the occupational group under consideration. If two police
departments, for example, draw their personne! from the same competitive
locality, the criterion of geographical proximity is satisfied. However,
geographical proximity is not the only relevant criterion. If, within a particular
geographic area, a large city does not compete with a much smaller political
subdivision for personnel, geographical proximity is irrelevant. The labor
market area for the two units are separate and distinct. In like manner, two
large city police forces may be comparable even if They are: relatively distant
from each other if size of city, price levels, size-of police force, and other factors
are relatively equal.

’ Considering the criteria of similar labor market area, similar size and
function of police force, and other economic factors, it is possible to conclude

that jurisdictions such as New York City, Yonkers, Suffolk and Nassau Counties
 

 

 

1

are not appropriate for comparisons with Buffalo. New York City and its police

force, obviously, is substantially larger than Buffalo, and some of its problems

- are of a substantially different nature. In addition to size, the New York Greater

Metropolitan Area, including Yonkers, Nassau and Suffolk Counties, has a
significantly different set of economic conditions. Prices and the Consumer
Price Index are substantially higher, salaries in general are substantially higher,
and police officer salaries in particular are substantially higher. The area’s
population is more than half the population of the entire state. Therefore,
conditions in that area are so substantially different that a comparison with
Buffalo is meaningless.

Syracuse and Rochester are twa larger cities in the State, and are outside
the New York Metropolitan Area. Their police forces and populations, although
not equal in size to those of Buffalo, are sufficiently large to permit credible
comparisons.

On the other hand, certain proximate jurisdictions cited by the City are
so small and do not derive their employees from the same labor pool as does
Buffalo that they cannot be reasonably considered comparable, Examples of
such jurisdictions are East Aurora with a 14-person police force, Lancaster
Village with a total of 15 in the police department, the City of Tonawanda with
a total of 31 persons in the police department.

Considering the criteria of competitive labor market area, population of

jurisdiction, size of police force, and other economic factors, an appropriate
 

 

 

12

grouping of jurisdiction for comparison with Buffalo would be larger jurisdic-
tions within the Buffalo area and larger cities outside the Buffalo area; but also
‘outside the Metropolitan New York City Area. That grouping would be the
towns of Amherst, Cheektowaga and Tonawanda, as well as the cities of

Syracuse and Rochester.

All the evidence affirms that salaries of Buffalo police officers lag behind
those of comparable police forces. The City denies the assertion of the PBA,
stating that, "the PBA’s members have fared well in terms of wages and
benefits. A comparison of these wages and benefits to those in Buffalo’s
market basket area reveals that Buffalo's officers lead the average salaries in
every category" [City Post-Hearing Reply Brief, p. 1}. The City’s conclusion rests
on the use of a grouping which contains some inappropriate jurisdictions.
Removing those inappropriate jurisdictions results in data which show that
Buffalo police officers are in an inferior position relative to comparable
jurisdictions.

The City asserts that even if a difference exists, the City’s finances are
such that it just cannot afford to increase ‘salaries at this time.

The response of the PBA to the City’s position is that the City has taken
the same position "in every past interest arbitration proceeding since the present
mayor has been mayor" [PBA Post-Hearing Reply Brief, p. 7]. When the City

and PBA went through an interest arbitration with the Drotning panel, the City
 

 

13

claimed that it could not pay salary increases, yet the Drotning panel awarded
7.7% and 6.8% salary increases which the City absorbed without incurring
~ budget deficits or incurring significant tax increases, Between 1977 and 1989,
the City property tax levy increased only 11.3%. There were no real property
tax increases in 1989 and 1990,

The City claimed inability to pay when its representatives testified before
the Sands panel. For 1989-90, both police and fire were awarded twenty
percent salary increases which the City not only paid but the City ended the
fiscal year of 1989-90 with a $10.8 million surplus.

The City’s witness, Thomas F. Keenan, City Budget Director, testified that
the City was not "crying wolf this time, that the fiscal problems it faces are real.
4. .a number of events that have occurred over the last several months make
some of the doom and doom news....reality as opposed to conjecture...the
Comptroller...reported a deficit for the City's general fund for the first time in
over fourteen years...the state government has indeed cut the amount of general

purpose revenue..." [Transcript, p. 357-58],

There is no doubt that the City of Buffalo is experiencing a difficult
financial period. A combination of reduced revenues from the state, the current
recession, and rising material, insurance and other costs have contributed to

budget difficulties. These difficulties require a tempering of salary increases for

police officers, but for competitive and other purposes, a salary increase is
 

3

 

 

 

 

 

 

14

appropriate. To deny a salary increase for police officers would be inequitable

because City firefighters recently received salary increases, as welkas police

: officers in other jurisdictions. Were this panel to award no salary increase,

police officers in the City would be seriously underpaid compared to other
units, creating not only a decrease in morale and possibly productivity, but the
City could fose a substantial number of highly effective police officers who
would seek employment elsewhere. In addition, recruiting would be more

difficult, creating still greater personnel problems.

It is the opinion of the Public Arbitration Panel that the salary Award

herein is a fair and equitable salary increase.

Based upon the evidence and arguments presented by the respective

parties, the Public Arbitration Panel AWARDS salary increases as follows:

Effective July 1, 1990, salary shall be increased by four (4%) percent.
Effective January 1, 1991, salary shall be increased by four (4%) percent.
Effective July 1, 1991, salary shall be increased by Four (4%) percent.
 

 

3

 

15
EDUCATION INCENTIVE

The Association proposes an education incentive for police officers. Its

‘specific proposal is:

All bargaining unit members shall receive, as additional compen-
sation, an education incentive based on the following percentages
of the members tap base salary

DEGREE/CREDIT HOURS (IN PERCENT)
Associate’s Degree {AAS) . “2, 0
Bachelor's Degree (BA or BS). 4.0

Bachelor's Degree - Relevant Field . 6.0
Master's or Professional Degree (MA, MS, 3D)... 8.0

 

 
 

 

Position of the Police Benevolent Association

The Association argues that a highly educated police officer is essential
in today's society. The responsibilities of a police officer are so varied that
education is a must. The PBA asserts that if a police officer has a college
education {s)he will develop an ability to rely on his or her own judgment, use
discretion properly, and apply policing to a variety of crisis situations. College
educated police will being new ideas, an environment for change, and a more /
sensitive approach to their duties, An education incentive has the added value
of attracting more qualified personnel to police work.

_ Many cities, towns and villages have realized the advantage of education
and have enacted education incentives. Some of those jurisdictions are the City
of Rochester, the City of North Tonawanda, the City of Lockport, the Village of

East Aurora, the Town of Amherst, and the Town of Cheektowaga.
 

 

 

 

16

Finally, the PBA argues that the Salary Review Commission sponsored by
the City of Buffalo Common Council recommended a salary education incentive
in 1988, as well the International Chiefs of Police Report commissioned by the

City of Buffalo in 1990.

Position of the City of Buffalo

The City states that, "while the desire of a police officer to improve
himself is commendable, the City is regrettably not in the position to pay a
stipend for such" [City Post-Hearing Reply Brief, p. 23]. The City believes that
the PBA proposal is excessive relative to other units. The Common Council's
Report provided for a maximum stipend of $300.00 for an Associate's Degree,
and $600.00 for a Bachelor’s Degree. The City's resources simply do not permit

such a drastic increase sought by the PBA.

Discussion on ucati al Incentiv

The arguments presented by the Association are well thought through
and valid. This Public Arbitration Panel embraces the concept of an education
incentive. However, the City is currently experiencing financial difficulties, and
adding the percentage increases to salary proposed by the PBA for education
incentive, in addition to the salary awarded above would place too great a
burden on the City at the present time. We recommand that the City and the

PBA negotiate an education incentive with a modest stipend initially. This
 

 

17

would accomplish the goal of alerting police officers to the City’s acknowledge-

ment of the value of education for police officers, and at the same time fit

. within the financial constraints experienced by the City.

The Public Arbitration Panel, while embracing the concept of an
education incentive, and recommending that the two parties negotiate such a

clause, makes no AWARD on this issue.

HEALTH INSURANCE
The PBA had proposed, and the City had tentatively agreed, that for
health care coverage, Rider 14 of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield program, be
teplaced with Rider 21. Although City representatives tentatively agreed to the
proposal, the Public Arbitration Panel, in its deliberations on the issue,
concluded that Rider 14, while less expensive to the City than Rider 21, actually
provided greater coverage for the expressed needs of the PBA, Therefore, we

make the following AWARD:

The current Rider 14 is to remain as part of the health insurance
coverage, and Rider 21 is rescinded.
18
SICK LEAVE (CONFINEMENT)
The City proposes a confinement policy. Presently, no confinement

policy exists. The City’s proposed clause js as follows:

{a) | Unless otherwise authorized by the Commissioner, or his
designated representative, a member of the Department on
sick jeave will not leave his residence or place of confine-
ment except for:

 

9 {1) obtaining professional medical treatment;
(2) ~ performing exercise prescribed in writing by
his physician which is part of his recovery
treatment, a copy of which must be submitted
9 to his Commanding Officer prior to com-
‘  mencing such exercise.
(b) Permission to leave the residence for reasons other than
cited above must be documented, in writing, by the
Q° ‘\ employee’s commanding officer.
Position of the City of Buffalo
The City argues that there has been an increase in the use of both sick
leave and IOD (Injured on duty) time since 1982, The confinement policy would

| not harm anyone. Those officers who are truly sick would normally be at home

during their shift at any rate. Individuals who are injured and who are able to

 

 

get out and about can seek permission to do so. The policy would permit the

Department to monitor sick leave usage with periodic phone calls or visits.

 

: Other departments in the area have a confinement policy, notably

Amherst, the Town of Lancaster, the ‘City of North Tonawanda, and the Town

of Tonawanda.
 

 

 

 

19

Position of the Police Benevolent Association

The Association objects to the City’s inclusion of [OD time for confine-

» ment, stating that the City’s proposal! submitted for interest arbitration excluded

10D time. The PBA argues that officers who report off sick not only see the
Department surgeon weekly, but A.D. weekly. Those officers are subject to
periodic phone calls or visits. If an officer abuses his sick leave privileges, he
is subject to formal disciplinary charges. There has not been a single
established case of abuse; therefore, there is no reason to disturb the establish-

ed practice.

iscussion 2 ‘olic

Although this Public Arbitration Panel does not believe that excessive sick
Jeave abuse occurs among officers of the Department, a confinement policy
limited to an individuai’s tour of duty will discourage any person from an
attempt in the future to abuse it. The confinement policy does not affect those
officers who do not take sick leave, nor does it affect those officers who are ill
and confined to their homes or hospitals. A person with the flu or other illness
would not feel like going out of his home. The person whom the policy would
effect is an individual who has an arm or a leg in a cast, or have some other off-

duty: injury or illness which prevents him or her from performing his or her

duties as a police officer, but who has some ambulatory capacity. But, the City
20

argues that a person in that situation could get permission to leave his or her
home, ,

This Public Arbitration Panel believes that the City’s proposal does no
harm to police officers who are ill, and may discourage potential sick leave
abuse. This Public Arbitration Panel agrees with the PBA that the issue
presented before it excluded 10D (injured on duty) personnel, and the City’s
proposal presented above reflects that, Therefore we make the following

AWARD:

 

A new clause shal! be added to the Agreement which specifies a
| confinement policy as stated above as the City’s proposal.

on) DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE
Article Xi] of the Agreement contains definitions and procedures

i) concerning disciplinary action. Section 12.2 (D) currently is the following:

The impartial hearing officer so selected and so designated shall
be vested with all the powers of the Commissioner of Police and
: shall make a record of such conference. His findings and
2 recommendations shail then be referred to the Commissioner of
Police for review and decision. . :

The PBA proposes deleting the last sentence of that paragraph and

 

substituting it with the following sentence:

 

The hearing officer, mutually selected by the parties, shall have
4 3 authority to render final and binding determination.

 
 

a3

 

 

 

y
3

 

21
Position of the Police Benevolent Association

The Association states that under the present Agreement, the hearing

’ officer may only make findings and recommendations which are referred to the

Commissioner of Police for review and decision. It states: "While the mutually
appointed hearing officer is empowered to determine whether the City has met
its burden of proof, the Commissioner of Police, who initially authorizes the
service of charges, is the ultimate determinator" [PBA Post-Hearing Brief, p. 57].
The PBA further states: "As is evident frorn Joint Exhibit No. 2, the Commis-
sioner frequently does not follow the recommended penalty" [PBA Post-Hearing
Brief, p. 57]. The PBA charges that the Commissioner has found guilt even
after the hearing officer recommended dismissal of charges. Of twenty
disciplinary cases, the Commissioner followed the hearing officer's recom-
mendation less than fifty-percent of the time. The PBA further asserts that there
are a number of instances in which an officer has plead guilty and sustained a
pre-stated lesser penalty because he or she felt that there would not be a fair
review following a formal hearing.

The PBA states: “The substitution of a neutral arbitrator empowered to
tender final and binding determination for a hearing officer will better Protect

each officer's due process rights" [PBA Post-Hearing Brief, p. 58].
 

 

 

22
ition of the City of Buff

The City opposes the Association’s proposal. [t asks the Public

’ Arbitration Panel to take judicial note that due process requires only that an

individual be apprised of the charges and be given an opportunity to respond.

The current section of the Agreement far exceeds those minimal rights.

iscussion on Disciplin: ischari

When a person is charged with actions that will result in discipline or
discharge, that individual must have the right of due process, that is (s)he must
be apprised of the charges, and must receive a full and fair hearing. If found
guilty, the severity of the penalty must be consonant with the infraction.

At some point in the past, the City and the PBA negotiated the present
discipline and discharge section of the Agreement. It is noted that similar
language is included in the Agreements of other bargaining units within the
City. None of the eight bargaining units in the City have Agreements which
contain a binding arbitration clause,

Although the City is consistent in its discipline and discharge clause
among the various bargaining units, the high incidence of changes in the
hearing officers’ recommended penaity is cause for concern. Also cause for
concern to the extent that it occurs, is the fact that individuals plead guilty to

charges of which they are innocent out of fear of more substantial penalty.
23

The Public Arbitration Pane! does not wish to decrease the role of the
Commissioner of Palice in this process, nor does it wish to completely alter the

* general thrust of Article 12.2. The Award below, while adding one layer to the
process, thus making it somewhat cumbersome, is intended to permit the
process to continue as before, while at the same time provide an avenue of
appeal for any police officer who believes that an increase in penalty recom-

‘mended by the hearing officer is unjustified.

The Public Arbitration Panel makes the following AWARD

Add the following to Section 12.2 (D):

if the Union disagrees with the decision of the Commissioner of
. Police to. change the decision recommended by the Hearing
Officer, it may seek review of such change in decision by an
arbitrator mutually selected by the parties through the American
Arbitration Association within seven (7) calendar days after service
of the Commissioner's decision. It is understood that such
arbitrator shall not be authorized to conduct a rehearing of the
matter, but only to review the record of the proceeding to
determine whether the change in decision by the Commissioner
_ was supported by substantial evidence in the record. If the
arbitrator so determines, he shall have the authority to award an
i) appropriate remedy which shall be final and binding upon the
: parties and the police officer involved. It is further understood
that the cost of such arbitration shall be shared equally between
the parties.

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

24

MAINTENANCE OF BENEFITS :

The current Agreement contains the following maintenance of benefits

clause:

All conditions or provisions beneficial ta employees now in effect
which are not specifically provided for in this Agreement or which
have not been replaced by provisions of this Agreement shall
remain in effect for the duration of this Agreement, unless
mutually agreed otherwise between the City and the Union.

The City seeks to remove this clause from the Agreement.

Position of the City of Buffalo
The City states that, "[G]iven the current fiscal plight the City now faces,

it cannot afford to play games with a catch-all clause.such as that above. The
City must know what its potential liability is under this clause." The City is
willing to incorporate specific conditions or practices relating to terms and

.
conditions of employment into the contract, but those conditions must be

clearly identified by the PBA.

Position of the Police Benevo Associatio
The Association argues that the City has presented no facts to support

its proposal. Although the City pleads ignorance as to the meaning of the
 

 

 

 

 

25

Article, the meaning is well understood because it has been in a series of

Agreements between the City and the PBA.

Discussion on Maintenance of B its C

lf this Public Arbitration Panel were to award the City’s proposal, it would
in fact potentially eliminate some terms and conditions of employment enjoyed
by the bargaining unit that are established practices which are have not been
reduced ta writing in the Agreement. It may be argued that all recognized
terms and conditions of employment should be identified and placed in an
agreement, that was not the charge placed before this Public Arbitration Panel.

Therefore, we decline to award the City’s proposal.

SHIFTS
Section 2.2 of the Agreement provides for three shifts of fixed time:
e
7:30 a.m to 3:30 p.m.
3:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m.

17:30 p.m. to 7:30 a.m.

The current policy is for a 5-2 "double back" shift. Under this arrange-

ment, there is a 42-day cycle, within which police officers work 26 days.
 

 

 

 

 

 

26
The City seeks to alter the shift system to provide for a straight 5-2, eight-hour

shift schedule, with a fourth "power shift.” :

sition o City of Bu

The City seeks the shift change because it has a lower "relief factor," and
is more efficient because it permits 71.4% of the manpower to be scheduled at
any one time, compared with the present 66.7%.

Buffalo is the only Department within the comparables that has a double-
back shift.

With the double-back shift, one-third of available manpower is scheduled
off each weekend, and 68.7 officers report off on average each day. Given this,
approximately 249 officers are off each day of every weekend, leaving too few
officers available to respond to calls."

Officers work both second and third shift on a rotational basis on the
double-back shift. This is harmful to both officers and citizens because the
schedule is inflexible. Staffing is distributed fairly evenly by time of day and
day of week. The most obvious discrepancy, according to the City, is on the
second and third shifts on Saturdays, and the third shift on Sundays. More
officers are needed on those shifts than the present system provides.

“ In addition, with the rotational shifts, the constant change in wark hours

is destructive to sleep patterns.
 

3

 

5
wf

 

 

27

Position of the Police Benevolent Association

The Association states that the City does not propose a particular

‘schedule whether it be a 5-2, 4-4, 4-3, 4-2, or other possible schedule. Nor

does the City propose any definitive set or set starting and quitting times. The
City's proposal does propose an increase in work hours since employees now
work eight hours inclusive of. lunch, whereas under the City’s proposal they
would work an eight-hour day exclusive of Junch.

The PBA argues that other than the assertion that a straight 5-2 schedule
would result in better deployment, the City has presented no evidence justifying
a change in the schedule. “Given the absence of specifics as to what is

encompassed within the City’s proposal as well as failure to present compelling

data supporting the straight 5-2 schedule....there is insufficient evidence in the
record to change the existing provisions" [PBA Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 62-63].

e

Discussion on Shifts
The report, Policing Buffalo In the Nineties, submitted by the International

Association of Police Chiefs [City Exhibit No. 12], recommends that the present
double-back shift scheduling be eliminated in order to increase the efficiency

of operations, provide greater service to the residents of Buffalo, and increase

productivity in general.
28

This Public Arbitration Panel believes that a change in shift schedule will

provide for greater flexibility and efficiency of operations, and it endorses a

" movement away from the 5-2 double back shift system with ratating shifts.
However, the Panel is not convinced that the straight 5-2 is the best alternative.

_ At the same time it is not convinced that the straight 5-2 shift system is not the

most efficient pattern. The Public Arbitration Panel has not been provided with

 

sufficient information to make that judgment, although with the limited
information it has, it appears that the straight 5-2 shift system would be
appropriate for this City of Buffalo Police Department.

Because of the relative inefficiency of the modified 5-2 shift system (the

+ double back system), this Public Arbitration Panel makes the following AWARD:

The parties are directed to negotiate a change from the modified
5-2 double back shift to either a straight 5-2-8 hour shift or some
other more efficient pattern mutually acceptable to the parties. If

oO negotiations do not result in agreement after a period of six
months after issuance of this Award, the unresolved issues may be
submitted to arbitration by either party using the procedures of the
American Arbitration Association.

 

 

 

 

staan.

 
 

29

ONE MAN PATROLS

:

' The City of Buffalo uses two-man vehicles for police patrol service. The
City seeks to establish a combination of one/two person vehicles, and makes

the following proposal:

(A) Acommittee of equal City/PBA membership be formed to

study and discuss such matters as:

(i) safety

(ii) ~~ bargaining unit impact

(iii) recommended implementation of the combined one/two
man patrot

(B) The Committee makes effective recommendations to the
Commissioner of Police.

(C) The Commissioner will give the PBA and the Committee at least
six (6) months notice prior to his intent to implement the one
man/two man vehicle system.

(D). Unresolved matters involving safety and/or bargaining unit impact,
as they affect terms and conditions of employment as defined
by the Taylor Law, may be submitted to interest arbitration by
either the City or the PBA prior to the Commissioner's implementa-
tion.

e
)
Position of the City of Buffalo

| Buffalo remains one of a group of major cities that maintains almost

 

exclusive reliance on two-man cars. This system has led to "stacking" of calls
wherein dispatchers give several calls to one unit. Officers may not be able to

respond to all the calls because of the lack of time.
 

 

 

 

 

 

Go

30

The fiscal state of the City of Buffalo demands a more efficient use of

services, and a well-planned use of one/two man Vehicles will “enhance the

’ efficient and effective use of police services” [City Post-Hearing Brief, p. 28].

Position of the Poli nt A: jati

The PBA avers that the City’s proposal is unclear, It states that It is clear
that the City wishes to ultimately establish a combination of one/two man
vehicles, "...it is unclear whether...the City is asking that this panel approve a
concept, a procedure, or an implementation" [PBA Post-Hearing Brief, p. 70].
The PBA believes that the issue should be deferred to the next round of
negotiations.

Discussion on One Man Patrols

The report submitted by the International Association of Chiefs of Police
recommends one/two person patrols. The arguments by the City regarding the
efficiency, flexibility, and cost-saving aspects of a change to a combination of
one-person/two-person patrol vehicles is impressive. This Public Arbitration
Panel heartily endorses the concept of one/two person patrol vehicles so long
as officer safety concerns are met. However, it cannot award the City’s

proposal as it is written because of the immense problems of implementation.

The City’s proposal would permit the implementation of the system within six
 

 

 

31

months,’ and any and ail prablems flowing from that implementation be
resolved as they arise.

’ As tempting and reasonably rational as that proposal sounds, it carries
with it severe limitations, For example, the City, in arguing for the proposal
states: "Operating a one-man/two-man patrol system will require the Depart-
ment to have a superior dispatch discipline, unfailing back-up procedures,
stronger field supervision, better equipment, and officers better trained in police
field procedures, Properly done, a complete move to a one-person/two-person
patrol system could take three (3) to five (5) years to accomplish" [City Post-
Hearing Brief, p. 29].

The Association informs the Panel that Jerome Needle’s letter of July 22, .
1991, cautioned that the one-man/two-man patrol system “must be done. with
total regard for officer safety..Conversion must be part ofa package of
changes, all put in place prior to actual implementation” [PBA Post-Hearing
Brief, p. 70]. The report then goes on to state that the new CAD ‘system is
critical, dispatchers must be trained, better vehicles must be purchased, body
armor, batons, support training, and other items must be provided.

It is clear that the implementation of one-person patrols must be
preceded by careful planning, the acquisition of certain types of equipment, and
yroper training of particular personnel. The actual implementation will have

ne substantial impact on terms and conditions of employment, and such

in. ot should be anticipated as thoroughly as possible.
 

9

oO

 

 

y

32

The issues and problems in implementing the plan are so complex that

the concept of a committee suggested by the City is an excellent suggestion.

’ But, because those issues and problems are so complex, it is not possible for

this Public Arbitration Panel to endorse the City’s proposal to provide the
Commissioner with the ability to implement the procedure at his will.

The Public Arbitration Panel endorses the concept of one-person/two-
person patrol vehicles, and makes the following AWARD:

A Committee of equal City of Buffato/Police Benevolent Associa-

tion membership is to be formed to study and discuss such

matters as safety, bargaining unit impact, and other items

regarding a shift to one-person/two-person patrol vehicles. The

total number of members is to be mutually determined by the City

and the PBA.

The Committee shall make effective recommendations to the
Commissioner of Police.

The City and the PBA shall negotiate a timetable for the imple-
mentation of one-person/two-person patrols.

OTHERISSUES

The City of Buffalo withdrew its proposal regarding Union Release Time.

Other issues presented to the Public Arbitration Panel which were examined,
evaluated and rejected are the following: Reporting Time (PBA); Vacations
{PBA); Sick Leave Incentive (PBA); Uniform Allowance (PBA); Dental Coverage
(PBA); Longevity (PBA); Sick Leave Abuse (City); Overtime (City); Seniority

(City); Reporting Time (City); Health Insurance (City). All other provisions and
 

 

33

language contained in the Agreement are hereby continued, except as

specifically modified in this Award.

Respectfully submitted,

a.

Date: Jowe 29, 49Ue Peter A. Prosper
Public Panel Member and Chairman

I (concur) (do not concur) with the Above Award

Date: co
Joseph L. Randazzo, Esq..

Employer Panel Member

RPP
| (concur) Idectasteeoneur) with the Above Award ,-

 
 

 

9g

34
STATE OF NEW YORK )
COUNTY OF ) SS:
” On this day of , 1992, before me

personally came and appeared JOSEPH L. RANDAZZO, to me known and
known to.me to be the individual described in and who executed the foregoing
instrument and he acknowledged to me that he executed the same.

 

STATE OF NEW YORK )
COUNTY OF ERIC ) Ss:
Onthis 254 day of Sone_ , 1992, before me

personally came and appeared ROBERT P. MEEGAN, JR., to me known and
known to me to be the individual described in and who executed the foregoing
instrument and he acknowledged to me that he executed the same.

    

G2.
STATE OF NEW YORK
COUNTY OF, aly } SS:

_ On this Dh day of , 1992, before me
personally came and appeared PETER A. PROSPER, to me known and known
to me to be the individual described in and who. executed the foregoing

_ instrument and he acknowledged to me that he executed the same.

IO). Trrcbes
Com tira June So, 1% 7

RITA M SCHALEC
Ratery Putte, Sita cf uw Yer

Comecat o Bars a, in
aalene
VIll.

1988 - 1990
Sands

 
 

 

 

 

 

3

9g

oO

 

C) stare oF NEW YORK

“158

PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS BOARD

 

In the Matter of the Interest Arbitration

Between IA88-29;M88-345
CITY OF. BUPPALO, , JS Case No.
Public Employer, 1423
And .
BOUPFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION, IKC., OPINION
Employee Organization AND
Se ee a a re mm mn mr en mn mms a me cen a AWARD

Before the Public Arbitration Panel:
JOHN E. SANDS, Public Member and Chairman .

RICHARD PLANAVSKY, Public Employer Member
ROBERT P. MEEGAN, Employee Organization Member

OPINION .

Pais interest arbitration case arises under Section
209.4 of New York State's Civil Service Law. On December 28,
1988 PERS Chairman Herold R. Newman appointed this Public
Arbitration Panel to make a just and reasonable determination of
the parsties' collective bargaining impasse.
r

to our statutory authority, we conducted

 

New York on May 10, 11, and 12, 1989. Both

 

sices appeared by counsel and had full opportunity to adduce
evidence, to crossexanine each other's witnesses, and to make’ '
argument in support of their respective positions. Each submit~-
ted pos &i-hearing briefs, and neither has raised objection to the

|

fairness of this proceeding,

(s'

a AB
129 oo 2 SEP19 1989

This Panel met in executive session in Buffalo on July

27, 1989. We have reviewed all of the parties! evidence and

 

9 arguments taking into consideration Section 209.4(c)(v)'s express

eriteria: -

9 a. comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of
employment of the employees involved in the arbitration
Proceeding with the wages, hours, and conditions of
employment of other enployees performing similar services or
requiring sjmilar skills under similar working conditions
and with other enployees generally in public and private

9 employment in comparable communities.

b. the interests and welfare of the public and the
financial ability of the public employer to pay;

 

1 ' c. comparison of peculiarities in regard to other

o trades or professions, including specifically, (1) hazards

| of erployment; (2) physical qualifications; (3) educational
Qualifications; (4) mental qualifications; (5) job training
and skills; .

co a. the terms of collective agreements negotiated

oy ) between the parties in the past providing for compensation
and frince benefits, including, but not limited to, the
provisions for salary, inserance and retirement benefits,
medical and hospitalization benefits, paid time off end job
security, . .

‘ Upon that consideration, a meierity of us have.reached

! the Iollowing relevant conclusions. +

 

q Pirsi, both in absolute and relative terms, sBuffalo

police compensation lags far behind that of comparable exployees

 

in comparable’ commtnities and behind relevant averaces as well.

 

5) Here are a few exaaples:
GLO 7. 3SEP 1 9 1989

 

9
‘Repartment Effective Police Officer Yrs. to Buffalo Deficit
Date Minimum / Maximum wax at Maximon
gy In $8$ / In
5”
Suffolk Cty 1/1/88 23,914 / 42,592 5.0 17,039 / 66.7%
Nassau Cty 1/1/88 28,620 / 43,927 5.0 18,374 / 71.9%
New York City 7/1/88 25,977 / 34,633 5.0 9,080 / 35.5%
syracuse 1/1/88 23,749 / 28,831 4.0 3,278 / 12.8%
o Rochester 7/1/88 23,105 / 33,007 2.7 7,454 / 29.28
Yonkers 3/1/88 26,686 / 35,094 4.0 9,541 / 37.3%
AVERAGE 25,342 / 36,347 4.3. 10,794 / 42.23
Amherst 1/1/88 20,163 / 29,001 3.0 3,448 / 13.58
3 Cheektowaga 1/1/88 = 23,338 / 30,832 3.0 5,279 / 20.78
Tonawanda Twn 1/1/88 22,279 / 30,388 4.0 4,835 / 18.9%
AV ERAGE 21,927 / 30,074 3.3 4,52] / 17.78
Burtfalo 1/1/88 18,900 / 25,553 4.0 xxx f XXX
o .

| :

4 in connection with that subject, a majority of us find
+ 5 unpersuasive the City's argument that Buffalo police are appro~ -
i pPriately paid when considered (a) against a nationwide list of

cities identified by an ingenious “cluster analysis" of demo-
ie Sraphic, crine and budget characteristics and (b) acainst local
statisiically adjusted to neutralize local income
re
> :
The City's nationwide list of comparables, although
chosen on a consistently applied statistical basis, fails to
4 reSlecz more relevant regional impellers of compensation levels.

 

The statutory context in which wage determinaticn occurs, for

example, will have more to do than per cepita serious crime data

 

with determining police compensation. .Al] large New; York State

‘elties must negotiate under the Taylor Law with politically

 
o

 

 

 

 

OHS

‘active employee organizations, That fact makes their compen-

EY Sation data intuitively more relevant to Buffalo than those of

cities in Alabama or Virginia that impose police wages unila-
terally. " Hor eover, cluster analysis fails to reflect important
but difficult-to~quantify cultural values that inevitably affect
police compensation: attitudes concerning public safety, status
in the community of police service, and ethnic and cultural
diversity that can complicate police work.

The City's community income differential analysis is
similarly flawed in its practical application, Notwithstanding
theiz rank in the relatively-depressed income hierarchy of
Buffalo, Buffalo police must still live’ on the real wages they
eceive. For example, when an Amherst, New York police officer
goes into an area supermarket, he or she still has between four.
ang five thousand dollars per year more to spend than a Buffalo

police officer even though, compared to residents of that

  

—close-by community, the Amherst police officer may

be less well off.

4s noted, Suffato lags far behind the lazce New York

ta

tate citie

in

in almoss every measure of police compensation. In

the parties' last interest arbitration award, Public Member and

Chairman Gchn Drotning addressed that situation with compelling
canéor, although thet year Buffalo's serious inability-to-zey

Prevented significant catch-up steps; ”

pe 19 Wey
. eo 5 SEP1% 889

‘ It must be clear that the relatively low maximum and
Starting salary for Buffalo Police Officers cannot be
corrected by this award since the amount of the adjustment
would bankrupt the City. However, the difference should not
pe allowed to increase and the gap narrowed to some extent,

[Union Exhibits A-91 and A-140, p, 32.1

Although Buffalo now enjoys vastly improved ability-to-
pay by reason of effective and responsible fiscal and political

Management, the need for a dramatic catch-up in police compensa-

 

tion has not changed. Indeed, even Buffalo's Common Council has
certified that fact, In 1988 the Common Council established a
3 tri-partite, "blue ribbon" Committee to Review Police Salaries.

That Committee met and reviewed much of the same data the parties

7 have presented to this Public Arbitration Panel. And it conclu-
lor’ )Sed withour dissent that, before any interest arbitration pro~

ceeding to determine appropriate current compensation, Buifalo
police mesc receive an immediate, ten-percent wage increase

oO across-the-boerd, The Committee noted, also without dissent,

 

e

ch controversial issues raised by the City es
nt, judicious use of one-ofiicer patrol cars,
ef civilians in support positions and
eporting Zor certain matters are examples of some
che policies and procedures this Committee recommends be
: icers, police administration and city
These issues, if properly examined, showlé
additional

 

 
 
   
  
   
 
 

 

     
AA, : g 2Er Lu ig63

tr:
c

. Asemajority “of "us““£ ind “the Connon ColineLL > own

Cy Committee. to, Review....Police” Salaries! extraordinary «report “both

9 compelling-~and-impossible to ignore. We have therefore decided

to grant, effective on the-date of this Award, the Committee's

immediate, -ten=percent across-the-board increase of base annual

9 police salaries. computed on-the basis of salary levels in effect

on the -date of ‘the Committee's report. We have also decided to

put in place the joint labor-management committee that the Common

Council Committee recommended to help address the various opera~

tional issues necessary to accomplish its purpose of improving
police service in Buffalo.

3

We nove that the City has already enjoyed productivity

improvements in the form of more police work accomplished by

<<“ fewer police officers and- limitations on off-duty employment.
Mere important, the City can secure further productivity gains

—
throuch judiciovs use of variable assignments, one-ofiicer cars KH

 

and duties, and civilianization of

within the City's managerial prere~

 

of course, to such

 

after police compensation is at the level certified appropriate

ty the Cozaon Council's own Committee to Review Police Salaries.

 

that those productivity improvenents and the

character oc the Commission's report are such

 

no other City bergeining unit should be able

rs)
bo
y
tt

 

ler catch-up adjustment,
on : . 7SEP 1 9 1989

We further find that, having-thus-addressed-the-drama+
tic disparity between Buffalo police compensation and-that dn
comparable communities, _there--is-no-reason “for Buffalo. Police:
Compensation” othérwise -to depart fror the five percent/five

Percent two-year “pattern the City has established and justified
for all of its other un And we will so ‘

 

oe)

 

 

 

 
een SEP 1 9 1989

1. Effective on the date of this Award, the base
annual salaries of bargaining unit personnel shall be increased
by an amount equal to ten»percents:{108)=-0f the rate in effect on
July 13, 1988,

 

 

2, Effective July*17°1988 and July 1, 1989. the base
annual salaries of bargaining unit personnel shall be increased
by five percent. Those increases shall. not include any portion
of the preceding paragraph's ten percent adjustment.

3. If the City retains a municipal law enforcement

counsulting organization to address modernization issues, the

3 parties snail establish a joint labor-management committee to
consider those issues and to work wi the consultants to

facilitate imrlenentation of modernt

 
  
 

Ot )

4 concur,

. Cen? SANDS
‘
I dissent.

RICEARD PLANAV SKY

 

we

 

 

 

 
po ROG , SEP 19 1988

 

pM RIMES
In this area, a majority of us agree that the Union's
demands are appropriate for (a)~ psychiatric, illness -rider. bo

9 existing coverage and (b) catastrophic illness coverage at the

| base level of benefits:for bargaining unit personnel hired on or'
after July.1, 1984, who have” limited sick” leave’ benefits: Both

9 demands address situations that involve the unique stresses and

| perils of police service, and, at &@ cost of onestenth of one
percent, each is well within the City's ability-to-pay, And we

3 so

AWARD

a Effective on the date of this Award, the City shall

Qos )improve its medical benefit program for bargaining unit personnel
by adding a rider covering psychiatr illness and coverage for
catastrophic illness at the base Ley ex of benefits for employees
hired on or after July 1, 1984. C

   

o_O

 
 

 

 

 

 

ROBERT P, MEEGAN

 
Te pep: pth i ¥ tuey

TREERRED COMPENSATION
EY

9
The Union seeks a -Section™457°™-deferred compensation

plan. funded. by srvoluntary:.-comtributi ons” of ™ ‘bargaining. unit
members. Thig is a no-cost -item-that’ the City. has already
granted to at least one other major bargaining unit. We
therefore find it appropriate, and we so

3 :

AWARD

3 . : <
The City shall sroyideoyf/section 457 deferred
con'pensation plan for iting-hit personnel.

 
      
   

C JOHN. EJ! SANDS
RICHARD PLANAV SKY

ROSERT >. NESGAN

 

 

 

 

 
i
O

ey
ww?

 

 

 

- shall not be paid to an of it

nOR . Orr ly yoy
li

On this subject, our executive conference established
that the City's principal concern is a potential abuse that the
Union does not seek, The City fears that the Union can use
existing contract language to generate Court Time payments by
subpoenaing its own members in proceedings for the Union's
interest, Because the parties agree on this qualification to

their contract's language we so

AHARD

: Article 2,8 of the parfies' collective bargaining
agreement shall be amended to adt is sentence: "Court Time

ubpoenaed the Union ina
NO. ,
Ce SANDS

RICSERD PLANAV SEY

   
 
 

 

 

 

 

“Rea , i SEP 1 9 1989

 

A majority of us find no reason to delete the “second
tier" of benefits for employees hired on and after July 1, 1984.
In 1984 the Union bargained that concession to support additional

benefits still being received.

Nor are we convinced that the Union's demand is
appropriate for "seli-back" of up to three weeks! vacation time
at either premium or straight-time rates. Vacation time is
necessary for effective stress management, and the City has not
expressed a need for the additional staffing this would provide.

There is, however, a real issue of fairness presented
by the Union's renaining Vacation demand. Under present contract

languace the Comn ex "may" allow carryovers of vacation time

   
   
   

 

instances of (a) reguest or order by the

 

vacation to eng the Department to

3
Or
n
'Y
»
£
ph
i
'
o
+
f
°
n
Hy
°
o
an
ral
n
y
o
m
»
o
uw
"4
Hy
sd
i

vacation entitiesent an

n
v
mp
"
wv
ts
da.
nw
ut
°
ny
<
»
ty
Db
"
o
v
6

over shor)
“220 TSEP 19 1989

1. The third sentence ofaAghicles4v4“0f the parties
collective bargaining agreement shall be amended to read, "The
Commissioner shall allow vacation carryover in the first two
specific instances which follow and may allow it in the third:"

2. Subparagraphs (B) and (C) of Article 4.4 shall be
exchanged so that present (C) becomes the second specific
instance and present {B) becomes e) third .

eee

 

I concur. i t
U JOAN E! SANDS
3 I dissent. 7
RICHARD PLANAV SKY ,
Tr concer,

4 ROBERT P, MEEGAN

 

 

 

 

 

y
2
14
SEP 19 1989

 

Current practice pays $380 per year to officers for
replacement and maintenance of uniforms and equipment costing far
more than that. The Gity- Council! s Commission *on-Police:Salaries
made special mention of the current uniform allewance's inade-
quacy. The City's objection to incurring the cost of additional
uniform allowance payments is that nothing guarantees officers

will use those payments for the intended purpose,

Both parties’ concerns can be met by changing entirely
the nature of the uniform benefit, We shall require the city
hereafter to provide all mandated original and replacement items
\£ uniform and equipment. The City shall make annual payments to
“officers cf $100 to be used exclusively for maintenance anc

cleaning to required standards of uniforms end equimment reguired

 

= the

  
 

 

pa ; feccive on the date cf this
ract shall be amended to :

 
3

 

 

 

19.1

19.2

Ico

4

co

neuer,

{ JOEN/E, SANDS
issent,

15 SEP 19 199

Oricinal and Replacement Items

Effective tSeptembér'S," F989 “at its own expense the City
shall provide bargaining unit personnel with all mandated
items of original and replacement items of uniform and
equipment. For present members of the Department this
provision shall apply prospectively for replacement items of
currently-owned uniforms and equipment.

. 7 3c) ‘

Effective September 5, 1989 the City shall make annual
Payments of -$100 to ail bargaining unit employees to be used
exclusively for maintenance/ and cleaning to required
Standards of uniforms en? equipment reguired by the City.

   
 

i

 

RICHARD PLANAVSKY

nenur,
ROZERT P. MEEGAN
 

 

 

“ 2139 7 1SEP 1 9 1969

The City seeks a number of amendments to the grievance
procedure that it intends to facilitate efficient processing of
grievances, After extensive discussion by the Panel, mediation
by the Chairman, and compromise by the partisan HNembers, we
unanimously direct that the.Grievance Procedure be amended in the

following respects to accomplish that purpose; and we so
AHARD .

i. -Article XI ‘of the parties’ collective bargaining
agreement shall be amended in the following respects:

(a) Step 1 shall read,

  

) The eaployee and/or the Union shall submit the
grievance orelly to the employee's direct line superior
holcing the k of not lower than Captain (or to the :
@ n's Gesicnee when the Captain is not on duty) within
y (20) calendar days . . , .{Continue es in original.)

 

= sentence shall read,

   
 
    
  

clory settlenent cr disposition is not made
Cavs after the oral submission of the
e-ployee and/or the Unicn-nmay 5
ing within ten (10) ys cher ea: to the
line supervisor holding a rank of not
inspector (or to ¢t i
e when the Division In
answer seme in writing ¥

    

 
 
  

 

 
aa “ . Ver iv ios
eo 17

{c) In Stepz3taifirst sentence, tre“five (Sear timesTimit
bhali--be~changed-to—ten=l0ydays,

(d)~Step4 *s first sentence shall be amended to read,

If not satisfied with the Commissioner of Police's
answer, the Union may, within ten (10) days after receipt
thereof, submit the grievance to arbitrationeby one of the
following panel of Arbitrators, who shall receive cases in
the following alphabetical order of rotation:

Elizabeth B. Croft
Howard Foster

Paul Klein

Wade J. Newhouse
David Randles

Eli I, Taub

In 212 other respects Public Employment Relations Board
procedures shall govern the arbitration proceeding.

(@) Article
"may," to read,

‘)

 

 
 

 

To concer.
; oo A SANDS
i
I 4 ' 4
R PLANAV SEE
T
MEEGAY

 

 

}
w?
We unanimously agree that the termeofunthe «contract
imposed “by: this™’Award» should be the Taylor Law's twomyear.

maximum, and we so

Tne term of the parties} collective bargaining
agreement shal] be two years, fr July 1, 1988 to June 30, 1990.

  

I coneur,
‘ ( JORN E SANDS

I ences.
RICHARD PLANAVSKY

a Ob concerns,
ROSERT MEEGAN

 

 
      

ZX .
{ ARFIRMATION
9
Pursuant to Article 75 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules a majority of us affirm the foregoing as our Interest
Arbitration Award in ‘the above matter and that at least a
majority of us has concurred in each item of thig Award.
o Z|
y 7
GH.S
Dated; South Orange, NJ f-]
September 5, 1989 SANDS .
9
Dated: Buffalo, NY
September 5, 1989 RICHARD PLANAVSKY
lo

Dated: Buffalo, RNY
Sectember S$, 1989 ROBERT P. HEEGAN

oO : 5

 

 

 

 

 
IX.

1986 - 1988

 
 

 

 

 

AGREEMENT

between
THE CITY OF BUFFALO, NEW YORK
and

BurFALo Potice BENEvoLent AssociaTIoNn
INCORPORATED

1, 1986 - June 30, 1988

 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN
CITY OF BUFFALO, NEW YORK
and
BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION

Incorporated

July 1, 1986-June 30, 1988

 

10 ‘y

 

 
3

Q

  

 

 

 

 

 

See

Title

Witnesseth

ARTICLE |
1
12
13
14
15

ARTICLE IT
2.1
2.2
2.3

2.11
ARTICLE Hit
31

3.2
ARTICLE IV
41

42

43

44

48

4.6

47

48

49

ARTICLE V
ARTICLE VI
61
6.2
ARTICLE VII
ARTICLE VII
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4

* ARTICLE IX

9.1
9.2
ARTICLE X
10.1
10.2
10.3

TABLE OF CONTENTS

   
     
 
 
 
   
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 

 

]
RECOGNITION . -3
Exclusivity ....... wd
Dues and Fees 2
Agency Shop . 2-3

Disaffirmance of Right to St :
City Service Defined ........

SALARIES AND HOURS OF
Salary
Hours of Work .
Employee Notification .
Reporting Time .
Overtime Compensation .
Overtime Procedure .
Preferred Overtime
Court Time ........
Departmental conference .
Pay Increments .......
Night Shift Differential .

Let af lk
weawtmtiadubbowis

HOLIDAYS ............065 10
Holidays Recognized and Observed 10
Holiday Pay .... 0... cece eee 16
VACATIONS .. -13
Eligibility and Allowance . YH
Non-cumulative ... ail
Prorated ... ou

Carryovers . 12
Scheduled Changes .... 12
Weckly-Vacation (W-V) Days . i2
Monetary Equivalent ..... 12

12

Vacation Anniversary Date
Retroactive Vacation Entitlement ....
Prorating Chart .........
SICK LEAVE BENEFITS
PERSONAL LEAVE ..

Entitlement .......
Personal Leave Date ...
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE ..........:
LEAVES OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY .
General

Union Business 18
Maternity . .B
AWOL ......ce cere ws
RETIREMENT BENEFITS ...... 19
20-Year Retirement Plan (Section 384-0) 19
Career Retirement Plan (Section 375-i) 19
SENIORITY ....

Definition ...... +20

Vacations and Personal Leave Days .
Officers
 

 

 

 

9

 

:
|

 

Title
10.4

ARTICLE XI
Wt
12

ARTICLE XII
12.1
12.2
12.3

ARTICLE XH

13.1
ARTICLE XIV

ARTICLE XV
ARTICLE XVI
ARTICLE XVII
ARTICLE XVID
ARTICLE XIX
91
19,2
ARTICLE XX
ARTICLE XXI
2L1
21.2
21.3
21.4
245
21.6
ARTICLE XXIL
22.)
22.2
22.3
22.4
22.5
ARTICLE XXII
ARTICLE XXIV
ARTICLE XXV
ARTICLE XXVI
ARTICLE XXVII
ARTICLE XXVUI
ARTICLE XXIX
ARTICLE XXX
APPENDIX A
APPENDIX B
APPENDIX C
APPENDIX D

TABLE OF CONTENTS CONT'D

Detective Sergeant, Detective and

Acting Detective oe
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES ..
Grievance and Arbitration Procedures
Matters Relevant to Grievance Procedure .
DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE ..,...
Disciplinary Action .
Procedure
Suspension Pending Determination

of Charges: Penalties ...... 0.00... c cee eee eee 25-26
UNION ACTIVITIES ON CITY'S TIME

AND PREMISES ..
Representatives
PLEDGE AGAINST DISCRIMINATION

AND COERCION
MAINTENANCE OF BENEFITS ...
JOINT HEALTH AND SAFETY COM:
TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT .
TRANSFERS ....-. 6.6.0
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
Allowance ..........55
Equipment ..
GROUP LIFE INSURANCE .
HEALTH AND DENTAL CARE COVERAGE .
Blue Cross and Blue Shield ..............
Medical Insurance Upon Retirement ... 235
Dental Program ....
Notification of Status ..
Payment Jn Lieu of Insurance Coverage
Alternate Insurance Coverage .....
POLICEMEN'’S BILL OF RIGHTS
Purpose .....
Informing the Member .
Conduct of Investigation .
Minor Violations .....
Disciplinary Action .
LONGEVITY
TENURE .....
PRINTING OF CONTRACT .
TERMINATION .......--
GENERAL PROVISIONS .
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS ...
POLICE DEPARTMENT VEH:
CIVIL INDEMNIFICATION .....
SALARY SCHEDULE "A
SALARY SCHEDULE "B"
SALARY SCHEDULE "C"
SALARY SCHEDULE "D" .

   
 
  
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 

 
 

 

 

AGREEMENT

THIS AGREEMENT, entered into this 30" day of December, 1987 by
and between the CITY OF BUFFALO, NEW YORK, a municipal corporation,
hereinafter called the "City" and BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT
ASSOCIATION, hereinafter called the Union

WITNESSETH:

WHEREAS, it is the public policy of the City to promote harmonious and
cooperative relationships between the City and its employees; and

WHEREAS, it is the further policy of the City to protect the public by
assuring at all times the orderly and uninterrupted operations and functions of its
government, and

WHEREAS, these policies are best effectuated by

{a} Granting to its public employees the right of organization and
representation; and

(b) Requiring the City to negotiate with and enter into written
agreements with Unions representing public employees which have been
certified or recognized; and

WHEREAS, the City has recognized the Union for the purpose of
negotiating collectively in the determination of, and administration of, grievances
arising under the terms and conditions of employment and also for negotiating
and entering into a written agreement with the said Union to determine such
terms and conditions of employment; and

WHEREAS, the parties hereto have negotiated in good faith with respect to
compensation and other terms and conditions of employment; and

WHEREAS, the parties following extended and deliberate negotiations
have reached certain understandings and desire to embody them in a formal
agreement, which the Common Council of the City has authorized the Mayor to
execute pursuant to Common Council Proceeding Item No. 74 of October 27,
1987.

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the following mutual covenants,
it is hereby agreed as follows:
 

 

 

 

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION

Li Exclusivity

The City hereby recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive negotiating
agent for all of the employees whose job titles appear on Schedules "A“ through
"D", annexed for the purpose of establishing compensation and other terms and
conditions of employment for the life of this Agreement.

1.2 Dues and

The City shali deduct membership initiation fees from the wages of those
employees who have filed with the Comptroller an appropriate written
authorization to do so and shall remit the same to the Union. The City shall also
deduct Union dues every two (2) weeks from the wages of those employees who
have filed with the Comptroller an appropriate written authorization and shall
remit the same to the Union. The necessary authorization forms shall be
provided by the Union. The amount to be deducted from each employee's wage
shall be certified to the Comptroller by the Secretary-Treasurer of the Union.

13__Agency Shop

(A). Any present or future employee represented by the Buffalo Police
Benevolent Association, Inc., who is not a Union member and who does not
make application for membership, shall have deducted from their wage or salary
the amount equivalent to the dues levied by such employee organization. The
Comptroller shall. make such deductions and transmit the sum so deducted to
such employee organization, provided however the employee organization has
established and maintained a procedure providing for the refund to any employee
demanding the return of any part of an agency shop fee deduction which
represents the employee's pro rata share of expenditures by the organization in
aid of activities or causes only incidentally related to terms and conditions of
employment.

(B) . For the purpose of this Agreement, the term "Employee" shall mean,
unless otherwise specified, only permanent, probationary, or provisional
personnel, or those who have been in City service on a full-time basis for (6)
consecutive months or more.

(C) The employee organization shall indemnify and hold harmless the
City of Buffalo and its officials or employees from any cause of action, claim,
loss, or damages incurred as a result of the Employer's deduction of an agency
fee from any employee. The employee organization shall have no right or
interest in any agency fee deduction until such collected monies are actually paid

wv
 

 

3

 

 

a

to the employee organization. Upon the forwarding by mail of payment of the
agency fee deduction to the last known address of the employee organization, the
City of Buffalo and its officer and employees shall be relieved from all liabilities
to deduct such fees and deliver such deductions to the employee organization.

1.4 Disaffirmance of Right to Strike

 

The Union affirms that it does and will not assert the right to strike or to
engage in other concerted stoppage of work or slow-down by its members against
the City nor to assist or participate in any such acts nor to counsel, advise, urge or
impose upon its members an obligation to conduct, assist, or participate in such a
strike, or other acts as herein defined.

In the event that the Union or any of its members shall violate any of the
provisions of this Section, the Union or its said members shall be subject to all
the penalties imposed by law.

15 City Service Defined

For the purposes of this Agreement, the term ‘City service’ shall include
service with the Buffalo Board of Education, Buffato Housing Authority, Buffalo
Sewer Authority, and any City of Buffalo department or division whose job title
is found in the approved City salary ordinances. Service with any other employer
will not be considered City service.

If an employee is hired by the Buffalo Police Department in a position
represented by the Union and has immediate service or a break in service of one
(1) year or less from the above-referenced agencies, the employee's vacation and
personal Jeave entitlements shall be based on their original date of hire in these
agencies, with appropriate adjustments made for any breaks in service. Personal
leave utilized in the previous twelve (12) month period shall be deducted from
the member's entitlement in the first year of hire in the Police Department.
Appointments at other than the first salary increment step shall be made only
with the approval of the Commissioner of Police and Director of Labor
Relations, and shall not be subject to the grievance procedures outlined in this
Agreement.

If the employee's hiring by the Buffalo Police Department is preceded by a
break in service of more than one (1) year, he shall be treated as a new employee.
Prior City service will count for vacation purposes only.
 

)
i

 

 

 

ARTICLE It
SALARIES AND HOURS OF WORK

2.1 Salary

(A) Retroactive to July 1, 1986, each employee shall receive a salary
increase of $100, as reflected in Salary Schedule "A".

(B) Retroactive to July !, 1986, each employee shall receive a salary
increase of four (4) percent and each employee holding the rank of Police Officer
shall receive an additional salary increase of $100, as reflected in Salary
Schedule "A".

C) Retroactive to January 1, 1987, each employee shall receive a one (1)
percent salary increase, as reflected in Salary Schedule "B".

(D) Retroactive to July 1, 1987, each employee shall receive a five (5)
percent salary increase and each employee holding the rank of Police Officer
shall receive an additional salary increase of $100, as reflected in Salary
Schedule "C".

(8) Effective January 1, 1988, each employee shall receive a one (1)
percent salary increase, as reflected in Salary Schedule "D".

(PF) The City shall pay all salaries and wages upon a biweekly basis. In
the event that the regularly scheduled day of payment is a holiday, payment shal}
be made upon the day preceding.

2.2 Hours of Work

(A) The regular hours of daily work shall be consecutive except for
interruptions for lunch periods.

(B) All employees shall be scheduled to work a regular work shift as
determined by the Commissioner of Police, which work shift shall have a regular
starting and quitting time. The present platoon system shall remain the same and

the hours are:

0730 hours to 1530 hours
1530 hours to 2330 hours
2330 hours to 0730 hours

All shifts not listed above shall remain the same.

Except for emergency situations, as declared by the Commissioner of
Police as outlined in 2.2(D), work shift schedules shall not be changed by the
Commissioner of Police unless the changes are mutually agreed upon. Work
shift schedules shall not be changed as a disciplinary measure, or for the purpose
of depriving any employee of a benefit to which he would otherwise be entitled.
 

 

 

 

 

3

 

 

(C) The City shall maintain and make available to all its employees a
daily record showing the time worked by each employee.

(D) Whenever public demands require the Commissioner of Police to
suspend any vacation or any W-V day or to increase any tour of duty, all
employees affected thereby shall be paid for such suspended vacation and/or
leave, or increased tour of duty at the rate of time and one-half (1 1/2).

23 loyee Notification

it shall be the responsibility of an employee to keep the employer informed
of his current address and telephone number, where he can be notified of
emergencies. In disciplinary action, the City shall notify the PBA if the
employee cannot be reached.

All notices of change of address and/or telephone numbers to the
Commissioner of Police shall be filed within ten (10) days of the effective day of
the change.

Except as otherwise provided, each employee is required to report all
unscheduled absences from work to a telephone number designated by the Police
Department no later than the beginning of the employee's regularly assigned
starting time. An employee failing to report an absence shall be deemed to be
absent without leave. An employee who reports for work within one (1) hour of
the regularly assigned starting time shall not be considered absent without leave.
Such employee shall be considered tardy.

Unreported absences and tardiness may result in disciplinary action.

24 Reporting Time

The fifteen (15) minute period prior to the commencement of a tour of duty
required by police regulations shall be compensated at time and one-half (1 1/2)
and such period shall neither be reduced nor eliminated. To be entitled to such
payment, an employee must have actually reported for duty.

The twenty-five (25) minute period subsequent to the conclusion of a tour
of duty shall be compensated at time and one-half (1 1/2), and such period shall
neither be reduced nor eliminated. Employees shall not be required to remain on
duty upon the completion of the regular duty hours as stated in Article 2.2(B),
except in those circumstances when it is necessary for an employee to complete a
task begun in the course of regular duty hours. To be entitled to such payment,
an employee must have actually reported for duty.

Employees injured in the line of duty will continue to receive forty (40)
minutes of reporting time per day to be paid at the rate of time and one-half
(1 1/2).
 

 

Whenever an employee, who is properly relieved by his superior,
terminates his tour of duty without completing a full eight (8) hours, said
employee shall receive forty (40) minutes of reporting time to be paid at the rate
of time and one-haif (1 1/2)

2: verti mpensation

Whenever any employee represented by the Union is required to remain on
duty or report for duty in excess of a regular work shift, such employee shall be
compensated at the rate of time and one-half (1 1/2) for the time worked in
excess of the regular work shift,

Overtime shall consist of all work performed in excess of eight (8) hours in
any tour of duty, or in excess of the regularly scheduled work week of forty (4)
hours per week. Overtime shall be earned in multiples of fifteen (15) minute
periods and shall begin after the twenty-five (25) minute period immediately
following a tour of duty.

2.6 Overti rocedure

In the event the Commissioner of Police determines overtime is required,
the opportunity to work overtime shal! be offered as follows:

(A) The senior off-duty Police Officer assigned to the platoon/unit in
which the manpower shortage occurs, shall be offered the opportunity to work
overtime. If that off-duty Police Officer declines to accept the overtime the
opportunity to work the overtime shall be given to the next most senior off-duty
Police Officer within the platoon/unit. Said opportunity shall likewise peas
through the platoon/unit based on seniority.

(B) Im the event no Police Officer, who is assigned to the platoon/unit in
which the manpower shortage occurs, accepts the overtime, then the opportunity
to work overtime shall be offered to the most senior off-duty Police Officer
assigned to the precinct/bureau in which the manpower shortage occurs, and said
opportunity shall likewise pass through the precinct/bureau based on seniority.

(C)_ If no Police Officer who is assigned to the platoon/unit - precinct/
bureau in which the manpower shortage occurs accepts the overtime, then the
most junior Police Officer assigned to that precinct/bureau will be assigned to fill
the vacancy. In instances of emergency, and upon approval of the commanding
Officer, the junior Officer may obtain a replacement to fill the vacancy.

(BD) In case of emergency, where’a command officer cannot readily
contact Police Officers pursuant to this Section, then the command officer may
retain Police Officers from the platoon which is then on duty, based on seniority
as contained herein.
 

 

{B) Police Officers assigned steady days off (W-V) shall be assigned to
platoon W-V section, and shall be offered the opportunity to work overtime when
that platoon section is on W-V.

(F) The Police Officer whose absence created the manpower shortage
shall not be considered to fill the vacancy, except those on regularly scheduled
annual vacations of one (1) or more weeks. Those Police Officers on single A-V
days are ineligible for overtime except in ernergencies.

(G) For purposes of overtime, seniority shall be based upon the length of
a Police Officers service in that rank, beginning with the date of appointment to
that rank.

{H) Personnel on military leave, bereavement leave, leave of absence,
sick leave or matemity leave will not be considered for overtime work.

(1) When there is a requirement to replace an absent Detective or
Detective Sergeant, the most senior officer, of the rank to be replaced, and in that
assignment, shall be given the first opportunity to work overtime, Said
opportunity shall likewise pass through the assignment based on seniority. If the
overtime is not accepted pursuant to this Section, the least senior officer within
the assignment shall fill the vacancy.

In the event department-wide general detective duty is required, selection
shall be made from the general roster of Detectives beginning with the most
senior Detective and progressing down the seniority list of such officers. The
least Senior Detective shall fill the vacancy in those instances where overtime is
declined pursuant to this Section. .

(J) In the event of the necessity to replace an absent Lieutenant, the most
senior Lieutenant within the assignment concemed shall be given the first
opportunity to work overtime. Said opportunity shall likewise pass through the
assignment based on seniority. If the overtime is not accepted pursuant to this
Section, the least senior officer within the assignment shall fill the vacancy.

(K) Anemployee receiving "Preferred Overtime" shal] not be considered
for an overtime tour of duty until all other preceding procedures have been
exhausted.

(L) In the event of the necessity to replace a Captain or Inspector, the
most senior officer, of the rank to be filled, shall be given the first opportunity to
work overtime, and said opportunity shall likewise pass through the applicable
rank based on seniority. If the overtime is not accepted pursuant to this Section,
the least senior officer within the applicable rank shall fill the vacancy,
 

 

 

 

2.7__Preferred Overtime

Employees desiring to be placed on the Department of Police preferred
overtime list, must so notify the Commissioner of Police, or his designee. in
writing, six (6) months prior to the employee's requested retirement date. The
lists established as a result of this notification procedure shail be in effect for the
six (6) consecutive month period following the month of notification only, and
shail be assembled and utilized in order of the seniority of the applicants. The
preferred overtime list shall contain the names of those employees desiring to
work overtime on those days they are scheduled by-the department head for
approved annual or personal leave.

All hours worked as a result of the preferred overtime list are done so while
an employee is using approved annual and personal leave and shal! be paid at the
rate of time and one-half (1 1/2) of the employee's base salary hourly rate.

An employee who has worked overtime while on annual or personal leave
and who subsequently is off duty due to illness or off-duty injury more than six
(6) days in the calendar year following his placement on the preferred overtime
list, shall have deducted the number of days in excess of six (6) days from his
accumulated unused vacation time which would otherwise be paid in a lump
sum. Exceptions for serious illness can be made at the sole discretion of the
Commissioner of Police.

An employee may work overtime from the preferred overtime list during
one (1) calendar year only. Such employee may not work more than one (1)
week of preferred overtime in any calendar month. Such employee will not be
eligible to work overtime while on annual or personal leave in any subsequent

calendar year.

The practice of paying the cash value of unused annual leave shall continue
as presently in effect.

If the preferred overtime list procedure is abused, those abuses will be
corrected to the reasonable satisfaction of the City.

2.8 Court Time

Police Officers who are required to appear in court or before any regulatory
or administrative agency for the purpose of testifying at any time other than
during their own regularly scheduled work period shall be paid at their regular
hourly rate for all time so spent and they shall be guaranteed at least four (4)
hours of pay at their regular hourly Tate for such time.

2.9 Departmental Cot ce

Any member who is directed to appear at a departmental conference either
 

 

 

 

xy

by his immediate superior or by the Commissioner of Police shall be
compensated for the time so spent at his regular hourly rate of pay where his
appearance is required at a time other than during his own regularly scheduled
work period. This provision shall not apply in the case of a member who is
himself the subject of such conference or investigation.

2.10 Pay Increments

The following procedure will be effective through the term of this
Agreement:

{A) There will be no increment steps in promotional ranks.

(B) All employees appointed to the position of Police Officer on or after
July 1, 1980 shall have a starting salary and four (4) incremental steps. The
incremental steps shall be obtained on the employee's anniversary date of hire,
which date shall be adjusted for any leaves of absence, suspensions without pay,
or absences without leave. An employee will reach the maximum salary in four
(4) years from the (revised) date of hire,

(C) Preferential rates of pay for employees formerly holding Desk
Lieutenant rank shall be abolished. These employees shall receive the regular
compensation paid to Police Officers.

2.11 Night Shift Differential

(A) In addition to the established wage rates, the City shall pay a night
shift differential of $.15 per hour to all second and third shift precinct personnel.
This differential shall apply for all hours worked on shifts beginning at 1530
hours to 0730 hours.

(B) Pot employees not assigned to precinct duty, a night shift differential
of $.15 per hour shall be paid to those employees whose tour of duty is between
1400 and 0730 hours.

The night shift differential listed in 2.11 (A) and (B) shall not be paid for
the fifteen (15) minute period prior to the commencement of a tour of duty or the
twenty-five (25) minute period subsequent to the conclusion of a tour of duty.
ARTICLE III
. HOLIDAYS
3.1 Holidays Recognized and Observed

The following are recognized holidays for the purposes of this Agreement:

New Year's Day Labor Day

Dr. Martin Luther King Day = Columbus Day
President's Day General Election Day
Good Friday Veteran's Day
Memorial Day Thanksgiving Day
Independence Day Christmas Day

Dr. Martin Luther King Day shall be celebrated on the third Monday in
January. President's Day shall be celebrated on Washington's Birthday.

Whenever any of the holidays listed above shall fall on a Sunday, the
succeeding Monday shall be observed as the holiday. Whenever any of the
holidays listed above shali fall on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be
observed as the holiday.

3.2 Holiday Pay

Beginning in December of 987, and in recognition of the police officers’

. 5 work schedule, each employee shall receive, on or before December 15 of each

9 ) year, a limp sum payment which is equal to four (4) hours’ pay at the straight
time rate of pay for each of the above-referenced holidays.

 

a

yy

 

 

3
ARTICLE IV
VACATIONS
4 ligibility ans wvane
Each employee who shall have been in the employ of the City for at teast

one (1) year shall be granted a vacation in each calendar year of the following
duration corresponding to his years of service:

 

Years of Completed Service Vacati owance
1,2,3.4 2 weeks
5 3 weeks
6 3 weeks } day
9 7 3 weeks 2 days
8 3 weeks 3 days
> 3 weeks 4 days
10 4 weeks
iL 4 weeks | day
. 12 4 weeks 2 days
9 13 4 weeks 3 days
| 14 4 weeks 4 days
| 15 and over 5 weeks
: Employees hired by the City on or after July 1, 1984 into positions
Q 5 represented by the Union, shall be granted vacation entitlements according to the
following schedule:
Years of Completed Service Vacation Allowance
1-2 1 week
Q 3-6 2 weeks
79 3 weeks
10-15 4 weeks
16 and over 5 weeks
| 4,.2._ Non-cumulative
3
! Except as. provided for under Section 4 hereof, vacations are non-
| cumulative and must be taken during the calendar year in which the employee

 

became eligible for such vacation period.

4.3. Prorated

In the event an employee does not complete a full twelve (12) month year,
the empfoyee's vacation period shail be prorated in accordance with the vacation
entitlement chart which appears in this Article.

 
 

lo

 

 

 

i
j
i

4.4 Carryovers

Vacation carryover means carrying unused vacation entitlement from one
(1) year to the next consecutive year. Vacation carryover shall be limited to a
maximum of two (2) weeks. The Commissioner may allow vacation carryover in
the specific instances which follow:

(A) The Commissioner requesting or requiring an employee (o forego
scheduled vacation in order that said department may provide and maintain
adequate service to the public

(B) Any employee entitled to vacation benefits who may become ill or
incapacitated prior to the taking of such vacation requesting carryover privileges;
provided that such illness or accident is medically verified by the attending
physician specifying the nature and date of the disability.

(C) Anemployee being injured in the discharge of his duties.

4.5 Scheduled Changes

There shall be no change in any vacation schedule once the same has been
posted unless the members effected by such change consent thereto.

4.6 _Weekly-Vacation (W-V) Days

Each employee may, at his option, use a maximum of two (2) weeks'
vacation (up to ten [10] days), one (I) at a time. Additionally, he may have two
(2) W-¥V days immediately preceding each of his vacation periods, and have two
(2) W-V days immediately following his vacation period, provided the vacation
period is a minimum of one (1) week or five (5) days. However, only five (5)

* A-V days, one (1) day at a time, can be taken in the months of June, July and

August. These five (5) individual days may be taken in addition to any other
scheduled summer vacation, provided they are not taken in consecutive units,
except those employees who work the long and short days in the precincts may
take two (2) consecutive A-V days.

4.7__Monetary Equivalent

Upon an employee's termination for reasons other than discharge, he or his
estate shall receive a monetary equivalent of his unused annual vacation
entitlement earned in the previous year. Annual vacation entitlement earned in
the year of termination shall also be paid on a pro-rated basis, upon termination
in accordance with the Vacation Entitlement Chart which appears in this Article.

4.8 Vucation Anniversary Date

An employee's vacation anniversary date shall be affected by all leaves of
absence or suspensions without pay. For example, an employee's date of hire is
October 1, 1982. If that same employee received a six (6) month leave of
absence, his vacation anniversary date would be adjusted according to the length
of the leave. Therefore, his new anniversary date is Apri} 1, 1983,

12
 

 

 

 

4.9 Retroactive Vacati titlement

An employee requesting prior vacation service time with (he City must
make a written request to the Division of Labor Relations within twenty-four (24)
months of his date of hire in the Police Department. Retroactive vacation
entitlements will be credited retroactive the immediately preceding twenty-four
(24) months.

VACATION ENTITLEMENT CHART

COMPLETED MONTHS OF SERVICE IN QUALIFYING YEAR

Years of Service 12.11 10 7.6 5 4 2.1
2 through 4 10 9 8 7 7 6 5 4 3 3 2 «1
5 15 14 12 1 10 9 8 6 5 4 2 +1

6 15 13 12 109 8 7 5 4 3 #1

7 17,16 14 13 TF 10 8 7 6 4 3 «JI

8 18 16 15 14 12 10 9 7 6 4 3 1

9 19 #17 16 14 13 11 10 8 6 5 3 2

10 20 18 17 +15 13 12 10 8 7 5 3 2

il 21°19 «17 16 14 12 10 9 7 S$ 3 2

12 22 20 18 17 15 13 11 9 7 6 4 2

13 23 21 #19 17 15 13 12 10 8 6 4 2

14 24 22 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2

15 or more 25_.23 21°19 17 15 12 10 8 6 4 2

 
 

 

 

ARTICLE V
SICK LEAVE BENEFITS

Employees shall be granted sick leave upon the terms and conditions set
forth in Section 207-c of the General Municipal Law and Section 238 of the
Charter of the City.

Employees hired by the City on or after July 1, 1984, into positions
represented by the Union, shall be granted sick leave entitlements according to
the following schedule and under the following procedures:

Employees shall be granted full pay during absences due to sickness or
other physical disability, to the extent of their sick leave credit, upon the
following terms and conditions:

(A) Employees with less than one (1) year of service shall earn sick leave
credits at the rate of eight (8) hours per calendar month of service which shall be
credited on the first day of the month next following the completion of each
credited month of service.

(B) Employees with more than one (1) year of service shall earn sick
leave credits at the rate of eleven (11) hours per calendar month of service which
shall be credited on the first day of the month neat following the completion of
each credited month of service.

{C) Accredited month of service is defined as a calendar month in which
an employee has been compensated for all but three (3) or less shifts.

(D) Employees shall accumulate sick leave as Jong as they are in the
service of the City up to a maximum of two thousand four hundred (2,400) hours.

(E) Accumuiated sick leave credits shall be transferred with an employee
from one branch of the City service to any other branch thereof.

(F) The City agrees that upon retirement or death, a fly accumulated,
unused sick leave, up to a limit of one thousand four hundred forty (1,440) hours
can be "bought back" at a ratio of 1:3 (e.g. an employee with two thousand four
hundred [2,400] hours unused sick leave may use only one thousand four
hundred forty {1,440] hours at a ratio of 1:3).

(G) Sick leave may be used in whole shifts units only.
(H) 1) In instances of disability due to illness which lasts three (3) shifts

or less, an employee may return to duty without the written certification of a
physician, provided notification is given by the employee to his Captain,
 

 

2) In instances of disability due to illness which lasts more that
three (3) shifts, an employee must obtain the written certification of a physician
and/or the Department surgeon before that employee may return to duty.

3) In instances of die ability due to an off-duty injury or accident,
the employee must obtain written certification of a physician and/or the
Department surgeon before that employee may return to duty. This requirement
tay be waived by the Commissioner of Police or his designee.

(1) It shall be the responsibility of the employee to maintain and monitor
an accurate account of his current sick leave entitlements. Employees who
request and receive sick Jeave in excess of their entitlements shall have an equal
number of hours deducted in a subsequent pay period.

(J) All absences due to illness are to be reported to the Commissioner of
Police or his designee on or before the first day of such absence, and the
Commissioner may require reasonable proofs of illness. In the event of a failure
to comply with the notice requirements in this Anicle, the employee's absence
may be considered as unauthorized leave. Abuse of sick leave privileges may be
cause for disciplinary action.

(KX) An employee who is disabled due to iltness or off-duty injury, will
be permitted to return to work on light duty in lieu of using sick leave subject to
determination by the Department surgeon that the employee can perform light
duty.
 

 

 

ARTICLE VI
PERSONAL LEAVE

6,1 Entitlement

Employees hired before July 1, 1980, and each fiscal year thereafter, shall
be entitled to seven (7) days personal leave with pay each fiscal year, which
leave shall be non-cumulative. An employee requesting personal leave shall do
so in writing at leant forty-eight (48) hours in advance to his commanding
officer. Personal leave shal] be denied if the commanding officer deems that
granting such a request will seriously hamper or impede the operation of his
command. In the event of a personal emergency, which makes the giving of a
written notice impossible, the employee must otherwise notify his commanding
officer prior to the start of his shift. Said emergency personal leave day may be
granted provided sufficient documentation of the emergency is produced upon
request. Such personal leave may not be taken in unit of less than one-half (1/2)
of a working day.

All full-time employees hired on or after July 1, 1980, shall be entitled to
personal leave time with pay as follows:

(A) Two (2) days in their first year of employment. This personal leave
entitlement must be used prior to the employee's first anniversary date.

(B) Four (4) days in their second year of employment. This personal
leave must be used prior to the employee's second anniversary date.

(C) Seven (7) days per year in their third year and subsequent years of
employment. Said employees must use this personal leave entitlement prior to
their next succeeding anniversary date,

6.2 nal Leave Date

An employee's personal leave date shall be affected by all leaves of
absence, suspensions without pay, or absences without leave. For example, an
employee's date of hire is October [, 1982. If that same employee received a six
(6) month leave of absence, the employee's personal leave date would be adjusted
according to the length of the leave, and the revised personal leave date would be
April 1, 1983.
ARTICLE VI.
AVEMENT LEAVE

Each permanent employee ho is absent from duty on account of a death in
his immediate family shall receive his established compensation for a period
commencing from the day of death. Such period shall not exceed five (5)
consecutive calendar days for each such death. This bereavement leave shall be
non-cumulative and non-chargeable to any other leave. The employee must
attend the funeral or memorial service and shall notify the Commissioner of
Police or his designated representative of his request for such leave.

The immediate family shal! include the spouse, grandparent, parent, child,
grandchild, brother, sister, father-in-law, mother-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-
law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, and any other relatives of the employee or of
the employee's spouse residing in the household of the employee. Steprelatives
are defined as stepparent, stepbrother, stepsister and stepchild.

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

9

 

 

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE Vil

LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY
8.1 General

(A) Whenever a leave of absence without pay is granted to an employee,
the head of the department or City agency granting such leave of absence without
pay shall forthwith file with the City Clerk, for Presentation to the Council, a
certificate Setting forth the date on which the leave of absence begins and ends.

(B) Any permanent employee who is elected or appointed to public
office shall, at the discretion of the Commissioner of Police, be granted a leave of
absence without pay for a period of not more than one (1) year from the effective
date of his election or appointment to such public office. Such leave of absence
shall be renewable for successive periods of not more than one (1) year in the
sole discretion of the Commissioner of Police.

8.2 Union Business

Any employee who is elected to a Union office or who is designated by the
Union to do work which takes him from his employment with the City, shall,
upon the written request of the Union, and the consent of the Commissioner of
Police, be granted a leave of absence without pay. This leave shall not exceed
two (2) years, but it shall be renewed or extended at any time upon the written
request of the Union and the consent of the Commissioner of Police. Any
member of the Union who is selected by the Union to participate in any other
Union activity shall be granted a leave of absence at the written request of the
Union and the consent of the Commissioner of Police. Such leave is not to
exceed one (1) month but it shall be renewed at any time upon the written request
of the Union and the consent of the Commissioner of Police.

8.3 Maternity

Maternity leaves, not to exceed six (6) months, shall be granted upon the
request of an employee. Maternity leaves shall, upon the request of the
employee, be extended or renewed for an additional period not to exceed six (6)
months.

84. AWOL

Any member absent without an authorized leave for more than twenty (20)
working-days may“have “his employment terminated’ by ‘the department ‘head
without a hearing, Such termination shall be final without recourse to the
disciplinary procedures contained in the collective Agreement. Upon such
termination, the City will provide the employee with all benefits which he has
previously earned. The above shall also apply to a member who fails to return
from an authorized leave of absence without pay within five (5) days subsequent
to the expiration of the leave of absence without pay.
 

|
\
i

ARTICLE IX

RETIREMENT BENEFITS

9.) __20-Year Retirement Plan (Section 384-D)

The City has adopted the necessary resolution to provide that “final
average salary" shall mean the regular compensation earned during the twelve
12) months of actual service immediately preceding the date of retirement as
provided in Section 302, subd. 9 paragraph (d) of the Retirement Security Law.

Employees shall also be entitled to obtain credit for retirement purposes for
military service during World War Il as provided by statute.

The City will make available the Twenty (20) Year Retirement Plan
provided in Section 384-d of the Retirement and Social Security Law which shall
include the 1/60th benefit, when authorized

The City has adopted the necessary resolution to provide the Career
Retirement Plan set out in Section 375-i of the Retirement ad Social Security
Law (twenty [20] years 1/50th fraction).

9.2 Career Retirement Plan (Section 375-i)

Any employee presently in a retirement plan other than the Career
Retirement Plan set out in Section 375-i of the Retirement and Social Security
Law (the 375-i plan), may transfer to the 375-i plan during the period from
February [5 to March 15 of any calendar year. Any employee who so elects to
transfer to the 375-i plan shall receive a salary adjustment based upon the
Employer's cost savings as a result of such transfer. That annual salary
adjustment will be equal to one-third (1/3) of the difference between the
Employer's cost for coverage of said employee in the retirement plan from which
he transferred and the 375-i plan, This salary adjustment shall be paid in a lump
sum on December 15, commencing with the year in which the employee
exercised his option and each year thereafter. The initial salary adjustment will
be based upon the Employer's cost savings for a full twelve (12) month period
ending on March 31 of the year in which the employee elected to transfer to
375-i. In each year thereafter, the salary adjustment will be based upon the
Employer's cost savings for the full twelve (12) month period ending on March
31 of the calendar year of payment.
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE X
SENIORITY
10.1 Definition

Seniority means the length of an employee's service commencing with the
date of his appointment to the rank of probationary Police Officer.

The Department recognizes the importance of seniority in filling vacancies
and shall make every effort to adhere to this policy, provided the senior applicant
has the ability and qualifications to perform the work involved, While
consultation with the Police Benevolent Association President on such matters is
not mandatory, the final decision of the Department shall be subject to the
grievance procedure.

1) | Whenever it is determined that a vacancy or additional position in a
precinct is to be filled from among employees already assigned to that precinct,
such employees shall be entitled to bid on such vacancy or position. The
vacancy or position shall be filled on the basis of seniority, provided the senior
applicant has the ability and meets the qualifications as specified by the
Commissioner of Police prior to the filling of the vacancy. In the event that no
one in the affected precinct bids on the vacancy/position, the position shall be
filled by the employee within the affected precinct with the least seniority, that
has the ability and meets the qualifications as specified by the Commissioner of

Police.

2) Prior to any newly appointed Police Officers being assigned a
precinct patrol vacancy or additional precinct position, the Commissioner of
Police shall announce the assignments to be filled via the police teletype. Bids
shall be accepted on a departmental wide basis to fill such positions, and such
positions will be filled on the basis of seniority, provided the senior applicant has
the ability and qualifications to perform the work involved. The bidding
procedure within subsection 10.1 (2) shall take place only once, prior to the
assignment of any rookie class.

3) Whenever it is determined that an employee from a designated
precinct be temporarily assigned outside of said precinct, such assignment shall
be made on the basis of seniority of the employees within that precinct. In those
cases when such temporary assignments are not requested by any employee said
temporary assignments shall be made on the basis of least seniority. However, in
the event an employee does not satisfactorily perform this temporary assignment,
thatempioyee may not be considered for this temporary assignment in the foture.
 

 

oy

0.2 Vacations and Personal Leave Days

Vacations and personal leave days shall be selected on the basis of
seniority. In the event that circumstance make it necessary to limit the number of
employees on vacation or on personal leave at any one time, the employee with
the greater seniority shall be given preference.

10.3 Officers

The term seniority as applied to officers in the Lieutenant rank and above shall
mean the length of an employee's service jn that rank commencing with the date
of his permanent appointment to that rank.

10.4 Detective Sergeant. Detective, and Acting Detective
(A) Demetion upon the Abolition or Reduction of a Position - in the

event of the in the details of Detective Sergeant, Detective, or Acting Detective
due to budgetary or administrative reasons, demotions shall be made in the
inverse order of seniority within the respective detail.

{B) Appointments - All assignments to the detail of Detective Sergeant
shall be made from the detail of Detective. All assignments to the detail of
Detective shall be made from the detai! of Acting Detective. Assignments to the
details of Acting Detective, Detective, and Detective Sergeant are not subject to
the provisions of 10.1 within this Article and are made at the discretion of the
Commissioner of Police.

(C) Continuous Service - For the purpose of this Section the original
appointment of Detective Sergeant, Detective and Acting Detective shall mean
the date of his first appointment to such position followed by continuous service
up to the time of the abolition or reduction of the position. Any period of sixty
(60) days or longer during which an employee did not serve in such position shall
constitute an interruption of continuous service for the purpose of this Section.

(D) No Detective or Detective Sergeant shall be assigned patrol duties,
either in or out of uniform, except in emergency situations as specified in Article
2.2(D) of this Agreement.

21
 

 

 

 

 

1

 

AR’ XI
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
11.1 Grievance and Arbitration Procedures

(A) Any grievance or dispute which may arise between the parties
regarding the application, meaning or interpretation of this Agreement shall be
settled in the following manner:

Step 1 - The employee and/or the Union shall submit the grievance orally
to the employee's immediate superior and the employee's Union ‘ representative
within twenty (20) calendar days of the occurrence of the facts giving rise to the
grievance or notice of such facts to the employee, whichever is later.

Step 2 - If a satisfactory settlement or disposition is not made within two
(2) days after the oral submission of the grievance, the employee and/or the
Union may submit the grievance in writing to his next immediate superior who
shall answer same within five (5) days. If the answer is a rejection of the
grievance, then the said superior shall detail his reasons therefor in writing.

Step 3 - If a satisfactory settlement or disposition is not made within five
(5) days from the date of the written submission of the grievance, the Union may,
within ten (10) days thereafter, submit the grievance with the answer of the said
superior, with any reply thereto, to the Commissioner of Police. The
Commissioner of Police shall schedule a meeting to be held not later than ten
(10) days after the date of the receipt of the grievance and any accompanying
papers at his office at which time the employee and/or the Union is entitled to be
present. The Commissioner of Police shall, within five (5) days thereafter, set
forth in writing his answer to the grievance.

Step 4 - If not satisfied with the Commissioner of Police's answer, the
Union may, within ten (10) days after receipt thereof, request that the matter be
submitted to an impartial arbitrator to be selected in accord with the Public
Employment Relations Board procedures, The Arbitrator shall issue his decision
within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of testimony and argument. His
decision shall be final and binding upon the parties.

(B) The failure of the Union or of an employee to take any of the action

authorized by this Section within the time limited therefor, shall constitute a
waiver of the right to proceed further and shall terminate the proceeding.

tb2 “Matters Relevantto Grievance Procedure

(A) The Union shal! provide agreed upon grievance forms in adequate
numbers.
 

4
I
|

(B) The time limits in the procedure may be extended by mutual
agreement, in writing.

(C) Any step of the grievance procedure may be bypassed by mutual
agreement, in writing.

(D) Neither the Commissioner of Police nor the arbitrator may consider
any evidence or facts which have not been previously discussed between the
parties unless otherwise agreed upon by the parties.

(E) In the case of a group, policy, or organization type grievance, the
grievance may be submitted directly to the Commissioner of Police by the Union.

(F) For purpose of definition, days shall not include Saturday, Sunday,
or holidays except as otherwise specified in 11.1, Step 1 of this Article.

(G) Expenses for the arbitrator's services and the proceedings shall be
borne equally by the City and the Union.

(H) No arbitrator functioning under provisions of the grievance
procedure shall have the power to amend, modify, or delete any provision of this
Agreement or render any award contrary to the laws of the State of New York.

(1) The Union shall provide to the Division of Labor Relations a copy of
each grievance filed at each step, at the time of submission, in accordance with
this Article. However, failure to do so will not constitute a waiver of the right to
proceed further.

Ww
ao
{Oo

 

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE XU)
DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGES

12.1 Disciplinary Action

(A) A permanent employee shall not be removed or otherwise subjected
to any disciplinary penalty provided in this Article except for incompetency or
misconduct or for committing a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude,
and then only after a hearing upon stated charges.

(B) Disciplinary action or measures shall consist only of the following:

Reprimand.

A fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100) to be deducted from
salary or wages.

Suspension without pay for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days.
Demotion in grade and title.

Dismissal from the service,

 

cedure

(A) A permanent employee against whom disciplinary action is proposed
shall be served with a written copy of the charges preferred against him and shall
have ten (10) days to answer in writing, said answer to be served upon the
Commissioner of Police. A copy of the charges shall also be served upon the
Union. Failure to serve a written answer within the time provided shall be
deemed an admission of the charges. However, where the accused defaults in
answering, he shall be permitted to show matters in mitigation of any punishment
which may be imposed.

(B) Within ten (10) days after the receipt of the written answer to the
charges preferred, the Commissioner of Police shal! conduct an informal
conference upon the charges. At such conference, the accused person shall have
the right to be represented by the Union or by legal counsel. He may, if he
desires, present witnesses in his behalf. The Commissioner of Police shall have
the power to dismiss or withdraw the charges if the conference so warrants, or
accept a plea of guilty.

(C) In the event that the charges are not withdrawn or dismissed after
such informal conference or if a plea of guilty has not been entered, a formal
conference shall then be held upon the charges before an impartial hearing officer
mutually selected by the parties. Such impartial hearing officer shall be deemed

24
 

 

 

 

to be the person designated by the Commissioner of Police for that purpose
within the meaning of Section 75 of the Civil Service Law of the State of New
York. If the parties are unable to agree upon a besting officer, or, if the hearing
ofticer agreed upon is or becomes unable or unwilling to act, then the parties
shall mutually apply to the Supreme Court of the State of New York for the
appointment of a hearing officer.

(D) The impartial hearing officer so selected and so designated shall be
vested with all the powers of the Commissioner of Police and shall make a record
of such conference. His findings and recommendations shall then be referred to
the Commissioner of Police for review and decision.

(E) Upon the said formal hearing, the accused person shall have the right
of representation’ by counsel and also the right to summon witnesses upon his
behalf. The burden of proving the charges preferred shall be upon the person
alleging same. Compliance with technical rules of evidence shall not be
required,

(PF) The time limits in this procedure may be extended by mutual
agreement in writing.

12.3 Sus ion Pendit termination of Charges: Penaltie:

(A) Pending the hearing and determination of charges, the person against,
whom such charges have been preferred may be suspended without pay for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days.

(B) The penalty or punishment imposed shall be as set forth in 12.1,
paragraph (B) of this Article.

(C) If the charges are not sustained, the accused person shall be restored to
his position with full pay for any period of suspension less the amount of
compensation which he may have earned in any other occupation or employment
or any unemployment benefits he may have received during such period.

(D) If the accused person is found guilty, a copy of the charges, his
written answer thereto, a transcript of the hearing, and the final determination
itself shall be filed in the office of the department or agency in which he has been
employed and a copy thereof shall also be filed with the Municipal Civil Service
Commission. A copy of the transcript of the hearing shall, upon the request of
the accused person so found guilty, be furnished to him without charge.

{E) No removal or disciplinary proceeding shall be commenced more
than one (1) year after the occurrence of the wrong-doing complained of or its
discovery, if later. However, such limitation shall not apply where the wrong-
doing complained of would, if proved in a court of appropriate jurisdiction,
constitute a crime.
(F) Any person believing himself aggrieved by a penalty or punishment
of demotion in or dismissal from service or suspension without pay, or a fine
imposed pursuant to the provisions of this Article, may appeal from such
determination either by an application to the Buffalo Municipal Civil Service
Commission, or by an application to the Court, in accordance with the provisions
of Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. If much person elects to
appeal to the Commission, he shall file such appeal with the Commission in
writing, within twenty (20) days after receiving written notice of the
determination to be reviewed. The decision of the Commission shall be final and
conclusive and not subject to further review in any Court.

 

 

 

 

 
ARTICLE XI
INION ACTIVITIES ON CITY'S IE ANI ISE,

13.1 Representatives

{A) The City agrees that during working hours, on or off its premises,
and without loss of pay, accredited Union representatives shall be allowed to:

Investigate and process grievances
Post Union notices
Distribute Union literature

Solicit Union membership during other employees’ non-working
time

Attend negotiating meetings

Transmit communications, authorized by the local Union or its
officer, to the City or its representative

Consult with the City, its representatives, local Union officers, or
other Union representatives concerning the enforcement of any
provisions of this Agreement.

(B) The present practice of granting released time to accredited Union
representatives for Union business shall be continued.

 

 

 
ARTICLE XIV
ey PLEDGE AG. DISCRIMINATION AND COERCION
9 (A) The provisions of this Agreement shall be applied equally to all

employees in the bargaining unit without discrimination as to age, sex, marital
status, race, color, creed, national origin or political affiliation. The Union shall
share equally with the City the responsibility for applying this provision of the
Agreement.

9 (B) Work rules shall be reasonable and shail be applied or enforced in a
_ fair and equitable manner.

(C) All references to employees in this Agreement designate both sexes,
and wherever the male gender is used, it shall be constmed to include male and

3 female employees.

(D) The City agrees not to interfere with the rights of employees as
~ stated in Section 209a of the Civil Service Law.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

ARTICLE XV
MAINT CE ENEFIT:

All conditions or provisions beneficial to employees now in effect which
are not specifically provided for in this Agreement or which have not been
replaced by provisions of this Agreement shall remain in effect for the duration
of this Agreement, unless mutually agreed otherwise between the City and the
Union.
ARTICLE XVI
JOINT HEALTH AND SAFETY COMMITTEE

A commitiee of four (4) members, two (2) members designated by the
Commissioner of Police and two (2) members designated by the Union, will
review and investigate complaints regarding working conditions or work
requirements.

This committee will make recommendations to the City for improvements.

The City will advise the committee of its decision or recommendations
concerning these matters.

 

| If the City rejects the committee's recommendations, it will advise the
oO committee the reason for its rejection.

‘The joint Health and Safety Committee will meet every three (3) months.

—

~~

 

 

30
 

 

 

“y
2

ARTI XVI
TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT

Whenever an employee is temporarily assigned to perform the duties of a
higher rank, grade, classification, or detail assignment, he shall be paid a wage
rate at the increment level of the person whom he is replacing, or, if not replacing
anyone, at the top of the rank. grade, classification or detail assignment.
Preference for such temporary assignments shall be based on seniority as defined
in Article X.
 

°

oe)

 

 

 

 

 

RTICLE XVI

TRANSFERS

When any member of the Department is transferred, he shall be entitled,
upon his request, to have the reason therefor stated in writing and with
particularity, which statement shall become a part of his personnel file, The
phrase "for the good of the service” shal! not constitute an adequate or sufficient
reason for transfer.
ARTICLE XIX
ey UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
9 19.1 Allowance
Effective September 15, 1986, the City shall pay an annual uniform
allowance of Three Hundred and Eighty Dollars ($380) in two (2) equal
payments of One Hundred Ninety Dollars ($198) each. Such payment will be

3 made on or before September 15 and May 15 respectively of each fiscal year.
Employees will be eligible to collect clothing allowance if they are on the active
payroll on September 15 and May 15. The employee shall be responsible for the
maintenance and replacement of al items of clothing.

19.2 Equipment

The City shall be responsible for furnishing the following items of
equipment:

(1) Helmets
. (2) Badges
3 (3) Night Sticks
and any other new equipment deemed by the commissioner to be job related,

lg

 

 

33
 

 

 

Me

 

ARTICLE XX
GROUP LIFE INSURANCE

The City will continue to provide a group life insurance plan for ail
members covered by this Agreement which contains the following provisions:

(A) A five thonsand dollar ($5,000) payment upon the death of the
insured;

(B) An additional five thousand dollar ($5,000) payment if the cause of
death is accidental;

{C) A maximum payment of five thousand dollars ($5,000) for limb
dismemberment according to a schedule of payments in the current policy
providing this coverage;

(D) A two thousand dollar ($2,000) payment upon the death of the
current Spouse;

(E) <A one thousand dollar ($1,000) payment upon the death of each
dependent child from age seven (7) days to nineteen (19) years;

(F) A waiver of premium and conversion privilege.
ARTICLE XXI
HEALTH AND DENTAL CARE COVERAGE

21.1 Blue Cross and Blue Shield

The City will provide hospital and medical coverage for all employees
under the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan generally known as 82-83 at no cost to the
employee.

The City will provide for all employees the following Blue Cross/Blue
Shield benefit riders at no cost to the employees:

MMER - $1,000,000

MMER - 82-83 (deductible $50.00}
Rider 8

Prescription Drug Rider as provided below
Rider 8

Blue Cross Rider 8

Dependents to age 23

Blue Shield Rider 4

oO Emergency O.P. EKG 82-83

| Blue Shield Rider 8

Dependents to age 23. 82-83

 

The City will provide the Blue Cross prescription drug $3.00 co-pay

lo é j prescription plan for all employees at no cost to the employees.
Db
21.2 Medical Insurance Retireme:
Employees who retire during the life of this Agreement, or until a
successor Agreement is executed by the Mayor or imposed by interest arbitration,
Q shall be entitled to receive, until their deati, medical insurance benefits without

cost as listed below:

BC/BS basic plan (generally known as 62-83
$3.00 drug prescription card (carrier identical to provider of current

employee plan)

These benefits are guaranteed only to those employees who retire during
this period. This tanguage shall be incorporated into a separate Agreement with
each employee who retires in the period described above.

The City and Union mutually agree to publish a comprehensive handbook
for employees represented by the Union, covering all current benefits and benefit

upon retirement.

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

>

oy

 

 

21.3 Dental Program

 

All employees represented by the Union shall be provided the Group
Health Incorporated Dental Plan known as Type M-l together with the
appropriate rider providing 100% of schedule, for basic, prosthetics and
orthodontia; fluoride treatments (8); dependent students covered to age twenty-
five (25) for all benefits except orthodontia which is to age nineteen (19); with no
deductible amount, at no cost to the employee.

The Union agrees the City may seek bids for alternate dental coverage. Ali
bid specifications will be submitted to the Union for its approval prior to
publication. Upon receipt of the bids and notice to the Union, the City may
select alternate dental coverage, subject to the Union's further prior approval of
such dental coverage,

21.4 Notification of Status

Each employee must notify the Division of Labor Relations of any changes
in marital and/or dependent status within ten (10) days of the effective date of the

change.

21.5 Payment in Lieu of Insurance Coverage

(A) Any employee, represented by the Union, entitled to Blue Cross/Blue
Shield family coverage as provided above may elect to waive such coverage if
his spouse has Blue Cross/Blue Shield coverage. Employees waiving coverage
may be required to show proof of spouse's coverage to the City and to the Union,
An employee who desires to waive such Blue Cross/Blue Shield coverage shall
notify the City and the Union, in writing, and such waiver of coverage shail be
effective on the first day of the month following thirty (30) days after the date of
receipt of such notification to the City. Those employees choosing to waive
coverage shall have their written request placed in their personnel file. All
employees waiving coverage will receive the sum of forty dollars ($40) per
month to be paid by separate check, on September 30 and March 30 of each year.

Should the spouse's coverage be terminated for any reason, the employee
will immediately notify the City. Upon such notification, the City shall transfer
the employee to the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan provided herein, and the
employee will be provided full family coverage without any preconditions or
lapse in coverage.

An employee who has waived his or her Blue Cross/Blue Shield coverage

- and-who- desires” to~be-teinstated~to~suclr-Blue~Cross/Blue-Shield-coverage-as

provided in Section 21.5 shall notify the City and the Union, in writing. Such
coverage shall be reinstated on the first day of the month following thirty (30)
days after the date of receipt of such notification by the City.
 

 

 

 

(B) Effective January 1, 1955, the City will net provide medical or
hospital insurance coverage, regardiess of the type of plan, for any employee or
retiree whose spouse has comparable or superior coverage as the result of
employment in, or retirement from, City service as defined in Article 1.5. Said
employee or retiree, however, shall receive four hundred and eighty dollars
($480) per year, (forty dollars [$40] per credited month) payable on or before
June 30 of each year as payment in lieu thereof.

(C) Any employee represented by the Union who is entitled to dental
insurance coverage may elect to waive such coverage, An employee who desires
to waive such coverage shall notify the City and Union in writing, and such
waiver of coverage shall be effective on the first day of the month following
thirty (30) days after the data of receipt of such notification to the City. All
employees waiving coverage will receive the sum of twelve dollars and fifty
cents ($12.50) per month (up to one hundred fifty dollars [$150] per year), to be
paid by separate check on December 15 of each year.

An employee who has waived his or her dental insurance coverage and
who desires to be reinstated to such dental insurance coverage as provided in
Section 21.5 shall notify the City and Union, in writing. Such coverage shall be
reinstated on the first day of the month following thirty (30) days after the date of
receipt of such notification by the City.

(D) Effective January 1, !988, the City will not provide dental insurance
coverage, regardless of the type of plan, for any employee or retiree whose
spouse has comparable or superior coverage as the result of employment in, or
retirement from, City service as defined in Article 1.5. Said employee or retiree,
however, shall receive one hundred twenty dollars ($120) per year, (ten dollars
[$10] per credited month) payable on or before June 30 of each year as payment
in Siew thereof.

21.6 Alternate Insurance Coverage

The Union agrees the City may seek bids for alternative dental and/or
medical and hospital insurance coverage, or provide coverage by self-insurance,
for its employees and/or retirees. All bid specifications or the terms of self-
insurance will be submitted to the Union for its approval prior to publication, and
such approval will not be unreasonably withheld. After approval and upon
receipt of the bids the City may elect altemate insurance coverage. Such
alternate coverage will pay the full cost of all treatment, services, or other
benefits as are now enjoyed under the present plan, and it will not add to the
employee's costs for insurance benefits.

It is the intent of the City to provide benefits that are equivalent to, or
better than, those currently in effect. Therefore, disputes concerning the level of
benefits shall be resolved through the grievance arbitration procedure. Pending
receipt of the arbitration award, benefits will remain unchanged.

37
 

 

 

 

4

 

ARTICLE XXII

POLICEMEN'S BILL OF RIGHTS

 

22.1 Purpose

The purpose of this Anicle is to adopt a "Bill of Rights" for members of
the Buffalo police force, setting down guidelines to be followed by superior
office in the conduct of investigations arising from the member's conduct as a
police officer,

22.2 Informing the Member

(A) The member shall be informed of the rank, name, and command of
the officer in charge of the investigation, as well a the rank, name and command
of the interrogating officer, and all persons present during the interrogation. If a
member is directed to leave his post and report for interrogation to another
command, his own command shall be promptly notified of his whereabouts.

(B) The member shall be informed of the nature of the investigation
before any interrogation begins, including the name of complainant. The
addresses of the complainant and/or witnesses need not be disciosed, However,
the member shall be given sufficient information to reasonably apprise him of the
allegations

(C) If it is known that the member is to be interrogated only as a witness,
he shall be so informed at the initial notification to appear.

(D) If the member is under arrest, or is likely to be, (that is, if he is a
Suspect or the target of a criminal investigation), he shall be informed of, and
given, all his rights, pursuant to the "Miranda" decision as set forth by the
Supreme Court of the United States.

22.3 Conduct of Investigation

(A) The guidelines set down in this Section of the Agreement shall be
observed by all superior officers in conducting investigation of actions of
members of the police force.

(B) The interrogation of a member shall be at a reasonable hour,
preferably when the member is on duty, unless the exigencies of the investigation
dictate otherwise. Where practicable, interrogations should be scheduled for the
daytime, andthe reassignment -of- the-~member -to -the-first platoon should-be:
employed. If any time is lost, the member shall be compensated,

38
 

 

 

 

 

 

(C) The interrogation shall take place at location designated by the
investigating officer. Usually it will be at the command to which the
investigating officer is assigned, or at the precinct within which the incident
allegedly occurred.

(D) The questioning shall not be overly Jong. Reasonable respites shall
be showed. Time shall be provided for personal necessities, meals, telephone
calls, and reasonable rest periods.

(E) The member shail not be subjected to offensive language, nor shall
he be threatened with transfer, dismissal, or other punishment. No promises or
reward shall be made as an inducement to answer questions.

(F) The complete interrogation shall be recorded, either mechanically or
by a stenographer. There will be no "off the record” questions. All recesses
called during the questioning shall be recorded.

(G) If a member so requests, he shall be given the opportunity to consult
with counsel before being questioned concerning a serious violation of the
Departmental rules, provided the interrogation would not be delayed unduly
thereby. In such cases, the interrogation may not be postponed past 10:00 A.M.
of the day following the notification of interrogation. Counsel, if available, and a
Tepresentative of a line organization may be present during the interrogation.

(H) No employee covered by this Agreement shall be ordered (by the
City) to submit to a polygraph test.

22.4 Minor Violations

In cases of investigations of minor violations of the Departmental rules,
requests to consult with legal counsel or with a line organization representative
will be denied unless sufficient reasons are advanced. In cases of minor
violations, the investigating officer shall have discretion as to whether or not the
interrogation shall be recorded.

22.5 Disciplinary Action

In any case, the refusal of a member to answer pertinent questions may
result in disciplinary action.

39
 

 

3

oO

oO

 

 

 

TICL OT
LONGEVITY

{A) Each permanent employee who has completed the years of service
set forth in Column I below shall receive annually in addition to his salary, the
payment set forth in Column II:

The following schedule shall take effect July 1, 1986:

COLUMN 1 COLUMN IL
YEARS AMOUNT
3-9 $ 200
10-14 400
15-19 600
20-24 800
25 1,200

The following schedule shall take effect July 1, 1986:

COLUMN | COLUMN I
YEARS AMOUNT
5-9 $ 200
10-14 450
15-19 700
20-24 950
25 1,200

(B) Eligible service for the computation of this benefit shall be
determined as follows:

(1) Only active services rendered in a permanent position, the salary of
which is paid on an annual basis, under "personal services” of the City budget,
may be counted. Seasonal and per diem service is not eligible service. Unpaid
“leave time" should not be counted.

{2) Service rendered by employees on a temporary or provisional basis,
or in the exempt, non-competitive, or unclassified service, which immediately
precedes permanent service, is eligible service.

(3) Acr authorized: leave of absence without pay does-not constitute
service time.

{4) Service with any City department or agency is counted as eligible

service for the computation of longevity payments, including service with the
Board of Education, Municipal Rousing Authorily, and the Sewer Authority,

40
 

 

 

 

 

(5) Employees who are granted an approved leave of absence for Union
activities and who remain as active employees under the terms of the New York
State Retirement System will accrue longevity credit during such leave,

(C) Longevity payments shall be made in a lump sum upon the close of
the pay period within which the anniversary date of hire occurs including
adjustments for any leave of ubsence(s). Longevity payments shall be included
in the calculation of court time, overtime and reporting time.

(D) An employee's longevity date shall be affected by all leaves of
absence or suspensions without pay. For example, an employee's date of hire is
October 1, 1982. If that same employee received a six (6) month leave of
absence his longevity date would be adjusted according to the length of the leave.
Therefore, his new longevity date is April 1, 1983.

4i
ARTI XX!
TENURE
Detectives, Detective Sergeants, Assistant Detective Chiefs and the Chief

of Homicide, upon completion of eighteen (18) months of service, shall not be
removed from their respective position B except for cause.

 

yo

 

 

 

 
ARTICLE XXV

PRINTING OF CONTRACT

The cost of printing this Agreement in booklet form in the number of one
thousand five hundred (1, 500) copies shal] be borne equally by the City and the
Union. Printing shall be performed in-house.

 

 

 

43
mi
o

ARTICLE XXVI

 

 

 

 

= 3 TERMINATION
9 This Agreement shall be effective as of the Ist day of July, 1986 end shall
remain in full force and effect until the 30th day of June, 1988. It shall be
automatically renewed from year to year thereafter unless either party shall notify
the other in writing sixty (60) days prior to the termination date that it desires to
modify this Agreement.
9 Either party may submit proposals no earlier than October 1, 1987, Upon
| receipt of a party's request to commence negotiations and its proposals the other
parly must submit its proposals no later than thirty (30) days from the date of
such receipt. Thereafter, the parties shall meet and commence negotiations
within thirty (30) days.
Oo
9
lo J
=)
hO
do
i

 

 
ARTICLE XXVIi
GENERAL PROVISIONS

This Agreement and all provisions herein are subject to all applicable
controlling laws and to the appropriation of funds by the Common Council. In
the event that any provision herein is found to violate such laws, said provision
shall not bind either of the parties, but the remainder of this Agreement shall
remain in full force and effect as if the invalid or illegal provision bad never been
a part of this Agreement.

 

oO

 

 

45
 

9

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE XVII
NAGEMI IGHTS

Except as expressly limited by other provisions of this Agreement, al! of
the authority, rights, and responsibilities possessed by the City including, but not
limited to, the right to determine the mission, methods, purposes and objectives
of the City, to include the examination, selection, recruitment, hiring or
promotion of employees pursuant to law, to establish specifications for each class
of positions and to classify or to reclassify and to allocate or to reallocate new or
existing positions in accordance with law, and to discipline or discharge
employees in accordance with law and the provisions of this Agreement, are
retained by it.

46
ARTICLE XXIX
2 POLICE DEPARTMENT VEHICLES

93 Police Inspectors shail be assigned Police Department vehicles for official
business only.
| 9
9

=)

ou

 

 

 

 

 

47

 
 

 

 

 

 

Se

ARTICLE XXX
CIVIL INDEMNIFICATION
The provisions contained in Section 50-k of the New York State General

Municipal Law regarding civil actions against employees of the City and
members of the Union, are made a part of this Agreement.

48
17 16 AGREBD AY AKD BRIWBEN THE PARTIRS THAT ‘ot, eEROVIS10N
OF EIG. AGREEMENT REQUIRING LEGISLATIVE ACTIOX

THPLENBNTATION BY ARBRDABNT OF LAW OR BY PROVIDING HE "RODITLONAL
PUNDS THERSFORE, GHALL MOT BECOME EFFECTIVE UNTIL TBE APPROPRIATE

LEGISLATIVE BODY HAS GIVEN APPROVAL,
Witneas Wherepf, the © parties have gat their hands thie

nif Le
85 DL GRIFFIN, MAYOR

RY MZBB TOY

9 eee ares -

   

CHICE, DIR
DavIBION" OP LABOR RELATIONS

9
APPROVED
AS TO FORM ONLY
= JAN 7 1988
‘ 5 SAMUEL F, HOUSTON
Oo x 5
a)

 

 

 

 

 

49
Appendix A

SALARY SCHEDULE "A"*
JULY 1. 1986 - DECEMBER 31. 1986

 
  
  
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

JOB TIT! GROSS SALARY
Police Inspector... 0.6... 0c eee cette nett e nen eee $34,826
Chief Detectives. . 34,826
Police Captain... 31,649
Chief of Homicide ...... 31,649
Assistant Chief of Detectives. .... : 29,574
Chief, Bureau of Administrative Services 29,574

Police Instructor... .
Police Lieutenant .. .

 

9 Polygraph Examiner.
Detective Sergeant. .
Police Photographer . . . + 25,579
Assistant Police Dispatcher .......- 06.0... 0 eee ce eee rene 25,579
Detective. .
Police Officer. . .
43
lo ) * The above Salary Schedule includes the value of twelve (12) paid holidays at
is the rate of time and one-half (1 1/2).
2
|
1
)

 

 

 

 

 

{ 50
Appendix B

SALARY SCHEDULE "B"*
JANUARY 1. 1987 - JUNE 30, 1987

  
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
   

 

 

QB TITLE GROSS SALARY
Police Inspector ....0 00... c eee eee eee $35,174
Chief Detectives.......... .. 35,174
Police Captain .. -. 31,965
Chief of Homicide...... 31,965
Assistant Chief of Detective: 29,869
Chief, Bureau of Administrative Services 29,869
Police Instructor 29,869
Police Lieutenant . 27,900
o Polygraph Examiner. . . 27,900
Detective Sergeant . . 26,123
Police Photographer ..... 25,834
Assistant Police Dispatcher ......... 00. ...000005 .. 25,834
Detective. . . «. 24,977
. Police Officer. . . 17,727
;? 19,294
| 20,862
22,430
| 24,000
uy ) * The above Salary Schedule includes the value of twelve (12) paid holidays at
o the rate of time and one-half (1 1/2),
O
4
1
L)
|

 

 

St
Appendix C

SALARY SCHEDULE "C"*
JULY 1.1987 - DECEMBER 31, 1987

   
 
   
  
  
 
    

JOB TITLE GROSS SALARY
Police Inspector $36,932
Chief Detectives. 36,932
Police Captain... . 33,563
Chief of Homicide... ... 33,563
Assistant Chief of Detectives... .. 31,362
Chief, Bureau of Administrative Services ......... 31,362
Police Instructor . . 31,362
Police Lieutenant... 29,295
Polygraph Examiner. 29,295
Detective Sergeant . . . 27,429
Police Photographer............0.00.. 0.0008 - 27,125
Assistant Police Dispatcher . 27,125
Detective... ...... cece cece eee eee ee 26,225
Police Officer,...............5 : . 18,713
: : -. 20,358
i 22,005
| 23,651
| 25,300
~ ) * The above Salary Schedule includes the value of twelve (12) paid holidays at
9 the rate of time and one-half (1 1/2).

 

 
Appendix D

SALARY SCHEDULE "D"*
JANUARY 1. 1988 - JUNE 30. 1988

 

    
 
   
 
 
 
 

OB TITLE GROSS SALARY
Police Inspector .. $37,301
Chief Detectives. 37,301
Q Police Captain . . 33,898
Chief of Homicide 33,898

 

 

4 Assistant Chief of Detectives. 31,675
Chief, Bureau of Administrative Services 31,675
Police Instructor 31,675
Police Lieutenant . 29,587
oO Polygraph Examiner. 29,587
Detective Sergeant . . 27,703
Police Photographer . . . 27,396
Assistant Police Dispatcher . 27,396
Detective............ sees +» 26,487
Police Officer,.........6.05005 ++ 18,900
9 .» 20,561
22,225
23,887
25,553
Oo ° ) * The above Salary Schedule includes the value of twelve (12) paid holidays at
“ the rate of time and one-half (1 1/2).
Oo

 

 

 

 

 

33
