MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING :

This MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING made and entered into this 15* day
of July, 2015.

BY AND BETWEEN CITY OF SAN DIEGO

AND SAN DIEGO POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS

i
|
|

Artic!
Articl
Artic!
Artic!
Article
Article
Article

- Parties to Agreement.
- Recognition ..
- Implementatio
- Term of Agreement.
- Renegotiation...
- Scope of Representatio:
- Provisions of Law
Article 8 - Holidays
Article 9 - Management’s Rights......
Article 10 - No Discrimination Policy
Article 11 - Exchange of Days Off Between Employees
Article 12 - Information on New Employees
Article 13 - Flexible Benefits Plan.
Article 14 - Industrial Leave
Article 15 - Educational Incentive .
Article 16 -
Article 17 -
Article 18 - Annual Leave.....
Article 19 - Sick Leave and Annual Leave Reimbursement
Article 20 - Board of Directors........
Article 21 - Formal Representation
Article 22 - POA ACCESS .....ccseeeeees
Article 23 - Out-of-Class Assignments.

 

   
 
  
 
 

ie
ie
ie
ie

   

 

WOBNABHTRWNHE

 

 

 

SHINS KRWWNHHEe

   
 
 
 

 

 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Article 24 - Grievance Procedure .. 22
Article 25 - Salaries ......ccee 27
Article 26 - Uniforms and Safety Equipment 28

Article 27 - Personnel Rules and Regulations
Article 28 - Field Training Officer Pay
Article 29 - Call-Back Pay .
Article 30 - Court Pay....
Article 31 - Stand-By Compensation.
Article 32 - Overtime ............
Article 33 - Work Schedules .
Article 34 - Starting Salary...
Article 85 - POA Representation
Article 36 - Payroll Electronic Deposi'
Article 37 - Employee Representation
Article 38 - Departmental Procedures - Advance Notice
Article 39 - Tuition Refund Plan....
Article 40 - Flight Pay
Article 41 - Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights (POBOR) Procedures 48
Article 42 - Copies of the MOU
Article 43 - Seniority...
Article 44 - Retirement
Article 45 - Long Term Disability Plan.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association i

 

 

 

 
Article 46 - Reopeners
Article 47 - Probation Period
Article 48 - Wellness .............
Article 49 - Transportation Incentives.
Article 50 - Preferred Shift Selection
Article 52 - Modification and Waiver...
Article 53 - Overpayment to City Employees and Repayment of Funds.
Article 54 - Conduct of Elections
Article 56 - Core Instructor Pay.
Article 57 - Drug and Alcohol Testing Program
Article 58 - Catastrophic Leave Plan
Article 59 - Side Letters...
Article 60 - Mileage Reimbursement ..
Article 61 - Special Pay for Administrative Assignments.
Article 62 - Shift Differential
Article 63 - Specialty Pays
Article 64 - Public Safety Officers Procedura
Article 65 - Employee Organizational Leave.
Article 66 - Labor-Management Committee...
Article 67 - Line of Duty Death
Article 68 - Effect of MOU.......
Article 69 - Bereavement Leave.
Article 70 - Agency Shop and Dues Deduction.
Article 71 - Use of City Email .
Article 72 — Volunteers
Article 74 — Discretionary Leave for Fiscal Years 2014 - 2018
Appendix A - Interim Defined Contribution Plan..............0.
Appendix B — Exhibits A, B, and C to FY 2011 Salary Ordinance...

 

 

 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association ii

 
SUBJECT INDEX

Agency Shop (Article 70) ..
Annual Leave (Article 18).
Badges (Article 17).........
Bereavement Leave (Article 69).
Bilingual Pay (Article 16)........
Board of Directors (Article 20)
Call-Back Pay (Article 29)
Catastrophic Leave Plan (Article 58)
Conduct of Elections (Article 54)
Copies of the MOU (Article 42) ..
Core Instructor Pay (Article 56).
Cost Of Living Annuity (Article 44
Court Pay (Article 30).
Departmental Procedures -
Discretionary Leave for Fiscal Years 2014 - 2018 (Article 74)
DROP (Article 5, 44)
Drug and Alcohol Testing Program (Article 57)..
Dues Deduction (Article 70)
Educational Incentive (Article 15)
Effect of MOU (Article 68)
Employee Organizational Leave (Article 65).
Employee Representation (Article 37)
Exchange Of Days Off Between Employees (Article 11)
Field Training Officer Pay (Article 28) ......ccscseeeseees
Fiscal Year 2011 Salary Ordinance-Exhibits A, B, and C (Appendix B)
Flexible Benefits Plan (Article 13)
Flight Pay (Article 40)...
Formal Representation (Article 21
Grievance Procedure (Article 24)
Holidays (Article 8)...........
Implementation (Article 3)
Industrial Leave (Article 14)...
Information on New Employees (Article
Labor-Management Committee (Article 66
Line of Duty Death (Article 67)..
Long Term Disability Plan (Article
Management’s Rights (Article 9).......
Mileage Reimbursement (Article 60)
Military Leave (Article 27)...
Modification and Waiver (Article 52)
No Discrimination Policy (Article 10) ..
Out-Of-Class Assignments (Article 23)...
Overpayment to City Employees canticle 53)
Overtime (Article 32)... see
Parties to Agreement (Article b..

 

  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 

RATOCASCARANUARNMNOwWERSO

 

  

)»

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association iii
Payroll Electronic Deposit (Article 36) ...........
Personnel Rules and Regulations (Article 27)
POA Access (Article 22) ......cc00
POA Representation (Article 35).
Preferred Shift Selection (Article 50).
Probation (Article 38, 47) .....
Provisions of Law (Article 7)
Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights (POBOR) Procedures (Article 41) 48
Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights Act (Article 64) .
Recognition (Article 2)...
Repayment of Funds (Article 53)
Renegotiation (Article 5).
Reopeners (Article 46)
Retirement (Article 44)..
Interim Defined Contribution Plan (Appendix A).
Salaries (Article 25)
Scope of Representation (Article 6)
Seniority (Article 43)...
Shift Differential (Article 62) ..
Sick Leave and Annual Leave Reimbursement (Article 19)..
Side Letters (Article 59) ...
Special Pay for ‘Administrative Assignments (antil 61).
Specialty Pays (Article 63) .. tee
Stand-By Compensation (Article 31).
Starting Salary (Article 34)...
Term of Agreement (Article 4).
Transportation Incentives (Article 49) .
Tuition Refund Plan (Article 39)...
Uniforms and Safety Equipment (Article 26).
Use of City Email (Article 71)
Volunteers (Article 72) ..........
Wellness (Article 48) ............
Work Schedules (Article 33).

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association iv
ARTICLE 1
PARTIES TO AGREEMENT
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) is made and entered into on by and

between the City of San Diego (City), and the San Diego Police Officers Association
(POA).

ARTICLE 2
RECOGNITION

City formally recognizes POA as the exclusive representative for all employees in
the Police Unit and Police Management Unit. This MOU applies to all
classifications listed below except as the units may be amended in accordance with
City’s Employee-Employer Relations Policy.

Police Unit: Police Management Unit:
Police Recruit Police Lieutenant
Police Officer I Police Captain

 

 

 

 

Police Officer II

 

 

Police Officer III

Police Detective

Police Agent (Terminal)
Police Sergeant

Community Relations assistant to the Police Chief

ARTICLE 8
IMPLEMENTATION
This MOU constitutes a mutual recommendation by the Parties to the San Diego
City Council (City Council) and/or the Civil Service Commission. This MOU will be

of no force or effect until ratified and approved as appropriate by City Council
and/or Civil Service Commission.

ARTICLE 4
TERM OF AGREEMENT

The term of this MOU will commence at 12:01 a.m. on July 1, 2015. This MOU will

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 1
expire and otherwise be fully terminated at 11:59 p.m. on June 30, 2020.

ARTICLE 5
RENEGOTIATION

In the event POA desires to meet and confer in good faith on the provisions of
a successor MOU, it will serve upon the City its written request to commence
meeting and conferring in good faith, as well as its written non-economic
proposals for successor MOU by October 2, 2019. POA will submit its
economic proposals no later than January 8, 2020. Upon receipt of the
written notice and proposals, meet and confer over non-economic proposals
will begin no later than November 6, 2019, and meet and confer over
economic proposals will begin no later than January 22, 2020.

The City agrees to notify POA by October 16, 2019 of its non-economic
proposals and will submit its economic proposals no later than January 22,
2020. If federal or state governments take action that has a direct effect
upon the areas which fall within the scope of representation, the City may
submit proposals concerning these areas at later dates. Any terms and
conditions of this MOU, not subject to this reopener provision shall remain in
force and effect. The impasse hearing will take place in advance of the first
reading of the salary ordinance for Fiscal Year 2020.

The City will request the City Council to schedule an impasse hearing if
necessary after 5:00 p.m. on a regular work day in order to permit POA
Bargaining Unit members the opportunity to attend and testify.

Unless otherwise agreed to, the parties agree that POA’s final economic and.
non-economic offers are due by February 19, 2020 and the City’s final
economic and non-economic offers are due March 5, 2020. POA agrees to
provide the City a written statement of its positions regarding any issues
should there be impasse.

City contends that the Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP) is an
employment benefit subject to modification through the meet and confer
process. Despite POA’s disagreement with this contention, the Parties agree
that, during the term of this MOU, they will meet and confer over proposals
to modify DROP to make DROP “cost free” to City. The Parties acknowledge
that City’s proposals will modify DROP to make DROP “cost free” as defined
by City and may include any and all aspects of DROP, including but not
limited to, all of the DROP alternative plan design proposals set forth in a
study by Buck Consultants presented by City to POA on March 14, 2012, or
any variations of the alternative proposals which changes numbers or
percentages reflected in the Buck study. However, by agreeing to meet and
confer regarding proposals to modify DROP, POA is not waiving its right to

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 2

 
challenge any proposed modification to DROP on the basis that it may impair
a constitutionally protected, individually vested pension benefit, or on any
other ground. POA further reserves its right to argue, despite any contrary
assertion by City, that the current unmodified DROP is, in fact, “cost free”
within the meaning of reasonable actuarial principles and appropriate
margins of error. Moreover, in agreeing to meet and confer regarding
proposals to modify DROP, neither Party is waiving its rights to make any
legal arguments or pursue any legal action related to any proposed DROP
modification.

In the event City and POA reach agreement on any modifications to DROP,
these modifications will become effective on the date agreed upon. In the
event the Parties fail to reach an agreement, any impasse hearing related to
DROP will be conducted in accordance with Council Policy 300-06 on a date
to be agreed upon by the Parties but in no event before January 1, 2013.
However, any impasse hearing related to the Parties’ meet and confer over
DROP, including the aspects of DROP described above, will be separate from
and not combined with any issues remaining for impasse in connection with
the Parties’ meet and confer process for a new MOU for Fiscal Year 2014.

ARTICLE 6
SCOPE OF REPRESENTATION
The scope of representation of POA includes all matters relating to employment
conditions and employer/employee relations including, but not limited to, wages,
hours, and other terms and conditions of employment as provided for and defined by

the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act (MMBA), at California Government Code section
3500, et seq.

ARTICLE 7
PROVISIONS OF LAW
If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause or phrase of this MOU is for

any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal, the decision will
not affect the remaining portion of the MOU.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 3

 
ARTICLE 8
HOLIDAYS

A. City Holidays.

1. The City recognizes the following holidays, which are referred to in
this Article as fixed or actual holidays:

a. January 1;

b. Third Monday in January, known as “Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s
Birthday;”

ec. Third Monday in February, known as “Presidents’ Day;”
d. March 31, known as “Cesar Chavez Day;”

e. Last Monday in May, known as “Memorial Day;”

m

July 4;

. First Monday in September known as “Labor Day;”

po

. November 11, known as “Veteran’s Day;”

me

Fourth Thursday in November, known as “Thanksgiving Day;”

December 25; and

k. Every day appointed by City Council for a public fast,
thanksgiving or holiday.

2. If January 1, March 31, July 4, November 11, or December 25 falls on
a Sunday, the following Monday is the City-observed holiday. And if
any of these dates falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday is the
City-observed holiday.

B. Payment for Holiday Worked.

1. Holiday Worked Premium Pay: An employee, who is regularly
scheduled to work on an actual holiday or a City-observed holiday
and performs work, will receive overtime compensation, of time and
one half, for all hours worked on the actual holiday or the City-
observed holiday, but not both. The employee will also receive
straight time pay equal to the amount of hours of one work day as
holiday compensation. An employee may not collect Holiday Worked
Premium Pay for both the actual holiday and the City-observed
holiday.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 4
2. Holiday Worked Day Off Pay: An employee, who is not regularly
scheduled to work an actual holiday or City-observed holiday, but
works either day, will receive time and one half pay for all hours
worked on the actual or City-observed holiday in excess of the
employee’s 40 hour work week.

C. Payment for Actual or City-Observed Holiday Not Worked.

1. Holiday Scheduled Pay: An employee, who is regularly scheduled to
work on an actual holiday or City-observed holiday, but elects to
take the day off with supervisor approval or is directed to take the
day off, will receive straight time pay equal to the amount of hours of
one regular work day. An employee may not collect Holiday
Scheduled Pay for both the actual holiday and the City-observed
holiday. An employee, who is not scheduled to work on an actual
holiday or a City-observed holiday and does not work, is not entitled
to Holiday Scheduled Pay.

2. Holiday Credit On Day Off: Notwithstanding paragraph C.1 above,
effective June 30, 2020, when an actual holiday or City-observed
holiday falls on an employee’s regularly scheduled day off, the
employee will receive pay for eight hours at his or her straight time
rate of pay or an equal amount of compensatory time off. An
employee may not collect Holiday Credit On Day Off for both the
actual holiday and the City-observed holiday.

D. Special Rules for City-Observed Holidays.

The following rules apply when the actual holiday and the City-
observed holiday are different days:

a. Officers, who have the City-observed holiday off and are regularly
scheduled to work on the actual holiday, will treat the actual
holiday as the holiday for purposes of collecting “Holiday Worked
Premium Pay.” In the alternative, officers may take the day off as
a “Holiday Scheduled” and receive straight time pay, if approved
by a supervisor.

b. Officers, who work on the City-observed holiday, as a regularly
scheduled day, and volunteer to work on the actual holiday,
which is not a regularly scheduled day, will receive straight time
pay on the actual holiday and Holiday Worked Premium Pay on
the City-observed holiday.

E. Floating Holiday.

In each fiscal year covered by the term of this MOU, each eligible
employee available for a duty assignment on July 1 (as defined in

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 5
Personnel Manual Index Code H-2) will accrue credit for ten (10) hours
of holiday time. Each employee accruing such time will schedule his or
her floating holiday to comply with the following conditions:

1. Employee must schedule the floating holiday prior to June 1;

2. The floating holiday must be a one-time absence and it must be used
before the last day of the last full pay period in June; and

8. The floating holiday must be taken at a time convenient to the
employee’s appointing authority.

ARTICLE 9
MANAGEMENT’S RIGHTS
A, The rights of City include, but are not limited to:

1. The exclusive right to determine the mission of its constituent departments,
commissions, and boards;

2. Set standards of service;

8. Determine procedures and standards of selection for employment and
promotion;

4, Direct its employees;
5. Take disciplinary action for just cause;

6. Relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for other
legitimate reasons;

 

 

 

 

7. Maintain the efficiency of government operations;

8. Determine the methods, means, technology and personnel by which
government operations are to be conducted;

9. Determine the content of job classifications;
10.Take all necessary actions to carry out its mission in emergencies; and

11.Exercise complete control and discretion over its organization and technology
of performing its work.

B. The exercise of these rights does not preclude employees or their representatives

from meeting and conferring or meeting and consulting as required by law with
City representatives about the practical consequences that decisions on these

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 6
matters may have on wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of
employment.

ARTICLE 10
NO DISCRIMINATION POLICY

It is agreed that neither City nor POA will discriminate against any employee based
on any of the protected classes or categories listed in City’s Equal Employment
Opportunity (EEO) Policy — Annual Statement or POA membership or activity. It is
further agreed that no employee will be discriminated against because of exercising
his or her rights specified in the Employee-Employer Relations Policy. POA and
City agree that they support the current policies of City as to affirmative action and
Equal Employment Opportunity, and City further agrees to meet and confer as
required by state law on any changes in these policies.

ARTICLE 11
EXCHANGE OF DAYS OFF BETWEEN EMPLOYEES

It is the policy of the San Diego Police Department (Department) to allow employees
of the same rank to exchange days off under the following conditions:

A. Both parties to the exchange must be willing to take the exchange and must
have the approval of the immediate supervisors concerned.

B. Generally speaking, exchanges of days off will be kept within the division,
section, watch, and detail unless, on an individual basis, the commands of the
parties to the exchange otherwise agree.

C. When practical, requests for an exchange of days off should be made in writing
at least five (5) working days prior to the first day of exchange.

D. An officer must report for the exchanged days off and with the exception of
illness, an officer who otherwise fails to report will be carried absent without
leave.

E. To avoid administrative problems, an exchange of days off must be made within
the same payroll period by both parties.

F. These exchanges must be made in accordance with the FLSA, when applicable.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 7

 

 

 
ARTICLE 12
INFORMATION ON NEW EMPLOYEES

 

 

 

A. Whenever City hires a Police Recruit or sworn Police Officer as a new employee,
it will inform POA in writing of such employment, giving the name, date of hire
and job classification of the new employee.

 

B. City agrees to use its best efforts to inform POA in all instances when an
employee represented by POA retires from City, giving the name, job
classification and date of retirement.

ARTICLE 13
FLEXIBLE BENEFITS PLAN

A. An Internal Revenue Service (IRS) qualified cafeteria-style benefits program
called the Flexible Benefits Plan (FBP) is offered to all eligible employees.
The FBP provides a variety of tax-free benefit options. “Eligible employee”
means any employee in one-half, three-quarter, or full-time status. “Eligible
employee” excludes all employees in an hourly status. Eligible employees
must have no less than forty (40) hours of compensated time during each pay
period in order to receive City-paid benefits. If an eligible employee has less
than forty (40) hours of compensated time during a pay period, the eligible
employee will have the right to continue his or her benefits by paying City the
full cost to continue any or all of the employee’s benefits during that period.
In the case of Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) approved absences, City will
continue to pay for the employee’s health, life and dental insurance for up to
twelve (12) weeks per year in accordance with FMLA requirements.

B. City’s contribution to the FBP, effective July 1, 2010, will be based on the level
of health insurance coverage selected by the eligible employee. City’s
contribution to FBP will be prorated according to the percentage of time
worked if the employee works less than full-time status.

1. The FBP annual allotment amounts for employees in the Police Unit for
Fiscal Year 2016 through Fiscal Year 2020 are as follows:

a. Health Waiver (for employees who have other comprehensive health
coverage) — $7,605

b. Employee only — $9,942
c. Employee and Children — $11,919
d. Employee and Spouse/Domestic Partner ~ $12,385

e. Employee and Spouse/Domestic Partner & Children — $16,700

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 8
2. The FBP annual allotment amounts for employees in the Police
Management Unit for Fiscal Year 2016 through Fiscal Year 2020 are as
follows:

1
i
)
|
|

a. Health Waiver (for employees who have other comprehensive health
coverage) — $10,605

b. Employee only — $12,942
c. Employee and Children — $14,919

d. Employee and Spouse/Domestic Partner — $15,885

 

e. Employee and Spouse/Domestic Partner & Children — $19,700

8. In addition to the FBP annual allotment amounts set forth in
paragraphs B.1. and B.2., employees covered by this MOU with eight
(8) or more years of service as a sworn police officer as of the last full
pay period ending day in April of each Fiscal Year, will receive on
the first full pay period of the fiscal year, an additional allotment for
flexible benefits as follows:

a. Fiscal Year 2016 — $2,900
b. Fiscal Year 2017 - $4,900
c. Fiscal Year 2018 - $11,400
d. Fiscal Year 2019 — $9,317
e. Fiscal Year 2020 — $6,728

4, For laterals, years of service includes continuous time served as a
sworn police officer at another law enforcement agency and/or the
City. For employees covered by this MOU who were police recruits
for the City, years of service includes the time service as a Police
Recruit.

C. All unused amounts of flexible benefits will be paid out bi-annually
on the last day of the first pay period of December and the last day of
the first pay-period of July.

D. The benefits available through FBP and the respective annual costs of the
benefits are reflected in the Flexible Benefits Summary Highlights booklet
provided to each employee each year of the MOU. POA will be allowed to offer
two (2) Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs (ALADS) HMO plans. It
will be POA’s and/or ALADS’ responsibility to inform the participants and
City of cost changes to be effective for January 1 coverage. Such notice must

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 9
=

A

be provided to City’s Risk Management no later than October 1 of the year
prior to the coverage effective date in order for changes to be made to City’s
OneSD system for deductions from participants’ paychecks beginning
December.

It is the intent of the Parties that all plans offered in the FBP comply with all
applicable state and federal laws, including IRS regulations as interpreted by
City Attorney. All disputes over interpretation of this Article will be
submitted to the appropriate agencies for interpretation.

The employee must select a health insurance plan unless the employee has
other comprehensive health insurance.

. Eligible employees are credited with City’s contribution on a biweekly basis as

taxable earnings. To allow employees to receive Flexible Benefit allowance on
a pre-tax basis, employees may designate a specific amount of pre-tax money
(RS restrictions apply) to be withheld from their paycheck for health, dental
and vision coverage and/or to reimburse eligible out-of-pocket
Dental/Medical/Vision (DMV) or Dependent Care expenses.

These payroll deductions must be designated during the open enrollment
period, are irrevocable, are subject to IRS regulations, and monies are
forfeited if not used within the fiscal year.

Eligible employees are required to enroll for their benefits each year during
the designated open enrollment period. If an employee fails to complete
enrollment within the open enrollment period, the employee’s current options
(or comparable plan if unavailable) will be automatically continued at the
same level for the next year as if the employee had elected to keep them.
Employees agree that City may make a payroll deduction for all elected
benefit options. All payroll deductions, including DMV and Dependent Care
reimbursement, will continue and may not be eligible to be stopped until the
following open enrollment period.

As part of the annual enrollment process for flexible benefits, all POA
members are required to acknowledge that no amount of flexible
benefit credits are included in “Base Compensation” under the
SDCERS plan.

It is agreed that POA fees for its prepaid insurance plans will be remitted by
the Risk Management in the aggregate amount according to the following
procedure: Risk Management will audit and balance the enrollment and
remit to POA, or its designee, the aggregate amount shown as soon as feasible
within City Comptroller guidelines for processing Requests for Direct
Payment. POA will be responsible for collecting premiums from employees
that were not collected due to the employee’s non-pay status.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 10
L. The Parties agree to meet and discuss potential changes to health, dental and
vision plans for POA represented employees. The Parties will discuss options
to lower costs to POA members, to include options for POA to become the
exclusive provider for health, dental and vision plans for POA members and/or
consolidation of City health plans. Potential options will be jointly determined
no later than December 1, 2016. Any option must conform to all applicable
laws, including tax laws.

ARTICLE 14
INDUSTRIAL LEAVE

Industrial Leave benefits will be administered in accordance with Administrative
Regulation (AR) 63.00. City will administer benefits for industrial injuries incurred
by employees covered by this MOU in accordance with California Labor Code
section 4850.

ARTICLE 15
EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE

City agrees to continue the existing Educational Incentive Program as described in
Department Procedure No. 5.13 except as set out below.

A. Effective July 1, 2007, the benefit for Advanced POST Certificate shall be eight
and one-half percent (8.5%) of employee’s base rate, and the benefit for
Intermediate POST Certificate shall be six percent (6%) of employee’s base rate.
These amounts are not cumulative.

B. Effective July 1, 2009, for the purpose of this Article only, those sworn officers in
the classifications of Police Officer I, Police Officer II (“A,” “C,” and “D” steps
only) and who possess an Advanced POST Certificate will receive $3.10 per hour.
Police Officer I, Police Officer II (“A,” “C,” and “D” steps only) and who possess
an Intermediate POST Certificate will receive $2.19 per hour. These
calculations are based upon the Advanced and Intermediate POST percentages
respectively, times the “E” Step salary of Police Officer IT.

C. Employees possessing the Advanced POST Certificate who have completed at
least sixty (60) college semester units or fifteen (15) years of service as a sworn
officer with City will not be required to re-qualify to be eligible for the
Educational Incentive Payment. Employees who have completed less than sixty
(60) college units or fifteen (15) years of service will be required to re-qualify in
accordance with Police Department Procedure No. 5.13. Employees with an
Intermediate POST Certificate with fifteen years of service as a sworn officer or
who meet applicable educational requirement will not be required to re-qualify.

D. POA agrees to establish and actively support a community service program.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 11
ARTICLE 16
BILINGUAL PAY

A. Ongoing Bilingual Services.

City agrees to continue a program which will provide ongoing extra compensation
for employees whose job assignment requires ability to communicate orally in
Spanish, Tagalog, Somali, Korean, American Sign Language, Chinese, Indochinese,
Russian, Arabic, or Farsi languages as well as English. Participants in this
program, who are certified by Personnel, and who are otherwise eligible, will receive
three and one-half percent (3.5%) of employee’s base rate while in the job
assignment requiring this additional skill. A claim by an individual of arbitrary
denial of bilingual pay is grievable.

B. Incidental Bilingual Services.

1. City agrees to provide bilingual compensation for the entire pay period for
those eligible individuals (those who are not currently receiving ongoing
bilingual pay for any language) who are requested or directed by a
supervisor, manager, or Communications to provide translator services in a
non-English language.

2. A statement attached to the Personnel Change Notice from a supervisor will
serve as certification for bilingual pay for the pay period.

8. For the purpose of defining “incidental bilingual services rendered,” any
language other than English may qualify for incidental bilingual
compensation.

4, City reserves the right to establish criteria which will enable candidates in
this program to qualify for the extra compensation.

5. POA’s request for City to consider expanding the number of languages
recognized as eligible for continuing bilingual pay will be referred to the
Multilingual Task Force for study and recommendations.

6. Employees are required to be periodically re-tested in order to ensure that
their bilingual skills are current. In order to continue receiving bilingual
pay, employees must pass a re-test on their non-English language. The re-
test will be administered on City time by the Personnel Department. City
may re-test an employee once every three (3) years thereafter.

7. The Parties may discuss the testing process at the POA Labor Management

Committee and a representative from Personnel may be invited to
participate during those discussions.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 12
ARTICLE 17 |
BADGES

 

A. Flat Badges.

City agrees to provide flat badges for sale by Department to employees. The flat
badge remains the property of City and, at the time of employee termination, the
badge must be returned to the Department without reimbursement to the i
employee. However, if the employee is retiring and eligible for a retired badge, |
the Department will exchange the flat badge for a retired flat badge.

B. Retired Badges. |

 

 

 

1. Upon a service or disability retirement, an eligible officer has the following
options:

 

a. If the officer has only a breast badge, City will have the officer’s name tag
and original breast badge encased in acrylic at no cost to the officer. In !
lieu of having the badge encased, the officer can have the breast badge
modified to or exchanged for a breast badge with a retired scroll in place
of the badge number.

b. If the officer has both a breast and flat badge, the officer has the following
choices:

1) City will have the officer’s name tag and original breast badge encased
in acrylic at no cost to the officer and have his or her flat badge
exchanged for or modified to a retirement badge.

2) City will have the officer’s name tag and original flat badge encased in
acrylic at no cost to the officer and have his or her breast badge
exchanged for or modified to a retired badge.

8) City will have both the breast and flat badge exchanged for or modified
to a retired badge.

2. Officers who do not have a flat badge for exchange or encasement have the
option to purchase a retired flat badge.

8. In addition to paragraph B.1.a and B.1.b., City will provide to POA, at no

cost, a flat badge of appropriate rank, to POA for purposes of ceremonial
presentation to the individual, by POA, upon retirement.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 13
ARTICLE 18
ANNUAL LEAVE

A. Employees covered by this MOU will accumulate annual leave time as follows
(references to number of years are to fully completed years of service):

1. 1-5 years of employment 5.24 hours per pay period
2. 6-15 years of employment 6.77 hours per pay period
3. 16 or more years 8.31 hours per pay period.
B. Appointing Authorities are responsible for arranging annual leave so that

adequate personnel are available to carry on necessary City work.

C. As far as is practicable, employees should be permitted to schedule annual leave
at times most acceptable to the employee. Scheduled annual leave will be
selected by employees within each division, watch, bureau, section, or unit, as is
applicable, based upon their seniority by rank within the Department.
Employees who are transferred at their request, or promoted, may be required to
modify their scheduled annual leave.

S

Employees should be encouraged to take regular annual leave but they will not
be required to take time off against their will. Any leave days in excess of the
authorized number earned for that year may be taken only at the convenience of
the Department.

E. 1. The maximum accumulation of annual leave for employees hired before July
1, 1994, with less than fifteen (15) years of service is six hundred (600) hours.
Annual leave credits may be accumulated over the six hundred (600) hours limit
until an employee’s annual “accrual date” (which is normally the day and month
when originally hired). The maximum accumulation of annual leave for
employees with fifteen (15) or more years of service is seven hundred (700)
hours.

2. For employees hired on or after July 1, 1994, the maximum accumulation of
annual leave is three hundred fifty (850) hours.

8. If, on an employee’s anniversary date, an employee’s leave balance exceeds
the applicable cap, accrual of additional annual leave, whether in hours or
cash equivalent, will cease. However, once an employee’s annual leave
balance falls below the applicable cap, accrual of annual leave will resume.
Employees will be provided reasonable opportunity to take time off to ensure
leave accrual is not interrupted. In unique situations when workload does
not permit an employee to take time off, Department will have discretion to
grant a ninety-day extension to the employee to use excess leave before the
cease to accrue will be implemented.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 14

 
F. Department annual leave periods will be divided into one-week increments.
Annual leave schedules are comprised of fifty-two (52) one-week increments for
each separate rank per division, watch, bureau, section, or unit, providing,
however, that the Department may establish an equitable formula relative to
Lieutenants and above to accommodate command staffing when a conflict exists
in annual leave scheduling. Employees may elect to take annual leave in
increments of one day or longer. Employees will annually be required to select a
vacation period in advance on the basis of seniority within their division, watch,
bureau, section or unit. The initial selection of leave will be the full regular
annual leave or the first segment of the leave. After the initial selection has
been completed by all employees, those seeking to take more than one segment.
of leave can select their second segment from those periods remaining. Those
employees desiring a third leave segment will select their third choice after those
choosing a second segment have completed their selection, etc. Each
Departmental unit will establish an equitable formula to predetermine the limit
or the number of officers that will be allowed to use annual leave credit during
each leave period. The limit may be lowered for the few selected periods of
anticipated heavy police work load, ie., July 4 and Labor Day weekend.

Q

All employees, upon separation, are entitled to receive pay for unused annual
leave credits.

H. Leave provisions included under item I and J below will be accounted for
separately.

I. Pre-approved annual leave, sick leave or compensatory time off properly used for
personal, family, or dependent illnesses will not be subject to disciplinary action.

J. Approved unscheduled annual or sick leave properly used for family, dependent,
or domestic partner illnesses will be considered as a separate category when
reviewing employee performance with regard to attendance and absenteeism
issues. Should City, for good and sufficient reasons, determine that an employee
is abusing this leave provision, City may request a bona fide doctor’s statement
from the employee to substantiate illness.

K. Employees may make up to two requests for payment in lieu of annual
leave each fiscal year. The total of both requests cannot exceed 125
hours each fiscal year.

L. Benefits While on Special Leave Without Pay (SLWOP).

1, All benefits while on SLWOP will be coordinated or offset by benefits the
employee receives under any other City program, including but not limited to
LTD and FMLA.

2. After one year on SLWOP, City may charge the employee a 2%
administrative fee or offer continuation of benefits under COBRA.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 15

 

 

 
3. Employees will not be eligible to purchase City-sponsored Supplemental Life
Insurance while on SLWOP.

M. The Department can grant so-called “Red A” leave, which is approved unpaid
leave, at Management’s sole discretion, per Personnel Manual Index Code I-7.

ARTICLE 19
SICK LEAVE AND ANNUAL LEAVE REIMBURSEMENT

An eligible employee, upon retirement, or upon termination (other than death or
discharge, including termination with eligibility for a deferred retirement), may
request that payment for sick leave and annual leave reimbursement be paid in
either: (a) one full payment; or (b) one full payment at a specified date within the
same calendar year of retirement.

A. Unused Sick Leave (for employees hired prior to July 1, 1975 only).
An employee hired prior to July 1, 1975, will be reimbursed for his or her unused
accumulated sick leave credit at his or her rate of pay at termination, in a lump

sum, subject to the following conditions:

1. Upon retirement or death, the employee is entitled to reimbursement for sick
leave at fifty percent (60%) of his or her rate of pay.

2. Upon termination, the employee is entitled to reimbursement for sick leave at
twenty-five percent (25%) of his or her rate of pay.

B. Unused sick leave is not paid if an employee is terminated for cause.

ARTICLE 20
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
A. Board of Directors.

POA Board of Directors may represent employees in the processing of grievances
subject to the rules and procedures outlined in Section B. Within thirty (80)
days of the effective date of this MOU, POA will furnish City with a written list
identifying by name and assigned work areas and including shift assignments
all members of the Board. The list will be kept current by POA.

B. Handling Grievances.

1. When an employee has a grievance, he or she may request that a Board
member, with permission of his or her supervisor, investigate the grievance
in his or her assigned work area and assist in its preparation and
presentation. If no Board member is assigned to the employee’s work area or

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 16
2.

if the Board member assigned to the employee’s work area is not available at
the time the grievant makes his or her request, another Board member may
investigate the grievance.

After notifying and receiving approval of the immediate supervisor, a Board
member will be allowed reasonable time off during working hours, without
loss of time or pay to investigate, to prepare and present the grievances. The
immediate supervisor will authorize the Board member to leave his or her
work assignment unless compelling circumstances require refusal of such
permission. In that case, the immediate supervisor will inform the Board
member of the reasons release time was denied and establish an alternate
time when the Board member can reasonably be expected to be released from
his or her work assignment.

When a Board member needs to contact an employee at his or her work
location, the Board member will first contact the immediate supervisor of
that employee, advise the supervisor of the nature of the business, and obtain
the permission of the supervisor to meet with the employee. The immediate
supervisor will make the employee available promptly unless compelling
circumstances prohibit the employee’s availability, in which case the
supervisor will notify the Board member when he or she can reasonably
expect to contact the employee.

A Board member's interview or discussions with an employee on City time
will be handled expeditiously.

The Department will provide POA prior notice before a Board member is
transferred or changed to a different work shift. The requirement of prior
notice to POA will not be construed as limiting City in its prerogatives to
transfer or change the work shift of a Board member.

C. Board of Directors Meetings.

Members of the Board will be permitted to attend, while on duty, meetings of the
Board of Directors.

ARTICLE 21
FORMAL REPRESENTATION

POA may select three (8) representatives to attend scheduled meetings with the
Management on subjects within the scope of representation during regular work
hours without loss of compensation, except for annual meet and confer sessions
concerning economic matters, when nine (9) POA representatives may be
released from the on-duty work schedules.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 17
1. In addition, POA may also select a representative to attend City Council,
Council Committees, Retirement Board, and Civil Service Commission
hearings during regular work hours, without loss of compensation, when
subjects within the scope of representation are being discussed.

2, Normally, requests for such release will be made of the Chief of Police or his
or her designee at least two (2) working days in advance of the meetings,
provided further that:

a. Names of all designated representatives will be given to the Chief of
Police or his or her designee at the time the request is made.

b. No representative will leave his or her duty station or assignment without
specific approval of the Chief of Police or his or her designee.

c. All meetings are subject to scheduling by City in a manner consistent with
the operating needs and work schedules.

B. POA maintains an Employee Representative Program. The purpose of the
program is to provide sworn employees with appropriate representation and
assistance during disciplinary actions and in matters which may lead to
discipline. The members of the program are personnel from throughout the
Department who have volunteered to serve, and have been trained in the duties
of employee representatives. Employee representatives may appear with
employees during:

1. Any investigatory, fact-finding, or appeal meeting which may result in
suspension (except emergency suspension), discharge, demotion, or
disciplinary transfer; or

2. The required discussion or the appeal of any document, including an Annual
Performance Evaluation that does not meet standards or is a Supplemental
Performance Report, written warning, or reprimand which may be made part
of the employee’s permanent record, and/or which may be used as a basis for
subsequent discipline.

Q

Employee representatives may also assist employees in preparing written
reports, including Department reports, where information contained in them
may be used as a basis for punitive or disciplinary action against an employee.
The Department and POA have agreed that the employee representatives will
notify their supervisors each time they are assigned a matter for representation.
Representatives are allowed two (2) hours of on-duty time to prepare for
participation in interviews, interrogations, and appeal hearings for each case to
which they are assigned. This preparation time is in addition to any on-duty
time actually spent in the interview, interrogation or appeal meeting. All
supervisors should note that the two-hour authorized preparation time is

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 18
Ss

provided to the employee representatives only, not to the employees being
represented.

The Department fully supports the Employee Representative Program.
Therefore, supervisors are encouraged to cooperate as much as possible with the
representatives in scheduling employee interviews, counseling sessions, and
hearings of any appeals of disciplinary actions. In addition, supervisors should
provide representatives with all the information the representatives request to
which they are entitled by law and by Department policy and procedure which
the representatives need to perform their duties. All information obtained by
the representatives during the course of their duties as representative will be
maintained in the strictest confidence. Because they are acting as agents of
POA’s attorneys while representing employees, the information gained by the
representatives is protected by the attorney/client privilege and its disclosure is
prohibited.

POA may designate up to forty (40) Employee Representatives and will provide
the Assistant Chief in charge of personnel service with a current list of
representatives.

Effective July 1, 2012, four (4) hours of release time, per quarter, is authorized.
for POA’s trustee representative for the purpose of attending San Diego
Employees Retiree Medical Trust board meetings. No overtime is authorized.
Additional release time may be granted subject to the approval of the Human
Resources Director.

ARTICLE 22
POA ACCESS

. Authorized POA representatives who are not City employees (such as business

agents or attorneys) will be granted access to work locations in which employees
covered by this MOU are employed, for the purpose of conducting grievance
investigations and observing working conditions.

. Authorized POA representatives seeking access to work locations will first

request access from the appropriate Department Management representative, at
which time the representative will inform the Department Management
representative of the purpose of the visit. The Department Management
representative may deny access to a work location if, in his or her judgment, it is
determined that a visit will unduly interfere with the operations of the
department or facility. In that event, the Department Management
representative will recommend an alternative time for the visit.

. Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this MOU, POA will provide

Department Management a written list of all authorized representatives. The

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 19
list will be kept current by POA. Access to work locations under this MOU will
be granted only to representatives on the current list.

D. Authorized POA representatives will be given access to non-security work
locations during working hours to conduct grievance investigations and to
observe working conditions on the condition that POA representatives will
comply with the regulations established in this Article, and POA representatives
will not interfere with work operations of any City department. Representatives
have the right to meet with employees during coffee, rest, or lunch breaks at
City facilities that may be available.

ARTICLE 23
OUT-OF-CLASS ASSIGNMENTS
A. Policy. The following applies to all out-of-class assignments:

1. The term “out-of-class assignment” (OCA) means the temporary transfer of
an employee to a vacant position or to a position where the incumbent of the
position is unable to perform the duties of the position because of absence or
disability. This OCA position must be officially allocated by the Civil Service
Commission to a class other than the one presently occupied by the employee.
The class may be at a higher, lower, or the same pay rate as the class the
employee presently occupies. However, the employee will continue to be paid
at his or her current pay rate.

2. Acceptable reasons for OCA are:

a. Non-availability of properly classified employees to fill a temporary
vacancy to which the regular incumbent is expected to return.

b. Assignment to light duty when required by City’s examining physician or
a doctor designated by the Workers’ Compensation unit.

ce. The temporary filling of a vacant position, for which there is no
permanent incumbent, pending certification of eligibles. For purposes of
this regulation, a vacancy will be deemed to exist upon reclassification of
an existing position.

d. The temporary filling of a vacant position for in-service training, or in
connection with a formalized training program for the purpose of
improving opportunities for promotion. Training assignments must be
approved by the Personnel Director regardless of duration. Appointments
made in accordance with City’s career advancement program, as outlined
in Personnel Manual Index Code D-3, are not OCA and are not eligible for
extra compensation.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 20

|

 
3.

An OCA may be made, if in the opinion of the Appointing Authority, such
action is necessary for the proper functioning of the Department. However,
after filling a vacancy by an OCA assignment, the Appointing Authority is
not required to fill the vacancy caused by such assignment.

a. Appointing Authorities may select any employee in non-represented
classes and in classifications in the Police, Administrative Support and
Field Service, Professional, Supervisory, and Technical representation
units to fill an OCA, using eligible lists, availability, training, seniority,
and other relevant factors as guidelines.

b. OCA will not exceed sixty (60) consecutive calendar days nor will a series
of OCA to any one vacant position exceed sixty (60) calendar days without
approval by the Personnel Director. OCA will not be made to avoid filling
a position with a limited or permanent appointment.

B. Eligibility For Additional Compensation.

1.

Employees will receive compensation for OCA to higher classes only when the
assignment has been continuous for thirty (80) days. Compensation begins
on the thirty-first (31st) continuous day and from that day forward. The first
(1s‘) through thirtieth (30th) days are paid at the employee’s regular rate of
pay.

Employees will be compensated for OCA at the rate of the higher paid class
after thirty (30) cumulative days. Compensation would begin on the thirty-
first (81st) day assigned. To calculate when this standard has been met for
employees on alternate work schedules, thirty (80) cumulative days is equal
to one hundred-seventy-six (176) regular (non-overtime) hours worked out-of-
class in a single classification. OCA will accrue on a fiscal year basis and will
not be carried forward into the next fiscal year, except in the circumstances
cited in City Memorandum entitled “Policy on Out-of-Class Assignments”
dated July 16, 1997.

C. Procedure.

1.

The Appointing Authority will forward Form CS-71 (Out-Of-Class
Assignment) to the Personnel Director, no later than the first day of each
OCA for which additional compensation will be paid.

The payroll procedure for determining an employee’s pay for an OCA will be
the same as that used when an employee is promoted to the same class from
an eligible list established by a promotional examination.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 21

 
ARTICLE 24
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

The purpose of this grievance procedure is to provide employees covered by this
MOU the broadest possible opportunity to resolve work-related problems through
an effective administrative procedure. POA and City recognize a mutual obligation
to faithfully uphold the spirit and purpose of the grievance procedure.

A. Definitions.

1. A grievance subject to this Grievance Procedure is any disagreement
concerning the interpretation or application of this MOU, including whether
a matter covered by Article 46 has been interpreted or applied against POA
or an employee in a manner violating that Article.

2. Actions which are covered in City Management Rights Article of this MOU
are not grievable, but this will not preclude employees or their
representatives from consulting with Management about the practical
consequences such actions may have on wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of employment. In addition, actions covered by another appeals
process as described in the Civil Service Rules, Personnel Manual, or this
MOU are not grievable and will not be processed through this Grievance
Procedure.

8. If the grievance system is abused by an unreasonable number of submittals
by one individual or group obviously designed to thwart orderly processing or
if the grievances are patently irrelevant, or incomprehensible, they will be
rejected as “nongrievable” and returned to the grievant.

4, Wherever applicable, the term “working days” means the actual work days of
the individual on whom the time limits are imposed.

B. Policy.

1. Employees have the right to use this Grievance Procedure without fear of
reprisal. No negative employment action will be taken against any employee
as a result of the use of this grievance procedure.

2. Employees may represent themselves or select whomever they wish to
represent them at any or all steps in the grievance procedure.

a. The employee has the right to the assistance of a POA representative in
the investigation, preparation, and presentation of a written grievance.

b. Employees may have no more than one City employee and one non-City
employee as representatives for grievance hearings.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 22

 
ec. Notwithstanding any other provision of this MOU, an employee may not
select a supervisor in the direct chain of command, as a representative,
except that a supervisor may select another supervisor as a
representative.

8. Grievances may be initiated by the employee, or by a formally recognized
employee organization, on the employee’s behalf or by the recognized
employee organization for this unit on its own behalf, on matters that directly
involve the interpretation or application of the specific terms or provisions of
this MOU. If an employee chooses to have representation on any formal
grievance concerning a matter that directly involves the interpretation or
application of the specific terms and provisions of this MOU, such
representation must come from POA.

4, The employee’s or employee organization’s first contact regarding job and
working conditions is with the immediate supervisor and supervisors will
attempt to settle grievances informally at this level.

5. A grievance will normally be presented and processed on City time, and a
grievant attending a grievance meeting on his or her own behalf on City time
will not lose pay. In scheduling the time, place, and duration of any
grievance meeting, the employee, a POA representative and Management
will give due consideration to all the participant’s responsibilities in the
essential operations of the Department. Management has the unequivocal
right to schedule hearings as convenient. Hearings may or may not be held
during an employee’s normal shift. No overtime pay will be given to the
grievant. Representatives, witnesses, or other participants will receive
overtime pay if ordered to be present by the Appointing Authority.

6. Waivers and Time Limits.

a. Failure by Management to reply to the employee’s grievance within the
time limits specified automatically processes the grievance to the next
level.

b. Any level of review, or any time limits established in this procedure, may
be waived or extended for good cause and only by mutual agreement
confirmed in writing.

c. If an employee fails to appeal from one level to the next level, within the
time limits established in this grievance procedure, the grievance will be
considered settled on the basis of the last decision and the grievance will
not be subject to further appeal or reconsideration.

d. By mutual agreement, the grievance may revert to a prior level for
reconsideration.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 23
e.

If a grievant fails to appear for a scheduled grievance meeting, such
failure without excuse approved by the Appointing Authority will entitle
Management to decide on the grievance without the presence of the
grievant, or to schedule another meeting at the level (in which case the
time requirements for hearing and decision are automatically waived).
Failure to appear at two (2) meetings on the same grievance without an
approved excuse automatically terminates the grievance and it is deemed
denied. The grievance will not be subject to further appeal or
reconsideration.

When a grievant is on approved leave the time limits established in this
procedure will be suspended for the period of the leave.

No grievance will be finally dismissed for an unexcused failure to appear
at a scheduled hearing unless the grievant had been given twenty-four
(24) hours notice of the hearing.

POA agrees to pursue all claims of violation of this MOU through the
Grievance Procedure. Resort to other remedies will not be pursued until
all steps of the grievance procedure have been exhausted. If POA
reasonably feels that an employee has suffered immediate and irreparable
harm, City and POA agree that POA may directly contact the Mayor or
his or her designee, the Human Resource Director, to seek a resolution
prior to pursuing remedies outside City. Contacting the Mayor or his or
her designee, the Human Resource Director, will be considered to exhaust
the Grievance Procedure in these cases.

C. Procedures.

1. General.

a.

Management of the Department has the responsibility to inform an
employee of any limitation of a given level of Management’s authority to
fully resolve the grievance. In this regard, Management will:

1) Supply the employee with the necessary information to process the
grievance to the proper agency or authority.

2) Advise an employee when any matter under submission is determined
by Management as not grievable according to the definitions in section
A above. The “grievance” paperwork submitted by the employee will
be returned to the employee along with a memorandum explaining
why the matter is not grievable and what alternative procedures, if
any, the employee may follow to process his or her grievance.

When a group of identical grievances develop, only one grievance form will
be submitted. The grievants may select not more than two (2)
spokespersons who thereafter will be their representative “grievants.”

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 24
e

The acceptance of a decision by the spokespersons at any step (or final
decision if the grievance moves to Step 5) will be binding on all parties.

A grievance will be recognized if it is brought to the attention of the
immediate supervisor either formally or informally within ten (10)
working days of the incident’s occurrence.

If the grievance is between the employee and his or her immediate
supervisor, or where an upper level supervisor has made a decision on the
subject of the dispute, Step 1 may be to the level above the level making
the decision. The upper level supervisor has the discretion to remand the
grievance to a lower level supervisor as Step 1. All remands will be in
writing.

To be recognized, a grievance must state the nature of the problem and
the remedy sought by the employee or POA. In the event that the
grievance is rejected for failure to clearly identify the problem or remedy,
it may be amended by the grievant or POA.

Members holding the rank of Police Captain will submit any grievance
directly to Step 3.

2. Steps.

a.

Cc

Step 1: At the employee’s or employee organization’s sole option,
grievances may be presented to the supervisor either orally or in writing.
If the grievance is presented orally, the procedure is informal and may be
settled by an oral answer given within five (5) working days. If the
grievance is presented in writing, the procedure is formal and the answer
must be given in writing within five (5) working days after submission.
The written grievance must be clearly and precisely detailed including the
specific grounds for the grievance, a listing of MOU articles allegedly
violated not the remedies sought. Grievances that fail to meet these
requirements will not be disqualified, but will be returned to the grievant
for compliance with the foregoing requirements. In such cases, the
written answer must be given within five (5) working days after
resubmission of the grievance.

Step 2: If the problem cannot be solved at Step 1, the employee or
employee organization may present the complaint in writing to the second
level supervisor Gf not done at Step 1) within five (5) working days.
Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of the grievance, a hearing will
be held and the Management representative will give a written decision to
the employee and POA representative.

Step 3: If the problem is not resolved at Step 2, the employee or
employee organization may submit the grievance to the division head

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 25
e.

within five (5) working days. Within ten (10) working days of the receipt
of the grievance, a hearing will be held and the division head will give
written decision to the employee or POA representative. In smaller
departments, this step is deleted.

Step 4: If the problem cannot be solved in Step 3, the employee or
employee organization may present the grievance to the Department
Head within five (5) working days. Within ten (10) working days of the
receipt of the grievance, a hearing will be held and the Department Head
or his or her designee will give a written decision to the employee or POA
representative. In non-managerial departments this will constitute the
final resolution of a grievance involving management policy or
regulations.

Step 5: Final Resolution of Grievance: If the grievance is still in dispute
after Step 4, the employee or employee organization may request a further
hearing, which at the discretion of the Management Team will take place
before the Civil Service Commission, on matters over which the
Commission has authority, or before the Mayor or his or her designee, by
submitting the grievance within five (5) working days. (If it is determined
that the hearing should be held before the Civil Service Commission, a
fact-finding hearing to define the issues in the grievance will be held by
the Personnel Director with the employee and/or employee organization,
prior to the date set for the Commission hearing. The grievance may be
settled during such fact-finding hearing, if a mutually acceptable solution
is developed.) The decision of the Commission will be issued at its next
regularly scheduled meeting following the hearing by the Personnel
Director. In grievances answered by the Mayor or his or her designee, a
hearing will be held and a written response given within thirty (30) days
from the date of receipt of the appeal from Step 4. If the Mayor's office
does not render a decision within forty five (45) days, and if there is no
waiver of the time limits, the grievance will precede to Step 6. The
employee or employee organization may only request a hearing before the
Civil Service Commission in matters solely involving Civil Service Rules
or the Personnel Manual.

Step 6: Grievances arising out of the disagreement on interpretation or
application of this MOU will follow City-wide grievance procedure. POA
may formally request to continue the grievance, not later than ten (10)
days following receipt of the answer at the final step of the grievance
procedure (provided it was heard by the Mayor or his or her designee), by
serving written notice upon the Management Team. The Management
Team will refer the grievance to City Council for hearing and decision.
City council will have six months from the date that POA serves written
notice on the Management Team of its desire to have the grievance heard
before City Council within which to calendar the grievance for hearing. If

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 26
City Council does not calendar the matter for consideration within the six |
(6) month period, then the grievance will be considered granted. j

ARTICLE 25
SALARIES

 

A. From Fiscal Year 2016 through Fiscal Year 2018, consistent with San
Diego Charter section 70.2, no base compensation, defined as base salary or
wages paid on a regular bi-weekly basis for services performed, for any
classification will be increased to an amount higher than the base
compensation for that classification set forth in the 2011 Fiscal Year Salary
Ordinance (San Diego Ordinance No. O-19952, adopted on May 4, 2010). i
Exhibits A and B to the 2011 Fiscal Year Salary Ordinance, which are both
related to the base salaries for the Classified Service, are attached to this
MOU and incorporated into this MOU. Exhibit A sets forth the base salaries
for the Classified Service. Exhibit B sets forth the Classified Service Classes
and Standard Rates. The parties agree that there will be no increases to the
base salaries for the classifications set forth in Exhibit A and B during the
term of this MOU. The parties further agree that the creation of any new
classifications during the term of this MOU must be consistent with San
Diego Charter section 70.2(c). For reference, Exhibit C to the 2011 Fiscal
Year Salary Ordinance, related to Classifications and Standard Salary Rates
for the Unclassified Service, is also attached to this MOU.

Further, during this period, no new compensation will be added to the
2011 Fiscal Year Earnings Code Document, Exhibit A, which sets forth Wage
Types Included in the Pensionable Wage Base.

Notwithstanding these agreements, the parties acknowledge that individual
employees may receive promotions during the period from Fiscal Year 2016
through Fiscal Year 2018 under the authority of San Diego Charter section
124 and all applicable Civil Service Rules, Personnel Regulations, and other
provisions. Further, the parties acknowledge that individual employees may
receive an increase in pensionable compensation, within the limits set forth
in Exhibit A or Exhibit C to the Fiscal Year 2011 Salary Ordinance, under
the authority of San Diego Charter sections 130 and all applicable Civil
Service Rules, Personnel Regulations, and other applicable provisions.

B. Effective the first full pay period following July 1, 2018, there will be
a general salary increase of 3.3% for all employees covered by this
MOU. The Fiscal Year 2019 salary tables for the classifications
covered by this MOU will be modified to reflect this increase.

C. Effective the first full pay period following July 1, 2019, there will be
a general salary increase of 3.3% for all employees covered by this

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 27
MOU. The Fiscal Year 2020 salary tables for the classifications
covered by this MOU will be modified to reflect this increase.

D. In the salary schedules for new employees, B step will be eliminated for new
hires beginning July 1, 1994. Employees hired on or after July 1, 1994, will
move from “A” step to “C” step after one (1) year for initial appointments as
well as subsequent promotions, transfers, or other appointments. This
represents an increase of approximately ten percent (10%). Current
employees will continue with the present five step salary schedule.

E. FLSA Exempt Classes — Pursuant to the provisions of the FLSA the
classification of Police Lieutenant and Police Captain are ineligible for

premium overtime and will not be subject to the overtime provisions of this
MOU.

ARTICLE 26
UNIFORMS AND SAFETY EQUIPMENT

A. Department Issued Equipment.

1. City will issue to each sworn officer:
a. Handgun and Ammunition;
b. Safety Helmet and Face Shield;
ce. Baton and Baton Holder;
d. Badge;

e. Protective Vest and Cover;

m

Mace and Mace Holder;
Flashlight;

PR

. Department Identification Card;

ms

Name Tag;

Whistle;

~

k. Raincoat and Rain Boots; and

1. Handcuffs and Case.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 28

 
B. Police Officer’s Uniform and Equipment. !

1. Initial Requirement.

 

a. Each Employee in this bargaining unit will be required to obtain and |
maintain, in a manner acceptable to City, the following items:

1) Pants; i
2) Tie:
8) Belt;

4) Shirt, Short or Long Sleeve;

5) Belt and Holster;

6) Ammunition Pouch or Speed-loaders and Pouch; and

7) Pistol Belt Keepers (4).

b. Effective Fiscal Year 2016, City will provide Police Recruits an
equipment allowance of $1,000 upon entry into the Academy and
$1,500 upon successful graduation from the academy so long as
the recruit is still employed by the City. These amounts are not
included in “Base Compensation” under the SDCERS Plan.

2. Maintenance and Upkeep.

a. City will also pay those sworn members of the Department who have
completed twelve (12) months as a Police Officer I as of September 1, and
who are available for duty assignments on September 1, the sum of
$900.00 for the maintenance and replacement of the uniforms and
equipment described in Paragraph B.1. Sworn officers of the Department
who have completed twelve (12) months as a Police Officer I as of
September 1, but who are on leaves of absence, including injury leave, will
be eligible for this payment upon their return to duty. Police Officers who
complete twelve (12) months as a Police Officer I after September 1, will
receive the sum of $900.00 as of the day they complete twelve (12) months
as a Police Officer I. No sworn member will receive more than $900.00
during the fiscal year for “maintenance and upkeep” of the uniforms and
equipment described in Paragraph B.1., except as provided in
Paragraph b., below.

b. Effective Fiscal Year 2016, employees covered by this MOU with
eight (8) or more years of service as a sworn police officer as of
August 15, will receive an additional uniform/equipment/cleaning

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 29
allowance of $2,100, prior to the first full pay period in September
of 2015.

1) For laterals, years of service includes continuous time served
as a sworn police officer at another law enforcement agency
and/or the City. The Parties may discuss the qualifications to
be considered a sworn police officer at the POA Labor
Management Committee.

2) For employees covered by this MOU who were Police Recruits
for the City, years of service includes the time served as a
Police Recruit.

8) Twice a year, the City will review an employee’s years of
service to determine eligibility for this allowance. The City
will determine an employee’s eligibility based on an
employee’s years of service as of August 15 and March 15. If
an employee is first eligible as of August 15, the City will pay
the annual allowance in the first full pay period in September.
If an employee is eligible as of March 15, the City will pay the
annual allowance in the first full pay period in April. An
employee covered by this MOU will receive this allowance
only once per calendar year.

4) These amounts are not included in “Base Compensation”
under the SDCERS Plan.

 

 

8. In addition to the uniform and equipment allowance set out in B.2, officers
assigned to Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) duty will receive the sum of
$400.00 for the reimbursement of the initial purchase of uniforms and
equipment so authorized by the Department upon assignment. City will also
pay those sworn officers assigned to SWAT duty the sum of $300.00 on the
regular paycheck on or before September 1, for the maintenance and
replacement of their uniforms and equipment. Employees receiving the
initial reimbursement will not receive the maintenance allowance in the
same fiscal year.

 

 

4, In addition to the uniform and equipment allowance set out in B.2, officers
assigned to the Harbor Patrol and permanent members of the Beach
Enforcement Team will receive reimbursement of $350.00 for the initial
purchase of uniforms and equipment authorized by the Department upon
assignment. City will also pay sworn officers assigned to the Harbor Patrol
and permanent members of the Beach Enforcement Team the sum of $150.00
on the regular paycheck on or before September 1, for the maintenance and
replacement of their equipment. Employees receiving the initial
reimbursement will not receive the maintenance allowance in the same year.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 30
5. In addition to the uniform and equipment allowance set out in B.2, officers
assigned to the Canine Unit will receive reimbursement of $350.00 for the
initial purchase of uniforms and equipment authorized by the Department
upon assignment to the unit. Members of the Canine Unit will also receive
an additional $300.00 on the regular paycheck on or before September 1, for
the replacement and maintenance of their uniforms.

6. In addition to the uniform and equipment allowance set out in B.2, members
of the Bike Patrol will receive $200.00 reimbursement for the initial purchase
of uniform and equipment. Officers who have already received this
reimbursement are not eligible for an additional reimbursement. City will
also pay those sworn officers permanently assigned to the dedicated Bike
Patrol Unit on September 1, the sum of $150.00 for the maintenance and
replacement of said equipment.

7. Core Instructors assigned to the Regional Academy, as determined by the
Chief of Police, will receive an additional initial uniform allowance of
$200.00, and an additional $100.00 on or before September 1, for the
replacement and maintenance of their uniforms. This allowance is in
addition to the uniform and equipment allowance set out in B.2.

8. In addition to the uniform allowance and equipment allowance set out in B.2,
any sworn officer appointed to the Color Guard Team will be compensated
$800.00 for the initial purchase of the necessary Color Guard uniform items.

9. In addition to the initial $800.00 uniform allowance, all members of the Color
Guard Team in good standing will receive a $200.00 annual uniform
maintenance fee in addition to the annual Department Uniform
reimbursement each September. However, no Color Guard member will
receive the $200.00 uniform maintenance within twelve (12) months of
receiving the initial $800.00 uniform compensation.

C. Motorcycle Officers.

8. Each sworn officer of the Department who is assigned to the motorcycle
squad will buy and use the following items:

a. Motorcycle boots;

b. Motorcycle breeches;
c. Gloves — riding;

d. Gloves — gauntlet;

e. Leather jacket;

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 31
f. Safety glasses — clear; and
g. Safety glasses — sun.
4. City will issue to each sworn officer assigned to the motorcycle squad:

a. Department of Transportation approved safety helmet every two (2) years
or sooner should there be a defect or damage to the helmet.

b. City will issue to each motor officer, on an as needed basis, the following
equipment:

1) Protective Gloves;
2) Protective Goggles; and
8) Face/Dust mask.

c. Each officer issued equipment in accordance with paragraphs a and b, will
be responsible for that equipment and will surrender such equipment to
City upon demand.

5. On September 1 of each year, City will pay sworn officers of the Department
who are assigned to the motorcycle squad $425.00 for the maintenance and
replacement of the equipment described in Paragraph 1.

6. Upon initial assignment to the motorcycle squad, each officer will receive
$750.00 for the initial purchase of equipment described in Paragraph 1.
Employees receiving this initial reimbursement will not receive the benefits
in C.8. in the same fiscal year.

D. Administration.

8. Sworn officers reporting for duty are expected to have uniforms and
equipment as described in Sections A, B, and C (Section C applies only to
sworn officers assigned to the motorcycle squad). Failure to have and use any
of these items may result in discipline of the employee.

4, POA agrees that City has discharged City’s obligation pursuant to California
Labor Code section 6401 to provide the safety equipment for police officers as
set forth in California Government Code section 50081.1.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 32
E. The Parties to this MOU agree that if, during the term of this MOU, a change is
proposed in the basic uniform, the Parties will meet and confer on the effects of
such a change.

ARTICLE 27
PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS

The following information is provided as a resource summarizing elements of Civil
Service Rule X, Leaves of Absence:

A. Section 3(4). ANNUAL LEAVE — WORKERS’ COMPENSATION: Those
employees who are absent from duty because of a temporary disability which is
defined as industrial under the Workers’ Compensation Act, but who are not
granted industrial leave may use annual leave credits; provided, however, that
any such employee who receives a temporary disability allowance, as provided
by the Workers’ Compensation Law, must reimburse City Auditor and
Comptroller in the amount of the authorized compensation, in which case, only
that amount of the employee’s accumulated annual leave credits as when added
to said disability allowance will result in a payment of not more than the
employee’s full salary or wages shall be charged against said accumulated
annual leave credits.

B. Section 4. SICK AND EMERGENCY LEAVES:

(1) SICK LEAVE INTENT, DEFINITION, PROVISIONS: The intent of this
section is to allow continued use of sick leave credits accrued prior to September
4, 1981, for those employees who are unable on account of illness or injury to
perform the duties of their positions or who would expose fellow workers or the
public to contagious disease and are thereby forced to be absent from
employment, and to provide necessary time off from work for medical and dental
care, subject to administrative regulations designed to prevent malingering or
abuse of these privileges.

a. SICK LEAVE DEFINITION: Sick leave is defined as the necessary
absence from duty of an employee on account of illness, injury, or exposure
to contagious disease suffered by the employee, or the serious disability of
the employee while on a scheduled leave, or absence authorized for
medical or dental care.

b. SICK LEAVE — WORKERS’ COMPENSATION: Those employees who are
absent from duty because of a temporary disability which is defined as
industrial under the Workers Compensation Act, but who are not granted
industrial leave may use sick leave credit; provided, however, that any
such employee who receives a temporary disability allowance, as provided
under the Workers’ Compensation Law, must reimburse City Auditor and
Comptroller in the amount of the authorized compensation; in which case,

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 33
only that amount of the employee’s accumulated sick leave credits as
when added to said disability allowance will result in a payment of not
more than the employee’s full salary or wages will be charged against said
accumulated sick leave credits.

(2) EMERGENCY LEAVE: INTENT, DEFINITION, PROVISIONS: The intent
of this Section is to allow continued use on a limited basis, of sick leave credits
accrued prior to September 4, 1981, by an employee who is confronted with
serious emergency illness, injury, or death in the employee’s immediate family.

a. Emergency leave is defined as the necessary absence from duty of an
employee because of emergency illness of a member of the employee’s
immediate family requiring the attendance of the employee upon said
member until professional or other attendance can be obtained, or the
absence from duty of an employee because of the death of an immediate
family member.

b. An eligible employee may be granted emergency leave with pay
chargeable to accumulated sick leave credits not to exceed a total of five
(5) workdays for each instance of emergency illness or death in the
employee’s immediate family. In the case of illness followed by death, an
employee may be granted a maximum of ten (10) consecutive workdays of
emergency leave chargeable to sick leave credits.

C. Section 7. MILITARY LEAVE:

1. In addition to the leaves of absence provided in this rule, City officers or
employees who are also members of the armed services or militia or
organized reserves of this State or Nation, will be entitled to the leaves of
absence and the employment rights and privileges provided by the Title 38,
United States Code (USC) Employment and Reemployment Rights of
Members of the Uniformed Services, Uniformed Services Employment and
Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) of 1994, and the Military and Veterans’
Code of the State of California (unless superseded by United States Code).
Military service is defined in Title 38, USC section 4308 (18).

2. City officers or employees who have had not less than one (1) year of regular
City employment immediately prior to the beginning of requested military
leave, will receive their regular City compensation during the military leave,
not to exceed a period of thirty (30) calendar days in any fiscal year. City and
POA will provide flexibility in the interpretation of Military Compensation
for any employee who is on temporary military leave of absence and who has
been in the service of the public agency from which the leave is taken for a
period of not less than one (1) year immediately prior to the day upon which
the leave begins, will be entitled to receive his or her salary or compensation
as such public employee for the first thirty (80) calendar days or one hundred.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 34
seventy four (174) hours of any such absence. Pay for such purposes will not
exceed thirty (80) days or one hundred seventy four (174) hours in any one
fiscal year. For the purposes of this section, in determining the one year of
public agency service, all service of said public employee in the recognized
military service will be counted as public agency service. No policies
governing Military Leave (Personnel Manual Index Code I-10) will be
changed to accommodate for this salary flexibility. Military leave hours will
accrue on a fiscal year basis and will not carry forward into the next fiscal
year.

8. With reasonable notification to their supervisor no less than twenty-one (21)
days prior to the start of their military obligation, unless exceptional
circumstances beyond the control of the employee and originating from the
employee's military unit, City officers or employees have the option to use
military leave, annual leave, compensatory time, or special leave without pay
for this leave, or at management's discretion to request that their schedule be
adjusted. The Department will take all reasonable steps necessary to ensure
that an officer’s or employee’s schedule is adjusted to facilitate such leave.

4. Prior to using of military leave, the employee will submit Form CS-14-25A
(Request for Leave of Absence) showing Military Leave.

D. Section 8. COMPULSORY LEAVE: If, in the opinion of the department head, an
employee is incapacitated for work on account of illness or injury, such employee
may be required, for a period not to exceed two (2) workdays, to absent himself
from duty. If said incapacity may reasonably be expected to extend beyond two
(2) workdays, the department head shall require the employee to undergo an
examination by a physician designated or approved by the Commission. If the
report of the physician shows the employee to be in an unfit condition to work,
the appointing authority shall have the right, subject to Commission approval, to
compel such employee to take sufficient leave of absence, not to exceed one (1)
year of leave without pay, so as to become fit for the proper performance of
assigned duties.

=

Section 9. SPECIAL LEAVE WITHOUT PAY: An employee whose work record
has been satisfactory and who, for any reason considered good by the appointing
authority and the Commission, desires to secure leave from regular duties, may
be granted special leave of absence without pay for a period not exceeding one (1)
year. For good cause, such leave may be extended, upon approval of the
appointing authority and the Commission. When such leave is granted to enable
an employee to take a position in the Unclassified Service, the Commission may,
upon request, grant a leave of absence for the period of actual service of the
employee in such Unclassified position. An employee asking for special leave
without pay, shall submit a request on prescribed forms with a transmittal
letter, stating the reasons for the request. The Appointing Authority who

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 35
endorses such request shall recommend and the Commission shall determine
whether the employee shall be entitled to the same position upon return from
such leave or whether the employee’s name shall be placed on the eligible list for
the class or classes as determined by the Commission. If appropriate, the
employee’s return shall be subject to passing the prescribed City medical
examination.

. Section 10. COURT LEAVE: An employee, other than one paid on an hourly
basis, who is required by court order to serve as a juror, or as a witness who is
not a party to a court action, shall be granted leave for such purpose upon
presentation of proof of the period of his required attendance to the appointing
authority and the Personnel Director. The employee shall receive full pay for
the time he serves on court duty. Request for such leave shall be made upon
leave of absence forms.

. Section 11. SPECIAL MEETINGS: Officers and employees may be granted
special permission, without loss of pay, to attend professional or technical
institutes or conferences, or other meetings as may contribute to the
effectiveness of their service to City. Such special permission is subject to the
approval of the appointing authority or City Council, whichever is applicable.
Evidence of such special permission to attend said conferences or meetings shall
be furnished promptly by the department head to the Personnel Director.
Officers and employees granted said special permission shall be considered to be
in duty status.

ARTICLE 28
FIELD TRAINING OFFICER PAY

. City agrees to continue a program which will provide extra compensation for
employees whose job assignment involves full-time Field Training Officer (FTO)
duties (including Sergeants), as defined by the Chief of Police or his or her
designee, relative to the Police Academy trainees. Participants in this program
will receive five percent (5%) of the employee’s base rate while designated in a
FTO capacity.

. The Department agrees to maintain at least one hundred (100) FTOs and the
number of FTOs beyond one hundred (100) will be determined at the discretion
of the Chief of Police. In determining the total number of FTO Sergeants, the
Department will generally use the formula of one (1) FTO Sergeant per watch
per service area.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 36
ARTICLE 29
CALL-BACK PAY

A. An employee who has been released from work and has left the workplace will,
if called back to duty from home or any other non-work location, be paid for the
reasonable estimate of the time required to travel from and to his or her
residence and the workplace and for the time actually worked. The total time of
call-back pay, including travel time, will not be less than four (4) hours.

B. This provision does not apply to instances when an employee is already present
at the workplace and is required by a supervisor to start work early or to
continue work following the end of shift. This provision also does not apply to a
meeting scheduled after the employee’s shift, and which is contiguous with the
shift. In those instances, the employee will receive compensation only for the
time actually worked or spent in the meeting after his or her shift.

ARTICLE 30
COURT PAY

Employees eligible for premium overtime that are required, as a result of their
employment responsibilities, to make court appearances during otherwise off-duty
hours, will be treated as follows:

A. The employee will receive compensation at premium overtime of his or her
regular base rate for all time actually spent in court (minimum of four (4) hours),
excluding court recess time.

B. If an employee is scheduled to appear in court up to two (2) hours prior to the
beginning of his or her shift, the employee’s schedule may be adjusted to
correspond with the court appearance. The intent of this change is to align the
beginning of the shift with court appearances and minimize the incidence of
court pay for hours not actually spent on court duty. If an employee is ordered
by his or her immediate supervisor, duty lieutenant or Communications to work
beyond the regular number of hours per day on the adjusted shift, the four-hour
(4) minimum applies, plus relevant overtime for the shift extension. The four-
hour (4) minimum does not apply in situations in which an employee was
directed to work beyond the adjusted shift as a result of a self-initiated action,
i.e. a vehicle or person stopped and detained, an arrest, etc.

C. Eligibility restrictions described in Section B also applies to the minimum
requirements described in Section A above.

D. If the employee makes a court appearance during the morning session and at
least part of the afternoon session, after he or she has just completed working a
night shift, and if the employee is scheduled to work the next succeeding night

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 37

 

 
shift, the employee will have the option of receiving premium overtime for the
actual court appearance time or having the succeeding scheduled night shift off
as compensatory time. If an employee is scheduled off on his or her next shift
following a court appearance, he or she may not exercise the second option.

E. Compensatory overtime will begin at the time indicated on the subpoena unless
the officer is otherwise notified by a superior.

ARTICLE 31
STAND-BY COMPENSATION

A. Court Stand-By.

When an employee is under subpoena to appear in court during his or her non-
duty hours, the employee will go to the court and stand by until called by the
court and will receive pay at a premium rate of one and one-half times the basic
rate for stand-by time, or, with the concurrence of the subpoenaing party,
remain standing by at another location where he or she may be reached by the
court by telephone. If an employee stands by at another location, no pay will be
received for such stand-by time. No employee will be required to stand-by
without compensation without his or her consent.

B. Non-Court Stand-by.

In order to ensure operational effectiveness, the Department may require or
request its employees to be available to return to work during the off-duty hours.
When this condition occurs, the employee is deemed to be on stand-by. When
employees are on stand-by, they must be available by telephone or other
electronic communication device and able to return to duty within one (1) hour of
receiving a request to do so. The determination for the need to place an officer
on stand-by-time is at the sole discretion of the Department.

C. Employees who are required or agree to be on stand-by will be compensated as
follows:

1. For every three hundred (300) hours of stand-by time accrued, employees will
be awarded one (1) day of discretionary leave time.

2. Employees may accrue up to ten (10) days of discretionary leave per fiscal
year (July 1 — June 30).

8. All discretionary days accrued must be taken within six (6) months of the

date they were approved. The employee’s commanding officer can extend the
six (6) month deadline at his or her discretion.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 38

 
4, If an employee has not already accrued the maximum ten (10) discretionary |
days by the end of the fiscal year, any remaining discretionary hours, up to
three-hundred (800), may be carried forward into the next fiscal year. |

 

5. Employees who are required or agree to be on stand-by on their scheduled
day off will accrue up to twenty-four (24) hours on stand-by time. i

6. Employees who are required or agree to be on stand-by during their ;
scheduled workday may accrue up to fourteen (14) hours of stand-by time i
during the time they are not working.

ARTICLE 382
OVERTIME

It is agreed that premium compensation at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) times
the base rate will be paid to employees in the classifications of Police Recruit, Police
Officer I, Police Officer II, Police Officer III, Police Agent, Police Detective, and
Police Sergeant, under the following conditions:

A. When an employee is called back to work from a non-duty status, he or she will
receive premium pay for all such call-back time worked, with a four (4) hour
minimum of compensation in each such instance, notwithstanding the usual
starting time of the work shift.

1. An employee’s “work shift” refers to the hours of work of the employee’s
normally scheduled work day. The work shift may be permanently adjusted if
the employee is given at least seventy-two (72) hours notice of the change. If
seventy-two (72) hours notice of the change is given, paying premium pay as
described above is not required, provided that the employee does not work a
total number of hours greater than his or her normally scheduled hours. An
employee’s days off cannot be changed solely to avoid paying overtime.
Department Management may, by providing at least five (5) calendar days
notice to an affected employee, change an employee’s permanent days off.
When unforeseen special events or emergencies arise necessitating that an
employee be required to work on his or her scheduled days off, he or she will
be paid overtime, or, at his or her election, be assigned other days off as a
substitution. As a general policy, officers will not be required to work more
than seven (7) consecutive days unless it is an emergency. “Special Events”
or “Emergencies” will be defined as unforeseen crime problems, natural or
man-made disasters, special events of which the Department had little or no
knowledge, e.g., presidential visits, and events requiring unusually large
numbers of personnel.

 

 

 

 

2. Notwithstanding the terms of the FLSA, an employee’s hours and/or days off
may be changed on a temporary basis with or without seventy-two (72) hours
or five (5) calendar days notice, when the employee voluntarily waives those

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 39
requirements. “Voluntary” is defined as acting freely without any coercion,
stated, or implied. (Department Management may request that the employee
sign a form denoting such schedule alternations).

8. The terms “permanent” or “permanently” means a change no more than once
within the span of a shift.

B. When an employee is required under subpoena to appear in court during non-
duty hours, he or she will receive premium pay for court time with a four (4)
hour minimum of compensation in each such instance. Employees will not
receive a second four (4) hour minimum of premium pay for subpoenas requiring
appearances within four (4) hours of a first subpoena appearance time (e.g., a
10:30 a.m. subpoena following an 8:15 a.m. subpoena on the same date). Only
actual time above the first four (4) hour minimum will be compensated with
premium pay in such cases. However, pursuant to Article 30.B, an employee’s
schedule may be adjusted to correspond to a court appearance, eliminating the
need for overtime pay. When an employee is directed to telephone a specific
court or agency at a designated time during non-duty hours for the purpose of a
telephonic hearing, and he or she does not have to place the call from a
designated location, he or she will receive premium pay for such time with a
thirty (30) minute minimum of compensation for each instance.

2

Eligibility restrictions described in Article 29.B, will also apply to the minimum
requirements described in above sections 1 and 2.

D. When an employee’s shift is extended beyond its normal ending time, he or she
will receive premium pay for the actual time worked beyond the employee’s
regular shift hours.

=

If an employee is scheduled to work or directed by the Department to work on a
fixed City holiday, he or she will receive pay at time and one half for the
actual time worked on the holiday and will also receive ten (10) hours of
straight time pay for the holiday. An employee that observes the City holiday
will receive straight time pay equal to his or her normal assigned shift. If they
are called back to work on that City holiday they will receive time and one half
pay for time worked with a four (4) hour minimum.

F. For all overtime earned, all employees of the bargaining unit will receive either
compensatory time off or pay, at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police may, at any time, determine that all overtime will be pay only.
However, all previously accrued compensatory time must be honored under the
terms of this MOU. Employees will not receive compensatory time off where the
Department is reimbursed by another governmental agency for overtime worked
by employees.

G. The Parties agree that overtime worked may be paid for by City as compensatory
time off at the rate of time and one half for each hour worked. Compensatory

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 40
time earned and accrued through overtime work will be banked in a leave bank
of up to a maximum of eighty (80) hours. This leave bank will carry over to the
next fiscal year, but will not exceed eighty (80) hours total.

H. Use of Compensatory Time.

The following terms will control compensatory time off:

1. Compensatory time off request will be honored if the request for
compensatory time off is made seven (7) calendar days or more prior to the
day requested for leave.

2. Requests for use of compensatory time off to be used the day before the
following Holidays: New Years Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, and Christmas Day will be honored if the request is made thirty (80)
calendar days or more prior to the day requested for leave.

8. The Parties agree to meet when circumstance arise that create safety
concerns regarding staffing levels resulting from compensatory time off
requests during special events or circumstances, and to resolve the safety
concern by an appropriate agreement.

I. Motor Unit and Canine Unit.

City agrees to provide employees assigned to the Canine Unit three point five
(3.5) additional hours of compensation each forty hour (40) work week at
premium rate overtime for time spent cleaning, preparing, and maintaining their
equipment. City agrees that employees assigned to the Motors Unit will be
released from work for two (2) hours during their scheduled shift each week for
cleaning, preparing, and maintaining their equipment. This time will be
scheduled on a day that is conducive to the employee’s schedule. The Parties
agree that this is a reasonable amount of time for such activities. If an employee,
due to extraordinary circumstances, spends more than the agreed to time on
these activities, an employee assigned to the Canine Unit may request additional
overtime and an employee assigned to the Motor Unit may request to be released
for additional time during their scheduled shift. This must be pre-approved.
Captains and Lieutenants are ineligible to receive the Motor Unit and Canine
Unit pays described above.

ARTICLE 33
WORK SCHEDULES

Effective July 1, 2008, the 4/10 plan will be applied to all sworn positions below the
rank of Captain. The 4/10 plan includes a thirty-minute (30) paid lunch break.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 41

 
A. All officers on a 4/10 work schedule will report to work at the scheduled start
of their assigned shift. Officers who are scheduled to work at the hour
daylight savings time either begins or ends will not have their hours adjusted
to avoid working overtime. Officers will report at their scheduled time and
work a regular, full ten-hour (10) shift.

B. All officers may receive thirty (80) minutes during their assigned shift as a
meal break during which time they may report as Code 7. This period is
unpaid.

Cc. An officer’s conduct while on Code 7 for a meal break is governed by
Department Instruction 6.32.

D. ‘During this thirty-minute (30) break, officers will be available to respond to
emergency calls.

E. If an officer's break is interrupted by an emergency call, the break will be
resumed after the call is completed.

F. If an officer is unable to take a total of thirty (30) minutes for a meal break
during his or her assigned shift, the officer will be paid premium rate
overtime for this thirty (80) minute period. This request for overtime will be
submitted through the normal procedures.

ARTICLE 34
STARTING SALARY

The Parties incorporate Personnel Manual Index Code H-9, Starting Salary Upon
Appointment, in this MOU, except that employees promoted from the class of Police
Officer I to Police Officer II will receive at least the base salary of “C” step of the
Police Officer II class.

ARTICLE 35
POA REPRESENTATION

Department Management will support a request to the Civil Service Commission for
a Leave of Absence Without Pay for two (2) POA members for the same period of
time, unless there is compelling reason to not support a “job to be saved” type leave.
In the latter case, City will meet and confer with POA in advance of any objection to
the leave without pay request.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 42
ARTICLE 36
PAYROLL ELECTRONIC DEPOSIT

All employees will be required to provide authorization to City Comptroller to
electronically deposit their paychecks to a financial institution of their choice
(subject to electronic compatibility). Employees will not be required to change
financial institutions if their financial institution is not compatible with the
Automated Clearing House (ACH) transfer.

ARTICLE 37
EMPLOYEE REPRESENTATION

A. An employee may request a representative, not to exceed one (1) City employee
and one non-City employee, to be present: (1) at any investigatory or fact-finding
meeting which may result in suspension, discharge, demotion, or transfer for
purposes of punishment, except in cases requiring immediate removal or
suspension as defined in Civil Service Rule XI, sections 4 and 6, and Personnel
Manual Index Code L-2 II.(C); (2) an employee may also request representation.
during the required discussion of any document, including a Supplemental
Performance Report or written reprimand, which is to be made part of the
employee’s permanent record and which may be used as a basis for subsequent
discipline with the following provisions:

1. An employee cannot select a “City employee representative” who is subject to
the same investigation or fact-finding, including any employee who is a
witness to the event which is the subject of the investigation or fact-finding.

2. An employee may not select an employee who is in the employee’s direct
chain of command as his or her “City employee representative.”

B. In all other instances, Department Management has the right to counsel
employees as it deems appropriate without employee representation being
present.

C. This Article is to be interpreted consistent with the Public Safety Officers
Procedural Bill of Rights (California Government Code sections 3300, et seq.)
(POBOR).

D. An officer subject to interrogation by a single Departmental representative may
have a sole representative. If the interrogation is conducted by more than one
(1) Departmental representative, an officer may be represented as provided for
in Paragraph A.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 43
ARTICLE 38
DEPARTMENTAL PROCEDURES — ADVANCE NOTICE

The Department may, in its discretion issue Departmental Procedures in writing
which pertain to matters not within the scope of representation. In order to
promote communications between the Department and POA, the Department
agrees to direct a copy of proposed written Departmental Procedures to POA prior
to official publication of the Procedures. Nothing in this Article is intended to
require or obligate, directly or indirectly, the Department to meet and confer on any
subject contained as proposed Departmental Procedures which is not within the
scope of representation. The purpose of this Article is to enable POA to review any
proposed written Departmental Procedure in advance of publication and provide
comments as may be appropriate. Nothing in this Article limits or otherwise
restricts the Department from immediately publishing departmental procedures
which in the determination of the Department are of an emergency nature.

ARTICLE 39
TUITION REFUND PLAN

A. Purpose.

1. To encourage and financially assist employees to continue their education so
they may improve their job knowledge, skills, and capabilities in their
present job and to prepare for advancement within City employment.

2. To assist City, through employee development, in achieving maximum use of
human resources in attaining Departmental objectives including Equal
Opportunity goals.

B. Eligibility Rules.

1. Eligible employees will be reimbursed one hundred percent (100%) of tuition
and fees for textbooks and supplies under certain conditions, up to a limit of
$1,000.00 per fiscal year. Reimbursement will be made for professional and
technical courses offered by accredited colleges, universities, business, trade
or correspondence schools, as part of an educational plan which has been
approved by the Chief of Police or his or her designee.

a. Taxation of reimbursements will be made based on IRS regulations.

b. City Comptroller will be responsible for determining which
reimbursements are taxable income in accordance with IRS regulations.

2. Tuition Reimbursement is an employee benefit, whereas attendance at
training is available at Department Management’s discretion. Tuition
Reimbursement will not be available for related employee travel expenses.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 44

 

i
I
i
|

 
Tuition Reimbursement course attendance must occur on the employee’s
personal time, not on City time. Travel costs are potentially reimbursable
when related to attendance at training. Training may be attended on City
time.

8. One day seminars are considered training and are ineligible for Tuition
Reimbursement. A semester course can be paid for by Tuition
Reimbursement.

4, Conditions under which reimbursement may be approved are as follows:

a. The course work must relate to the applicant’s present position or must be
beneficial to the employee’s City related professional development, or
must enhance career advancement potential within City, as follows:

1) An improvement in skills or knowledge required by the present
position;

2) Preparing the employee for significant technological changes occurring
in his or her City related career field;

3) Preparing the employee for changes in duties due to the different use
of a position or class;

4) Preparing the employee for the assumption of new and different duties
as a result of a recent promotional appointment;

5) Preparing the employee for promotional opportunities within the
employee’s present career series with City, supported by a logical
educational plan of accomplishment approved by the Chief of Police or
his or her designee; or

6) Preparing the employee for career-enhancing promotional
opportunities or transfer opportunities into a different City career
series.

b. An educational plan must be approved by the Chief of Police or his or her
designee prior to course enrollment. This plan must include:

1) Intended degree to be achieved or continuing professional education
requirements to be satisfied;

2) Major area of study;

8) Core courses and number of electives required by the educational
institution; or

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 45

 
4) Additional information as required by the Chief of Police or his or her
designee.

c. Reimbursement will be made for all core courses and for electives taken to
fulfill degree requirements. Core courses should take priority, and the
majority of them should be completed prior to enrolling in elective courses.

d. Reimbursement will be made for courses taken to satisfy professional
continuing education certificate and licensing requirements. These
courses must directly relate to the employee’s City career.

e. Individual semester classes directly related to the employee’s current
position with City are potentially reimbursable.

f. Requests for reimbursements must be approved by the Chief of Police or
his or her designee before enrollment in the Course.

g. Reimbursement will be made for tuition fees and/or required textbooks
and a reasonable amount of supplies (as determined by the Chief of Police
or his or her designee) verified by receipts upon completion of the course
with a grade of at least “C,” “Satisfactory,” “Pass” (for Pass/Fail courses),
or the equivalent. Reimbursement will be made within 90 days after all
forms are properly completed and submitted.

h. The employee must have completed six (6) months of City service in a
budgeted City position prior to starting the course. Tuition
Reimbursement is not available for hourly employees.

i. The minimum amount of tuition reimbursement which will be approved
for any employee is $5.00 per course.

j. The employee must not be receiving funds for the same course from any
other source, such as scholarships, with the exception of Veteran’s
benefits.

k. Tuition fees for City sponsored courses for which academic credit is
granted by an accredited college or university will be reimbursable under
this program, subject to the limits described above.

C. Requests and Reimbursement - Procedure.

1. An employee meeting the eligibility rules fills out the “Tuition
Reimbursement Request Form” or CM-1578 or both, as required, “Request for
Approval of Tuition Reimbursement,” in four copies, prior to enrollment in
the class. The form is available from In-Service Training Section. A central
supply is maintained in City Operations Building - Store No. 4. The
employee submits the original CM-1578, (Tuition Reimbursement Request

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 46
Form), and the Department Educational Plan for approval to In-Service
Training prior to the class start date.

. The completed form is presented to the employee’s Chief of Police or his or

her designee.

. The In-Service Training Unit will manage the Educational Plan and submit a

complete package to Financial Management for appropriate review, approval
and submission to the Auditor for reimbursement payment. Two (2) copies of
the completed package are retained at In-Service Training. The program
manager (Administrative Aide II) keeps one copy; the other copy is retained
in the employee's training file.

. Upon completing the course, the employee will furnish the In-Service

Training Section with the original receipts of payments made, and proof of
passing grades or evidence of satisfactory completion.

Exceptions.

Department Management and POA agree to form a standing committee
comprised of two (2) POA representatives and two (2) Department
Management representatives to meet approximately twice yearly for the
purpose of reviewing prospective exceptions and establishing an initial list of
Tuition Reimbursement exceptions. Exceptions must receive prospective
approval. Disagreements will be referred to the Human Resources Director
and POA for discussion.

ARTICLE 40
FLIGHT PAY

Those members of the Department who are authorized to fly the
Department’s aircraft and who are additionally designated as a “Primary
Pilot” will receive approximately eleven and one-half percent (11.5%) of
employee’s base pay as special assignment pay. During the term of this
MOU, there will be no less than two (2) primary pilots. Effective the first
full pay period in Fiscal Year 2019, Primary Pilot’s special
assignment pay shall increase to fifteen percent (15%) of employee’s
base pay.

Effective the first full pay period in Fiscal Year 2016, the City will provide up
to $5,000 tuition reimbursement for Tactical Flight Officer’s (TFOs) who are
actively working towards their pilot’s license as a prerequisite to become an
Airborne Law Enforcement (“ABLE”) Pilot. This tuition reimbursement is
subject to the conditions set forth in Administrative Regulations 70.30. This
tuition reimbursement is in addition to any tuition reimbursement
available under Article 39 of this MOU. Total tuition reimbursement

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association AT
under these two Articles is $6,000 per fiscal year. under Article 39.
There is no guarantee that the Department will subsequently hire a
TFO who is pursuing a pilot’s license as an ABLE Pilot.

Cc. Effective the first full pay period in Fiscal Year 2019, TFOs will
receive specialty pay equal to five percent (5%) of employee’s base
pay.

D. Effective the first full pay period in Fiscal Year 2019, Sergeants
assigned to the unit who are receiving neither TFO specialty pay nor
Primary Pilots pay will receive 5% Administrative Assignment Pay.

E. Any officer relieving a primary pilot will also receive flight pay for the period
served in that capacity.

F, Air Support Trainers will receive approximately three and one-half percent
(3.5%) of employee’s base pay.

G. The cost of the required FAA pilot physical will be reimbursed by City.

ARTICLE 41

PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICERS PROCEDURAL BILL OF RIGHTS (POBOR)
PROCEDURES

A. POBOR.

 

1. The Parties hereto recognize that all members of the Police Unit and Police
Management Unit are covered by the provisions and decisional
interpretations of the POBOR.

2. Officers may, with the approval of POA Board of Directors, bring an action in
Superior Court without exhausting the administrative remedies described in
this Article, in those instances where it is alleged that a specific violation of
the POBOR has occurred and it is alleged that the remedies contained in this
Article are inadequate.

B. Definitions.
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions apply:

1. “Punitive action’ means those actions which may directly lead to dismissal,
demotion, suspension, reduction in salary, written reprimand, written
warning, transfer for purposes of punishment, or an evaluation in which the
employee is not meeting performance standards.

2. “Interrogation” means any inquiry concerning the actions or conduct of an
officer which may lead to punitive action or criminal allegation.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 48
3. “Investigation” means the process of conducting an inquiry or inquiries into
the actions or conduct of an officer or officers from the moment it is
reasonably apparent that the inquiry or inquiries may lead to punitive action
or criminal allegations directed toward an officer or officers.

C. Civil Service Appeals.

1. Officers may, in addition to other rights to administrative appeals and
hearings set out in this MOU, appeal any punitive action which is covered by
provisions of City Civil Service Rules to the Civil Service Commission in
accordance with those rules.

2. Where a punitive transfer action has taken place in conjunction with a
disciplinary action over which the Civil Service Commission has jurisdiction,
the Parties to this MOU agree that the Commission may rule on the
propriety of the matter before it and that the Department will be bound on
the matter of the punitive transfer by the findings of the Civil Service
Commission.

D. Investigations.

1. Any officer or officers under investigation will receive at least three (8)
working days notice prior to an interrogation except where a delay will
hamper the gathering of evidence as determined by an Assistant Chief. At
the time an officer is advised that an interrogation is planned, the officer will
be advised of the subject of the interrogation and told that he or she has a
right to obtain representation.

2. The actual scheduling of the interrogation is subject to the reasonable
accommodation of the schedules of the subject officer and his or her
representative.

8. Investigations of shooting incidents involving officers and any incident
involving the actions or conduct of an officer or officers where personnel from
the Internal Affairs Unit are called to the scene of the incident will be
reported to POA immediately. POA will provide a telephone number to the
Department and it is the responsibility of the duty lieutenant to telephone
POA’s number and report the general nature of the incident.

 

 

 

 

4. Officers who are removed from the normal duties of the job during the
pendency of an investigation will not be removed for longer than thirty (80)
calendar days except where the business necessities of the Department
require the removal from duties to extend beyond thirty (80) days. If the
investigation requires an extension, the involved officer has the right to a
hearing before an Assistant Chief concerning the business necessities alleged
and will have the opportunity to argue and present evidence to contradict
those business necessities. This hearing is an informal opportunity for the

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 49
officer to present to the Chief of Police or his or her designee of not less than
the rank of Assistant Chief regarding why the extension should not be
granted. This is not to be confused with the evidentiary hearing afforded
officers pursuant to the POBOR for punitive action.

E. Intra-Department Hearings.

1. Scope. The intra-departmental hearing procedures described in this MOU
are available to officers as follows:

a.

b

&

j.

p

a.

b.

Dismissal;
Suspension;
Demotion - in rank or classification;

Reduction in compensation (as defined in Personnel Manual Index Code
L-2); does not include loss of overtime due to transfer or loss of a take-
home car due to assignment);

Written reprimand;
Written warning;

Performance evaluation in which the employee is not meeting
performance standards; or

Punitive Transfers.

Officers entitled to appeal any action to the Civil Service Commission will
retain that right notwithstanding the use of intra-departmental appeal
procedures and may elect either or both procedures without prejudice to
the other.

 

 

 

The intra-department hearing procedures are available only to officers
who have permanent status with City. For probationary officers, see
Article 41.1 below.

 

Procedure. Hearings regarding punitive actions will be conducted as follows:

The hearing officer will be the Chief of Police or his or her designee of not
less than the rank of Assistant Chief, except that for hearings regarding
notes of counseling and written warnings not brought by a Police Captain,
a Police Captain may be the designated hearing officer. The hearing
officer cannot be an individual who had a role in the original decision to
take punitive actions.

Each officer requesting to appeal a matter has ten (10) working days to
file an appeal with the office of the Chief of Police.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 50
c. The appeal hearing will be recorded in a manner that permits a transcript
to be made. All parties will have access to the original recordation, a
duplicate copy and any transcript.

 

 

 

d. The officer has the right to present evidence, cross-examine witnesses,
and require the attendance of any witnesses who are city employees.

 

e. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer will render a written
decision which states the facts found to be true and the decision of the
hearing officer based upon those facts.

f. Officers who have reached permanent status may appeal a decision of the
hearing officer in matters set out in section E.1.d and E.1.e of this Article,
to the Human Resources Department within ten (10) working days of
receipt of the decision. Such appeal will consist solely of a review of the
written record and/or audio tapes developed at prior steps of the appeal.
Mayor or his or her designee, the Human Resources Director, will issue
findings within thirty (80) working days of receipt of the full and entire
appeal package.

3. Denial of Promotion on Grounds Other Than Merit.
a. General Guidelines.

1) In every promotional process there are more qualified candidates than
there are available positions for promotion. This Article is not
intended to address the inevitable non-promotion of an otherwise
qualified candidate for which there is no right of appeal under this
Article.

2) During the promotional process, the Chief of Police will receive a list of
certified candidates who are eligible for promotion from City Personnel
Department. All candidates on the certified list are considered equally
qualified for purposes of promotion. The Chief of Police has complete
discretion to select anyone from the certified list. It is acknowledged
that the entire promotional process is merit based.

3) Any officer denied promotion on grounds other than merit may appeal
the denial through the process set out in this MOU. However, the fact
that an otherwise qualified candidate whose name appeared on the
certified list was not selected is not, in and of itself, a ground for
appeal. Officers not on the certified list have no standing to appeal
under the Article.

F. Prima Facie Case.

Prior to any appeal being heard, a written appeal will set forth a prima facie
case stating the grounds the appellant was given as the reason for non-selection

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 51

 
denied a promotion on grounds other than merit. The written appeal must be
submitted to the Chief of Police’s office within twenty (20) working days of the
alleged violation. In order to meet the threshold prima facie showing for an
appeal hearing, the appellant must make specific factual assertions of conduct,
other than matters over which the Appointing Authority has discretion in
making selections based on merit, which if true, would violate appellant’s
protected rights. The initial determination of whether a prima facie case has
been sufficiently stated will be determined by the Chief of Police or his or her
designee not lower than the rank of Assistant Chief with a written decision
issued within twenty (20) working days from submission of the appeal.
However, a decision denying an appeal hearing based on an insufficient prima
facie case may be appealed to the Human Resources Department. The appeal
will be submitted to the Human Resources Department in writing within ten
(10) working days of receipt of the denial.

G. Denial of Promotion Hearing.

1. The Department will maintain a record of the hearing and provide appellant
with a copy of any written or audio recording. The cost of a court reporter
will be at the expense of the party requesting the reporter.

2. The hearing is limited in scope to the specific factual assertions made in the
appellant’s written prima facie showing. The appellant has the right to call
and examine witnesses and present evidence. Prior to the hearing, the
appellant will provide the hearing officer with a proposed witness list. The
hearing officer will preside over the hearing and has authority to rule on the
appropriateness and relevance of witnesses to be called, the admissibility of
evidence and all other procedural matters.

8. The hearing will be heard by the Human Resources Department.

4. The hearing officer will issue findings of fact and a decision within thirty (30)
days of the hearing to deny the appeal or to grant an appropriate and lawful
remedy.

H. Other Negative Material.

1. Any officer who has material negative to his or her employment relationship
or a performance evaluation containing negative comments (other than a
Supplemental Performance Report) placed in his or her personnel file may
appeal the placement of the adverse material to a ranking officer of not less
than the rank of Captain.

2. Personnel Files. Any employee who has any material adverse to his or her
employment relationship placed in a personnel file will be allowed to file a
complete written response to the material within thirty (30) calendar days of
being notified of its placement in the file. The Department will notify an

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 52
individual of the placement of the material in the file by certified mail within
thirty (80) calendar days of its placement. If the Department fails to notify,
the material will be considered void and removed from the personnel file.
The rights to protection of the personnel file established in this MOU survive
the termination of the employee should such material be placed into the file
without the knowledge of the employee or after his or her termination.

8. For the purposes of this section and this Article, “Personnel file” will mean
any file or repository of material kept for the purpose of making employment
related decisions concerning an officer.

I. Separation of Probationary Employees.

1. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after the Department separates a
probationary employee, unless extended by mutual agreement, the
Department will provide one informal and non-evidentiary post-separation
hearing, to be conducted by an Assistant Chief or his or her designee. A
reasonable number of witnesses may be presented. The Department will
serve the decision within seven (7) calendar days. There is no appeal from
the Department’s decision at this hearing, and the Department’s decision is
not subject to the Grievance Procedure.

2. Upon separation of a probationary officer who is terminated for less than
satisfactory performance or failure to meet employment standards, City will
release to any person or entity seeking information only the name of the
officer, the dates of employment, classification and “failed probation.” The
only exception will be proper process of the court and a waiver signed by the
affected employee. Such separation will not be considered disciplinary in
nature.

J. Other Policies, Practices and Procedures.

 

1. During the term of this MOU, no policies, practices or procedures of City or
the Department which affect wages, hours, or other terms and conditions of
employment and which specifically affect investigations, or the procedures for
conducting appeals and hearings will be changed in any way without the
mutual agreement of the Parties.

2. During the term of this MOU, City agrees not to implement or adopt any
changes in policy or procedure which adversely affects or diminishes the
procedural or substantive rights of officers contained in this Article, the
Personnel Manual, the San Diego Charter (Charter) of City, any applicable
state or federal law, or the Constitutions of the State of California or the
United States except by mutual agreement of the Parties.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 53
K. Miscellaneous Provisions.

1. Conformity with POBOR. All provisions of this Article are to be read to
expand or complement rights which officers enjoy under the POBOR. The
Parties to this MOU do not intend to limit or reduce those statutory rights in
any way.

2. Formal reprimands without further penalty more than two (2) years old, and
those with additional penalty more than five (5) years old, will not be
considered for purposes of promotion, transfer, special assignments and
disciplinary actions except as to disciplinary actions, when the reprimands
show patterns of specific similar police misconduct as defined in the
Departmental Rules and Regulations and Department Instructions. All
officers will have the right to review their Departmental and Divisional
Personnel Jackets and identify all the documents. Upon concurrence of the
commanding officer that such documents have been appropriately identified,
they will be placed in an envelope, sealed and initialed by the officer. The
envelope will be placed in the officer’s Department personnel file and will be
opened only in the event the officer is subject to discipline in the future.

8. Upon the adoption of this Article, the appropriate provisions of policies,
practices, and procedures of City and Department will be amended to
conform with this MOU. If City or Department fail to make appropriate
amendments to policies, practices, or procedures or if the policies, practices,
or procedures conflict with this Article, this Article will prevail.

ARTICLE 42
COPIES OF THE MOU

POA may obtain copies of this MOU from City by reimbursing City for their cost.
This MOU will be posted on City’s website in a location easily accessible to all POA
Members.

City agrees to send electronic link to the POA MOU to the Police Department and
the Department will email the link out to all Officers.

ARTICLE 43
SENIORITY

A. Seniority. Seniority will be computed according to the length of last continuous
service in the class of the class, or of an equal or higher ranking class. Ties will
be broken by first considering the length of total City service, and then at the
discretion of the Appointing Authority.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 54
B. Job Rights. Subject to the provisions of Rules VI and IX, a permanent employee
whose layoff is imminent will have the right of transfer to any vacant position in
the same class or subdivision thereof in any other department. If there is no
such vacancy, said employee will have the right of competition for retention in
equal and the next successively lower classes in which he or she has served
satisfactorily. The Parties acknowledge that there are no “subdivision”
classifications in this bargaining unit.

ARTICLE 44
RETIREMENT

The following Paragraphs A and C are included in this MOU for historical purposes
only and have no force and effect during the term of this MOU.

A. Federal law mandates that all employees be covered by a qualified retirement
plan or by Social Security effective July 1, 1991. This impacts the classification
of Police Recruit as Police Recruits do not participate in any retirement system
while in the Academy. Due to this mandate, it is agreed for the classification of
Police Recruit that participation in a version of the Supplemental Pension
Savings Plan is mandatory until becoming sworn and being enrolled in City
Retirement System.

B. Effective July 1, 2018, Police Recruits participate in the SPSP-H Plan, as
amended by the City Council by Ordinance 0-20275, adopted July 19, 2018, until
they are sworn officers and become eligible for the defined benefit plan.

 

 

 

 

C. 1981 Pension Plan: Effective July 1, 1991, for the purpose of benefit calculation
only, the 1981 Plan service will be made equivalent to San Diego City
Employees’ Retirement System (SDCERS) service.

D. Internal Revenue Code section 414(h)(2).

Beginning July 1, 1993, City agrees to implement Internal Revenue Code section
414(h)(2) for all members in the unit, allowing employee contributions to the
Retirement System to be made pre-tax, contingent upon “safe harbor” limitations
not being exceeded.

E. 1997 Benefit Changes.

The following paragraph E.1. is provided solely for historical purposes and has
no effect. City and POA, having met and conferred, have agreed to benefit
improvements to San Diego City Employees Retirement System (SDCERS). The
City Council has approved these changes by adoption of Ordinance No. O-18383
Adopted on February 25, 1997, and Ordinance No. O-18392 on March 31, 1997;
subsequently the improvements were approved by a majority vote of System
Members in April 1997. Those changes include the following:

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 55

 
1. Effective August 1, 1997, a Retiree Health Benefit is established for eligible
retirees. A Health Eligible Retiree is any retired Member who: (1) was on the
active payroll of City on or after October 5, 1980; (2) retired on or after
October 6, 1980 but before April 1, 2012, and (8) is eligible for and is
receiving a retirement allowance from the Retirement System.

a. Health Eligible Retirees may choose to participate in a City-sponsored
health insurance plan or any other health insurance plan of their choice.
The Retirement System will pay or reimburse the applicable Medicare-
eligible or non-Medicare eligible retiree-only premium up to but not to
exceed the cost of the retiree-only premium for the highest cost HMO plan
which is also a City sponsored health insurance plan made available to
Health Eligible Retirees.

s

Additionally, the Retirement System will reimburse the Part B
Supplemental Medical Expense Premium for those Health Eligible
Retirees enrolled in Medicare.

ec. City agrees that it will not diminish the benefits contained in its current
retiree HMO plans without mutual agreement with the exclusive
bargaining representatives; nor convert to a blended premium for active
employees and retirees without mutual agreement with the exclusive
bargaining representatives.

2. The Disability Income Offset provision is eliminated. There will be no
reduction of retirement benefits if the retiree has other income.

8. A five-year purchase of service credit provision is established effective
January 1, 1997 for employees hired before July 1, 2005. Under this
provision, the eligible Member may purchase up to five years of service credit
by paying both employee and employer contributions in an amount and
manner determined by the San Diego City Employees’ Retirement System
Board to make the System whole for such time. In addition, eligible Members
retiring on or after January 1, 1997, may purchase probationary periods,
military and veterans code leaves, waiting periods for the 1981 Pension Plan,
actual time worked hourly or part time, special leaves without pay occurring
prior to January 1, 1997, the difference in time between part time and full
time prior to January 1, 1997, long term disability, vocational rehabilitation
maintenance (VRMA) and temporary total disability (TTD), FMLA periods,
special leaves of absence with job to be saved periods and any preceding
reinstatement by the Civil Service Commission following a termination
appeal.

4. A Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP) is established effective April 1,
1997. DROP provides an alternative form of benefit accrual while allowing a
Member to continue working for City. During the DROP period, a DROP
Member retains all rights, privileges and benefits of being an active City

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 56

 

 

 
employee, except as specifically modified in the DROP Plan (SDMC Chapter
2, Article 4, Division 14), and is subject to the same terms and conditions of
employment including disciplinary actions up to and including termination.
The Member continues to be eligible for the active employee Flex Benefits
Program for the classification and is not eligible for “retiree” health benefits
until the Member terminates City employment. Under DROP, a monthly
service retirement allowance along with any COLA increases, Supplemental
Benefit checks and any adjustments to such payments applicable to
retirements effective on the date the Member entered the DROP are credited
to the member’s DROP Account in the SDCERS Trust Fund. These SDCERS
benefits are calculated as if the Member were retiring on the date the
Member enters the DROP. The Member’s contributions to the Retirement
System cease. The Member and City each contribute 3.05% of the Member's
salary each pay period that the Member participates in the DROP. The
Member’s contribution is made on a pre-tax basis pursuant to Internal
Revenue Code section 414(h)(2). These amounts are credited to the Member’s
DROP Account in the SDCERS Trust Account, and are distributed to the
DROP participant upon termination of employment. No withdrawals may be
made from the DROP Account until the Member terminates City
employment. Interest is credited to the Member's DROP account at a rate
determined by the SDCERS Board. The Member is one hundred percent
(100%) vested in his or her DROP Account from its inception.

A DROP participant who becomes disabled may apply for conversion of their
deferred retirement allowance to a disability retirement allowance calculated
at the date of entry into the DROP, and the employee will retain all of the
DROP and matching contributions. A Member who participates in DROP
irrevocably designates a specific consecutive period of months for
participation, not to exceed 60 months. The Member must terminate City
service at the end of the designated period.

At the completion of the DROP period, and after the Member terminates City
employment, the DROP account will be distributed as a lump sum, or in any
other manner permitted by the IRS as soon as those options are developed by
the Retirement Administration.

5. For retirements effective on or after January 1, 1997, the 50% continuance is
available to the spouse to whom the Member was married on the date of
retirement. The requirement that the member be married to his or her
spouse at least one year prior to retirement for the spouse to receive the 50%
continuance is eliminated.

F. A retirement allowance cap of ninety 90% of Final Compensation (high one year

salary) is established for eligible Police Safety Members, except as provided in
paragraph I below.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 57
G. 2000 Retirement Benefit Changes.

City and POA, having met and conferred, and having participated in the
settlement of a class action lawsuit challenging the calculation of “compensation
earnable” have agreed to benefit changes to SDCERS. The benefit changes
resulting from this class action settlement were approved by the CERS active
and retired membership in June, 2000.

1. Formula Change for Calculation of SDCERS Monthly Retirement Benefit.

The Retirement Calculation Factor to be applied to the Police Safety
Member's high one year salary at specified ages may be increased from the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

current levels to those shown below for all retirements effective on or after
July 1, 2000, if the Police Safety Member selects this option.
Retirement Factor Factor
Age effective effective
1/01/97- 07/01/00
6/30/00 [New]
[Current]
50 2.50% 3.00%
51 2.60% 3.00%
52 2.70% 3.00%
53 2.80% 3.00%
54 2.90% 3.00%
55+ 2.99% 3.00%

 

 

 

 

 

Member Option: Pursuant to the class action settlement, a Police
Safety Member hired before July 1, 2009, may choose, upon application
for retirement, one of the following two options:

a, The Retirement Calculation Factor in effect on July 1,
2000 with no change in the Police Safety Member’s Final
Compensation OR

b. A 10% increase in the Police Safety Member's Final
Compensation, with the Police Safety Member's
Unmodified Service Retirement Allowance calculated
using the Retirement Calculation Factor in effect on June
30, 2000.

This election must be made with SDCERS at the time of application for
retirement.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 58
2. Police Safety Member's SDCERS Contribution Rate Change.

a. The following paragraphs 2.b. through 2.c. are included in this MOU for

historical purposes only and have no force and effect during the term of
this MOU.

b. On July 1, 2001, Police Safety Members’ contribution rates to SDCERS
will be increased by 0.58%.

c. Effective July 1, 2000, Police Safety Members’ Contribution rates will
increase by an additional 0.16% to pay for the cost of providing the choice
of Retirement Calculation Factors described above. The additional 0.16%
increase will be paid from the Employee Benefit Reserve described in San
Diego Municipal Code section 24.1507 until the Reserve is exhausted.

38. Eligibility for Industrial Disability Retirement Change.

a. A Police Safety Member may be eligible for an industrial disability
retirement if it has been medically determined that the Police Safety
Member has become psychologically or mentally incapable of performing
his or her normal and customary duties as a result of a violent attack on
the member with deadly force, such as a shooting or stabbing that causes
great bodily injury, and that resulted in a nervous or mental disorder.
This provision will sunset on June 30, 2010, and no such applications may
be made after that date.

b. City agrees to take the following actions necessary to restore Section
F.3.a:

1) Step 1. Contact SDCERS and request a Charter Section 143.1 vote of
the Members.

2) Step 2. Upon a successful vote under Step 1, initiate a Charter Section
143.1 vote of the electorate for the June 2016 election or the next
Citywide election whichever is sooner.

3) Step 3. Implement change after necessary Municipal Code provisions
have been adopted by City Council.

H. 2003 Benefit Changes.

This paragraph is included in this MOU for historical purposes only and has no
force and effect during the term of this MOU.

Effective July 1, 2008, City agrees to amend the Municipal Code to provide

Safety Member retirement status for Police Recruits on day one of the police
academy.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 59
I, 2009 Benefit Changes.

1. A Safety Member, who is employed as a sworn officer of City Police
Department and is hired by City on or after July 1, 2009 but before July 1,
2013, will not be entitled to a Retirement Calculation Factor of 3% unless and
until the Safety Member reaches age 55 with at least ten years of Creditable
Service. A Safety Member, who is employed as a sworn officer of City Police
Department and is hired by City on or after July 1, 2009, will have the option
to retire at age 50 after 20 years of Creditable Service with a proportionately
reduced Retirement Calculation Factor, as set forth in the following table.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

agement O70 109 for eworn City Police
Officers hired on or after July
1, 2009

50 2.50%

51 2.60%

52 2.70%

53 2.80%

54 2.90%

55+ 3.00%

 

 

 

 

2. Effective July 1, 2009, interest will be credited to a POA Member’s DROP
account at a rate determined by the SDCERS Board.

J. New Retirement Factor Computation for Safety Members, Hired On or After
January 1, 2012 but before July 1, 2013, as sworn officers of City Police

Department.

A Safety Member, who is employed as a sworn officer of City Police Department
and is hired by City on or after January 1, 2012, will not be entitled to a
Retirement Calculation Factor of 3% unless and until the Safety Member reaches
age 55 with at least ten 10 years of Creditable Service. A Safety Member, who is
employed as a sworn officer of City Police Department and is hired by City on or
after January 1, 2012, will have the option to retire at age of 50 after 20 years of
Creditable Service with a proportionately reduced Unmodified Service
Retirement Allowance, as follows: Retirement Calculation Factor is 2.5% at age
50; 2.6% at age 51; 2.7% at age 52; 2.8% at age 53; 2.9% at age 54; and 3.0%at
age 55. For purposes of determining retirement allowance for these Safety
Members, “Final Compensation” will be defined as the average of the Safety
Member's three highest years of Base Compensation at any time during his or
her Membership in the System.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 60
K. Benefit Changes After July 1, 2013.

Effective July 1, 2018, Police Recruits will receive a defined contribution
retirement plan, the SPSP-H Plan, which is being used as an Interim Defined
Contribution Retirement Plan for benefited employees while the City negotiates a
permanent plan. The mandatory employee and matching employer contributions
are 11% of compensation. Under this plan, employee contributions are post-tax
and both employer and employee contributions are immediately 100% vested.
Once a Permanent Defined Contribution Retirement Plan is in place for new
benefited employees, eligibility for any death and disability benefits offered for
employees in the permanent plan will apply retroactively to July 1, 2018.

Effective July 1, 2013, the maximum amount of retirement benefit payable to a
sworn police officer, who is hired on or after July 1, 2013 and who is a
participant under the Defined Benefit Pension Plan, shall be an amount
equivalent to 80% of the average of the participant’s highest consecutive 36
months of Base Compensation at age 55 as defined by Section 70.1. The
maximum set by this provision shall decrease by 3% for each year that the
participant retires before age 55.

L. Elimination of Cost of Living Annuity Benefit for POA Bargaining Unit
Members Hired On or After August 1, 2012.

As provided in SDMC section 24.1507(c), employees in POA bargaining units
initially hired after July 31, 2012 are not eligible or required to make “cost of
living annuity contributions” to the Retirement System, as defined in San Diego
Municipal Code section 24.1507, and will not be eligible to receive the cost of
living annuity when they retire.

M. Other Benefits

1. The surviving spouse of a Member who is killed while in the performance of
duty is entitled to continued health coverage as provided in California Labor
Code Section 4856. (Please refer to Article 67, Line of Duty Death).

2. The modified special death benefit provided to the surviving spouse of a
Member killed in the line of duty is amended to eliminate the requirement
that the benefit be discontinued if the spouse remarries. Any benefit
terminated to such spouse as a result of remarriage will be reinstated
effective January 1, 1997.

N. Retiree Health Benefits

Notwithstanding any provision in this MOU to the contrary, the retiree health
benefits for employees who retire on or after April 1, 2012 are determined by the

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 61
City's MOU (including amendment with POA), which the City Council adopted
by San Diego Ordinance O-20135 (February 17, 2012) and amended by San
Diego Ordinance O-20173 (June 26, 2012), and Chapter 2, Article 9 of the San
Diego Municipal Code.

ARTICLE 45
LONG TERM DISABILITY PLAN

A. City will continue to offer a LTD Income Plan to eligible members of the Police
Unit and Police Management Unit. This Article generally describes the benefits
available under this LTD Income Plan. Specific provisions are set forth in the
LTD Income Plan on file with City Clerk. To apply for this benefit employees
must be disabled (unable to work as a result of injury, accident, illness or
pregnancy), subject to medical disablement certification. Benefits do not start
for thirty (80) calendar days from the date of disability and continue for the next
twelve (12) months. The benefit is seventy percent (70%) of basic biweekly
earnings, less all other income benefits while totally disabled. To qualify for
benefits you must file a claim on an approved form available from the Risk
Management or the Police Personnel Office. The claim must be submitted
within sixty (60) days of disability date, or within sixty (60) days of the date an
employee is first aware of the disabling condition. If a claim is denied, the
employee may appeal the decision to Mayor or his or her designee within ten (10)
working days.

B. City agrees to meet and confer with POA prior to making any changes in this
Plan.

C. City will issue a RFP to fully insure and administer the LTD Program by an
outside vendor. The parties will meet and confer over any impacts as a result of
the implementation a new LTD program.

D. The parties agree to continue to meet and confer over City’s LTD
Program and administration of the program by an outside vendor.

ARTICLE 46
REOPENERS

A. The provisions of this MOU, together with those provisions of wages, hours and
other terms and conditions of employment subject to meet and confer currently
in existence and not changed by this MOU will not be revised to adversely affect
the employees in this unit during the term of this MOU.

B. POA agrees that, should City introduce a proposal to amend Charter in a
manner that would change the reporting relationship of the Personnel Director

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 62

 
9

from the Civil Service Commission to the Mayor, that POA will promptly meet
and confer, at any time during the term of this MOU, regarding any aspects of
that proposal that would affect wages, hours, or other terms and conditions of
employment.

Any claim of a violation of this provision will be pursued solely through the
grievance procedure.

Nothing in this MOU affects or impairs the rights, if any, of City or POA granted
pursuant to California Government Code section 3504.5.

This Article does not apply to any policy, procedure, or practice established by a
member of the unit which was not approved by a superior authority. Those
policies, procedures and practices established by a member of the unit and
known by an unclassified police manager are deemed to be approved.

. The Parties acknowledge that this Article in no way diminishes the exercise of
Management’s Rights as provided for in Article 9.

G. Paragraph A of this Article does not apply to any enactment of any Police

Review Board or Commission. However, the policies and procedures of this
Board or Commission are subject to meet and confer to the extent required by
the MMBA.

H. Department Management and POA agree to meet and confer on issues regarding

the qualifications for an industrial disability requirement and related issues
which are subject to meet and confer. The meet and confer will commence upon
request of POA.

The parties acknowledge that four of the City’s recognized employee
organizations have filed a consolidated unfair labor practice charge with the
California Public Employment Relations Board (PERB) related to Proposition B
(PERB litigation). The parties acknowledge that the City and the four employee
organizations involved in the PERB litigation have the right, under California
Government Code section 3509.5 and other applicable law, to exhaust all appeals
if aggrieved as a result of a final decision by PERB. This right includes filing a
writ of extraordinary relief with the California Court of Appeal and taking any
other action in any court of competent jurisdiction that is authorized by law.
Nothing in this MOU is intended to waive that right. If, in the PERB litigation,
a court of competent jurisdiction, following exhaustion of all appeals, issues a
final order or decision declaring Proposition B to be unlawful or invalid, in whole
or in part, the parties to this MOU agree to reopen negotiations, upon request by
a party, on that provision or aspect of Proposition B declared to be unlawful or
invalid. If, in the PERB litigation, a court of competent jurisdiction, following
exhaustion of all appeals, issues a final order or decision declaring Proposition B
to be lawfully adopted, the parties to this MOU agree to reopen negotiations,
upon request by a party, on any provisions or aspects of Proposition B not yet

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 63
implemented. The parties agree that, regardless of the outcome of the PERB
litigation or exercise of this reopener, the provisions regarding limitations to
base compensation and to other pensionable pay components set forth in Article
25 will remain in effect.

J. At the request of either the City or POA during the term of this MOU, the
parties will meet and confer over the implementation of a death and disability
benefit for employees who are covered by the Interim Defined Contribution Plan.

K.In the event either party desires to reopen the MOU and meet and
confer in good faith for Fiscal Year 2019 and Fiscal Year 2020, it will
serve upon the other its written request to commence meeting and
conferring in good faith, as well as its written non-economic proposals
by October 2, 2017. POA will submit its economic proposals no later
than January 8, 2018. Upon receipt of the written notice and proposals,
meet and confer over non-economic proposals will begin no later than
November 6, 2017, and meet and confer over economic proposals will
begin no later than January 22, 2018.

L. The City agrees to notify POA by October 16, 2017 of its non-economic
proposals and will submit its economic proposals no later than January
22, 2018. If federal or state governments take action that has a direct
effect upon the areas which fall within the scope of representation, the
City may submit proposals concerning these areas at later dates. Any
terms and conditions of this MOU, not subject to this reopener
provision shall remain in force and effect. The impasse hearing will
take place in advance of the first reading of the salary ordinance for
Fiscal Year 2018.

M. The City will request the City Council to schedule an impasse hearing if
necessary after 5:00 p.m. on a regular work day in order to permit POA
Bargaining Unit members the opportunity to attend and testify.

N. Unless otherwise agreed to, the parties agree that POA’s final economic
and non-economic offers are due by February 19, 2018 and the City’s
final economic and non-economic offers are due March 5, 2018, POA
agrees to provide the City a written statement of its positions regarding
any issues should there be impasse.

O.The City will conduct or have conducted a total compensation survey of
the largest municipal/government organizations within the County of
San Diego, and within the State of California, as determined by the
City. The City will have the compensation survey completed in time for
the initiation of bargaining for the reopener in Fiscal Year 2019 and
Fiscal Year 2020. The City will meet and consult with POA over the list
of agencies it will use for the compensation survey.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 64
P. By no later than October 8, 2016, the parties will reopen negotiations on health
care benefits for current employees. The purpose of the negotiations will be to
determine if modification to the current Flexible Benefit Plan can result in lower
out-of-pocket expenses for current employees. The negotiations will proceed
with a two-step process as follows:

Step 1, the City and POA along with the City’s other five recognized employee
organizations to conduct a joint study which will review and analyze healthcare
related subjects including:

Current plans for all employees

Potential plan design changes

Number of plans available to employees

Health Reimbursement Arrangement Accounts (HRA Accounts)
Number of health care providers for employees

The Affordable Health Care Act

Use of Voluntary Employees’ Beneficiary Association (VEBA)
Restrictions on employee’s ability to opt out of coverage
Wellness Program

COHAN OT Pw

Step 2, the parties will then meet and confer over the issue.

Q. By no later than October 3, 2016, the City and POA will commence a Rewards
and Recognition Study to evaluate the current rewards and recognition
programs and policies within individual City departments, and meet and confer
over a standardized Citywide Rewards and Recognition Program that promotes
positive morale and recognizes employee excellence.

R. By no later than October 8, 2016, the City and POA along with the City’s other
five recognized employee organizations will begin to meet and confer over
modifications to the City’s Employee Relations Resolution contained in Council

Policy 300-06 to comply with the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act as amended August
1, 2012.

ARTICLE 47
PROBATION PERIOD

All new employees will be subject to a twelve (12) month probation period which
will commence upon appointment as a sworn member of the Department.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 65
ARTICLE 48
WELLNESS

During the term of this Agreement, City will fund $35,000 on an annual basis to
be used for the maintenance or purchase of weight machines and/or similar
equipment. The Parties will discuss and mutually agree on the expenditure of these
funds through the Labor-Management Committee.

ARTICLE 49
TRANSPORTATION INCENTIVES

City intends to make modifications to the Transportation Alternative Program
(TAP) during the term of this MOU. City agrees to meet and confer, as required by
law, over any changes which have a significant or adverse impact to wages, hours,
and other terms and conditions of employment. The specific changes are being
drafted and will be presented to POA as soon as is practicable. Pending review of
the changes, the following provisions will continue to apply:

A. Employees who use the Concourse Parkade and pay on a monthly basis will be
charged fifty percent (50%) of the prevailing general public monthly rate.

B. Employees participating in the TAP will pay fifty percent (50%) of the public
daily rate, for up to fifty-two (52) instances per year. Participation in this
program is limited, and available on a first-come first serve basis.

2

City will provide a seventy five percent (75%) reimbursement up to $100.00 per
month to those employees who wish to purchase monthly passes for
transportation on the public bus, trolley, and commuter rail service.
Transportation passes will be for the exclusive use of the employee/purchaser.
City will provide an equal amount to employees who use the San Diego Bay ferry
and to employees participating in a City approved vanpool program. Employees
must use these subsidized transportation services to commute to and from work
at least three days per week to be eligible for reimbursement. Payments for
passes are made payable to City Treasurer no later than the 12t day of the
current month for the next month’s pass. Payment is loaded on to issued
Compass Cards.

D. City will provide reimbursement to employees who use the Concourse Parkade

and carry riders. The rate of reimbursement will be calculated so that an
employee who carries three riders will receive free parking.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 66
ARTICLE 50
PREFERRED SHIFT SELECTION

A. All uniformed police officers with twelve (12) or more years of service on the
Department are eligible to receive their preference of shift assignment within
the area in which they are working, provided the employee is meeting
performance standards. There will be two (2) preferred shift officer positions per
service area per watch in every patrol division, except Northwestern.
Northwestern patrol division will have one (1) preferred shift officer per service
area per watch. There will be two (2) preferred shift officer positions per watch
in traffic division.

 

 

 

 

&

All preferential assignments are considered permanent; however, the employee
has the option of requesting a change in his or her preference of assignment to
be effective at any shift change. Any request for preferred shift selection, either
initially or for change, will be made in writing to the area captain at least thirty
(80) calendar days prior to a shift change. Exercise of this privilege can only be
made at a shift change or by command approval.

Qa

While the employee may request a choice of area of assignment, it is the
responsibility of the appropriate commands to assure that preferential shift
assignments are designated equitably throughout all area commands.

D. The Department will make reasonable efforts to allow each preferred shift
position at least one shift that includes Saturday and Sunday off during the
calendar year.

E. It is the intent of the Chief of Police to keep this policy in effect as long as it is
feasible to do so. This right may be revoked by the Chief of Police whenever it is
deemed to be in the best interest of the Department.

ARTICLE 52
MODIFICATION AND WAIVER

A. Reasonable written notice will be given to POA if affected by any ordinance, rule,
resolution, or regulation directly relating to matters within the scope of
representation proposed to be adopted or changed by City Council, Retirement
Board, Civil Service Commission, or by Department Heads and Assistant
Department Heads, and POA will be given the opportunity to meet with the
appropriate body or person prior to adoption of any change, as required by law.

B. In cases of emergency pursuant to Charter, when City determines that an
ordinance, rule, resolution, or regulation must be adopted immediately without
prior notice or meeting with POA, City Council or the board or commission of
City responsible for the changes will provide such notice to POA and an

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 67

 

 
opportunity to meet at the earliest practicable time following the adoption of
such ordinance, rule, resolution, or regulation.

ARTICLE 53
OVERPAYMENTS TO CITY EMPLOYEES AND REPAYMENT OF FUNDS

A. Overpayment.

1. If it has been discovered that an overpayment or unauthorized payment has
been made to a City employee, it is the responsibility of the department to
notify the employee in writing and supply the employee with the
documentation used to determine the overpayment.

2. If the employee contends that any portion or the entire amount is not owed,
he or she may request a meeting with the appointing authority to attempt to
resolve the disagreement. If the dispute about the payment originates in
another department, the employee has a right to request a meeting with the
appointing authority in that department. The department will notify the
employee that he or she may have a representative attend such meeting(s)
with him or her. If the dispute regarding overpayment arises from the
interpretation of a personnel regulation or administrative regulation, the
employee may grieve this matter directly to the Department Head level.

B. Repayment of Funds.

1. An employee will pay no penalties, fees or interest as a result of the
overpayment. The employee will have the right to select one of the three
following options for the repayment of the funds:

a. Lump sum payment with the date mutually established by the employee
and the department (ump sum payments must be made if the total
amount due is five percent (5%) or less than the employee’s biweekly
salary);

b. Biweekly installment payments through payroll deduction (nstallment
payments must be a minimum of $10.00 and repayment must be
completed within twenty six (26) pay periods); or

c. Any other repayment arrangement mutually agreed upon between City
and the employee.

2. The final agreement on the repayment will be committed to writing, with the

lump sum payment date, or the biweekly amount and the beginning and
ending date of the installment plan identified. Disputes over repayment of

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 68
funds which were overpaid to an employee through no fault of the employee,
will not be a factor in employee performance reports or discipline.

C. Referral to Collections.

A department may refer an employee to the Treasurer, Collections Section only
when the employee, after being duly notified of the overpayment and having had
the opportunity to review the relevant documentation, refuses to agree to a
repayment of the amount owed. The employee will be notified of the referral and
informed that the Collections Section will proceed with collection as it would for
any other debtor.

ARTICLE 54
CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS

The Parties agree that POA may make use of intra-departmental mail systems and
mail slots, from time to time, to conduct POA elections or votes on issues among its
members. There will be no interference with the conduct of this POA business by
management of the Department or City.

ARTICLE 56
CORE INSTRUCTOR PAY

All Core Instructors assigned to the Training Development Division will receive
special assignment pay which is equal in salary range to Police Sergeant. Core
Instructors will retain their current pay step in the higher salary range and would
be eligible for merit increases at their normal review dates. Further, all Core
Instructors would continue to be eligible to receive the training pay differential as
outlined in Article 28.

ARTICLE 57
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING PROGRAM

A random Drug and Alcohol Testing Program has been implemented and applies to
all sworn personnel.

A. Procedures.

1. The Chief of Police or his or her designee will administer the Drug and
Alcohol Testing Program.

2. All officers will be tested twice every eighteen (18) months by urinalysis,
which will be screened for the presence of specific drugs.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 69
8. The drug screening will be. conducted to detect only the following drug
groups:

a, Amphetamines/Methamphetamines (e.g. Speed, Crystal);

b. Benzodiazepines (e.g. Valium, Librium, Oxazepam, Serax, Dalmane,
Ativan);

c. Barbiturates (e.g. | Amobarbital, Butabarbital, Pentobarbital,
Phenobarbital, Secobarbital);

d. Cocaine;

e. Methadone;

f. Ethanol;

g. Opiates (e.g. Codeine, Heroin, Morphine);
h. Phencyclidine (PCP);

i, THC (Marijuana); and

j. Hallucinogenics (e.g. LSD).

4, Officers will be assigned a confidential number for testing purposes. Numbers
will be selected on a random basis, using a secured computer program.

5. Officers may provide appropriate documentation of legally-prescribed
medications. The documentation will be included in the review of test results
by the testing facility.

B. Sample Collection.

1. Medical Contractor’s (MC) personnel will be responsible for obtaining the
urine sample from the officer being tested.

2. MC’s personnel will be available for test processing between 8:00 a.m. and
2:00 a.m. hours, five (5) days per week, to allow officers to be tested during
normal work hours. (Hours vary at some MC locations.)

 

 

 

 

8. MC’s personnel will not observe the officer as the sample is being given.

4. Officers to be tested will be notified at the start of their shift. They will
present themselves for testing at the earliest possible time during the shift,
and no later than four (4) hours after being notified that they are to be tested.
Refusals or failures to complete the test as required will be referred by the
Chief of Police or his or her designee to the Command for investigation and

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 70
appropriate discipline up to and including termination. Officers who fail to
appear for testing will be scheduled to test their next working day.

5. At the MC’s site, the officer being tested will:

a. Identify himself or herself by presenting his or her Department
identification or California driver's license.

b. Complete requested paperwork.

c. Remove jackets, bags or other bulky items of clothing prior to entering the
testing area.

d. Provide a urine sample.

1) Officers will be required to stay within the MC’s facility until the
required sample is given.

2) Sample must be at least 45 ml, the minimum amount required for
testing purposes.

6. At the MC’s site, the Medical Assistant (MA) will:

a. Have the officer wash his or her hands and provide the officer with a pair
of gloves. Washing hands and wearing gloves is required when providing

the specimen. Failure or refusal to do so will be documented by the MA.

b. Direct the officer being tested to a private lavatory.

e. Assure that the lavatory is secured in accordance with established City
procedures.

d. Wait outside the lavatory for the sample.

e. Upon receipt of the urine sample, and in the presence of the officer, the
MA will:

1) Split the sample into two unused separate containers which will be
referred to as test sample and control sample.

2) Seal the containers.
f. Complete the appropriate chain-of-custody forms for the samples.

g. Refrigerate both the test sample and the control sample until the samples
are picked up by the laboratory courier.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 71

 

 
C. Screening Procedure.

1. The initial screening of all collected samples will generally be conducted
within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt by a City-designated Laboratory
certified by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA).

2. Initial screening of urine samples will be conducted using a testing
methodology based primarily upon an “Enzyme Immunoassay” or other
testing methodology of equivalent quality and acceptability.

8. If a confirmation test is required, it will be conducted by Gas
Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS) testing or other testing
methodology of equivalent quality and acceptability.

4, Upon receipt of a sample for testing, the designated laboratory will:

a. Check the container to ensure it is not damaged, and that the seal is
intact.

b. Complete the appropriate chain-of-custody forms for the sample.

c. Conduct the initial testing of the sample using an “Enzyme Immunoassay”
technique or other testing methodology of equivalent quality and
acceptability.

d. Ifthe sample tests “negative,” all urine samples will be discarded.

e. If the sample tests “positive,” a confirmation test will be performed for the
specific drug or drugs found in the sample during the initial test.

f. If the confirmation test confirms the presence of drugs, any remainder of
the test sample and the entire control sample will be retained in a locked
freezer for a minimum of one (1) year.

g. If the confirmation test is “negative,” the whole test will be considered
negative and all urine samples will be destroyed.

5. Alcohol Test.

a. The standard for alcohol testing will be the converted urinalysis
equivalent of a blood alcohol level of 0.02 percent.

b. An alcohol testing level of 0.02 percent will be treated as a “positive”
result and may be cause for disciplinary action. Any measurable amount
of alcohol will be cause for mandatory referral of the officer to City’s
Employee Assistance Program.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 72,
D. Reporting Test Results.

1, Test results will be provided to Personnel Department’s Medical Program
Administrator by the MC.

2. The officer will be notified of his or her test results in writing without delay.

8. If test results are positive, the Executive Assistant Chief of Internal Affairs
will be notified, and will be responsible for initiating an investigation.

 

E. Independent Testing.

1. If the test results are positive, the affected officer has the right to require
independent testing of the control sample. The request must be made to the
Executive Assistant Chief of Internal Affairs by the officer within thirty (80)
calendar days of receipt of the notice of drug test results indicating that the
officer’s drug test was positive and a representative from the Department is
being contacted. The right of the officer to independent testing of the control
sample includes:

a. The right to designate the laboratory, which must be a SAMHSA certified
laboratory.

b. The right to designate the type of test to be conducted in order to identify
substances that will cause a positive finding for the test sample.

c. The designation of the test to be performed will be communicated by the
affected officer directly to the laboratory selected and is a confidential
communication protected by the medical privacy privilege which extends
to all communications between or on behalf of the affected officer and the
independent test laboratory and its personnel. The privilege is waived if
section F.2 is applicable.

2. If, in any proceedings involving an appeal from a notice of adverse action
based upon a positive drug test sample, the employee intends to challenge the
accuracy of the results of the test sample or intends to introduce into
evidence, whether during direct examination, cross-examination, or rebuttal,
any evidence whether testimonial or documentary which results from the
affected officer's demand for independent testing, the affected officer will,
without delay, and prior to any appeal hearing, including the Skelly meeting,
furnish to the Department a copy of all reports setting forth the result of the
testing of the control sample. If the reports are not provided prior to the
Skelly meeting, the reports may not be used in any future appeal hearing.

8. If testing is donc to confirm the presence of the drug or drugs identified in the
original test, it will be done in accordance with SAMHSA’s Mandatory
Guidelines regarding Retesting of a Specimen, which provides the amount of
sample necessary for a retest is not subject to a specific cut-off requirement

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 73
but must provide data sufficient to confirm the presence of the drug or
metabolite. i

4, The officer and his or her representative will make all necessary
arrangements for transport and preservation of the control sample to the
independent testing laboratory designated by the affected officer. He or she
will first inform City’s Random Drug Testing Coordinator, who in turn will
initially contact City’s Laboratory to provide for release of the sample to the
officer’s courier.

 

5. All costs associated with independent testing will be borne by the officer.

F. Program Records.

1. All drug testing information relating to individual officers is strictly
confidential. i

2. All records related to the Drug and Alcohol Testing Program will be
maintained as directed by the Personnel Director.

G. Use of Test Results.

The Random Drug Testing Program is considered an administrative matter, and
the results of this test will not be used in any criminal action. However, if
additional information is available through other means to support criminal
action against an employee, the Department will not be precluded from taking
further action.

ARTICLE 58
CATASTROPHIC LEAVE PLAN

A. Purpose.

Establish a City-administered Catastrophic Leave Bank (Leave Bank) permitting
City employees to assist other City employees who face extended leaves without
pay due to a catastrophic occurrence in their lives. For the purpose of this plan, a
“catastrophic occurrence” is defined as any event that would qualify the employee
under the FMLA as determined by Mayor or his or her designee. Catastrophic
Leave determinations are non-grievable.

B. Procedures.

1. The employee must have exhausted or expect to exhaust his or her accrued
leave (to be verified by the Department payroll specialist), as a result of a
qualifying event in order to establish a Leave Bank.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 74
a. If an employee is diagnosed as terminally ill, a Leave Bank may be
established without meeting this requirement. In such cases, the donated
leave will be paid out when the employee leaves work due to illness. A
recipient’s total annual leave balance, including donated leave cannot
exceed 2080 hours.

b. The employee has received approval for an unpaid leave of absence from
his or her Department Head.

2. Requests to establish a Leave Bank for receipt of donations will be processed
by the Human Resources Department.

a. An eligible employee will submit a completed “Request to Establish
Catastrophic Leave Bank” form to the Human Resources Director,
accompanied by:

1) A medical statement from the attending physician, including a brief
statement of the nature of the illness or injury and an estimated time
the employee will be unable to work, or other appropriate
documentation supporting the request in accordance with state and
federal law.

2) Evidence of the Department Head’s approval of leave of absence.
8. Donations of annual leave may be made to an employee eligible for
catastrophic leave. The donor department will be billed for the dollar amount

of the donor’s annual leave donation.

a. Donations of leave will be strictly voluntary; the identity of Leave Bank
donors will be held in absolute confidence.

b. Employees may only donate accrued annual leave.

ce. Donations must be made in whole hour increments. There is no tax
benefit to the donor.

d. Donors must have an overall annual leave balance of one-hundred and
sixty (160) hours remaining after donated time has been deducted.

e. Once donated to an individual, donated leave cannot be reclaimed by the
donor.

f. Employees wishing to donate time will complete a “Confidential
Authorization for Catastrophic Leave Donation” form and submit it to
their department Payroll Specialist, who will:

1) Verify that the donating employee has the minimum required leave
balance of one hundred sixty (160) hours;

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 75
2) Convert the donated time to dollars at the hourly rate of the donor and
subtract the donated time from the donor's designated leave category;
and

8) Forward the donation authorization form to the Human Resources
Director for tracking and submission to the City Comptroller.

4) Donation authorization forms which do not contain all requested
information will not be processed.

4, Upon receipt of donation authorizations, the City Comptroller will take the
following action:

a. Convert donated dollars as computed above into hours at the hourly rate
of the recipient, and add the donated hours to the recipient’s annual leave
balance. Recipient will be taxed for the leave when it is taken.

b. Retain a confidential file of donation authorizations.

c. All deductions (e.g. health premiums, parking, credit union, union dues,
etc.) which have previously been authorized by the recipient will be made
unless notified in writing by the recipient to cancel deductions.

5. Donated time is treated as annual leave accrued by the recipient of the
donation. Payments up to eighty (80) hours per pay period will be made to
the recipient until the donated leave has been exhausted.

a. Donated time does not alter the employment rights of City or the
recipient, nor extend or alter limitations otherwise applicable to leaves of
absence or annual leave, except as noted in this Article.

b. Employees who are using donated annual leave hours will continue to
accrue annual leave in accordance with Personnel Manual Index Code 1-2,
Annual Leave.

ARTICLE 59
SIDE LETTERS

Effective July 1, 2007, all side letters signed by both Parties not specifically
referenced by the current MOU will expire and be of no further force and effect.
The current MOU as printed will represent all agreements between POA and City.
Effective July 1, 2015, any additional agreements must be made in writing between
City and POA with the approval of the Mayor or his or her designee, the Human
Resources Director, and the POA President or his or her designee.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 76
ARTICLE 60
MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT

“C” Mileage reimbursement will be paid in accordance with the current IRS
Standard Mileage Rates for business reimbursement.

ARTICLE 61

SPECIAL PAY FOR ADMINISTRATIVE ASSIGNMENTS

Police Sergeants assigned to specialized administrative assignments as designated
specifically by the Chief of Police will receive an additional five percent (5%) of their
base rate, effective July 1, 2003.

ARTICLE 62
SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL

A. Police Officer ITI’s, Sergeants, Detectives, and Agents, who are assigned to Third
Watch, or if the majority of their regularly scheduled work shift falls after 2100
hours will receive additional compensation of five point three percent (5.3%) of
the employee’s base rate. Police Officer III’s, Sergeants, Detectives, and Agents,
who are assigned to Second Watch or if the majority of their regularly scheduled
work shift falls after 1800 hours will receive additional compensation of three
point eight percent (3.8%) of the employee’s base rate. In addition, the
Lieutenants assigned to the Watch Commander’s Office and Communications
will be eligible for this shift differential.

B. Police Officer II’s (“A,” “C,” “D,” and “E” Steps), Police Officer Is and Recruits
who are assigned to Third Watch, or if the majority of their regularly scheduled
work shift falls after 2100 hours, will receive additional compensation based on
five point three percent (5.3%) of Police Officer II’s (“E” Step) base rate. Police
Officer II’s (“A,” “C,” “D,” and “E” steps), Police. Officer I’s and Recruits who are
assigned to Second Watch, or if the majority of their regularly scheduled work
shift falls after 1800 hours, will receive additional compensation based on three
point eight percent (3.8%) of Police Officer II’s (“E” Step) base rate.

ARTICLE 63
SPECIALTY PAYS

A. Community Relations Officers.

Community Relations Officers will receive additional compensation of three and
one-half percent (3.5%) of employee’s base rate while assigned as a Community
Relations Officer.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 77
B. Emergency Negotiators.

Emergency Negotiators will receive additional compensation of three and one-
half percent (3.5%) of employee’s base rate while assigned as Emergency
Negotiators.

C. K-9 Trainers,

K-9 Trainers will receive additional compensation of three and one-half percent
(3.5%) of employee’s base rate while assigned as a K-9 Trainer.

D. K-9 Officers.

K-9 handlers assigned a dog will receive additional compensation of three and
one-half percent (3.5%) of employee’s base rate while assigned to the unit.

E. Accident Investigation Bureau.

Members of the Accident Investigation Bureau (AIB) unit who have successfully
completed the POST Traffic Collision Reconstruction Course will receive an
additional compensation of four percent (4%) of their base rate.

F. Harbor Unit.

1. Full-time members of the Harbor Unit will receive additional compensation
of four percent (4%) of base pay, while assigned to the Harbor Unit.

2. Selected Harbor-trained officers who maintain their skill level through
Department-paid training will continue to receive additional compensation of
four percent (4%) of their base pay. The number of officers to receive this pay
will be based upon the discretion of the Department Management.

G. Trainer Pay.

Officers working as trainers, as determined by the Chief of Police, while
assigned as and performing the duties of a trainer in the manner specified by the
Department will receive additional compensation of three and one-half percent
(3.5%) of employee’s base rate.

HH. Motorcycle Pa:

Members of the unit will receive an additional three and one-half percent (3.5%)
of employee’s base rate when assigned to two-wheel motorcycles.

I, SWAT Pay

1. Employees in the classifications of Police Officer II, Police Officer III, Police
Agent, Police Sergeant, and Police Lieutenant assigned to the SWAT will

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 78

 

 
receive an additional three and one-half percent (3.5%) of employee’s base
pay.

2. SWAT officers that are members of the Special Response Team (SRT) will
receive an additional three and one-half percent (3.5%) of employee base pay.
Snipers will also be eligible to receive this additional pay.

ARTICLE 64

PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICERS PROCEDURAL BILL OF RIGHTS ACT

City agrees to include the following language of the POBOR Act in the MOU. The
Parties enter into this MOU with the understanding that any legislative or case law
changes to the POBOR made during the term of the contract will be applicable to
the Parties but will not cause City to update this Article of the MOU, for purposes of
republishing the MOU, during the term of the contract.

GOVERNMENT CODE
SECTION 3300-3312

3300. This chapter is known and may be cited as the Public Safety Officers
Procedural Bill of Rights Act.

8801. For purposes of this chapter, the term public safety officer means all peace
officers specified in Sections 830.1, 830.2, 830.3, 830.31, 830.32, 830.33, except
subdivision (e), 830.34, 830.35, except subdivision (c), 830.36, 830.37, 830.38, 830.4,
and 830.5 of the Penal Code. The Legislature hereby finds and declares that the
rights and protections provided to peace officers under this chapter constitute a
matter of statewide concern. The Legislature further finds and declares that
effective law enforcement depends upon the maintenance of stable employer-
employee relations, between public safety employees and their employers. In order
to assure that stable relations are continued throughout the state and to further
assure that effective services are provided to all people of the state, it is necessary
that this chapter be applicable to all public safety officers, as defined in this section,
wherever situated within the State of California.

8302. (a) Except as otherwise provided by law, or whenever on duty or in uniform,
no public safety officer shall be prohibited from engaging, or be coerced or
required to engage, in political activity.

(b) No public safety officer shall be prohibited from seeking election to, or
serving as a member of, the governing board of a school district.

8303. When any public safety officer is under investigation and subjected to
interrogation by his or her commanding officer, or any other member of the
employing public safety department, that could lead to punitive action, the

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 719
interrogation shall be conducted under the following conditions. For the
purpose of this chapter, punitive action means any action that may lead to
dismissal, demotion, suspension, reduction in salary, written reprimand, or
transfer for purposes of punishment.

(a) The interrogation shall be conducted at a reasonable hour, preferably at a
time when the public safety officer is on duty, or during the normal
waking hours for the public safety officer, unless the seriousness of the
investigation requires otherwise. If the interrogation does occur during
off-duty time of the public safety officer being interrogated, the public
safety officer shall be compensated for any off-duty time in accordance
with regular department procedures, and the public safety officer shall
not be released from employment for any work missed.

 

 

 

 

(b) The public safety officer under investigation shall be informed prior to
the interrogation of the rank, name, and command of the officer in charge
of the interrogation, the interrogating officers, and all other persons to be
present during the interrogation. All questions directed to the public
safety officer under interrogation shall be asked by and through no more
than two interrogators at one time.

(c) The public safety officer under investigation shall be informed of the
nature of the investigation prior to any interrogation.

(d) The interrogating session shall be for a reasonable period taking into
consideration gravity and complexity of the issue being investigated. The
person under interrogation shall be allowed to attend to his or her own
personal physical necessities.

(e) The public safety officer under interrogation shall not be subjected to
offensive language or threatened with punitive action, except that an
officer refusing to respond to questions or submit to interrogations shall
be informed that failure to answer questions directly related to the
investigation or interrogation may result in punitive action. No promise
of reward shall be made as an inducement to answering any question.
The employer shall not cause the public safety officer under interrogation
to be subjected to visits by the press or news media without his or her
express consent nor shall his or her home address or photograph be given
to the press or news media without his or her express consent.

(@) No statement made during interrogation by a public safety officer under
duress, coercion, or threat of punitive action shall be admissible in any
subsequent civil proceeding. This subdivision is subject to the following
qualifications:

(1) ‘This subdivision shall not limit the use of statements made by a
public safety officer when the employing public safety department

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 80
 

 

 

is seeking civil sanctions against any public safety officer,
including disciplinary action brought under Section 19572.

 

(2) This subdivision shall not prevent the admissibility of statements
made by the public safety officer under interrogation in any civil
action, including administrative actions, brought by that public
safety officer, or that officer's exclusive representative, arising out
of a disciplinary action.

(8) This subdivision shall not prevent statements made by a public
safety officer under interrogation from being used to impeach the
testimony of that officer after an in camera review to determine
whether the statements serve to impeach the testimony of the
officer.

(4) This subdivision shall not otherwise prevent the admissibility of
statements made by a public safety officer under interrogation if
that officer subsequently is deceased.

 

 

 

 

(g) The complete interrogation of a public safety officer may be recorded. Ifa
tape recording is made of the interrogation, the public safety officer shall
have access to the tape if any further proceedings are contemplated or
prior to any further interrogation at a subsequent time. The public safety
officer shall be entitled to a transcribed copy of any notes made by a
stenographer or to any reports or complaints made by investigators or
other persons, except those which are deemed by the investigating agency
to be confidential. No notes or reports that are deemed to be confidential
may be entered in the officer's personnel file. The public safety officer
being interrogated shall have the right to bring his or her own recording
device and record any and all aspects of the interrogation.

 

(h) If prior to or during the interrogation of a public safety officer it is
deemed that he or she may be charged with a criminal offense, he or she
shall be immediately informed of his or her constitutional rights.

G) Upon the filing of a formal written statement of charges, or whenever an
interrogation focuses on matters that are likely to result in punitive
action against any public safety officer, that officer, at his or her request,
shall have the right to be represented by a representative of his or her
choice who may be present at all times during the interrogation. The
representative shall not be a person subject to the same investigation.
The representative shall not be required to disclose, nor be subject to any
punitive action for refusing to disclose, any information received from the
officer under investigation for non-criminal matters. This section shall
not apply to any interrogation of a public safety officer in the normal
course of duty, counseling, instruction, or informal verbal admonishment
by, or other routine or unplanned contact with, a supervisor or any other

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 81
0)

3304. (a)

(b)

(©)

(d)

public safety officer, nor shall this section apply to an investigation
concerned solely and directly with alleged criminal activities.

No public safety officer shall be loaned or temporarily reassigned to a
location or duty assignment if a sworn member of his or her department
would not normally be sent to that location or would not normally be
given that duty assignment under similar circumstances.

No public safety officer shall be subjected to punitive action, or denied
promotion, or be threatened with any such treatment, because of the
lawful exercise of the rights granted under this chapter, or the exercise of
any rights under any existing administrative grievance procedure.
Nothing in this section shall preclude a head of an agency from ordering a
public safety officer to cooperate with other agencies involved in criminal
investigations. If an officer fails to comply with such an order, the agency
may officially charge him or her with insubordination.

No punitive action, nor denial of promotion on grounds other than merit,
shall be undertaken by any public agency against any public safety officer
who has successfully completed the probationary period that may be
required by his or her employing agency without providing the public
safety officer with an opportunity for administrative appeal.

No Chief of Police may be removed by a public agency, or appointing
authority, without providing the Chief of Police with written notice and
the reason or reasons therefore and an opportunity for administrative
appeal. For purposes of this subdivision, the removal of a Chief of Police
by a public agency or appointing authority, for the purpose of
implementing the goals or policies, or both, of the public agency or
appointing authority, for reasons including, but not limited to,
incompatibility of management styles or as a result of a change in
administration, shall be sufficient to constitute "reason or reasons."
Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to create a property
interest, where one does not exist by rule or law, in the job of Chief of
Police.

(1) Except as provided in this subdivision and subdivision (g), no punitive
action, nor denial of promotion on grounds other than merit, shall be
undertaken for any act, omission, or other allegation of misconduct if the
investigation of the allegation is not completed within one year of the
public agency's discovery by a person authorized to initiate an
investigation of the allegation of an act, omission, or other misconduct.
This one-year limitation period shall apply only if the act, omission, or
other misconduct occurred on or after January 1, 1998. In the event that
the public agency determines that discipline may be taken, it shall
complete its investigation and notify the public safety officer of its
proposed discipline by a Letter of Intent or Notice of Adverse Action

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 82
 

articulating the discipline that year, except as provided in paragraph (2).
The public agency shall not be required to impose the discipline within
that one-year period.

(2)(A) If the act, omission, or other allegation of misconduct is also the
subject of a criminal investigation or criminal prosecution, the time
during which the criminal investigation or criminal prosecution is
pending shall toll the one-year time period.

 

 

 

(B) If the public safety officer waives the one-year time period in writing,
the time period shall be tolled for the period of time specified in the
written waiver.

 

(C) If the investigation is a multi-jurisdictional investigation that
requires a reasonable extension for coordination of the involved
agencies.

(D) If the investigation involves more than one employee and requires a
reasonable extension.

(£) If the investigation involves an employee who is incapacitated or
otherwise unavailable.

(F) If the investigation involves a matter in civil litigation where the
public safety officer is named as a party defendant, the one-year time
period shall be tolled while that civil action is pending.

(G) If the investigation involves a matter in criminal litigation where the
complainant is a criminal defendant, the one-year time period shall
be tolled during the period of that defendant's criminal investigation
and prosecution.

(H) If the investigation involves an allegation of workers’ compensation
fraud on the part of the public safety officer.

(e) Where a pre-disciplinary response or grievance procedure is required or
utilized, the time for this response or procedure shall not be governed or
limited by this chapter.

() If, after investigation and any pre-disciplinary response or procedure, the
public agency decides to impose discipline, the public agency shall notify
the public safety officer in writing of its decision to impose discipline,
including the date that the discipline will be imposed, within 30 days of
its decision, except if the public safety officer is unavailable for discipline.

(g) Notwithstanding the one-year time period specified in subdivision (c), an
investigation may be reopened against a public safety officer if both of the
following circumstances exist:

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 83
(1) Significant new evidence has been discovered that is likely to affect
the outcome of the investigation.

(2) One of the following conditions exist:
(A) The evidence could not reasonably have been discovered in the
normal course of investigation without resorting to extraordinary

measures by the agency.

(B) The evidence resulted from the public safety officer's pre-
disciplinary response or procedure.

(h) For those members listed in subdivision (a) of Section 830.2 of the Penal

3304.5.

3305.

3306.

3306.5.

Code, the 30-day time period provided for in subdivision (f) shall not
commence with the service of a preliminary notice of adverse action,
should the public agency elect to provide the public safety officer with
such a notice.

An administrative appeal instituted by a public safety officer under this
chapter shall be conducted in conformance with rules and procedures
adopted by the local public agency.

No public safety officer shall have any comment adverse to his interest
entered in his personnel file, or any other file used for any personnel
purposes by his employer, without the public safety officer having first
read and signed the instrument containing the adverse comment
indicating he is aware of such comment, except that such entry may be
made if after reading such instrument the public safety officer refuses to
sign it. Should a public safety officer refuse to sign, that fact shall be noted
on that document, and signed or initialed by such officer.

A public safety officer shall have 30 days within which to file a written
response to any adverse comment entered in his personnel file. Such
written response shall be attached to, and shall accompany, the adverse
comment.

(a) Every employer shall, at reasonable times and at reasonable intervals,

upon the request of a public safety officer, during usual business hours,
with no loss of compensation to the officer, permit that officer to inspect
personnel files that are used or have been used to determine that officer's
qualifications for employment, promotion, additional compensation, or
termination or other disciplinary action.

(b) Each employer shall keep each public safety officer's personnel file or a

true and correct copy thereof, and shall make the file or copy thereof

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 84
©

(d@)

3307.

(a)

(b)

3307.5.
(a)

available within a reasonable period of time after a request therefor by
the officer.

If, after examination of the officer's personnel file, the officer believes
that any portion of the material is mistakenly or unlawfully placed in the
file, the officer may request, in writing, that the mistaken or unlawful
portion be corrected or deleted. Any request made pursuant to this
subdivision shall include a statement by the officer describing the
corrections or deletions from the personnel file requested and the reasons
supporting those corrections or deletions. A statement submitted
pursuant to this subdivision shall become part of the personnel file of the
officer.

Within 30 calendar days of receipt of a request made pursuant to
subdivision (c), the employer shall either grant the officer's request or
notify the officer of the decision to refuse to grant the request. If the
employer refuses to grant the request, in whole or in part, the employer
shall state in writing the reasons for refusing the request, and that
written statement shall become part of the personnel file of the officer.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

No public safety officer shall be compelled to submit to a lie detector test
against his or her will. No disciplinary action or other recrimination
shall be taken against a public safety officer refusing to submit to a lie
detector test, nor shall any comment be entered anywhere in the
investigator's notes or anywhere else that the public safety officer refused
to take, or did not take, a lie detector test, nor shall any testimony or
evidence be admissible at a subsequent hearing, trial, or proceeding,
judicial or administrative, to the effect that the public safety officer
refused to take, or was subjected to, a lie detector test.

For the purpose of this section, "lie detector" means a polygraph,
deceptograph, voice stress analyzer, psychological stress evaluator, or any
other similar device, whether mechanical or electrical, that is used, or the
results of which are used, for the purpose of rendering a diagnostic
opinion regarding the honesty or dishonesty of an individual.

No public safety officer shall be required as a condition of employment by
his or her employing public safety department or other public agency to
consent to the use of his or her photograph or identity as a public safety
officer on the Internet for any purpose if that officer reasonably believes
that the disclosure may result in a threat, harassment, intimidation, or
harm to that officer or his or her family.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 85

 
3308.

3309.

(b) Based upon his or her reasonable belief that the disclosure of his or her
photograph or identity as a public safety officer on the Internet as
described in subdivision (a) may result in a threat, harassment,
intimidation, or harm, the officer may notify the department or other
public agency to cease and desist from that disclosure. After the
notification to cease and desist, the officer, a district attorney, or a United
States Attorney may seek an injunction prohibiting any official or
unofficial use by the department or other public agency on the Internet of
his or her photograph or identity as a public safety officer. The court may
impose a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500) per day commencing two working days after the date of receipt of
the notification to cease and desist.

No public safety officer shall be required or requested for purposes of job
assignment or other personnel action to disclose any item of his property,
income, assets, source of income, debts or personal or domestic expenditures
(including those of any member of his family or household) unless such
information is obtained or required under state law or proper legal procedure,
tends to indicate a conflict of interest with respect to the performance of his
official duties, or is necessary for the employing agency to ascertain the
desirability of assigning the public safety officer to a specialized unit in which
there is a strong possibility that bribes or other improper inducements may
be offered.

No public safety officer shall have his locker, or other space for storage that
may be assigned to him searched except in his presence, or with his consent,
or unless a valid search warrant has been obtained or where he has been
notified that a search will be conducted. This section shall apply only to
lockers or other space for storage that are owned or leased by the employing
agency.

3309.5.

(a) It shall be unlawful for any public safety department to deny or refuse to
any public safety officer the rights and protections guaranteed to him or
her by this chapter.

(b) Nothing in subdivision (h) of Section 111181 shall be construed to affect
the rights and protections afforded to state public safety officers under
this chapter or under Section 832.5 of the Penal Code.

 

 

 

 

(c) The superior court shall have initial jurisdiction over any proceeding
brought by any public safety officer against any public safety department
for alleged violations of this chapter.

(d) (1) In any case where the superior court finds that a public safety
department has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the court

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 86

 
(©)

shall render appropriate injunctive or other extraordinary relief to
remedy the violation and to prevent future violations of a like or similar
nature, including, but not limited to, the granting of a temporary
restraining order, preliminary injunction, or permanent injunction
prohibiting the public safety department from taking any punitive action
against the public safety officer.

(2) If the court finds that a bad faith or frivolous action or a filing for an
improper purpose has been brought pursuant to this chapter, the court
may order sanctions against the party filing the action, the party’s
attorney, or both pursuant to Sections 128.6 and 128.7 of the Code of
Civil Procedure. Those sanctions may include, but not be limited to,
reasonable expenses, including attorney's fees, incurred by a public safety
department, as the court deems appropriate. Nothing in this paragraph
is intended to subject actions or filings under this section to rules or
standards that are different from those applicable to other civil actions or
filings subject to Section 128.6 or 128.7 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

In addition to the extraordinary relief afforded by this chapter, upon a
finding by a superior court that a public safety department, its
employees, agents, or assigns, with respect to acts taken within the scope
of employment, maliciously violated any provision of this chapter with
the intent to injure the public safety officer, the public safety department
shall, for each and every violation, be liable for a civil penalty not to
exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) to be awarded to the public
safety officer whose right or protection was denied and for reasonable
attorney's fees as may be determined by the court. If the court so finds,
and there is sufficient evidence to establish actual damages suffered by
the officer whose right or protection was denied, the public safety
department shall also be liable for the amount of the actual damages.
Notwithstanding these provisions, a public safety department may not be
required to indemnify a contractor for the contractor's liability pursuant
to this subdivision if there is, within the contract between the public
safety department and the contractor, a "hold harmless" or similar
provision that protects the public safety department from liability for the
actions of the contractor. An individual shall not be liable for any act for
which a public safety department is liable under this section.

8310. Any public agency which has adopted, through action of its governing body or

3311.

its official designee, any procedure which at a minimum provides to peace
officers the same rights or protections as provided pursuant to this chapter
shall not be subject to this chapter with regard to such a procedure.

Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to limit the use of any
public safety agency or any public safety officer in the fulfilling of mutual aid
agreements with other jurisdictions or agencies, nor shall this chapter be
construed in any way to limit any jurisdictional or interagency cooperation

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 87
under any circumstances where such activity is deemed necessary or
desirable by the jurisdictions or the agencies involved.

3312. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the employer of a public safety
officer may not take any punitive action against an officer for wearing a pin
or displaying any other item containing the American flag, unless the
employer gives the officer written notice that includes all of the following:

 

(a) A statement that the officer's pin or other item violates an existing rule,
regulation, policy, or local agency agreement or contract regarding the |
wearing of a pin, or the displaying of any other item, containing the
American flag.

(b) A citation to the specific rule, regulation, policy, or local agency
agreement or contract that the pin or other item violates.

() A statement that the officer may file an appeal against the employer
challenging the alleged violation pursuant to applicable grievance or
appeal procedures adopted by the department or public agency that
otherwise comply with existing law.

3318. In the 2005-06 fiscal year, the Commission on State Mandates shall review
its statement of decision regarding the Peace Officer Procedural Bill of Rights
test claim and make any modifications necessary to this decision to clarify
whether the subject legislation imposed a mandate consistent with the
California Supreme Court Decision in San Diego Unified School Dist. v.
Commission on State Mandates (2004) 33 Cal.4th 859 and other applicable
court decisions. If the Commission on State Mandates revises its statement of
decision regarding the Peace Officer Procedural Bill of Rights test claim, the
revised decision shall apply to local government Peace Officer Procedural Bill
of Rights activities occurring after the date the revised decision is adopted.

ARTICLE 65
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONAL LEAVE
The Parties agree to reopen negotiations on the issue of Employee Organizational

Leave after further legal analysis on the tax limitations on this proposal and after
the Parties agree on how POA will fund it.

ARTICLE 66
LABOR-MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
A Labor-Management Committee is hereby created, which will consist of the

President of POA and his or her designee, and two (2) Board members of POA, and
two representatives designated by the Chief of Police, and the Human Resources

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 88
Director or his or her designee. The Committee will meet quarterly for the purpose
of informally resolving open issues, and improving communication between the
parties. Any agreements reached at the Committee meetings will be reduced to
writing and signed off by parties.

ARTICLE 67
LINE OF DUTY DEATH

City will pay for the reasonable burial and interment expenses for the family of any
officer killed in the line of duty, not to exceed $5,000.00. City will also provide an
additional $5,000.00 to the family of an officer killed in the line of duty, to use at
their discretion. City will pay for the highest cost HMO health plan for the
surviving spouse and eligible dependents of any officer killed in the line of duty by
external violence or physical force, or as a result of an accident or injury caused by
external violence or physical force and suffered in the line of duty.

ARTICLE 68
EFFECT OF MOU

This MOU has no effect or impact on any litigation pending between POA and City,
or any other current litigation concerning its members (including former members)
or their rights. This MOU has no effect or impact on any pending claims, including
denied claims where the statute of limitations has not run.

ARTICLE 69
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
Paid Bereavement Leave of up to five (5) days is available for use during each fiscal
year of this MOU upon the death of an employee’s spouse, father, mother, brother,
sister, son, daughter (son or daughter to include: step-, foster, or adopted), or state-
registered domestic partner, with a limit of one eligible death per fiscal year. Proof
of death (death certificate, obituary, funeral program, etc.) must be provided before
an employee can be paid for Bereavement Leave, which is in addition to Annual

Leave and must be submitted within thirty (80) calendar days of when the employee
returns to work.

ARTICLE 70
AGENCY SHOP AND DUES DEDUCTION

A. Police Unit.

1. Definition and Purpose.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 89
a. “Agency Shop” means an arrangement that requires an employee, as a
condition of continued employment, either to join POA or to pay POA a
service fee or agency fee in an amount not to exceed the standard
initiation fee, periodic dues, and general assessments of POA. This MOU
is intended to be consistent with and conform to the provisions of the
MMBA and the PERB Regulations relating to agency fee agreements.

b. City and POA mutually understand and agree that all affected employees
have the right to join or not join POA. It is the purpose of this Article to
establish fair and equitable procedures for the implementation of any
Agency Shop arrangement and to protect the rights and privileges of the
employees, POA, and City.

2. Employee and POA Rights and Responsibilities.

a. Employees’ Responsibilities.

Within thirty (30) days of their employment by City or mailing of the
initial Hudson letter in a bargaining unit covered by an Agency Shop
arrangement, all employees (except management employees pursuant to
Government Code 3502.5(e)) will have the choice of either becoming a
member of POA, or of being a non-member and paying an agency fee or
conscientious objector fee. City will notify POA within forty-five (45) days
of the identity of these new employees. Members of the Police
Management Unit are not subject to the agency fee provision pursuant to
Government Code Section 3502.5 (e).

1) Employee’s Right To Conscientious Objections.

a) An employee who is a member of a bona fide religion, body, or sect
that has historically held conscientious objections to joining or
financially supporting public employee organizations will not be
required to join or financially support any public employee
organization as a condition of employment. The employee will be
required, in lieu of periodic dues, initiation fees, or agency fees, to
pay sums equal to the dues, initiation fees or agency fees, to a
nonreligious, nonlabor charitable fund exempt from taxation under
Section 501(c)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code, chosen by the
employee from a list designated by Section 2(a)(ii) of this MOU.

b) Declaration of or applications for religious exemption, with
supporting documentation, will be submitted to POA and will be
processed promptly. If the application for religious exemption is
challenged by POA, the deduction to the designated charity will
commence but will be held in escrow by POA pending POA’s

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 90
resolution of the challenge. Charitable contributions made by
employees who are eligible conscientious objectors as a substitute
for the payment of dues or an agency fee will be made by regular
payroll deduction or by proof of payments to a nonreligious, non-
labor charitable fund on a monthly basis to POA as a condition of
continued exemption from the requirement of financial support to
POA.

2) Designation of Nonreligious, Nonlabor Charitable Funds.

a)

Employees who are eligible conscientious objectors as described in
Section A.2.(a)(1) must designate one of the following nonreligious,
non-labor charitable funds to which his or her contributions in lieu
of dues or agency fees will be paid:

i. Wounded Warrior Project.
ii. Nice Guys San Diego
iii. Susan G. Komen for the Cure

b. POA’s Responsibilities.

1) Notice to City of Dues and Agency Fees. POA will provide a biweekly
transmittal file detailing by employee the amount of dues and agency
fees to be deducted.

2) Notice to Fee Payers.

a)

b)

In accordance with state law and regulations, including PERB
Regulation 82992, POA must provide agency fee payers an annual
explanation of what the fee is used for and sufficient financial
information to enable the agency fee payer to determine the
appropriateness of the fee (Hudson Notice). POA must provide
agency fee payers a reasonably prompt opportunity to challenge the
amount of the fee before an impartial decision maker, not chosen by
POA, and must provide an escrow account to hold amounts in
dispute while challenges are pending.

POA will provide City copies of its Hudson Notice concurrently with
POA’s distribution to agency fee payers.

3) Notice of Employees.

a)

POA will provide newly hired employees in the Police Unit with an
authorization notice advising them that all unit members must join
POA, pay an agency fee to POA, or execute a written declaration

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 91

 
 

setting forth a bona fide religious exemption from this requirement.

The notice will include a form for the employee’s signature

authorizing payroll deduction of POA dues, or an agency fee, or a

charitable contribution equal to the agency fee. Affected employees i
will have thirty (30) calendar days from the date of receipt of this :
notice and authorization to fully execute and return it to POA. If

the employee fails to execute the form, the agency fee will be

deducted from the employee’s paycheck.

b) POA will provide City copies of the authorization notice each time it
is changed, but no less frequently than with the delivery of its
annual Hudson Notice.

B. Police Management Unit.

1. Since the MMBA (Government Code section 3502.5(e)) prohibits
requiring management employees to pay an agency fee, Lieutenants
and Captains are not required to do so but may continue to authorize
voluntary dues deduction.

2. Dues will be for a specified amount and will be made only upon the
voluntary written authorization of employees in the Police
Management Unit. The authorization or cancellation of fees will be
made upon clearly marked cards provided from the employee to POA.

Cc. Deductions/Remittance of Dues and Fees.

1. POA voluntary dues or agency fees will be deducted by City from the salaries
of employees over twenty six (26) pay periods subject to Section VI (B) of the
Employee-Employer Relations Policy. Payment of voluntary dues or agency
fees will be by regular payroll deductions only. Remittance of the aggregate
amount of all voluntary dues and agency fees will be made to POA by City bi-
weekly at the conclusion of each pay period in which dues and agency fees
and deductions were made. Remittances will be made by City and sent to:

 

 

 

 

San Diego Police Officers Association
8388 Vickers Street
San Diego, CA 92111

2. If an improper deduction is made, upon proof of the improper deduction, POA
will promptly refund the full amount directly to the employee. Dues
deductions, once initiated, will continue until the employee’s authorization is
revoked in writing by the employee. An employee may only revoke a dues
deduction authorization by delivering the written notice of revocation to POA.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 92
8. Sufficiency of Employee’s Earnings: The employee’s earnings must be
sufficient, after all other legally required but not voluntary deductions, are
made to cover the amount of the dues or fees authorized. When an employee
is in an unpaid status for an entire pay period, no withholding will be made
to cover that pay period from future earnings nor will the employee deposit
(with City) the amount that would have been withheld if the employee had
been in a pay status during that period. In the case of an employee who is in
an unpaid status during part of a pay period, whose salary is insufficient to
cover the full withholding, no deduction will be made. All other legally
required deductions, including health care deductions, will have priority over
dues and agency fees.

Notice to POA.

City will provide a biweekly census file of POA represented employees by
bargaining unit to POA.

Indemnification.

1. Any dispute concerning the amount of the voluntary dues or agency service
fee or the responsibilities of POA with respect to agency fee payers is not be
subject to the grievance procedures contained in a comprehensive MOU
between the Parties. POA will indemnify, defend and hold harmless City, its
officials, representatives, and agents from and against any liability arising
from any claims, demands, or other action relating to City’s compliance with
this Article. In addition, POA will refund to City any amounts paid to it in
error after City provides POA supporting evidence of the error.

2. In the event that the agency fee arrangement is terminated by a lawful vote
of the employees in the unit, a modified agency fee will be in effect for current
employees for the duration of this MOU, and each person hired to fill a
position in the bargaining unit will, as a condition of employment in that
position, be required to become a member of POA or pay a service fee.

Provisions of Law.

POA agrees to comply with all applicable state and federal laws and
regulations relating to agency fee arrangements, including California
Government Code section 3502.5 and PERB Regulations sections 32990
through 32997. If any part or provision of this Article is in conflict with any
federal or state laws, or is otherwise held to be invalid or unenforceable by
any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, that part or provision will be
suspended or superseded by the applicable laws and the remainder of this
Article will not be affected by the stricter provision.

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 93
G. City will not oppose POA’s efforts to pursue the establishment of additional
lawful benefits for its members including but not limited to affiliated
institutions with all privileges and powers authorized by state and federal
law.

H. In the event of any concerted action authorized by POA which encourages
employees to withhold their services to City, City Council has the right, by
resolution, to immediately cease the collection and remittance of dues and
other deductions to POA. Before invoking its rights under this paragraph,
City will notify POA of its intention and meet to discuss the matter if
requested to do so by POA.

I City and POA will discuss and develop any additional terms or conditions
necessary for the agency fee or voluntary dues deduction or implementation.

ARTICLE 71
USE OF CITY EMAIL

Authorized POA representatives will be permitted to use City’s email system
subject to authorization by Department Management, for the sole purpose of
directing employees to information contained on POA’s website or for other matters
pertaining to Employer/Employee relations.

ARTICLE 72
VOLUNTEERS
A. City’s Volunteer Program is governed by City Council Policy 300-01.

B. A “volunteer” is defined as an individual or groups of individuals who offer
themselves for some service or undertaking without being compensated pay by
City.

C. In accordance with City Policy No. 300-01, City will continue to optimize the use
of volunteers where it is economically feasible, by developing volunteer
opportunities throughout City. Unless the Parties meet and confer during the
term of the MOU, volunteers are to be used only to supplement and complement
the work performed by City personnel and without decreasing bargaining unit
work or displacing existing City personnel.

D. Parties understand that departments participating in City’s Volunteer Program

will use volunteers to perform a number of tasks necessary to support volunteer
programs. Projects performed by volunteers include the following:

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 94
1. Retired Senior Volunteer Patrol — senior citizens who perform license plate
reading to recover vehicles, conduct “You Are Not Alone” checks, support
schools to develop child safety fingerprint programs, provides McGruff Crime
Dog Prevention programs, assist with business security surveys, support
Speed Surveys and Radar trailers and may provide support at front counters.

2. Volunteers in Policing assist patrol, investigative, and administrative
commands, speak to community groups and seniors on crime prevention and
support Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design for local
businesses.

8. Crisis Interventionist volunteers respond to traumatic incidents and help
console and provide guidance and run the Community Access Phone System
(CAPS).

ARTICLE 74
DISCRETIONARY LEAVE

A. During the term of this MOU, all full time employees will receive forty (40)
hours of discretionary leave for use during each fiscal year of this MOU and the
discretionary leave identified in this Section has no eligibility requirements
except as set forth in this Section. Three-quarter time employees will receive
thirty (80) hours of discretionary leave for use during each fiscal year of this
MOU. Half-time employees will receive eight (8) hours of discretionary leave for
use during each fiscal year of this MOU.

B. If an employee requests use of discretionary leave under this Article 30
days in advance and receives approval, the discretionary leave will be
granted unless doing so would require backfill on overtime. Once
approved, the Department will not revoke the approved discretionary
leave. The Department may also authorize use of discretionary leave
under this Article if an employee is sick. The Department is not
required to grant use of this leave when to do so would require
backfilling on overtime. As an alternative, each employee may schedule
his or her discretionary leave hours in the same manner as annual leave is
presently scheduled pursuant to the departmental annual leave guidelines.

c. All discretionary leave granted under this Article must be used by May 81st of
each fiscal year or it will be forfeited. The discretionary leave under this
article does not have any cash value.

D. Section C above does not amend, modify, or alter any discretionary leave that
may be granted under AR 95.91 (Employee Recognition and Rewards Program).

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association 95

 
COALITION
AND
CITY OF SAN DIEGO

FY2013 PROPOSITION B IMPLEMENTATION NEGOTIATIONS
TENTATIVE AGREEMENT

The San Diego Municipal Employees Association, International Association of Fire
Fighters, Local 145 (“Local 145”), International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Local 911,
Deputy City Attorneys Association of San Diego and Local 127 American Federation of
State, County, and Municipal Employees (collectively the “Coalition”), and City of San
Diego (“City”) have negotiated and reached a tentative agreement on certain terms for
an Interim Defined Contribution (DC) Plan on August 16, 2012. Negotiations between
the Coalition and City (collectively the “Parties”) continue over a Permanent DC Plan.

In accordance with Ground Rule 5, the Parties agree that final approval of the tentative
agreement is subject to approval of the City Council.

TERMS FOR INTERIM DC PLAN
INTRODUCTION

41. The purpose of this proposal is to provide a means for an Interim DC Plan to be
established expeditiously to accommodate the City’s hiring needs without
undermining the time otherwise needed for a good faith meet and confer process
over the terms of a Permanent DC Plan with disability/death benefit features
pursuant to Proposition B. Non-safety employees initially hired after July 19,
2012, who are excluded from SDCERS, will not participate in the 2009 401(a)
Plan.

2. The Parties acknowledge and agree that, by entering into this agreement on
terms for an Interim DC Plan neither party is prevented from making different
proposals during negotiations on the Permanent DG Plan over any aspect of
the DC Plan, including the vehicle, vesting schedule for City contributions, the
definition of compensation which could include a cap on eligible compensation,
the death benefit, disabillty benefit, and/or the percentage for employer and
employee contributions

SPSP-H VEHICLE

3. The SPSP-H Plan (as proposed and modified by this agreement) will be used for

purposes of this interim DC Plan. The City also agrees that any and all
“reservation of City's rights” as stated in the SPSP-H Plan document, which
relate to employees’ rights or benefits under the Plan, is limited by the City's
obligations under an agreement for an Interim DC Plan, as well as its obligations
under the Meyers-Milias-Brown-Act (“MMBA").

96
COALITION AND CITY OF SAN DIEGO
FY2013 PROPOSITION B IMPLEMENTATION NEGOTIATIONS
TENTATIVE AGREEMENT

CITY CONTRIBUTIONS

Effective October 2, 2012, the City’s total mandatory contribution for each Eligible
Class Employee as defined in SPSP-H Plan document Article |, section 1.15,
subdivision (a)(ii) will be 9.2% for non-safety employees and 11% for safety
employees under the Interim DC Plan. These percentages will apply to all
compensation as defined tn Article |, section 1.10 of the Plan document. For the
purpose of this agreement, Eligible Class Employees excludes all hourly
employees.

The SPSP-H Plan document will also be amended to expand the definition of
compensation fo include pay in lieu of compensatory time and pay in lieu of
cycle time.

EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS

Effective October 2, 2012, the total mandatory post-tax contribution for each
Eligible Class Employee will be 9.2% for non-safety employees and 11% for
safety employees under this Interim DC Plan. These percentages will apply to all
compensation as defined in Article |, section 1.10 of the SPSP-H Plan document
and as amended under paragraph 5 above.

VESTING

The employee will be 100% vested at all times in all amounts held in his or her
SPSP-H account whether contributed by the employee or by the City,

DEATH/DISABILITY

The City agrees that the terms of the disability/death benefit adopted in
conjunction with a Permanent DC Plan will be made retroactively applicable to
any Eligible Class Employee or his/her beneficiary(ies) who suffers a qualifying
event during the period of time when this Interim DC Plan is in effect. By this
provision, the City agrees to extend to any such Eligible Class Employee or
beneficiary the full benefits and rights which would otherwise have been available
to him or her had the disability/death benefit adopted in conjunction with a
Permanent DC Plan been in effect when the incident giving rise to the Eligible
Class Employee's disability or death occurs.

NO UNILATERAL CHANGES
No benefits or monies received by employees may be altered by the City during
this Interim DC Plan. The Parties acknowledge that negotiations are continuing

over a Permanent DC Plan. After the effective date of the Permanent DC Plan
the terms may change as set forth in paragraph 2.

97
 

|
|
|

GOALITION AND CITY OF SAN DIEGO
FY2013 PROPOSITION B IMPLEMENTATION NEGOTIATIONS
TENTATIVE AGREEMENT

RESERVATION OF RIGHTS

10. Each union is participating in this proposal for an Interim DC Plan under
continuing protest and objection and while expressly reserving its claims which
include but are not limited to the following: (a) Proposition B is unlawful as
applied to represented employees due to the City’s violation of the MMBA; (b) the
City’s insistence on altering the terms and conditions of employment for new
hires due to the chaptering of Proposition B — and after unilateral imposition of a
hiring freeze ~ is unlawful because each Union has an MOU in effect, which was
adopted and made final and binding by the City Council on June 18, 2042, and
these MOUs establish the terms and conditions of employment for all new hires
through June 30, 2013.

MAKE-WHOLE
11. The parties acknowledge that this agreement for an Interim DC Plan may
eventually be impacted by any order or decision in pending consolidated unfair

practice cases before PERB once such order or decision becomes final after the
exhaustion of all appeals under Government Code section 3509.5.

FOR THE CITY

>,

‘fimethy Davis

 

Date

 

FOR MEA FOR LOCAL 145

rk we als|iz Ftark QO. Weng ef 12

Date Date

98
COALITION AND CITY OF SAN DIEGO
FY2013 PROPOSITION B IMPLEMENTATION NEGOTIATIONS
TENTATIVE AGREEMENT

FOR LOCAL 127

DZ 4.8.1.

Date

 

FOR DCAA

Metubhbee F502.

Date

FOR LOCAL 911

( Von. “odie P-S~te 2
Date

99
APPENDIX B-EXHIBITS A,B, AND C TO FY 2011 SALARY ORDINANCE

EXHIBIT A

SALARY TABLE
EXHIBIT A

EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2010

100

 

 

 

 
 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE. Paget
Effective 7-1-2010
RATE SUEP  Bragexny _nouRwit RAYE STEP sxwemkny _ROURLY RAYE sree BiWEEKIy HOURLY
< 204d A 1174.40 14.68 20200 A ‘2120.80 26.52, 2103 A 1273.60 15.92
B 1323.20 15.29 .B 2220.00 27.75 B 1331.20 16.64
e 1281.60 16.02 e 2336.80 29.21 ¢ 1388.00 17,35
D 1336.80 16.71 D 2449.60 30.62 D 1456.80) 18.2
z 1396.90 17.45 z 2559.20 31599 g 1532.00 19.15
1012 A 2452.80. 18.46 doat 2516.00 31.45 alos OB 1211.20 15.14
3 1519.20 18.99 B 2636.80 32.96 B 1268 500) 15:85
1588.80 19.86 c 2762.40 34.53 ¢ 1321-60 46.52
D 1661.60: 20.77 D 2896.80 36.21 D 138720. 27.34
z 4740.00 21,75 z 3040.80 38.01 E 1458 240 18.23
2013 A 1594.40. 19.93 noaz 2287.20 28.59 qos. A. 1421.60 17,77
B 1660.80 20,76 B 2396.80 29,96 B 1491.20 18.6%
¢ 1740.80 24.76. oe 251220 31.39 © 1560.00 19,50
D 1816.00 22.70 D 2633.60 32.92 D 1637.60. 20.47
E 1904.00 23.80 '  g 2764.00 34.55 5 1742.80 21.41,
104A 1832.00 0 1023 2079.20 25599 au06 2283,20 28.54
B 1915.20 23.94 B 2179.20 27.28 B 2394.40 29.93
c 2001.60 25.02 ¢ 2283.20 28.54 e 2512.80 31.41
D 2093.60 26017 D 2394.40 23.93 D 2626.40 32.83,
z 2187520 27.34 1: 2512.80 34.41 B 2760.00 34.50
1015 A 2406.40 26.33 1024 "2867,20 37.08 107 aA 1637 +60 20.47
B 220240 27.53 B 3107.20 38.84 B L742,80 Bhat
c 2303-20. 28.79 ¢ 3263420 40.79 ¢ 1793.60 22,42
> '2409..60 30.12 D 3425.60 42.82 D 1884.80 23.56
E ‘2514.40. 31.43 z 3593.60 44.92 z 1974.40 24.68
to1s A 2404.00. 30.05 1025 2696.80 33.74 1108 A 1490.40 18.63
B 2518.40 31.48 B 2824.00 35,30 B 1563 . 20 19.54
c 2636.00 32,95 ¢ 2966.40 37.08 ¢ 1637.60 20.47
D 2761360 34.52 D 3145.20 3B.94 D 1710.40 21,38
z "2889.60 36.12 8 3266.40 40,83 E 1797.60 22.47
1017, A 2222.40, 2778 u026 A 2397.60 29.97 auto. a 2568.00 32.10
B 232560 29.07 B 2514.40 31.43 B 2689.60 33.62.
c 2446.40 30.58 c 2638.40 32.98 c 2824.80: 35.32
D 2564.80" 32.06 D 2757.60 BA.AT D. 2967.20" 37,09
gE 2684.00 33.55 z 2898.40 36.23" z 3111.20 38.89
101g A 2624.00 32.80 1200 & 2283.20 28.54 a6 A 2079.20: 25.99
B 2748.80 34.36. 3 2394.40 29.93, B 2179.20 27.24
¢ 2884.00 36,05 © 2512.80 31,44 c 2283.20 © - 28,54
D 3028.00 37.85, D 2626.40 32.83: D 2394.40 29.93
z 3172.80 39.66, E 2760.00 34.50 & 2512.80 31.4%
1019 A 2808.00 35.10 woz 1740.40 21.38 qT OA 1344.00 16.80
B 2941.60 36677 : B 4797.60, 22.47 B 2402-80, 47.56
c 3085.60 38.57 C 3887520 23.59 c 1465.60 18,32
D 3220.00 40.50 D 2974.40 24.68 > 4532.80 19.46
= 3395.20 42.44 z 2079.20 25.99 zg 1601.60. 20.92

101
    

BASE SALARY TABLE. CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 2
Effective 7-1-2010

 

   

RATE Sk BIwmexny Hour’ RATE STRP__ BIWEBWTe RATE AERP BIWEEKLY" HOURLY
alle oA 197200 24.05 1437 A 1929.60 1153. A 2225.60 27.82
B 2063.20 25.79 B 2024.00 oe) 2328.80 29,41
¢ 2264.80 27.06 ¢ 2120.00 ¢ 2440400 30.50
D 2265.60. 28.32 -D 2222.40 D 2562.40 32.03
ca 2376.80 29.72 z 2325.60 5 2681.60 33.52
aa9 2806.40 35,08 a45 A 1877.60 aise A 3181.60 39.77
B 2946.40 36.83 B 1970.40 B 3342.40 41.78
c 3091.20 38.64 ¢ 2057.60 c 3497.60 43.72
D 3240.80 40.51 D 2148.80 D 3672.80 45:01
E 3405.60 42.57 xg 2251.20 z 3850.40 48413
21220 2118.40 26.48 ag A 2400.80 4157 A 2225 .60- 27.82
B 2222.40 27678 B 2524.80 B 2328.80 29.21
c 2329.60 29.12 , ¢ 2645.60 c 2440.00 30.50
D 2446.40 30.58 D 2770.40, D 2562.40 32.03
g 2568.00 32,10 ‘EB, 2904.80 E 2681.60 33.52
2130 A 1758.40 21.98 aqa7 oA 2445.60 1158 A 1710.40 21.38
. &B 1839,20 22.99 B 2560.80 B 1797.60 22.47

c 1932.00 24,15 c 2680.80 c 2887.20 23,59 .
D 2028.80 25.36 D 2811.20 D 1974.40 24.68
z 2124.80 26.56 1 oz 2942.40 Ee. 2079.20 25.99
qi31 2028.80 25.36 1u4B OA 2023.20 dso A 2711.20 33.89
B 23.20..00 26.50 B 2192.40 B 2840.00 35.50
c 2231.20 27.89 ¢ 222320 c 2972-80 37.16
D 2346.40 29.33 D 2332.00 D 312080 39.04,
z 2458.40 30.73 z 2438.40 zB 3272.00 40-90
aa320A 2710.40 23.38 au49 3181.60 1160 |A 1296.00 26.20
B 1797.60 22.47 B 3342.40 B 1360.80 17.04
¢ 1887.20 23.59 c 3497.60 2S 1428.80 17.86
D 1974.40 24.68 D 3672.80 D 149360 18.67
z 2079.20 25.99 E 3850.40 z 1561.60 19.52
1133 A 1456.80 18.21 2150 A 2729.60 161 A 2019.20 25.24
B 1532.00 19.15 B 2864.80 B 2120.80 26.51.
c 1605.60 20,07 c 3004.00 c 2226.40 27.83
D 1678.40 20.98 D 3148.80 D 2330.40 29,13
E 2756.80 21.96 E 3304.00 E 2440.80 30.51
1134 A 2174.40 2718 a15l 2720.40 162° A 2120.80 26.51
B 2274.40 28.43 B 1797.60 B 2225.40 27,83
e 2376-80 29.71 G 1887.20 e 2330.40 29.13
D 2488.00 31.1.0 D 1974.40 D 2440.80 30.5
z 2600.80 32.51 z 2079.20 z 2560.80 32.01
u36 0A 2068.80 25.86 1152 A 2158.40 ais3 A 2435.20. 30.46
B 2171.20 27.14 B 2264.00 B 2560.80 32.01
¢ 2281.60 28.52 c 2379.20 c 2676.00 33.45
D 2392.00 29.90 Pp 2492.00 D ggil.20. 35.18
a 2512.80 34.41 z 2616.00 32270 B 2940.80 36.76

 

       
 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 3
Effective 7 ~1~20410
KATE SURP  BINERDY _nouiuiy RATE Seep BIWERKLY HOURLY RATE STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY
1164 A 1.923..20. 24,08 1175 A 1844.00; 23.05 1186 AS 2953.60 36.92
B 2023.-60 28127 B 1932.86 24.46 B 3094.40 38.68
c 2121.60 26.52 c 2027.20 25638 © 3248.80 40.62
D 2219.20 27.74 D 2126.40 26.58 D 3408.00 42.60
E 2326.40 29.08 E 2231.20 :27.89 z 3571.20 44.64
A165 2021.60 25:27 aL7e A 1264.00 15.05 4490 2079.20 25.99
B 212160 26.52 B 1264.80 15.81 B 2179.20 27.24
e 2219.20 27.74 c 1328.80 16.61 £ 2283.20 28.54
D 2326440 29.08 De 1392,80 27.44. D 2394 £0 29.93
= 2438.40 30.48 E 1464.00 48.30 zB a5i2.80° 31:41
aes A 2321.60 29.02 ALIT B. 2019.20 25.24 wigl BR 4519.20 1a.99
B 2438.40. 30.48 B 21.40..80 26.51, B 1581.60 19.77
¢ 2550.40 34.88 1 2226.40 © - 27.83 e 1659.20 20.78
D 2680.00 33.50 D: 2330.40 29,13, p 1729.60. 21.62
z 2802.40 35.03 ' og 2440.80 30.52, : E 1811.20, 22.64
a167 A 2225.60 27.82 we oA 2:20:80 Be.51 i1s2. a 4156.00. 14,45
B 2328.80 29.21 . B 2226.40 27.83 B 2222.00 15.15
¢ 2440.00. 30.50 c 2330.40 28.13 c- 4270.40 15.88
D 2562-40 32,03 D RAA0.80 30,51 D 1332.80 26.66
E 2681.60 33.52 L oF 2560-80 32.01 z 1396.80 17.46
ques A 1744.00 bao 1179 a 2485.20 30.44 t193 2344.00 16.80
B 1834.40 122.93 B 2560.80 32.02 B 2404.80: 17.56
c 1928.80 24.12 g 2676.00 33.45 c 1465.60 18.32
D 2023.20 25.29 D 2811.20 35.14 D (1532.80 49.16
=. 2193.20 26.58 B 2940.80 36.76 z 1602.40 20.03
tivo A 4705.60 21.32 unex oR 1740.40 21:38 tia A 1152.20 14.39
B 1792.00 22240 B 2797.60 22.47 B 4211.20 45.8
¢ 1880.80 23.51 ¢ 1937.20 23.59 ¢ 1268.00. 15.85
D> 1968.00 24.60 D 1974.40 (24.68 D 1321.60 16.52
z. 2072.80 25.92 E 2079.20 25.99 zB 1387.20 17.34
a7. 2019.20 25.24 1183 MIN 2568.00 32.10 195 A 2370340 29.63
B 2120,80 26.5% MAK. 3422.40 42.78 B 2488.00 31.10
¢ 2226.40 27,83 ¢ 2622-00 32.65
D 2330-40 29.13 D 2742.40. 34.28
E 2420.80 30.52 E 2880.00 36.00
11720 OA 2120.80 26.51 1184 A. 2225.60 27.82 4196 A 1797.60. 22,47
B 2226540 27.83 B 2328.80 29,11, 3 1880-80 23.51
c 2330.40 29.13 ¢ 2440.00 30,50 ¢ 1977.60 24,72
D 2440.80 30.51 2 2562.40 32.03: D 2079.20 25.99
E 2560.80 32.0% z 26B1.60 33,52 B 2179520 27.28
1173 BR 2435.20 30.44 anes 8 2562.40 aol A 1710.40 21..38
B 2560.80 92.04 B 2681.60 B ‘1797.60 22.87
¢é 2676.00 33.45 c 2816-00 e 1887.20 23.59
R 2811.20 35.14 D 2953.60 D 1974.40 24.68
. 36.76 E 3094.40 z 2079-20 25.99

 

 

103
 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pagad
Effective 7-1 ~ 2010
RATE STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY RATE STEP BIWREKLY _ oUREY RATE STEP BIVERKDY HOURLY.
1205 A 1740.00 21.75 12230 «A 2562.40 32.03 12330 A 2562.40 32.03
B 1818.40 22.73 B 2682.60 33.52 B 2681.60 33.52 -
¢ 1995.20 23.69 ¢ 2816.00 35.20 ¢ 2816.00 35.20
D 1984.60 2A.77 D 2953.60 36.92. D 2953.60 36.92
E 2070.40 25.88 _  & 3094.40 38.68 g 3094.40 38.68
3206. A 1740.00 ©? 24.75 aa24 A 1969.60 24.62 1235 A 1880.80 © 23.52
B 1818.40 22.73 .B 2063.20 25.79 B 1968.80 24.61
e 1895.20 23.69 ¢ 2166.40 27.08 e 2065-60 25-82
D 1981.60 24.77 D 2276.80 28.46 D 21.72.00 27.15
E 2070.40 25.88 z 2384.80 29,81" EB 2276.80 28.46
1207 A 2225.60 27.82 u2as 2562.40 32.03 1236 A 1008.00 12.60
B 2328.80 29.11, B 2681.60 33,52 “3B 1058-40 13.23
¢ 2440.00 30.50 . oe 2816.00 35.20 ¢ 1098.40 13.73.
D 2562.40 32.03 D 2953.60 36:92 D 1151.20 14.39
z 2681.60 33.52 g 3094.40 38.68 = 1211.20 15.14
1208 A 2225.60 27,82 1226 A 2072.80 25,91 32370 A 1272-80 35.92
B 2323.80 29,01 B 2272.00 27.45 B 4331.20 16.64
c 2440.00 30.50. e 2273.60 28.42 c 1388.00 17.35
D 2562.40 32.03 D 2386.40 29.83 2 1456.80 18.21
z 2681.60 33.52 18 2504.00 31.30 E 1532.00 19.25
task 2079.20 25.99 12270 A 2181.60 27.27 1238 1526.40 19.08
B 2179.20 27.24 B 2282.00 28.60 B 1602.40 20.03
c 2283.20 28.5% e 2395.20 29.94 ¢c 1676.80 20.96
D 2394.40 29,93 D 2543.60. 32.42 D 1760.80 22.02.
E 2512.80 31.41 z 2636.00 32.95 E 1848.80 23.11
qau9 2562.40 32.03 a228 A 2079.20. 25.99 apao 2283.20 28.54
B 2681.60" 33.52 B 2179.20 27.24. B 2394.40 29.93
c 2816.00 25.20 ¢ 2283.20 28.54 “og 2512.80. | 34.42
DB 2953.60 38.92 D 2394.40 29.93 D 2626.40 32.83
E 3094.40 38.68 BE 2512.80 BL.at E 2760.00 34.50
1220 A 2384.80 29.81. 1229 A 1902-40 23,78 aaa. oA 2568.00 32.20
B 2500.00 31.25 B 1992.00 24.90 B 2689.60 33.62
c 2627.20 32.84 c 2084.00 26.05 e 2824.80 35.31
D 2758.20 34.49. D 2196.00 27.45 D 2967.20 37,09
z 2887.20 36.09 E 2296.80 28.71 z 3131.20. 38,85
a2za A 2562.40 32.03 3230 A 1664.00 20.80 12420 2825.60 35.32
1B 2681.60 33.52 : 3 1740.80 21.76 B 2959.20 36.99
c 2816.00 35.20 c 1822.40 22.78 c 3108.00 38.85
D 2953.60 36.92 D 1913.60 23.92 D 3262.40 40.78
E 3094.40 38.68 z 1999.20 24.99 z 3422.40 42.78
12220 a 2079.20 25.99 1234 A 2562.40 32.03 i243 2825.60 35.32
B 2179.20 27.24 B 2681.60 33.52 B 2959.20 36.99
¢ 2283.20 28.58 c 2816.00 35.20 c 3108-00 38.85
D 2394.40 29.93 D 2953.60 36.92 D 3262.40 40.78
z 2512.80 Erorts E 8094.40. 38.68 x 3422.40 42.78

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 8
Effective.7 — 1 ~2010°°
RATE STEP BIWEERDY HOUR Hage ‘pip prvgieny pour RATE SRP BIWEEKLY HOURLY
t2ak 3247 20 40,59 a261 qito.4o 43.88 1275 A 1958.40 21.98
B 3404.00 42.55 B * q156.00. 14.45, B 1836.00 22,95
¢ 3572.80 44.66 e 1264.00 15.05 c 1931.20 2414
D 3751.20 46.89 D 1261,60 15277 D 2030.40 25,38
zB 3932.80 49.16 z 1312.80 16-01 B 2126.40 26.58"
1246 4151.20 14.39 1262. 1222240 15.28 1275 A 2019.20 25.24
B 1211.20 15.44 B 1274.40 15.93 B 2120180 26.52
€ 1268.00 415285 c 4321.60 © 16.52 c 2226040 27.83
D 1321.60 16.52) D: 1388.80 17.36 D 2330.40 9 29.13
z 1387.20 L734, B 1447.20 g 2440.80 30.51.
aeag; A 2975.20 24.69 wba 1706.40 wa77 A 2120.80 26.54
B 2074.40 25.93 B 4792.20 B 2226.40 27.83
@. 2178.40 27.23 , ¢ 1872-00 ec 2330.40 29.13
D 2287.20 28,59 D 1952.80 D 2440.80 30,51
z 2401.60 30.02 8 2046.40 E 2560.80 32.03,
1250 A 1746.80 1265 1449.60 1278. A 2664.80 33.34
B 1797.60 B 1519.20 B 2800.00 35.00
c 1888-00 ¢ 1590.40- 19-88 : ¢ 2935.20 36,69
D 1974.40 D 1660.00: 20.75 > 3077260 38.47
z 2079.20 1 B 1738.20 23.69 E 3225.60 40.32
aba 2764-00 ia6e a 1672.20 20.94 aa79 2258.40 36.98
B 2895.20 B 1743.26 21.79 B 3410240 38.88
c 3038.20 ¢ 1827.20 22.84 ec 3252.00 20.68:
D ‘3188-80 D 1904.80 23.81 D Bad4.a0 42.68.
z ‘3348-00 gE 1996.00 24.95 _ =# 3577.60 B42 72
1S OA 1241.20. 1267 1940.00 2300 3280 4281.60 16.02
3 1268.00 B 1917.60 23,97 B 1336-80 26.72
c w321.60 ¢ poii.20 25,34 ¢ 1396.00 A745
D 4387-20 D 2100.80 26.26 D 1457.60 18.22
£ 1458.40 ® 2396.80 27.46 E 1525.60 19.07
1256 A 1268.00 15.85 1268 A 1212.20 15.44 u2a2, 1888.80 23-64
B 4322.40 16.53 3B 1268.00 25,85 3B 1979.20 28.74
€ 1387.20 17.34 c 132,60 46.52 € 2077 60 25.97
D 145840 18.23 D 1387.20 gga D. BLTL.20 27.14
E 1531.20 19.44 E 1488.40 18.23 z 2288.00 28.60
4257 A “2485.20 18.19 1273 A 2379.20. 29.78 1283 A 1490.40. 18.63
B 1825.60 19.07 B 2498.40 34.23 B 1560.00 19.50
c 1596.00 49.95 e 2616.80 32.71, c 1637.60 20.07
2 1677.60 20.97 D 2742640 34,28 D A742 .80 214d
B 1760-80 22.01 B 2876.80 35.96 = 1793.60 22.42
1260 A 337.60 a.72 waya 1529.60 19,12 1285 A 1395.20 17 Waa
B 97200 ia. B s98.40 19.98 B 1457.60. 28,22
c 2016.00 12.70 ¢ 1677.60 20.97 ¢ 1526.40 19,08
D 1063.40 13,28 D 1758.40 BL.98 D 1602.40 20.03
E 1ak0.40 13.38 R 1836.00 22.95 x 1681.60 21.02

 

105
 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE

 

  

Page 6
Effective 7-1-2010
RATE STEP BIWEEKLY —_ HOUREY. RATA STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY. RATE STi BIWEEKLY HOURLY
1286 aA 1421.60 17.77 1305 A 1767.20 22,09, 1314 A 1537.60 49.22.
B 1491.20 18.64 B (1872.20 23.39 B 1665.60 20.82
Cc 1560.00 19.50 Cc 1975.20 24.69 c. ‘1793.60 22.42
D 1637.60 20.47 D 2079.20 25.99 D 1921.60 24.02
E 1712-80 - 21.41 : z 2079.20 25.99 u 2049.60 25.62
1287 A 1564.80 19.56 2306 A 1247.20. 15.59 1315 A (1921.60 24,02
B 1640.00 20.50 B 1351.20 16.89 B 2049.60 25.62
Cc 1725.20 (21.44 ¢ 1455.20 18.19 Cc 2178.40 27.23
D 1801.60 22.52 D 1559.20 19.49 D 2306.40 28,83
z 1885.60 23.57 ER 1663.20 20.79 Eg 2434.40 30.43
i288 AK 1671.20 20.89 1307 AD 1559.20 19.49 1316 A 1172.00 14.65
B (1744.00 21.80 B 1663.20 20.79 B 1269.60 15.87
Cc 1829.60 22.87 hs c ‘1767.20 22.09. Cc 1367.20 17.09
D 1911.20 23.89 D 187: 0 23.39 D 1464.80 18.32
E 2000.00 25.00 ‘ =z 1975.20 24.69 B 1562.40 19.53
1290 A 1892.00 23.65 1308 A 1247.20 15.59 i3i7 BR 1464.80 18.31,
B 1982.40 24 .78- B 1351.20 16.89 B 1562.40 49.53
¢ 2082.40 26.03 ¢ 1455.20 18.29 ¢ 1660.00 20075
D (2185.60 27.32 D 1559.20 19.49 D 1757.60 (21.97
gE (2291.20 28.64 £ gE 1663.20 20.79 Eg ‘1855.20 (23.19
1293, A 1671.20 20.89 1305 A 1559.20 19.49 1318 A 1272.00 14.65
B 1744.00 21.80 B 1663.20 20.79 B ‘1269-60 15-87
Cc 1828.00 22.85 c 1767.20 22.09 Cc 1367.20 17,09
D 1911.20 23.89 D (1871.20 23.39 D 1464.80 18,32
E ‘2003.20 25.04 iE 1975.20 (24.69 E 1562,40 19,53
1296 A 2086.40 26.08 1310 (OA 1146.40 14.33 1319 OA 1464.80 18.31
B 2187.20 27.34 B 1242.40 15.53 B (1562.40 19.53
c 2294.40 28.68 Cc 1337.60 16.72 Cc 1660,00 20.75
D 2406.40 30.98 D 1433.60 47.92 D 1757.60. 21.97
E: 2520.00 31.50 z (1528.80 19,12 'E 1855.20 23,19
1302 KR 4200.00" 13.75 wll 1433.60 17.92 43200 «A 1247.60 15.22
B 4191.20 14.89 B 1528.80 19.11. B 1318.40 ‘16.48
Cc 1283.20 16.04 Cc 1624.80 20,31: c 1420.00 ‘17.75
D 1374.40. 17.18 D (1720.00 21.50 D 1521.60 19.02
E 1557.60 19.47 EB (1816.00 22.70 Ez 1623.20 20.29
1303 A 1ip1.20 14.89 1312 «A 1247.20 15.59 1321 A (1521.60 19.02
B 1283.20 16.04 B 1381.20 16.89 B 1623.20 20.29
c 1374.40 217.18 c 1455.20 18.29 Cc 1724.80 21.56
D 1557.60 19.47 D 1559.20 19.49 D 1825.60. (22.82
B 1740.80 21.76 E 1663.20 20.79 z 1927.20 24.09
1304 =A 1247.20 15.59 1313 A 1559.20 19.49 1322 WA 4247.20 15.59
B 1351.20 16.89 B 1663.20 20.79 B 1351.20 16.89
Cc 1455.20 18.49 c 1767.20 22.09 Cc . 1455.20 18.19
D 1559.20 19.49 D 1871.20 (23.39 D 1559.20 19.49
E 1663.20 20.79 E 1975.20 24,69 E 1663 ,20 20.79

 

 

 

 
_ BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE

Effective 7~1— 2040

payee

Page7

 

 

 

BAVE sree Biyiimeny _wourny. avn STEP priemmiy _ nourty RATE _ STEP
a3a3 A 1589.20 19.49 1333) 1922.00 23.96 4342, A 1682.40
B 663.20 20.79: B 2004.80 25.06 B 1768.00
c 1767.20 22.08: ce 2097 60 26.22 * c 1850.40
D 1871.20 23.39 D 2207.20 D 1943.20
z 1975.20 24.68 B 2310.40: @- 2036.00
a32aa 1172.00 44.65, 233@ 0 A 4268.00 45.85 a343 2036.00
B 1269.60 45.87 zB 4322.40 16:53 B 2136.00
& 1367.20 17.09 ¢ 1387.20 17.34 ¢ 2237.60
D 1464.80 48.32 D 1458.40 18.23 D 2344.00
= 1562.40 19.53 E 1531.20 19.14 RB 2462.40
1325 A 1464.80 18.3% 1335 A IAG 40. 14:33 ase 2568.00
B 1562.40 49.53 B 1242.20 15.53 3B 2689.60
© 1660.00 20.75 ye 1337.60 16.72 c 2824.80
D 1957.60 21.97 D 1433.60 27,92 D. 2967.20
z 1855.20 23.19 E 1624: 80 20.33 E g2ta,20
was A 1398.40 17.48 13360 A 1242.40 35.53 1346 A 2953.60
B 1514.40 48.93 B. 1837.60 16.72 B 3094-40
c 1631.20 © 20.39 c 1433.60 ‘27,92 c 3248:80 40.61
D 1748.00 21.85 D 1624.80: 20.33 D 3408.09 42,60
B 1980.80 24.76 » 2 4826.00 22.70 E 3571.20 44.64
1327 1544.40 18.53 13370 A 1045.60 33074347, A Biig1.60 27.02
B 2631.20 20.39 B 1132.80, 14.16 B 2269.60 28.37
c 2748200 21..85 c 1220.00 45.25 e 2380.00 29.78
D. 1980.80: 24.76 D 1307.20 16.34 D 2493.60 34.47
& 2213.60 27.67, B 2480.80 18.5E z 2612.80 32.66
1329 «A 1364-00 27.05 1338 A 1132.80 14.46 1348 A 2079.20 25.99
8, 1477.60 18.47 B 1220.00 15.25 B 2179.20 27.24
Fel 2591.20 19.89 » ¢ 1307.20 16.34 ¢ 2283.20 28.54
D 1705.60 = 21.32 D 1480.80 ag.51 D 2394.40 29.93
Bi 1819.20 © 22.74 z 1655.20 20.69 = 251280 0 31.41.
1330, A 4215.20 9 45,14 i339 A 1705.60 21,32 1349 2253.20 © 38.5e
B 2268.00 15.85 B 1819-20 22.74: B 2394.80 29.93
c 1321.60 46.52 ¢ 1932.80 24.26 ¢ 2512.80 © 34.44
D 4387.20 27.34 D 2046.20 25,58 D 2626.40 32.83
E 2458.40 18.23 B 2160-00 27.00 E 2760.00 34.50
1332 A 1545.60 19.32 1340 442160 47.97 asso 2952.20 36.89
B 1620.00 20.25 B 1491.20 18.164 B 3092:00 38.65
e 1682.00. 21.15 ¢ 1560.00 19.50 c 3246.40 40.58
D 1780). 80 22:26 D 1637.60 20.47 D 3405.60 42,57
z 1866 .40. 23.33 E 4712.80 BL.ad B 3572.80 44.66
1332 A 1738:,40 21.73: aad. 1241.20 15.14 as £720.40 21,38
B 1919.20 22.74, B 1268.00 15.85 B 1797.60 22.47
. c 1907.20 23.84 ¢ 1321.60 16552 ¢ 1887.20 23,59
D 2005.60 25.07 D 1387.20 17.34 D 1974.40 24.68
gE 2058.40 26.23 B 1458.40 18.23 8 2079.20 25.99

 

107

 
 

 

 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 8
Effective 7-1-2010
RATE SYP. BIWEEKLY HOURLY RATE STEP BIWEREEY' HOURLY RATE STEP. BIWENELY HOURLY
13520 A 2079.20 25.99 1364 A 2079.20 25.99 1373 RK 1833:,.60 22.92 :
B 2179.20 27,24 B 2279.20 27.24 B 1913.60 23.92
¢ 2283.20 28.54 ¢ 2283.20 28.54 c 2004.80 25.06
D 2394.40 29,93 D 2394.40 29.93 D 2084.80 26.06
EB 2512.80 34,41, zB 2512.80 31.44 E 2188.00 27.35
1353 A 2394.40 29.93 1365 A 2283.20 28.54 374 2B 1793.60 22.42
B 2512.80 34.41 B 2394.40 29.93 B 1884.80 23.56
c 2626.40 32,83 ¢ 2512.80 31.41 © 1973.60 24.67
D 2760.00 34.50 D 2626,40 D 2072.80 25.91
E 2895.20 36.19 z 2760.00 zB 2175.20 27,49
a3s5@ A 2568.00 32.10 1366 A 2568.00 32.10 1375 211840 26.48
B 2689.60 33,62 B 2689.60 33.62 B 2222.40 27.78
c 2824-80 35.31 » ‘2824.90 35.34 ‘c 2329.60 29,12
D 2967.20 37,09 D 2967.20 37.09 D 2486.40 30.58
E 3421.20 38,89 og 3111.20 38.89 E 2568.00 32.10
a355 A 2683.20 33.54 13670 A 1174.40 14.68 1376 A 2333.60 29.47
B 2812.00 35.45 B 1223.20 15.29 B 2448.00 30.60
¢ 2949.60 36.87 e 1281.60 16.02 c 2567.20 32.09
D 3091.20 BB.64 D 1336.80 16.72, D 2695.20 33.690
z 3244.00 40.55 1. 8 3396-00 17.45 z 2827.20 35.34
1256 A 1432.00 47.90 i368 A 1594.40 19.93 1377 «A 1507.20 18.84
B 1500.00 18.75 B 1660.80 | 20.76 B 1580-00 19.75
¢ 1576.00 19.70 e 1740.80 | 21.76 c 1659.20 20.74
D 1645.60 20.57 D 1816.00 22.70 D. 1735.20 21.69
. E 1723.20 23.54 g 1904.00 23.80 = re12.80 22.66
3357) A 1649.60 20.62 1369 A 1832.00 22.90 1378 A 2564.80 32.06
B 1723.20 21.56 B 1915.20 23.94 B 2688.80 33-61
c 1811.20 22.64 c 2001.60 © 25.02 i 2824.80 35.31
D 4888.80 23.61 D 2093.60 26.17 D 2960,00 37.00
z 1974.40 24.68 gE 2187.20 27.34 z 3110.40 38.88
age. A 1654.40 20.68 33700 8 2106.40 26.33 1379 A 1387.20 17.34
B 1732.00 21.65 B 2202.40 27.53 B 1458.40 18.23
. ¢ 1820.80 22.76 e 2303.20 © 28.79 c 1534.20 19.44
D 2895.20 23.69 B 2409.60 30,12 D 1598.40 39.98
E 1988.80 24.86 E 2510.40 31.43 B 1673.60 20.92
13620 A 1902.40 23.78 w3g7L oA 1454.40 18.18 1381 A 1598.40 19.98
B 1989.60 24.87 B 1524.00 49.05 3 1673.60 20.92
c 2093.60 26.17 . c 1594.40 19.93 ¢ 1755.20 21.94
D 2193.20 27,29 D 1660.80 20.76 D 1836.00 22.95
B 2286.40 28.58 E 1740.80 21.76 # 1932.00 24,35
1363 A 173.0.40 21.38 1372, 1672.80, . 20.92 asea A+ 1598.40 19.98
B 1797.60 22.47 B 1743.20 21.79 B 1673.60 20.92
€ 1887.20 23.59 c 1826.40 22.83 ¢ 1755.20 21.94
D 1974.40 24.68 D i90¢.80 0-23.81 D 1836.00 22,95
z 2079.20 25.99 B 1996.80 24.96 B 1932.00 24.15

 

 

 

 

 
 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page®
Effective 7-1-2010
RATE STEP _Btwubiny __nouRE RATE STEP BiweRKiy ‘HOURLY _ RATE STEP  BIWEERLY HOURLY
1383 A. 1677.60 20.57 1392 A 1374420 La w40l A 1637.60 20.47
B 1758.40 21,98 » 28 1438.49 17.98 B 1712.80 21.4i
c 1883.20 23.04 e 1509.60 18,87 ¢ 1793.60 22,42
D 4929.60 24.42 D 1576 -00 19-70 D. 1884.80 23.56
zg 2029.60 25.37 a 1648.80 20.64, B+ 1974.40 24.68
a3ea A 2882.40 36.03 iss A. 2222.40 27.78 isa 1938.40 24.23
B 3047.60 37.72 B 2325.60 29.07 Bo" 2026.40 25.33
¢ 3168.80: 39.61 e 2486.40 30,58 co 2125.60 26.57
D 3324.00 41.55 D 2564.80 32.06, D 2225.60 27,82
R 3482.40. 43-653 g 2684000 33.55) z 2336.00 29.20
1385 A 2562.40, 32.03 1394 A 4268.00 15.385 a4o6 A 2036-00 © 25.45
B 2681.60 33.52 B 1322,,40 16.53 73 2136.00 26.70
¢ 2816.00. 35.20 . ¢ 4387.20 17.34 ¢c 2237.60 27.97
D 2953.60 36.92 D 1a58.40 18.23 D 2346.00 29.30
E 3094, 40: 38.68 ‘8 1531.20 49.14 E 2462.20. 30.78
13860 2B 4211.26 1s.a4 1395 A "1268.00 15.85 aao7 a 2079.20 25.99
B 1268.00. 415.85 B 1322.40 16.53 B 2L79,20° (27.28
¢ 1321.60: 16.52 ¢ 4387,20 17.34 a 2283.20 28.54
QR 1387.20 47.34 D 1458.40 48.23 2B 2384.40 29.93
z TA58.40. 18.23 1 # 1532.20 19.14 B 2542.80 31.40
asaya 24,80 12.56 i306 A 2455.20 19,43 1410 A 1308.80 16.96
B 970.40- B 4152560 .' 19.07 B 1376.80 Ay.2a.
C 1009.60, ¢ ‘1596.00 18,95 g 1441.60 ‘18.02
D 1058.40 D 1677.60 20.97 D 1506.40 18.83
z 1104.80. B 1760.80 22.02 # 4577.60 19.72
gee aA 1268.00 1397 1710.40 21.38 wi A 2440.00 38-00
B 1322.40 B 1797.60 22.47 B 1528.40: 18,98
e 4387.20 ¢ 1887320 23.59 c 1579.20 19,74
D 1458.40 _ o> 1974.49 24,68 D 1656.00 20.70 .
5 1531.20 E ‘2079.20 25.99 zB 2737.60 21.72
1389 A 1009.60: ago 1634.40 20.43 qaiz 1268-00 15.85
B 1058.40 _ 8B 471%.20 21:39 3B 1322.40 16.53
ec 1104.80 a 1793.60 22,42, c 1387.20 17.34
D 1146.40 D 4880.00 23.50 DB 1458.20
x 1201.60 z 1992,.00 24.65 . E 1532.20
1390 A 41.04,,80 1399 1793.60 22,42 ig 2004.00
B 1146.40, B 1888.00 23.60 B 21.00.80
‘e 1301.60 c 1974.40 24.68 ¢ 2211.20
D 1249.60 D 2066540. 25,83 D 2308.00
x 1306.40: B 2167.20 27.09. z 2422.40
A391 oA 2461.60 1400 A 2066.49 © 25.83 mia 3026.40
B 2576.80. B 2L7%,20 27.14 a Bi68.80
c 2703.20 ¢ 2275.20 28.44 c 3327.20
D 283760 D 2379.20 = *29.74 D 3490.40
@ 2973.60 zB 2498.40 31.23, E 3656.80

 

 

 

109
 

 

 

 

 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 10
Effective 7 ~1— 2010
RATE STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY RATE STEP BIVERKLY HOURLY RATE STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY
1415 A 2079.20 25.99 a424, A 2283.20 28.54 1435 «A 2088.80 26.11
B 2179.20 27.24 B 2394.40 29,93 B 2196.80 27,46
¢ 2283.20 28.54 c 2522.80) 31.42 ¢ 2299.20 28.74.
D 2394.40 29.93 D 2626.40 32.83 D 2409.60 30.12
E 2512.80 Bi.41 z 2760.00 34.50 E 2525.60 31.57
14is A 2568.00 32.10 1425 A 2950.40 36.88 1436 A 1384.80 27.31
B 2689.60 33.62 B 3086.40 38.58 B 1452.00 18.15
c 2824.80 35.31 ¢ 3237.60, 40.47 ¢ 1519.20 18.99
D 2967.20 37.09, D —' 3392.80 42.41 D 1581.60 19.77
E 3411.20 38.89 E 3561.60: 44.52 z 1659.20 20.74
14a7 A 2710.40 21.38 4426 A 2236.80 27.96 14370 1706.40 21.33
B 1797.60 22.47 B 2343.20 29.29 B 1791,20 22.39
c 1887.20 23.59 ae 2443.20 30.54 e 1872.00 23.40
D 1974.40 24.68 D 2862.40 32.03 D 1952.80 24.41,
g 2079.20 25.99 8 2682.40 33.53 E 2046.40 25.58
zis A 2398.40 29.98 a427 A 2564.80 32.06 1438 1549.20 18.99
B 2513.60 31.42 B 2689.60 33.62 B 1581.60 19.97
¢ 2637.60 32.97 ¢ 2823.20 35.29 e 1659.20 20.74
D 2767.20 34.59 D 2950.40 36.98 D 1729.60 21.62
zB 2893.50 36.17 1 & 3200.00 38.75 E 1811.20 22.64
mig A 1386.40 17.33 q428 A 1811.20 22.68 14390 1449.60 18.12
B 1463.20 18.29 B 1900.00 23.75 B 1529.20 18.99
¢ 4525.60 29.07 c 1978 40 24,73 c 1590.40 19.88
D 1600.80 20.01, D 2079.20 25.99. D 1660.00 20.75
z 1673.60 20.92 E 274.40 27.18 = 1735.20 21:69
maz0 0A 1631.20 20.39 1429 2568 .00 32,10 1440 B 2590.40 18.88
B 1706.40 at.33 B 2689.60 33.62 B 1660.00 20675
¢ 1792.80 22.44 c 2624.80 35,32 c 1735.20 24.69
D 1874.40 23.43 D 2967.20 37.09 D 1816.00 22.70
E 1968.00 24.60 E 3411.20 38,89 E 1902.40 23.78
a4za A 2616.00 32.70 q4sd A 2604.80 32.56 Mal A 1668.00 20.85
B 2734.40 34.18 B 2728.80 34.11 B 1740.80 21.76
¢ 2876.80 35,96 ¢ 2856.80 35,72 c 1826,40 22,83
D 3026.80 87:71 D 3000.80 37.51 D 1904.80 23.81,
z 3158/40 39.48 z 2150.40 39.38 g 1992.80 24.91.
1422 A 1488.00 18.60 i431 A 2065.60 25.82 1442 1829.60 22.87
B 1560.00 19.50 B 2172.00 27.45 B 1921.60 24.02
c 1637.60 - 20.87 c 22716.-00 28.45 e 2021.60 25.27
D 1708.80 24.36 D 2383.20 29.79 D 2103.20 26.29,
Bp 2794.20 22.39 E 2498.40 31.23 z 2212.80 27.66
14230 2708.80 21.36 14320 A 4231.20 15.39 1443 A 1811.20 22.64
B £791,.20 22.39 B 125.20 26.29 B 1900.00 23.75
¢ 1881.60 23.52 ¢ 1348.00 ¢ 4978.40 24.73
D 1970.40 24.63 D 1419.20 17.74 D. 2079.20 25.99
z 2065.60 25.82 ® 1484.80 18.56 z 2174.40 27.18

 

 

 

 

 

 
BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Paget
Effective 7 —1—2010

 

 

RATE @vgp arrsiiwy _* nouRny RATE vif Biv  pOURLE Rate STEP _ BIWEEKLY
14te A 2065.60 25.82 14530 A. 3182.60 39.77 1466 A 1855.20
B 2172.00: 27.15 B 3342-40 41.78 B 1947.20

c 2276.00 28.45 ¢ 3497.60 43,72 ¢ 2039.20

D 2383.20 * 29.79 a 3672.90 45.91 D 2137260

E 2498.40 31.23 z 3850.40 48.13 z 2243.20

1445 A 1660.00 20475 1456 A 2729.50 34.12 qis7 1103.20
B 1735.20 21.69 B 2664.80 35, BL. Be 1152.00

c 1816-00 ° 22.70 ¢ 3004,00 37.55 c 4200/80 ©

D 4902.40. 23.78 D: 3148.80 39.36 D 1254040

Eg 1987.20, g. 3304.00 41,30 E 1307.20

. 1446 A 2706.40 ° 21.33 14570 A 2953.60 36.92 1468 1221.60
B 1791.20 '22.39. B 3094.40 38.68 3B 1270.40
e 1872.00 "23.40 ae 3248.80 40.61 e 1332.00

D igs2.g0 24.41 D 3408.00 42.60 D 1389/60

E 2046.40 25,56 1k 3571520 44-68 E 1452.80

aay 1835.20 22.94 1458 A 2368.80 asvel = 1469 1332.00
B 1920.00 24.00 B 2491.20 Bide B 1389.60

G 2004.80 25-06 e 2598.40 32.48 < 4452.80

D 2098.40 26.23 > 2732.00 34,15 D 1514-40

z 2398:.40 27.49 1 8 * 2864.00 35.80 . z 1596.40,

144g 1933.60 34.17 w46l 1806-40 18283 aayo ok 1454,40
B 20249, 20 25.24 B 4576.80 19.71, B 1524.00

c 2420.80 26.51 ¢ 1658.40 20.738 © 1596.80

D 2228.80 27,86 D 2738.40 BL D 1673.60

z 2335.20 © 29.19 B 1812.09 22.65 ¥ 1749.60

1449 21.60.00 24-50 4462 A 2020.00 25.25. 1474 2020.00
8. 1212.80 15.46 B 2114.40 26.43 B 2u14s40

¢ 1272.80 a5.91 ¢ 2225.60 27.82 ¢ 2225.60

BD 1315.20 16.44 D 2332.80 29.16 D 2332.80

B 2380.00 9-47.25 R 2437.60 30-47 E 2437.60

a4500 1407.20, 17.59 1463 A 1187.20 14,84 1475 2368.80
B 1468.80 18.36 B 1242..40 15.53 “8B 2494.20

G 1536.00 19,20 e 1308.00 16535 © 2598 AQ.

D 1605.60 20.07 D 1373 ,60 A747 D 2732.00

z 3677.60 20.97 z 1432.80 2791 5 2864.00

mst A 1504.80 48282 1s6a 1586.40 29:. 83. 176 OR 2729.60
B 4575.20 19.69 B 1668.80 20.86 B 2864.80

@ 1656.30 20.72 C 1742.60 B77 ¢ 3004200

D 1732.00 21.65 DB 1819.20 22.74 D + 3148-80

g 1816.00 22.70, z 2915.20 23-94 i 2304,.00

1452 & 4315.20 16.44 465 A 1243.20 15.54 aag0 A 2181.20
B 4380.00. 17.25" B 1304.80 16.31 B 2212.20

¢ 1440:.00 18.00 a 1372.20 17,44, e 1268.00

Dd 4504.80 18.84 D 1430.20 17.88 D 1321.60

B 1576.00 19.70 8 ‘na96.80 18.72 # 1387.20

 

41

 
BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE

 

 

 

 

 

Page 12
Effective 7—1—2010
RAYE SUMP BIWEEKLY _ HOURLY. BAYH STEP BrWREKEY  ouRRY RAK syke  BIVENKLY HOURLY,
148. A 4329-60 16.62 1507 A 1729.60 23,62 1518 A 1824.00 22.80
B 1388.00 17.35 B 1811.20 22564 B 1922.40 24.03
e 145360 18.17 c 1906.40 23 83 ro 2004.00 25.05
D 1520.80 19.01 D 1998.40 24:98 D 2096,00 26.20
E 1596.80 19.96 E 2088.00 26.10 zg 2202.40 27.53
1482, A 1174.40 14.68 i508 A 1454.40 48.48 1520 A 1636.00 20.45
3B 1223.20 25.29 B 1524.00 19.05 B 1715.20 BL
c 2281.60 16.02 © 1594.40: 19.93 c 1798-40 22.48
a) 1336.90 36,72 D “1660.80 20,76 D 1881.60 23.52
z 1396.00, 17.45 z 2740.80 21.76 z 1971.20 24.64
i403 1454.40 18.18 1509 A 2040.80 25,51 1522 A 21.69.60 27.12
3 1524.00 119.05 B 2141.60 26.77 B 2283-20 28.54
¢ 1596-80 49.96 . € 2249.60 28.12 ¢ 2388.80 29.86
D 167360. 20.92 D 2352.00 29.40 D 2504.80 31.31
E 1749.60 21.87 . #8 2467.20 30,84 z 2624.00 32.80
1488 A 2282.40. 28.53 15400 1814.20 22.64, 15230 A 1996.00 26.95
B 2388.00 | 29.85 B 1900.00 23.75 B 2091.20, 26.14
c 2509.60 31.37 c 1978.40 24.73 € 2181.60 27,27
D 2625.60 32,82 D 2079.20 25.99) D 2290.40 28.63
E 2760.00 34.50 1 2174.40 27.18 B 2396.00 29.95
2489 2880,80 23.51 asil A 2065.60 25.82 as240 A 2639.20 20.49
B 1968.80 24,61 B 2172.00 27.15 B 1712.80,
¢ 2065.60 25.82 ¢ 2276-00 28.45 ‘c 1797.60
D 2172.00 27.15 D 2383.20 29.79 D 1880.00:
a 2276.80, 28.46 E 2498.40 31.23 E 1972.80
1490 A 1664.00 20.80 u5120 A 1444.20 18.06 3525 A 1923.20.
B 2740.80 21.76 B 1518.40 28.98 3B 2019.20
c 1822.40 22.78 ¢ 1590.40 19.88 g 2120.00
D 1913.60 23.92 D 1665160 20.82 D 225.160
E 4999.20 24,99 5 4742.40 BL. 78 E 2328.90
q4a98 OA 1836.00 22.95 isis A 1393.60 17.42 1826 1793.60
B 1922.40 24.03 B 1449.60 418.12 B 1884.80
c 2009.60 25.42 ¢ 1519.20 18.99 e 1973.60
D 2101.60 26.27 D 1590.40 19:88 D 2072.80
5 2201.60 27.52 E 1660.00 20.75 z 2475/20
i500 A 2808.40 35.08 isi4 A 2040.80 25.51 1527 A 2118.40
B 2946.40 36:83 B 2142.60 26.77 3B 2222.40
¢ 3091.20 38.64 c 2249.60 28.42 c 2329.60
D 3240.80 40.52 D 2352.00 29,40. D 2486-40
z 3405.60 42.57 z 2467.20 30.84 B 2568-00
z506 A 1289.60 16.12 1517 A 1016.80 1.94 isda A 2806.40,
B 1350.40 16.98 B toea.20 13:34 B 2946.40
¢ 1420.80 17.76 ¢ 4120.00 14,00 g 3092.20
D 1488.00 28.60 D 1176.00 14.70 D 3240.80
/ 8 1552.00 19.40 E 1227.20 15.34 B 3405.60

 

 

 
BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 13 i
Effective 7 ~1 —2010

 

 

 

 

 

RATE sump srymdkey  HouRi RATE syle BtNmEKne _nouREy RaW! stip Sriwmykie HOURLY
15300 A 1634.40 20.43 1546 A 1.923 .20. 24,04 1562 A 1923.20 26.08 i
B 2724.20 21.39 B 2019.20 25,28 B 2015.20 25.24 :
¢ 1793 «60 22542 c 21.20.00. 26.50 © 2420400 26.50 :
D 1880.00 23-50 D 2225.60, 27,82 D. 2225.60, 27.82
£ 1972.00 24.65 B 2328 80: 29,11. B 2328.80 29.41.
153i. 2104.80 13.83 4552 1923-20 24.04 1563 A 1603+20 20-08 :
B 2155.20 Ad.aa B 2019.20; 25,24 B 4.67600. 20.95
g 1209:60 45.42 ¢ 2120.00: 26.50; c 1756.80 21:96
D. 1258.80 15.86 D 2225.60 27.82 D 1844.00 23205
g 1332.00 26.65 E 2328.80 Bgv1d B 1932.20 24.16: |
1532 A 1234.40 15:43 i555 A 1488 . 00: 18.60 1564 A 1490.40 38.63
B 1297.60 16.22 B 156000 19.50 B 1563.20. 19,54
€ 1354.40 16.93 i ¢ 1637.60: 20,47 ct 1637.60, 20.47 i
D 1428.00 17.85, D 1708.80, 21.36 D 1710.40, 21,38.
= 1492.80 18.66, ' 8 3791.20 22.39 z 2797.60 22.47
1533 ‘1752.80 21.9%, 1556 A 2951.20: 36,89 1565 A 958.40 41,98
B 1844.00. 23.05 B 3092.00. 38.65 _ iB 1004.00 12.55
¢ 1925.60 24,07 e 3246.40 40,58) c 1056.00 43.20
D 2023.20 25.29 D 3405.60 42.57 D. 1108.80 «13.8
gE ‘ad1e.40 26.48 + 8 3572.86 aa.66 E 1155.20 14.48
1535 A 4452.20 14.39. 1557 A 2568.00 32-40 AB6B A. 1281.60 26 102:
B ‘tat1.20 1s B 2689.60 33.62, B 1836.80 16.72
c 1268.00 15.85 e 2824.80 35.31 c 4396.00 21,45
D 1321.60 16.52 2 2967.20, 37.09 D. 1457.60: 18.22
: B 1387.20 47.34 g 3114.26 38.89 zB 1525.60 19.07
usss A 1268.00 315.85 1s58 A 2079.20 25.99 i569 950.40' 11.98.
B 1322.40 16.53 3B 2179320, 27.28 B idos.oo 12-60
¢ 1387.20 17.34 c 2283.20 28.54 ¢ 1058.40 43.23
D 1458.40 18.23 D 2394.40: 29.93 D: 2098.40 13.73
= 1534.20 19.44 E 2522.80 314d z 1152,20 14.39
1538 A 2490.40 18.63 1559 A 710,40, 21,38 as7 A 2293.60. 28.67
B 1563.20 19.54 B 1797.60" B 2403.20 30.08
¢ 1637,60 20.47- c 1887.20 ¢ 251.7.60 31.47,
D 4710.20 21.38 2 1974.40 D 2646.40 33.08
=m 3797.60 22.47 e 2079.20 z 2772.00 34.65,
1543 OB 2797.60 22.47, 1560 A 1061.60 aB7L 1668.00 20.85
B 1888.80 23,64 B 12.09.60 B 1746.40 22,83
@ i980.00 24.75 c 1155.20 14.aa e 1828.20 22.86
D 2068:80 25.B6 D 1206.40 75.08 D 1922.40 24.03
z 2271-20 27,48 E 1256.80 $5.71 g 2009.60. 25.02
i544 A 2333-60 29547 1561 A 2283.20 be.54 4572 A 903.20 11.29
B maas.00 30.60 Bo. 2894.40 29.93 B 944.80 168
e 2567.20 32.09. c 2512.80 31.41, eC 981.60 12.27
D 2695,20 33.69 D 2626.40 32.83 D 1026.40. 32.83
= 2827.20 35.34 B 2760.00 34,50 (2B 1068.00 13.35

113
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 14
Effective 7-1-2010
RATE STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY RAVE SYEP. BIWEEKLY _NOURLY RATE STEP BIVERKLY HOURLY
1573 A 1828.00 22.85 1585 A 2336.00 29.20 1594 1334.40 6.68
B 1908-20 23.86 B 2457.60 30.72 B 1393.60 17.42
¢ 4999.20 24.99 S 2578.40 32.23 ¢ 1449.60 18.12
a 2088.80 26.41 D 2708.00 33.85 D 1519.20 18.99
R 2186.40 = 2836.80 35.46 g 2590.40 19.88
1575 B 1233.60 1586 A 1571.20 19.64 1595 1539.20 39.24
3 4296.80 B 1645.60 20:57 B 1608.80 20.41
¢ 1356.00 c 1730.40 21:63 e 2682.40 21,03
D 1425.60 D LOLL.20 22.64 D 1758.40 24.98
B 1493.60 B Lg9oa 40 23.68 z 1833.60 22.92
as76 oA 493,60 48.67 1587 A 3312.80 41.42 1596 A 2239.20 27,99
B 1563.20 19.54 B 3476.80 43.46 B 2347.20 29,34
q 1639.20 20.49 . e 3645.60 45.57 c 2459.20 30.74
D 1715.20 21.44 D 3813.60 47,67 D 2581,60 32.27
B 1795.20 22.44 1 # 3998.40 43.98 EB 2708.80 33.86
1877 A 1675.20 20.94 useo A 804.80" 10.06 1597 A 4.700,80 21.26.
B. LTSA.40 21.93 B 844.00 10.55 B 1776.00 22.20
¢ 1837.60 22.97 e 876 .80 10.96 c 1864.00 23.30
D 1925.60 24,07 D 923.20 1.54 D 1943.20 24.29
E 2025.60. 25.32 i ok 965.60 12.07 E 2032.80 25,41
is78 A 980.00 1589 A 2752.00 34.40 1598 A 2014.40 25.18
B 1026.40 ; B 2888.80 36.11 B 2112.80 26.42,
¢ 2076.00 e 3027.20 37.84 c 2242.20 27.64
D 1122.40 D 3168.80 39,61 DB 2320.00 29.00
z 2180.80 gE 3323.20 41.58 gE 2430.40 30.38
1579 A. 1122.40, i590 A 3234.40. 15143 1599 A 2825.60 35.32
B 1174.40 B 1298.40 16.23 B 2959.20 36,99
e 1223.20 ¢ 1360.80 47.04 ¢ 3108.00 38.95
D 1281.60 D 1421.60 17.77 D 3262.40 40,78
g 1336.80 E 1493.60 18.67 E 3420.80 42.76
15g0 A 1562.40 159L A 1298.40 16,23 1601 A 2065.60 25.82
3B 1644.80 3B 1361.60 17.02 B 2172.00 27.45
¢ 1720.00 . 21.50 ¢ 1422.40 17.78 ¢ 2276.00 28.45
D 1796.00 22.45 D 1490.40 18.63 D 2383.20 29.79
E 1887.20 23.59: E 1560.00 19.50 z 2498.40 31.23
i583 A 1593.60 19.92 1592 A 2283.20 © 28.54 1602 A 1774.40 0-22.18
B 1668.00 20.85 B 2399.20 29.99 B 1850.40 23.13
¢ 1748.00 21.85 ¢ 2513.60 31.42 c 1934.40 24.18
D 1836.80 22.96 D 2634.40 32.93 D 2028.80 25.36
gE 1920.00 24.00 E 2759.20 34,49 E 2125.60, 26.57
aseg A 1919.20 23.99 1593 A 1890.40 23.63 1603 A 2084:.00 26,05
B 2006.40 25.08 B 1989.60 24.87 B 2190.40 27,38
c 2106.40 26.33 c 2080.80 26,01. c 2293.60 28.67
D 2197.60 27.47 D 2174.40 0-27.18 D 2396.80 29.96
g 2311.20 28.89 z 2288.00 28.60 E 2520.80 31.54

 

 

414

 

 
RY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE

 

 

BASE SALAI Page 15
. Effective 7-1-2010

RATE STEP  BIWEEKGY HOURLY RATE STEP. BIWEEKLY. HOURLY RATE STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY.
1604 A 2400.80 30.03 vols A 2568.00 32.10 1627 A 1228.80 15.36
B 2520.80 31.51 B 2689.60 33263 B 1284.80 16.06.

¢ 2641.60 33.02 ¢ 2824.80 © 35.31 Cc 1340.00 16.75

3 2775.20 34,69: D 2967.20, 37.03 B 1399.20 17.49

gE 2907.20 36.34 x 3142.20 38.89 E 1464.00 18.30

1605 A 2364.00 24.55 dete A 2088.80 26.21 1628 A 2854.40 18.28
3 2062.40 25.78 B 2196.80 27.A6 B 1524.00 19.05

e 2165.60 27.07 ¢ 2299.20! 28.74 ¢ 1596.80 19.96

> 2273.60 28.42 D 2409.60 30.22 D 1673.60 20,92

RB 2388.00 z 2525 160, 31:57 z 1749.60 21.87

1608 A “1708.40 KOL7 OB 152,20 14.39 1630 1504.00 18.80
B 1791.20 B 1241.20 15.24 B 1578.40 19.73

¢ 1872.00 , e 1268..00. 15,85 e 1658.40 20.73

D 1952.80 D 2321.60 46.52 D 4734.40 24.68

z 2046.40 z 1387.20 417.34 gE 4811.20 22.64

1609 A 1800.00 rere: A 1791.,20: 22:39 1631 A 2079.20  -25.99
B 1888.80 B 1880.80 23.51 B 2479.20 27.24

c 1980.00 c 1963.20. 24.58 c 2283.20 28.54

D 2065.40 D 2081.20 25.64 D 2394.40 25.93,

z 2UTL.20 1 o£ 2145.60 26.82 z 2542.80 31,41

xex9o 2068.40 2622 A 2382.80 BS.81 tesa 1204.80 16.06
R 2174.20 B 2500.00 84.25 B 1339.20 16:74

e 2282.40 ¢ 262880. 32.86 ¢ 1399.20 17,49

> 2390.40 D 2760.00 34,50 D 1463.20 18.29

z 2512.80 x 2887.20. 36.09 E 1529.60 19.12

heat A 2384.80 1623 A 1800.00 22.50 iest A 1579.20 19.74
B 2500.00 B 1889.80 23,61 B 1657.60 20.72

c 2628.80 c 980700 24.75 c ¥742,40 21.78:

D 2760.00 D 2066.40. "25.93 D. 1827.20 22.84

E 2887.20 E BLTI..20 27.18 E 1918.40 23.98

1612 2283.20 28,58 1624 2066.40 25:83 1635 A 2600.00 20,00
8B 2394.40 29.93 B 2171 120, 27.08 B 1676.80 20,96
¢ 2512,80 Bia c 2282.20 28.53 c 1752.80 21.91

D 2626.40 32.83 D 2390.40 29.88 D 1832.80 22.91.

z 2760.00 34.50 E 2542.80 31.41 z 1921.60 24.02

qeaa 1710.40 21,38 1625 A 1557.60 19.47.1637 1822.40 22.78
B 1797.60 2347: B 1626.40: 20.33 B 1906.40 23.83

¢ 3887.20 23.059 c 1702.40 22,28 c 2003.20 25.04

D 1974.40 24.58. D 1780580 22,28 D 2103.20 26.29

E 2079.20 25.99 E 1865.60 23.32 E 2202.40 27.53

nerd A 2079.20 25.99. ieee 1557.60 1638 2564.00. 32.05
B 2179.20 BT 2d B 1626.40 B 2683.20 33.58

¢ 2283:20 28.54 ¢ 1702.40 ec 2819.20 35.28

D 2394.40 29:93 D 4780.80 D 2958.40: 36.98

gE 2512.80 B1.AL E is865.60. z 3096.00: 38570

 

415
 

 

 

 

 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 16
Effective 7-1 ~2010
RATE seb BIWEERLY HOURLY RATE. STEP BIWEBKLY. HOURLY RATE STEP. BIWEEKLY BOUREY,
1639 A 1656.80 20.71, 1649 A 4526.40 19.08 ase A 2122.60 26.52
5B 1738.40. 21.73 B 1602.40, 20.03 B 2219.20 27.74
ec 1818.40. 22.73 c 1676.80 20.96 c (2328.80 29.41
D 1904.80 23,81 D 1760.80. 22.01 D 2440.00 30,50.
E 19290,40 24.88 E (1848.80 a3.1. gE 2556.00 31.95:
1640 A 1370.40 17,13 déso A 2273.60 (28,42 1659 A 1678.40 20.598
B 1434.40: 17.93 B 2386.40 (29.83 B (1758.40 21.98
c 1505.60 18,82 c 2504.00 31.30 c 1844.80 23.06
D 1575.20 19.69 D 2618 .40. 32.73 D 1929.60 (24.12
gz 1648.00 20,60 E 2750.40 (34.38 EB (2027.20 25.34
164, A 1589.60 19.87 165i A 1421.60 17.77 1660 A 1588.00 19.85
B 1659.20 20,74, B 1491.20 18.64 B 1660.80 20.76
c 1739.20 21.7% 4 cc 1560.00 19.50 2 & 1737.60 21.72
D 1814.40 22.68. D 1637.60 20.47 D 1826.40 22.83
E 19090,00 23.75 a Ez ‘1712.80 21,41 . & 1906.40 (23.83
1642 A 1979.20 24,74 L652 A 1454.40 18.18 1661 A (1914.40 23.93
B 2068.00 (25.85 B 1524.00 19,05 B 2015.20 25.19:
c 2277.60 (27.22 c 1594.40 19.93 c (2096.80 26.21
D 2288.80 28.61 D 1660.80 20.76 D 2201.60 27 52.
B 2398.40 25.98  # 1740.80 21.76 E 2308.80 © 28.86
1644 A 1517.60 18.97 1663 A 1594.40 19.93 1662 A (1637.60 20.47
B (1585.60 19.82 5B 1660.80 20.76 B ‘1712.80 21.42
Cc 1654.40 20.68. c (1740.80 21.76 Cc ‘1793.60 22.42.
D 1729.60 21,62 D (1816.00 22.70 D 1884.80 23.56
E 1809.60 22.62 E 1904.00 23,80 Bz 1974.40 24,68
1645, KR 1571.20 19.64 1654 A 1749.60 21.87 1663 A 1056.00 13.20
B 1645.60 20.57 B 1829.60 22.87 B 1104.80 13.8%
c 1725.60 AL.57. Cc 1916.80 23.96 ¢ ‘1155.20 14.44
D 1806.40 22,58 Dd 2001.60 25.02 D 1209.60 15,12
gE 1890.40 23.63 =z 2093.60. 26.17 E 1268.80 15.86
le46 A 1820.80 22.76 1655 A 1564.80. 19.56 1664 =A 1268.80. 15.86
B 1904.80 23.81 B (1637.60 20,47 B 1332.00 16.65
c 1990.40 24.88 Cc 1720.00 21.50 Cc 1387.20 17.34
a 2075.20 25.94 D 4800 ,00 22.50 D 1454.40 qe.a8
gE 2176.80 27.21 E (1887.20 (23,59 E 1526,40 19.08
1647 A 1456.80 1656 A 1722.40 21.53 1665 A 1526.40 19.08
B (1532.00 B 1800.00 22.50 B 1596.80 19.96
c “1607.20 c 1888.80. 23.61 c 1673.60 20.92
D. 1678.40 D 1978.40 24.73 D 1756.80 21.96
Eg 1758.40 gE 2076 ,80 25.96 BE 1841.60 (23.02
1648 A 1331.20 1657 A 1934.40 24.18 1666 A 1996.00 24.95
B 1388.80 B 2027.20: 25.34 B 2091.20 26.14
c 1456.80 c 2124.80 (26.56 c 2181.60 27,27
D 2532.00 D 4227.20 27.84 D 2290.40 28.63
gE 1607.20 zg 2334.40 29,18 EB 2396.00, 29.95

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED, SERVICE Page 17
Effective 7-1-2070
RATE STEP BIWEEKIY HOURLY PATE, STEP, BrWweEKiy _- wouRLy. RATH STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY.
1667 oR 958,40 LL.98 1678 A 1563.20 19.5% 1697 A 162.2.80 20.16
B 1004.00 12.85 B 1637.60 20.47 B 1684.80 22.06
¢ 1056.00 13,20 c ‘1710.40 21,38 c 1767.20 22.09
D 1104.80 13.81 P 1737.60 22.47 D 1857.60 23.22
g 4155.20 pears z 1897420 23.59 B 1943.20 24.29
i668 oA 2168.60 27.12 1680 A 4524;80 56.56: 1698 A 2958.40 36.98
B 2283.20 28.54 B 4730.40 59.13 8 3101-60 38.77
¢ 238880 29.86 c 4949.50 61.87 a 3256.00 40.70
D 2504.80 31.83 D 5179.20 64.76 D 3405.60 42.57
E 2624..00 32,80 B 5419.20 67.74 B 3576-80 44.94
1669 A 2025.60 25.32 iea3 A 375360 46.92 1699 A 1352.00 46.90
B 2112.80 26.8% B 3923.60 49.02 B 1423.60 17.83
¢ ‘2214,40 27,68 , ¢ 4103.20 5L.29 c 1490.40 18.63
D 2315.20. 28.94 D 4294.40 53.68 D. 1563.20 19.58
E 2416.80 30.24 og 4492.86 56.16 B 4637.60 20.47
1670 A 2424.00 30.30 isaa A 2538 40 31.73 aia 1749.00 21.75
B 2537.60: 31.72 B 2659.20 33,24 B 1827.20 22.88
c 2664.00 33.30 © ‘2788.00 34.85 - o@ 904,00. 23,80
D 2792.80 34.91 D 2929.60 36.62 D 1995.20 2.8
EB 2924.80 36.56 4 3087.20 38.34 E 2097.60 26.22
wert A 2310-40. 28.88 1692 A 189.40 23.68 ams A 2384.40 29.93
B 2420,,00: 30.25 B 1983.20 24,79. 3B 2510.40 31.38
c 2535.20. 31.69 o 2de3.20 26,04, oe 2632.00 32.90
D 2659.20° 33.24 D 2179.20 27.24 D 2763220 34.54
B 2787-20' 34.84 z 2287.20 28.59 z 2887.20 36.09
eva A ‘2749.60 24.87 1692 A 2446.80 30.21 ive A 1420-40 18.63
B 1832.80 22,92 B 2583.60 34.67 B ‘£560.00 19.50
¢ 4921.60 24,02, € 2654 40 33.18 ¢ 1637.60. 20.47
D 2004.00 25.05 D 2790-40 34.98. D 1709.60  .21.37
z 2097.60 26.22 zB 2920.30 36,52 z 1793-60: 22.02
1673 A 2457.60 28.22 ieoa A 2533.60 31:67 ari7 B® 191.2-00
B 1525.60 19.07 8. 2654.40 33.18 B 1996.00
¢ 1594.40 19.93 c 2790.40 , 34.88 g 2088.89
D 1665.60 20.2 D 2920.80 36:51 D 2186.40
zB 1740.00 24.75 B 3064.00 39.30 g 2282.40 28.53
1675 Bw 1812.20 22.64 1695 A ‘2538.40 31.73 wae oA 2120.80 26.51
zB 1900.00: 23.75 B 2659.20 33.28 3 2226.40 27.83
¢ 1573.40: 24.73 e 2788400 34,85 e 2330.40 29.33
D 2079.20 25.98. D 2929.60 D 2440.80 © 30.54
g 2174.40: 27.18 B ‘9067.20 zg 2560.80 32.01
i677 2065160 25.82 2696 2933260 a7 A 4331.20 16.64
B 2472-00) 27.15 B. 3078.40 B 139520 27.44,
e 2276.00 28.45 ¢ 3226.40 c 1455.20 18.19
D 2383.20 29,79 D: 3386.40 D 1525.60 19.07
§ 2498.40 B1.23 g 3546.40 g 1596.80 19.96

 

 

47
 

 

 

 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 18
Effective 7-1-2010
RAYR srep BIWEEKLY HOURLY RAYE STEP BIWEEKIY HOURLY RATE STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY
a720 Bw 1268.00 25.85 27300 A 1923 .20 24.04 147 A 1490.40 18:63
B 1322.40 16.53 B 2019.20 25,24 B 1569.20 19,54
c 1387.20. 17.34 ¢ 2120.00 26.50 ¢ 1637.60 20.47
D 1458.40 D 2228.60 27.82 D 1740.40 21.38
gE 4531.20 = 2328.80 29.41 z 1797.60 22.47
172. 2760.80 22.0: 1732 «A 1596 ..00 19.95. 1748 OA 4710.40 24.38
B 1841.60 23.02 B 1660.80 20.76 B 1797.60 22.47
c 1928.80 Badd c 1741.60 24.77 ¢ 1887.20 23.59
D 2028.80 25,36 - D 1816.00 22.70 D 1974.40 24.68
= 2123.20 26.54 E 1902.40 23.78 z 2079.20 25,99
17220 A 1675.20 20,94 1734 2000.00 25.00 am9 OR 2079.20 25.99
B 4755.20 24.94 B 2997.60 26.22 B 2179.20 27.24
e 1834.40 22.93 Log 2198.40 27.48 ¢ 2283.20 28.54
D 1931.20 24.24 D 2303.20 28,79 D 2394.40 29.93
E 2023.20 25.29 E 2416.80 30.20 B 2512.80 31.41
4723 1756.80 21.96 1735 1640.00 20.50 17500 2225.60 27.82
B 1841.60 23,02 B 1742.80 21.41 3B 2328.80 29,03
c 1924.80 24,06 ¢ 4795.20 22.44 ¢c 2440.00 30.50
D 2025.60 25.32 D 1887.20 23.59 D 2562.40 32.03
E 2121.60 26.52 t 8 1972.80 24.66 g 2681.60 33.52
1724 oR 2684.00 1736 A 2198.40 27-48 1752 OB 2562.40 32.03
B 2806.40 B 2292.00 28.65 B. 2681.60 33.52
c 2948.80, c 2393.60 29.92 ¢ 2816.00 35.20
: D 3088.60 Q 2500.00 31,25 D 2953.60 36-92
z 3235.20 zg 2620.00 32.75 B 3094.40 38-68
1725 4K 1923.20 137 A 1539.20 18299 2752 A 2953.60 36.92
B 2019.20 B 1582.60, 19.77 B 3094.40 38.68
¢ 2420.00 c 1659.20 20.74 ¢ 3248.80 40.63.
D 2225.60 D 1729.60 21.62 D 3408.00 42.60
z 2328.80 -z 1841.20 22.64 z 3572.20 44.64
2726 1675-20 1738 OB 1742.40 21.78 1754 2816.80 35.23,
B L754.40 B 1820.80 22:76 B 2949.60 36.87
¢ 1837.60 ¢ 1908.80 23.86 ¢ 3096.00 38.70
D 1925.60 ‘ D 1988.00 24.85 D 3248.00 40.60
x 2025.60 s 2083.20 26.08 E 3405.60 42.57
41727 OB 1923.20 1739 8 2671.20 33.39 1756 A 2283.20 © 28.54
B 2019.20 B 2805.60 35,07 B 2394.40 29.93
c 2120.00 “oe 2935.20 36.69 ¢ 2512.80 BL.A2
D 2225.60 D 3079.20 38.49 D 2626.40 32.83
x 2328.80 z 3225.60 40.32 _ 8 2760.00 34.50
a728 A 2700.80 1746 1211.20 15.14 1757 A 2799.20 34.99
_&B 2828.80 B 1268,00 15.85 B 2932.80
¢ 2973.60 c 1321.60 16.52 € 3078.40
D 3114.40 D 4387.20 17.34 D 3232.80
E 3271.20 40.89 B 1488.40 48.23 E 3390.40

 

 

 

 
 

  

 

 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 19
Effective 7-1 ~ 2010
RATE STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY RATE STEP. BIWEEKLY: HOURLY RATE Stump BIWEEKLY HOURLY
1758 B 1268 00 15.85 1777 OB 673.60 20.92 1798 A 2288.00 28.60
B 1322.40 26.53 B 4749.60 21.87 B 2395.20 29.94
¢ 1387.20 17.34 @ 1837.60. 22:97 ¢ 2516.00 31.45
D 1458.40 18.23 D 1932.20 2416. D 2636.80 32,96
zB 1631.20 19.14 B 2027.20 25.34 - B 2760.00» 34.50
a759 0 455.20 18.19 1778 A 1387.20 27.34 ago. A 1455.20 18.19
B 1525.60 19.07 B 1458.40 18,23 B 1525.60 19.07
c 1596-00 19.95 < 1531.20, 19.74 ¢ 1596.00 19.95
D 1677.60 20.97 D 1598.40 29,98 DB 1677.60 20.97
E £760 80 22.04 z 1673 60 20.92 8 1760.80 22.01
2762 2952 .B0 36.91 a7a3 2 2283.20 2B.54 1802 A. 1786.40 22.33
B 3095.20 38.69 B 2393.60 29.92 B 1868.80 23.36
c 3246.40 40.58 » ©» 2810.40 31.38 ¢ 1952.80 24.44
2 3408.00 42.60 D 2528.00 32.85 D 2038.40 25.48
5 3577.60 44.72 . 8 2764.00 “34,55, Ez 2137.60 26.72
1765 4753.60 21.92 1784 1430-40 27688 1803 A 1672.00 20.90
B 1eak.60 23.02 B 1503.20 48.79 B 1741.60, 33.77
¢ 1825.60 24,07 ¢ 4572.80 19.66 cs 1827.20 22.84
D 2020.80. 25.26 D 1652.00 20.65 D 2904.00 23.80
z 2208.00 26-38 Lo "173040 21.63: R 1992.00 24.90
1766 A 1375.20 1749. a3 2626.40 32.83, asot A 2760.00 34.50
B 2448.00 8.10 B 2760.00 34.50 B 2987.20 36.09
¢ 1513.60 1g.92 c 2895.20 36,19 e 3030.40 37.88
B 1582.40 19.78 D 3039.20 37.99. D 372.80 39.66
8 1657.60 20.72 g 3L84;90 39.80 z 3325.60, 41.57
aveT Be 1580.00. 39.75, i79e A 746.00 8.95 as05 A 2824.80 35.31
B 166,00 20.80 B 750,40 9.38 B 2960..00 37.00
¢ 1740.80 21.76 @ 792.20 9.89 ¢ 3105.60 38.82
D 1825.60 22.82 -D 10.29 D 3260.00 40.75
z 1906.40 23.83 z 10,73 = 3416.80 42.73
1769 OK 2568.00 32.0 1795 A 2824.80 35.32 1806 A 2953.60 36.02
B 2689.60 33.62 B 2960400 37,00 B 3094.40 38.68
o 2824.80 35.32 e 305.60 38:82 c 3248.80 40.62
D 2967.20. 37.08 D 3260.00 40.75 D. 3408.00 42.60
z 3411.20 38.89 EB 3416.80 42.71 z B57%.20 44.64
1774 OB 1268.00 15.85 196 A 2529.60 19.42 igo 1476.00 18.45
B 1322.40 26.53 B 1600.00 20.00 B 1543520 19.29
g 1387.20: 17.34 ¢ 1675.20 20.94 ce 1610-40 20.13
D 1458.40 18.23 D 176.60 22.02 D 1681.60 21.02
B 1531.20 29.24 g 1839.20 22,99 z ETGL.60' 22.02
ii ow 1212/20 15.14 1787 649.00 20.50 igo, 1155.20 18,19
B 1268.00 15.85 B 1712.80 21.42 3B 1525.60 13.07
c 13at.60 26.52 c 1795.20 22.44 c 1596.00 19.95
D 1387.20 37.34 D “1887.20 23.59 D 1677.60 20.97
z Aase.40 18,23 E 1972.80 24.66 § 4760.80 22.03,

119
 

 

 

 

 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 20
Effective 7~1—2010
RAYE SYEP BIWEEKLY _HOURD RATE’ QTRP BIWEEKLY HOURLY RATE STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY
1g10 A 1811.20 22.64 1823 2227.20 27.84 1839 A 2294.40 28.68
B 190000: 23.75 B 2331.20 29.14 B 2393.20 29.99
¢ 1978.40 24.73 ¢ 2447.20 30.59 ¢ 2513.60 31.42
D 2079.20 25.99 D 2568.00 32.10 D 2624.00 32.80
zB 2L74.40 27.18 E 2689.60 33.62 a 2748.00 34.35
2eal A 2240.80 28.01 te2a 2828.00 22.85 18400 B 1387.20 27.38
B 2345.60 29.32 B 2904.60 23.77 B 1458.40 18.23
¢ 2461.60 30.977 ¢ 1979.20 24.76. c 1531.20 19.14
D 2578.40 32.23 D 2061.60 25.77 D 3598.40" 19,98
E 2708.80 33.86 g 2152500 26.90 z 1673.60 20.92
1816 A 2824.80 35.32 1825 A 1604.80 20.06 184. A 2409.60 30.12
B 2960.00 37.00 B 1682.40 21...03 B 2520.00 31.50
c 3105.60 38.82 . 8 1768.80 22,13. - ¢ 2632.00 32.90
D 3260.00 40.75 D 1850.40 23.13 D 2758.40 34.48
E 3416.80 42.74 ‘8 1940.80 24.26 B 2884.00 36.05
1817 A 1539.20 19.24 1826 A 1940.80 24.26 i842 2079.20 25.99
B 1608.00 20.10 B 2032-80 25.42 B 2179.20 27.24
¢ 1682.40 24.03 ¢ 2136.00 26.70 ce 2283.20 28.54
D 2760.80 22.04 D 2237.60 27.97 D 2394.40 29,93
E 1839.20 22.99 ‘8 2347.20 29.34 E 2512.80 3L.aL
isig A 2734.40 ° 22.68 1830 2953.60 36.92 aa4a 4387.20 47.34
B 1826.00 22.70 B 3094.40 38.68 B 1458.40 8.23
¢ 2306.40 23.83 e 3248.80 40.61 c 1532.20 19.24
D 2004.00 25.05 D 3408.00 42.60 D 1598.40 19.98
gE 2098.40 26.23 zg 3572.20 44.64 5 1673-60 20.92
isis A 1825.60 49.07 ias20 A “2740.80 2L.76 1849 A 2435.20 30.44
B 1596-00 19.95 B 1810.40 22,63 B 2560.80 32,01
/ a 1668.00 20.85 ¢ 1885.60 23.57 ¢ 2676.00 33.45
D 2742.40 21.78 D 1964.00 24:55 D 2811.20 35.14
g "1828.00 22.85 B 2051..20 25.64 g 2940.80 36.76
1820 A 1846.40 23.08 1833 A 1281.60 16.02 aeso A 2075.20 25.94
B 1930.40 24.13 B 1336-80 26.71, B 2167.20 27,09
¢ 2024.00 25.30 ¢ 1396.00 17-45 c 2283.20 28.54
D 2420.00 26.50 D 1457.60 18.22 D 2393.60 29.92
E 2224.80 27.8% B 1525.60 19.07 E 2510.40 31.38
1822 A 1979.20 24.74 1634 A 1420.00 17575 est A 2760.00
B 2068.00 25.85 B 1483.20 18.54 B 2887.20
c 2177.60 27.22 e 1551.20 19.39 e 3030.40
D 2288.80 28.61 D 1624.00 20:30 D 3172.80
g 2398.40 29.98 z 1698.40 21.33 E 3325.60
ie2a2A 2217.60 ‘27.72 1835 A 1955.20 28.48 1852 A 1525.60"
B 2323.20 29.04 B 2036.80 28.46 B 1602.60
a 2432.00 30.40 ¢ 2133.60 26.67 c 1673.60 20,92
B 2552.00 31.30 D 2230.40 27.88 D 1759.20 21.99
gE 2669.60 33.37 z 2334.40 29.18 z 1847.20 23.09

 

 

 

 

120

 
FATE srap

1853

1854

ess

aes6

1887

1959

1860

1861,

1863

BU GUPHUOU PR UOUP HUGE RU AEP RU OEP RON Ae EO

BIWERRLY
“1055.20

1525.60
1596.00
1677.60
1760.80
2758.20
2887.20
3029.60
3172.80
3325.60
2953.60
3094,40
3248.80
3498.90
3571.20
3315.20
3468.00
3643.20
3827.60
4004 80
4848.60
1932.80
2028.80
2124.00
2232.00
2348.00
2460.00
2565.60.
2690.40
2816.00
2455.20
1525.60
1596.00
4677.60
4760.80
1708.80
2792.20
1881.60
1970.40
2065.60
2953.60
3094.40
3248.80
3408.00
3571.20

HOURLY,

18.19
19.07
19,95
20.87
22.0%
34.49
36.09
37.87
39.66
al.57

36.92,

38.68
40.61
42.60
An 6e
ALA
43.35
45.54
47.77
5006
23.12
24.16
25.36
26.55
27.90
29.35
30.75
32.07
33.63
35.20
18.39
49.07
19.95
20.97
22.01
2L.36
22.39
23,52
24.63
25.82
36.92
38.68
40.64
42.60

 

 

 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE ° Page 24,
Effective 7-1-2040
RATE SYEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY Rane Sup BIWEEKLY HOURLY
1864 A 1387.20 17.34 1874 A 2714.20 33.89
B 18.22 B 2840...00. 35.50.
¢ 19.26 ¢ 2972.80 37.16
D 1608.00 20410 D 3120.80 39,02
E 678.40 20,98 ® 327200 40.90
nes A 4356,00 16.95 1875 2953.60 36.92
B 1422.40 47.78 B 3094.40 38.68
¢ tag3.60 18.67 e 3248.80 40.02
D 1564.20, 19.56 D 3408.00 42.60
z 1639.20 E 3571.20 44,64
1966 A 2202.40 1876 A 1675.20 20.94
B 2314.40 B 1754.40 21.93
eo 2829.60 ¢ 1837.60 22.97
D 2536.80 D 1925.60 24.07
‘ok 2661.60 EB: 2025.60 25.32
1867 A 2125.60 1877 A 2390.40 29:88
5 2237.60 B 2509.60 31.37
c 2344.80, c 2624.00 32.80
D 2462.40 D 2758.40 34.48
bk oOR 2580.80 B 2886.40 36.08
1968 A 1465.60 ae78 A 2953.60. 36.92
B 1533.60 B 3094.40 38.68
¢ 2602.40 c 3248.80 |
DB 1673.60 D 3408.00
E 1744.00 z 3571.20
1870 A 1816.00 . 1879 A 1387.20
B 1901.60, 23.77 : B ABB 640
¢ 1997.60 24.97 ¢ 4531.20
D 2086: 00 26.20 D 1598.40
B 2197560 27.47 z 1673.60 20.92
zs7 2079520 25.99 isso A 2122.40 26.53
B 2179.20 27.24 B 2230.40 27.88
e 2283.20 38.54 c 2326.80 29,21
D 2394.40 29,98 D 2450.40 30.63
z 2512.80 BLeat E 2571.20 32,14
1a720 A 2513 .60 3:42: 1881 A 1708.80 21.36
B 2636.00 32.95 B 1791.20 22.39
c 2758.40 34.48 © 2881.60 23.52
> 2895.20 36.19 D 1970, 40 24.63
© 3039520 37.99 z 2065.60 25:82
1873 1421.60 27.77 183 A 3137.60 39.22
B 2492.80 18.66 B 3289.60 41.12
e 1562.40 19.58 e 3460.00 43.25
D 640.00 20.50 D 3620-00 45.26
z 2712.80 21.41 E 3795.20 47.44

44.64,

421

 

 

 

 
         

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 22
Effective 7 ~1~ 2010

 

  

 

RATE STEP BIWEERWY HOURLY, RAVE STEP BIWERELY HOURLY RATE STEP. BIWERELY _ HOURDY
qesa A 3137.60 29.22 1894 A 146,60 18.12 1903 A 1455.20 18,19
B 3289.60 41.12 LB 1519.20 18.99 B 1525.60 19.07
C 3460.00 43,25 ¢ 1590.40 19.88 c 1596.80 19.96
D 3620.00 45.25 . 3 1660.00 20.75 D 1675.20 20.94
z 3795.20 47.44 # 1735.20. 21.69 E 1758.40 2.98
-1885 A 2453.60 1995 A 1889.60 23.62 190% 2079,20°, 25.99
B 2572.00 B 1972.80 24.66 B 2179.20 27.24
¢ 2702.40 c 2060.00 25.75 ¢ 2283.20 28.54
D 2830.40 D 2163.20: 27.04 D 2394.40 29.93
z 2973.60 z 2260.00 28.25 gE 2512.80 34.42
ieee A 1845.60 1696 A 2564.80 32.06 1905 tA 4209.60 15.12
B 1935.20 B 2688.80 °° 33.61 B 1268.00 15.85
¢ 2021.60 oe 2824.80 35.31, ¢ 1321.60 16.52
D 2124,80 D 2960.00 37.00 D 1387.20 17.34
z 2228.80 8 3110.40 38.88 EB 1455.20 18.19
1887 A 2487.20 4897 A 1749.60 21.87 1906 A 1416.00 27.70
B 2598.40 B 1832.80 22,91 B 1468.80 28.64
c 2719.20 ¢ 1924.80 24.06 c 1558.40 19.48
D 2844.00 D 2008.00 25.10 D 1635.20 20.44
z 2972.80 1 8 2097.60 26.22 z 1709.60 21.37
1e@a A 271920 zs98 A 1449.60, 58.12 1907 A 1558.40 19.48
B 2848.80 B 4519.20 18.99 B 4635.20. 20.44
¢ 2997.60 G 1590.40 19.88 ¢ 2709.60 24.37
D 3137.60 D 1660.00 20.75 . D 1793-60 22,42
zg 3289.60 B 1735.20 21.69 gE 1880,80 23.51
ze90 A 2070.40 1899 A 1156.00 14.45 1908 A 174.40 14.68
B 2164.80 B 1210-40 45.13 B 1223.20 15.29
¢ 2262.40 ¢ 1268.80 15.86 ‘¢ 1282.60
D 2371.20 : D 1331.20 16.64 D 1336.80
. E 2476.80 E 1395.20 17.44 E 1396.60
1891 A 1634.40 1900 A 1641.60 20.52 1909 A 1472.80
B 1706.40 B 1719.20 21.49 B 1535.20
¢ 1780.80 e 1796.00 22.45 ¢ 1606.40
D 1872.00 D 1891.20 23.64 D 1680.00
z 1952.80 2443 : # 1976 .80 Beh BR 1752.00
ze920 A 2297.60 28.72 upo1 A 1531.20 19.14 1910 A 1027.20
B 2415.20 30.19 B 1601.60 20.02 B 1073.60
c 2532.50 31.66 c 1675.20 20.94 ¢ 1123.20
D 2659.20. 33.24 D 1764.00 22,05 D 4179.20
B 2793.60 34,92 E 4841.60 23.02 z 1231.20 15.39
1893 A 1594.40 19,93 1902 A 1331.20 16.64 1912 A 22:68
B 1672.20 20.89 B 1395.20 47 .Aa 3B 23.69
ec 1748.00 21.85 c 1455.20 18,19 ¢ ‘ag92.80 24.91" |
D 4828.00 22,85 D 1525.60 49:07 D 2079.20 25.99
E 1908.80 23.86 E 1596.80 19.96 E 2177.60 27.22

        
BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE

 

Page 23
Effective 7 ~1—2010
RATE STEP BIWREKEY HOURLY, RAvE simp BIWSRELY.. HOURLY. RATE STRE. BIWEEKLY HOURLY.
ass A 1902.40 23.78 923 A 2568 00 32.10 1992 A 1374.20 17644
B 1992.80 24.94, B 2685.60 33.62 B 1434.40 17.93
¢ 2079.20 25,99 c 2324.80 = 35434 ¢ 1506,40 18.83
D 2183.20 27.29 D 2967.20 37.09 DB 4575.20 + 19.69
E 2284.00 28 55' z 3111.20 38.89 z 650.40 20.63
il4 A 804,80 10.06 A924 2823 .20. 35.29 1933 A 1501-60 18.77
B 844.00 10.58, B 2958.40 36.98 B.. 1573.60 19.67
c 876.80 10,96. ¢ 3105.60 38,82 ¢ 1651.20 20.68
D 523.20 11,54: D 3256.00 40.70 D 1725.60 21.57
z 958'.40 11.98, E 3408.80, 42.61 z 1804.20 22.56
1915 A 2436.80 30.46. 1925 4432.80 27.81, 1934 1305.60 ‘16 32
B 2561.60 32.02 B 1500.80 18.76 B 1368580 27.14
e 2676.00 33.45 . 1560.80 19.62 ¢ 1436.00 17.95
D 2811.20 35.44 D. 1644.80 20,56 >. 1500.20 18,76
z 2949.00 36.75 ae 1720.00 21.50 BE 4569.60 19.62
qsi7 A 2568.00 32.10 d926 A 2568.00 32.20 1935 A 2953.60 ° 36.92
B 2689.60 33-62 B 2689.60 33.62 B 3092.40 38.68
¢ 2824.86 35.31 e 2824.80 35.31 ¢ 3248.80 40.64,
D 2967.20 37.09 D 2967.20 37.09 D 3498.00 42.60
E 3124.20 38.89 5 & 3111.20 38.83 x 3571.20 44.64
asia A 2105.60 26.32 a927 A 2B59.20 31:99 i936 A “1053.60 13.17
B 2216.80 27.7 B 2680.80 33.51 B 1104.00 13.80
. cs 2306.40 28.83 e 2815.20 35,19 ¢ 1152.80 daar
D 2421.69 30.27 D 2956.00 36.95 D 1209.60
z 2540.00 31.78 zg 3099.20 38.78 = 1268.00
a919 1199.00 WAS = jo28 2332.20 29.16 1937 A 2240.80
a 4233.60 15.42 B 2440.00 30.50 B 2345.60
c 1297.60 16.22 ce 2564.80 32.06 ¢ 2461.60
D 1352.00 16.90 D 2684.80 33.56 D 2578.40
z 4425760 17,82 z 2832.00 35.15 2 2708.80
1920 A 1526.40 19.08. i929 A 2568.00 32.10 1938 A 2225.60
B 2601,60 20.02 B 2689.60 33,62 B 2328.80.
c 1681,60 21.02 c 2824.80 35,31 c 2420.00
D ~~ . 1769.60 22,12 2 2967.20 37.09. D 2562.40
E 1844.80 23.06 E 3441.20 38.89 R 2684.60
joa A 3372.20 47.44 1930 A 1600.00 20.00 1939 2562.40
B 2430.40 17.88 B 1678.40 20.98 B 2681.60
¢ 1496.86, 18.72 ¢ 1756.80 21.96 c 2816.00
D 1568.80 19.64 D 1844.00 23.08, D 2953.60
E 1649,60 20,62 z 1932.80. 24,16. g 3094.49
1922 A 2703.20 33:79 1931 A 1887.20 23.59 noag A 2383-20'
B 2828.00 35.25 B ov2.80, 24.66 B 2394.40
¢ 2968.80 37.11 e 2076.80 25.96 c 2512.80
D 3214.40 34,93 Pp 2181.60 27.27 D 2626.40
Ez 3264.00 40.80 E 2287.20 28:59 = 2760.00

 

123
RATE
49461

i946

4947

1955

1956

1957

4961

1964

1965

sep

HUQUP PONE ROAUP HUA MPH UOU PHONEPHONE HAP Ae

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE Page 24
Effective 7-1-2010 . .

BIWEERLY HOURLY RATE STEP _BIWNEXLY HOURLY RAYE STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY
2538.40 34,73 1966 A 2511.20 31.39 1976 A 2282.20 28.53
2656.00 33.20 B 2633.60. 32.92 B 2388.00
2796.00 34.95 ¢ 2764.00 34.55 c 2509.60
2939.20 36.74 D 2888.80 36.11 D 2625.60
3079.20 38.49 z 3036.00 37.95 E | 2760-00
1281.60 46.02 1967 2824.20 35.31 1977 Bs 2692.80
1336.80 46.74 B 2958.40 36.98 B 2819.20
1396.00 17.45 c 3107.20 38.84 ¢ 2959.20
1457.60 28.22 D 3264.00 40.80 D 3105.60
1525.60 19.07 E 3422.40 42.78 BE 3251.20
1396.00. 27.45 1968 oA 1406.40 i7.se° 1978 A 1474.40 14.68
2457.60 18.22 B 1468.80 18.36 B 1223.20 15.29
1525.60 19.07 . oe 1534.40 19,18 c 1281.60 16.02
1596.00 49.95 D 2600.00 20.00 D 1336.80 16.72
1668.00 20.85 “og 1676.00 20.95 E 1396.00 17.45
2377.60 29.72 1969 A 1344.80 16.81 1979 1281.60 16.02
2500.80. 31.26 B 1402,40 17.53 B 1336.80 16.71.
2617.60 32.72 c 1464.80 c 4396.00 17.45
2746.40 34.33 D 4529.60 D 1457.60 18.22
2876.80 35.96 1 8 2600.80 E 1525.60 19.07
1811.20 22,64 1970 A 1564.80 1980 A 2000.00 25.00
1900.00 23.75 B 1640.80 B 2097.60 26.22
4978.40 24.73 ¢ - 1718.40 ¢ 2198.40 27.48
2079.20 25.99 D 1796.00 D 2303.20 28.79
2AT#.A0 27618 zg 1888.00 B 2416.80 30.23
2083.20. 26.08 1972 2283.20 28.54 1982 A 1211.20 15.14
2184.00 27.30 B 2394.20 29..93 B 1268.00 15.85
2276.80 28.46 ¢ 2512.80 31.42 c 1321.60, 16.52
2391.20 29-89 D 2626.40 D 1387.20 17.34
2500.80 31.26 B 2760.00 BE 3458.40 18.23
1904.80 23.81 1972 2568.00 1963 A 1421.60 17.77
1995.20 24.94 B 2689.60 B 1491-20 18.68
2097.60 26.22 ¢ 2824.80 35.31 e 1560.00 19.50
2200.80 27.51 D 2967.20 37.09 D 1637.60. 20,47
2306.40 28.83 E 3112.20 38.89 g 4712.80 21.44.
2881.60 23:52 1974 A 4672.00 20.90 1995 1706.40 24433
1977.60 24.72 B 1741.60 21.77 B 1791.20 22.39
2076.00 25.95 ¢ 1826.40 22.83 ¢ 1872.00 23.40
2172.00 27.15 D 1907.20 23.84 D 1952.80 24.42
2287.20 28.59 z 1999.20 24.99 B 2046.40 25.58
2287.20 28.59 1975 A 1816.00 22.70 1986 A 2616.80 32.74
2396.80. 29.96 B 1901.60 23.77 B 2733.60 34.47
2511.20 32.39 e 1997.60 24.97. ¢ 2860.80 35.76
2633.60 32.92 D 2096.00 26.20 D 2992.00 37.40
2764.00 34.55 g 2197 ,60 27.47 z 3127.20 39:09

 

 

 

124

 

 
 

 

 

BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED-SERVIGE Page 25
Effective 7 ~ 14-2040.
RATER syep BIWEEKLY  HOURDY. RATE SRP) BIWEEKLY HOURLY RATE STEP BIWEEKLY HOURLY,
1987 A 2972.80 37.16 2139. 930.40: 41.63
B 311440 38.93 B "979.20 22,24
¢ 3277.60 40.97 ¢ 1024, 80: 12.84
D 3430.40 42.88 D 1069.60 13.37
B 3596.80 44.96 = 122.40: 14.03 +
1988 A 2274.40. Bes43 2166 A 1500.00 48.75.
zB 2376.80 29.74 B 1575.20: 19.69
¢ 2482.00 34:05 < 1654.40 20,68
D 2602.40 32.53 D 1738.00 21.70
E 2719520 33,99 5 1824.00 22.80
u99l A 1672.00 20.90 2iss A 933.60 11.67
B 2741.60 21,77 B 980.00, 12.25
¢ 1826.40 22.83 » oe 1026.40 12,83
D 1907.20, 23.84 D 2072.00: 43.40 :
B 4999.20 24.99 ' 8 1123.20 14.04
iss2 1284-60 16.02 2185 A (1825.60 22.82 -
B 1336.80 2674. B 1916.80 23.96
c 1396.00 17,45 2032-90 25.45
D 1457.60 18,22 D 2142.80 26.41
® 1525.60 a8-07 Lo 2217.60 27072 '
u994  B 2564.80 32.06 = 2188 A 93360 E1.67 i
B 2684.80. ~ 33.56 3B "£2.25 ‘
c 2819.20. 35.24 c 12.83 “
D 2957.60 36.97 D 13.40
= 309680 38.7 a 1123-20 14.04
4995 644.80 8.08 21e8 A ‘746.00: 8)95 ,
B 684.00 8.55 B 750.40. 9.38
C+ 743.60 8,92. ¢ 3,81
D 750.40 9138 D 40.29
EB 788.00 9.85! z 10073
1997 a 1722.40 21...53
B 1804, 80 22.56
c 1890.40 23.63
D. 1983.26 28.73 .
® 2078 40 25.98
iss A 2932.00 24.15)
B 2023.20 25.29,
©. 2122.40 26.53
. D 2228.80 27.86
z 2338.80 29,21 .
2203 A 933.60 14.67, :
zB 980.00 12.25
c 1026.40 12.83
D 1072.00 13.40
E 1123.20 44.04

125
EXHIBIT B

THE CITY OF SAN DIEGO
CLASSIFIED SERVICE
CLASSES AND STANDARD RATES
EXHIBIT B

JULY 4, 2010

126

 

 
 

Q-
Classified-Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard
te Number

BULLYING iWapHorroN

. Combination Taspector I. 1276
Combination Inspector It . 1297
Hleotrical Inspector I - A164
Blectrical Inspector TX ¢! 1162 i
Houalng Inspector F 1164
Housing Inspestor IT 1165,
Mechanical Inspector I ALT.
Mechanical Inspector IT L172
Senior Conbinat:.on, Thisipictot 1849
Senior Electrical Inspeator . 4163
Senior Housing Inspector LL66
Senior Mevhanies. Inspector 1173 =
Senior stuuctural Inspector = 1179 .
dtevotwral Inspector I. 4177
Structural Inspector IL L278

CHBATS US

Asbestos and Lead Program Inspector yaaa
Assistant Chemist 1136
Assistant baboratory Technician 4166
Associate Chemist , 1220
Biologist T 1643
3

Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard
Rate Number

Biologist tL

Bhologlat ILE

Hazardoud Materlals Inspector I
Hazardous Materials Inspector IT
Hazardous Materials Ingpestor ILL
Hazardous Materlals/Pretzeatment. Tralnee
Hazardovs Matéilals Program. Managar
gunier Chemist

laboratory Assistant

taboratory Technician

Marine Blolagiat I

Marine Blologist IT

Mavine Biologist IIT

Senior Biologiet ~~ -

senior Chemist

Senior Marine Blologi.et

Supervising Hazardous Materials Inspector
Supervising Wastewater Pretreatment Inspactor
Wastewater Pretreatment Inspector I
Wastewater. Pretreatment Inepedtor Tk
Wastewater Pretreatment Inspector IIT

Wastewater Pretreatment Program Manager

1624
1622
1526
1527
1844
1524
1500
1543
1578
1580
1609
1610
1641.
1804
1854
1854
1896
1378
1374
4375
1376
1528

128

i
i
i
|
\
|
i

 

 

 
a4.

Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard. :
Raté Number

CLERICAL

Acdotmt Clerk
Ageount Audit, Clexi
Auto Measerger T
Auto Messenger IT

Benefits Represéhtative T

Benefits Reprdsevtative IT

Bookmobile Driver

Cashier

Claims Clexk

Clerical Assistant I

Clerical Agsistant IT

Contracts Processing Clark
Council Seoretary “=: - -
Court Support Clerk =

Court Support Clerk IT

Customer sarvices Representative
Deputy Ghty Clerk I

Deputy City Clerk. IT

Disposal site Representative
Hall tox’/Prookveaded

Executive Beoretary

Imtermediate Stenagrapher (Terminal)

1104
T1038
1236
94
1255
1256
1268
i3a
4341,

Lb69>

1835
B36

agei

1386
1988
1394
1395
1996
1412
1246
1876
1532

129
-B-

Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard
Rate Number

Legal Secretary I

egal Secretary IT

Legislative Regorder T
“negdslative Recorder IT

iibrary Aide.

Library Clerk

iibrary Technician

Midrogvaphica Clark

Payroll Audit Specialist I
Payroll Audit Specialist IT
Payroll Audit Supervisor « Auditor
Payroll Audit Supervisor - Personnel,
Payroll Specialist £

Payroll Specialist - rr “
Payroll Supervisor

Police Records Clerk

Principal Clerk

Prinelpal Customer Services Representative

Principal Legal secretary

Brincipal Police Records Clerk
Pringipal Tast Administration spedialist
Public Information Clerk

Publie Information specialist

1379
1877
1382
1383
1see
1590
L758
1627
1647
1649
1886
1659
1237
1648
1238
1720
1726
L7a2
1408
V724
1723
2776.

L774

130

|
|
i

 
“6

Clasaified Servies Classes and: Standard ‘Rates

Standard
Rate Number

Public
Publia

Information Supervisor

Bexvice Career Trained

Retirement Agsiatant

Senior
Bentor
Senior
Senior.
Senior
Beniox
Senior
Senior
fenior
Senior
Senior
Senior

Senior

Aacouiit Clexk

Account Audlt Clerk

Accounts Payable Audit clerk
Benefits Representative

Cashier

Gherk/Typist

Custoner, Services Represéntative
Disposal Site Representative
Legal Secretary
Tegislative Recorder
idbraty Technician
Police Records Clerk

Gest Adminigtration Sspecialidt

Student Worker

Sipervieing Dispopal Site Representative

Test Administration speclaliat

Vehicle and Fuel, Clerk

Word. Processing Operator

L778

45%..below
(target class)

Laon
1844
1133
4g09
1257
1840
1879
1860
1864
1920
us57
¥TB9
1853
1852
dete
1990.
1419
1982

L746

131
“Je

Classified Service Glasses and Standard Rates

Standard
Bate Number

CONMUNT CATIONS

Dispatcher t.

Dispateher IT

Fire Dispatch Supervisor
Bire Dispatcher.

Fire Dispatch Administrator
Police Dispateh Administrator
Police Dispatch Supervisor
Police Dispatcher

Police Lead Dispatcher

Public Works Dispatcher

Public Woxke Diepatch supervisor

CONSTRUCTZON AND MATNTENANCH - ”

Assistant Resexvolr Reaper
Building Service Technician
Building Services Supervisor
Building supervisor .
Gsharal Utility Supervisor
General Water ULLLity supervisor
laborer

Lake aide I

lake Aide IT

Pringlpal Utility Supervisor

Pringipal Water Utility Supervisor

1410
14L1
1518
1464
1017
4195.
1918
174
1661.
1766
L767

A193
1280
1275
1274
1976
1488
1579
1572
1560
1980

1734.

132

 

|
!

|
|

 

 
8.

Classified Service Classes. and Standard Rates

Standard
Rate Number
Publid Works Superintendent. L977
Public Works Supervisor . , L961
Resexvoix Keéper LOL7
Senior. stable Attendant dg9og
Senior Utility supervisor . L975
Senior Water veutaty Supervisor 1870,
Stable Attendéint 1908
Stadium Madiitenange Supervisor +1897
“stadium Maintenance TechnicLan 1898
Tank Service Tedhiigian t ~ . 1946
Wank Setvice Tedhnielan IL toa
Utility supervisor 1974
Utility Worker 1o78
Utility Worker Ir ~~ a 1979
Water Sydétema District’ Manager 1046
Water Systems Technician r 101.
Water Systems Techrileian Ir Lona
Water Systems Techniclan ITT L013
Water Systems Technician Iv Lou
Water Systenia Technician Supervisor , L015
Water UtLldty Supervisor 4992
Water Utility Worker . 1992

Work Sexvice Aide 1995
“Qe
Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard.
Rate Number

CUSTODIAL
Custodian I
Custodian IT
Custodian LIT
Supervising Custodian
DATA PROCHBSING ‘
Folice Records Data Specialist
Police Records Data, Specialist Supervisor
Programmer Analyst Ir
Programmer Analyst IT
Programmer Analyst IIT
Senio® Police Records Data Specialist Supervisor
Senior Systéins Analyst

ENGINUERANG
Assistant Engineer - Civil
Assistant Engineer ~ Eleatriecal.
Assistant Engineer = Mechanical
Assistant Engineer - Traffic
Assistant Park besigner
Associate Communications Bngineer
Agsoclate Engineer - Civil

L387
1389
i390
1919

1575

1576
L147
1748

_ 1749

1865
2877

Li53
L567
1167
1207
1168
4219
1221

134

 

 

 
 

~10-

 

Classified Service Classes and'Standard Rates

 

Standard !
e be! i

Associate Engineer - Corrosion : ~ 1385 i

Associate Engineer « Electrival 1223 . :

Agsociate Engineer ~ Mecharildal 1225 |

Assoglate Engineer - Traffic . R238

Drafting Aide 4422

Engineering Yrainée 1432

Nydrography Aide . 1520

Junior Engineer - Civili ABAG

Junior Engineex - Blectrical 1582

Junior Engineer ~ Mechanical 1862

Mmior Engineering Aide 1553

Land, surveying Assistant . 4938

hand Surveying Asgogiate 1939

Park Degigner . a +638

Plan Review specialist 1 + we5s “

Plan Review spectalist rt L6K6

Plan Review spédialist ITT 1657

‘Plan Review Speclalist Iv 1658

Polide Special Projects Manager 1754,

Prinolpal Drafting Aide 4725

Principal fingingering Aide 1727

Principal Plan Review Specialist . 1724

Principal survey Aide . 1525

Principal Traffid Engineering AGS 4730 ot

‘project Assiatant : 1,750

Projéct Officer I L784

135
“11.

Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard
Rate Number

Project Officer II

Senior Civil Biginear

Seniox Communications Engineer
Senior Drafting Aide —

genion Hlectricgal Engineer
Senior Engineer - Fire Protection
Senior Engineering Aide '

Senior Bnginearing Geologist
Senior Land surveyor

Senior Mechanical Bngineer
Bendor Survey Aide

Senior raffie Bnugineer
Structural, Engineering Agsiatart
Structural fngineering Associate
Structural fingineering Senior
Student Engineer

Supervising Plan Review Specialist

Work Contxol Manager

L782
1855
L346
1423
1863
1457
ieét
1806
i935
1830
1881
1878
1208
1231
1875
4910
1928

1994

136

 

{

 

 

 
“1
Classified Sérvice Classes and Standard Rates

Standard .
Rate Number

EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE

Aixoraft Mechanie 1145
Aquatics Technician I 1737 .
Agquatias Tedhnictan. Tt . L732
Aquatics Techuiolan supervisor 1738
Assiatant Water ‘Distribution operator 1368
Rody and Fendex Mechanid 1264
Equipment Mechanio & 1439
Hquipment ‘Painter 2 Aaa.
Equipment Repair Supervisor 1435
Equipment Service Supervisor L451
Hquipment Service Writer “ 1447
Bauipment Techiielan 7 1496 |
Equipnent Technician: IT ~ # 1438
Boipwient Techtiledar TIT H4Ad
Firearms TechnieLan A194,
Fleet Natmteniange supsrcvisor 114.6
Pleet Manager A762)
Mactiladat 1602
Marine Mechanie eos
Métal Fabrication Services Supervisor 1604
Metal ‘Fabrication Supervisor 1616
Motive Sexvica Technician 1452

137
-13-

Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard
Rate Number

Motive Service Trainee

Parking Metar Superviaor

Parking Meter Technician

Plant Technioler I

Plant. Technician IT

Plant Technician ITT

Plant Technician Supervisor

Bower Plant Operator

Power Plant Superintendent.

Power Plant. Supervisor

Pribelpal Plant Technician Supervisor
Pump station Operations Supervisor
Pump Station Operator

Pump Station Operator iirainee
Senior Motive Service Tedmician
senior Parking Metex Tedhnician
Senior Plant TeclinioLad supervisor
Senior Power Plant Supérvigor
Water Distribution Operator

Water Distribution Operations supervisor
Water Distribution Oparator Trainee

Walder

daag
1646
L641
66a
1653,
1654
1669
1717
1739
1718
1670
1373
4372
1374
1450
1803
LO7L
1945
1369
1370
1367

1985

138

 
 

-1de : |

Classified-Service Clagges and Standard Rates

 

Standard . a
Rate Number i |

EQUIPMENT OPERATION

Awea, Refuge Collection Supervisor 1835
Boat Operator 1266
Disposal Site supervisor. . 1413
District Refuse Colledtion Supervisor 1839
Equipment Operator I 1439
Hguipwent ‘Opevatoy IT . . : 1440
Equipment Operator ITT : . 1445
Equipment Trainer — i4aa
Heavy Truck, Driver 1513
Heety Truck Driver IT 1512
and£ill Equipment Operator 1573
Laght Equipment Operator 1594,
Motor Sweeper Operdtot ne 2625 .
Motor ‘Svieepeir Supervisor 1648
Refuse Collection Managex’ 1B4%
genitation Davee z 1934
Sanitation Driver: It. : 1832
Sanitation Briver EET : 1824
sanibatdon ‘Driver Tuaines | 1833
Senior Boat Operator 1267
Senior. Disposal Site Supervisot 1866
Seven-Gang Mower Oparstor 1265
Trafic Striper Operator 1626

139
“1B. '
Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates ij

Standard |
Rate Number

 

FIELD CONTACT

 

Airport Operations Assietant AL i
Assistant Customer Services Supervisor 1137 '
.City Attorney Investigator 1596 |
Claims Aide 1340
Claims Representative T 1342 |
Claims Représchtative rr 1343
Code Compliance Officer 1356 |
Codé Compliance Supervisor 1387 i
Collections Tnvastigator I 1331,
Collections Investigator IT 1332 |
Collections Investigator ITT 1333 i
Collections Investigator Trainee 1334 :
Customer Services Supervisor * 1393
Field Representative L465 i
Investigation Support, Mariager 1924 \
Parking Enforcement Officer I 1640
Parking Enforcement Officer IT 1630
Parking Enforcement Supervisor 1.639 |
Police Code Compliance officer 1361 |
{

140
=16-

Classified Service Classes and:Standard Rates

Standard

Rate Number

PIRE

Police Code Compliance supervisor
PYindipal Clty Attornéy Tivestigator
Safety Representative I

Safety Reptesentative IT

Senior Adrport Operations Agsistant
Senior City Attorney Investigahor
Serilor Claims Representative

Senior Code Compliance supervisor
Senior Parking Enforcement Supervisor
Special, Events Traffic ‘Control supervizor
Special tvents Tratfid Controller T
Special Events Sraffie controler Ir
Supervising Field Represaiitative
Supervising Meter Reader

Rik Operators Chief
Assistant Fire Marshal
Emergency Medical Technician
Wire Battalion Chief

Fine. Captain

Fire Sngineexr

vine Righter 1

1862
1728
2825
gas
1208
1885
1937,
1942

1148.

1933
1934
i933,
sean
i925

1149
L156
‘48 Lh
1453
1456
1458
L461

141
GRAPHICS

LIBRARY

-17-

Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard
Rate Number

Dive Fighter IL

Fixe Fightexy TTT

Ble Helicopter Pilot

Fire Prevention Inspector I
Fire Prevention Inspector It
Fixe Prevention Supervisor
Fire Reoruit

Paramedia I

Paramedie II

Graphic Communitations Manager
Graphic Design Supervigor
G@raphie Designer - ~
Multimedia Production Coordinator
Multimedia Production Specialist
Photdgrapher ,

iibvarlan I
uibrarlan IT
Tlbvantan PLT

Glbrarian. IV

‘vasa
1020
2150
1474
1475.
1476
1463.
1506

1507

1347
1489
apo
1235
123.0

1660

1571
1584
L867

1585

142

 

 

 
=1B~

Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

 

Standard
Bate Number
Library Assistant 5586 :
Superviaing iLbravian i922 . . i

MANAGEMENT, FISCAL AND STATE

Accountant I : i102
Aacountant IT ie42
-Agcountant Tit 4100
Agcountant IV , 4183
Accountant Trainee : 1538
Adwindsbrative aide I . 1208
Adminietvative Aide, IT 07
Agricultural Ledge Manager: 1110
Aixport Matagex i148
Algport Noise Abatement Officer 1416 .
Applications Programiner I ta40
Applications Programmer EL r244.
Applications Programmex TIT da42
ARTIS Adminiatrahor _ 2253,
AsKestos Program Manager “Les.
Assistant Budget Development Analyst 1964
Aggistant Department Human, ‘Resources, Analyst, 1363
Assistant Hdonomist 1158
Assistant Facility Manager a1s9

143
= TQ-

Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard
Rate Number

Assistant Management Analyst

Assistant Personnel Analyst

Assistant Property Agent

Assietant Rate Analyst

Associate Budget Development Analyst
Associate Department Human Resources Analyst
Associate Hoonomist

Associate Mariagement Analyst

Associate Parsonnel Analyst

Associate Property Agent

Building Code and Noise Abatement Supervisor
Business Systems Analyst T

Business aystens Analyst IL

Business Systems Analyst LIT »

Buyer's Aide I

Buyer's Aldea I©

Cemetery Manager

Claims and Inaurance Manager

Collections Manager .

Commmity Development Cooxdindtor
Community Development Specialiat 1
community Development Specialist IT
Commnity Development Specialiat ITT
Community Development Spedialigt Vv
Compliance and Metering Manager

Customer Information .and Billing Manager

1132
1t70
L184
1i90
1965
1364
1322
1218
1226
1228
1278
1023
1022
Load
1286
1287
1296
1816
1344
1350
1354,
1352
1353
1354
1808

1795

144

 

i
t
i
i

 

 
* 920-

Classified Service Classes and Standard Ratés

Standard
Bate Number

Deputy Noise Abatement Officer
Davelopment Project Managex I
Development Project, Manager TT
Development Project Manager LTT
Dispute Resolution Officer
‘Boonomist
Employee Assistance Counselor
Employee Assistance Program Manager
Employed Benefits Admimidkrator
- Employee Benefits specialiat
Employee Benefits specialist 11
Fitness specialiet
Fleet Parts Buyer
Fleet Parts Buyer ‘supervisor
Information systems Administrator
Information Systemy Analyst. 1
Information systems Analyst IT
Trifowiiition Systems Audlyat TLy
Tnfoxination gystens Analyst LV
THfowination systems Manager
Inforniatilod syatems Techiiedan.
Junior Property Agent
Takes Progam Manager
Paralegal ‘
Literacy Program Adwinistrator

Management Trainee

1397
aise
_ bias:
1186,
1415:
1424
Lane
Laag
M16
tan7
#407
220%
i256
1249.
1248
a1Bd

1348

1349,
o26

Lead

1404.

Lea
A599
1598
1787
1208

145
-24- 7 |
Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard . !

 

 

 

Rate Number — i
Noisé Abatement Officer 1631.
Organizational Bffectiveness Spectialist I 1613 |
organizational Effectiveness Specialist 1 1644 { |
organizational Effectiveness Speglaliat IIT 1642 . I
Organizational Effectiveness supervisor : 1615 i
Pérsonnel Aséietant I 1651
Persomel Assistant IT 1662
Police Property and Records Administrator 1698
Principal Paralegal 1147 : ! i
Pringipal Progurement Specialist 1783 i
Procurement Specialiat : 1282 Hl
Produrement ‘Trainee , . 1283 . |
Property Agent 1786 ,
“‘Bublic Act Prdgtam Administrabor L769 '
fublic Toformation Offieer 1777 :
Rate Analyst > 1793
Reoyeling Program Manager 1556 :
Recydling Specialiat 1 1559
Recycling Speclalist IT . 1558
Resyoling Specialist Tir 1364
Rehabilitation Coordinator _ 484
Safety and Tralning Manager : 4972
Safety Officer 1823
Senior Budget Development Analyst L966
Senior Department Human Resources Analyst 1365
SenutLor Paralegal 1822

146
 

~22- |

Classified Service Classes. arid Standard Rates so

Standard - . |
Bate Number

Senlor Management Analyst, 1206

Senlor Pexsornel, Analyst 1650.

Senior Produvement Specialist * Taso

Senior Publia. Information Offiger 1874.

Btadlum/Peld Manager 1874.

Bupervising Claime Representative 139%

‘ipervising Budget Developmerit Analyst: 1967

Supervising Department. Human Resources Analyst 1366

Supervising Hoonomist 4923
Supervising Management Analyst LOL?
Supérvieing Persdrinel Analyst: 4.927
Supervieiny Property Agent: 1929
supervising ‘Publia Information Officer 1940.
Supervising Retything Speclaliat’ 2557
“ Systiaite Admiiiietiator T 1026
Systems Administrator IE 2025
systems: Administratow ITT “L024
Training Supervisor L971
Victim sexvides Coordinator 4983
MARINE Gaiety
Lake Renger "4590
Lifeguard 1 L594,
Lifeguard IT ‘1593
nifeguard rrr 4603
fuigeguard Sergeant: 1592
Manine Safety Capbain 1587

147
 

+B 3e

Classified Service:Classes and Standard Rates

|
Standard , : ‘ |
i

{

Rate Number |
Marine Safety Lieutenant 1589 |
Ranger/Diver I 1398 | :
Rangex/Diver IT 1399 i
Rangex/Diver Supervisor 1400 !

PARK MAINTENANCE

Golf course superintendent 1509 :
Greenskeeper 1482 i
Creeniskeepar Bupervisor . 1483
Grounds Mainténance Manager 1642
Grounds Maintehance Supervisor 1470 |
Grounds Maintenance Worker I . 1467
Grounds Maintenance. Workex II 1468 |
Grounds Maintenance: Worker ITT 1469
Homtiewltiuriet . BLA
Tenigation Specialist 1508 t
head Cemetery droundskeepex 1568 |
Nursery Gardener 1627
Nursery Supervidoxr 1628 {
Pesticide Applicator L644 |
Pesticide Supervisor 1645 :
Senior Stadlum Groundskeeper 2893 |
Stadium Groundskeeper 1894

Stadium Turf Managex 1892

Tree Maintenaioe Crewléader 1968

Tree Maintenance Supervisor 1970

 

148
~24e

Classified Service Classes and Standatd Rates

Standard
Rate Number

PLANNING

Tees elmer

Asgketant Planner
Associate Planer

Juiilox Plennex ‘
Planning. Teohnichan Z
Planning Techulelan IT
Planning Technician IIT
Senior Planner

Senor Zoning Investigator
Zoning Investdgator r
Zoning mvéstigater IT

PLAN? OPmRAMTON

Assistant Wastewater Plant Operator.
Assidtant Wates’ Plat Operatot
Plank Operator Trainee

Senior Wagtewater Operations Supervisor
Senloe Wasbewated Plant Operator
Senior Water Operations Supervisor
Wastewater Opexations Supervisor
Wastewater Plant. Operaror
Wastewater Treatiiént Superintendent
, Water Operations: Supervisor

Water Plant Operator

Water Production Syperintendent

“1969

10°75
1227
1563
1663
1664
1.668
1872
ieeo
1997
1998

1208
208
1673
wage
t1a4
isan
1887
1890

1b83 “

Lose
1988
4884

149

 

 
POULCH

“25s

Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard
Rate Number

Cal-Id Technician

Commuulty Relations Assistant to the
Police Chief

Criminalist I

Crdiminalist IL

DNA Technical Manager

Document Examiner I

Document Examiner IT

Document Examineir: IIT

Forensic Alcohol Analyst

Cxima Scene Specialist.

Interview and Interrogation Specialist I
Interview: and. Interrogation Specialiet a
Intexvlew and Interrogation Speclaliat TIT
hatent Print Examiner t

Latent Print Examiner TI

Police Agent (Terminal)

Polida Captain

Police Detective

Pollea Tnvestigative Aide I

Police Investigative Aide IL

Police tieutenant

Police Officer T°

1285
1355

asa
1304
WALA
1420
1224
1421
1466
1448
L7L6
196
1748
1229
1570
1694
1680
eae
1699

L678

1683

1692

150

 

 

 
-26-

Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

 

 

Standard

Rate Number |
Polloe Officer IT : 1693 ;
Poliloe Officer ITT . 1695 |
Police Reortit 1627
Police Sergemt . 1696 |
PolLeé Servids Officer T i392 :
Bolige service OfELver IT 1377
Supervising Academy Tastruatox 1941
Supervising Cal~ID Teghniglan 4990
Supervising Crime Sdené spedialiat LOL8
Supervising -Criminalist. 1856
Supexvising Latent Print ‘Examiner LOL9

PRINTING
Bindery Worker I - ca 1260
Bindery Worker IT 1264 °
Bindery Worker. ILL 1262
Bleati¥onle Publishing Specialist 1583
Lithographic Yachnician 1595
Offset Press Operator ‘ 1632
Offset Press Supervisor L768,
Print Shop Supervisor _ 1736
Senior Offsek Préas Opérator 1868
RHOREATION

Ares Manager I 1130

Avea Manager IT A134

164 j
27»

Classified Service Classes and Standard Ratés :

Standard
Rate Number

Assistant Reeveation Center Director

Distclet Manager

Golf Course Manager

Golf starter
: Golf Starter Supervisor

Park Ranger Aide

Park Raiger

Pool Guard T

Pool Guard It

Recreation Aide

Reoreation Center Director I
Reoreation Centex Director Ir
Recreation Centex Director TIT
Reoreatilon Leader. ©. .
Recreation Leader IT
Recreation specialist

Senior Park Ranger

Supervieing Reoreation Spaclalist
Swimeing Pool Manager T
Awimming Pool Managet It

Swimming bool Manager ITI

1492
L418
4798
1480
1481.
LL76e
1634
1667
1936
L794
devs
L796
1735
1565
4531
1797

tea. *

1931
1.905
1906

‘y907

152

 

 
-28-

Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard
Rate Number

SEILLED TRADES

Apprentice Salary range will be
established as a pardéntagd of
*D" step of the appropriate.
Journey. ‘Level. clas

Building-Maintenance Suparvisor 4273
Caxpenter 4288
Carpenter Supervisor 1290
Cement Finigher 1293
Cement ‘Gun opatatoz 1498 .
Communi¢atiions ‘Teehniodan 1426
ComiunLoations Technician Supervigor , 1427
Construction. Estimator 1é0t
Blectridian . 1428
Electxriclan Suparvigor 1431
Blect#inidd echhiclan “ 1443
Electronics TedhuioLan. Supervisor 1444,
Heating Technigian : 4510
Heating, Ventilating, and Ale A512
GonditLoning Supervisor .
Znstrunienitation and contol, Technician 1523
‘tngtyumentation and Control, supervisor L622
Gookemth . * 4857
Millwhight an . 1605
Painter . 1635
Painter pigperviaor = Loa7
' Plant. Process Control Electrician 1666

Plant Prégesa ‘Control supervisor 1668

153
+29

Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard
Rate Number

Plasterer

Plumber .

Plumber Supervisor

Refrigeration Mechanic |

Roofex

Roofing Supervisor

feniox Building Maintenaies supervisor
Senior Communications Technician
Senior Communications Technician Supervisor!
fenlor Hlectrical Supexvisor

Senior Locksmith

Senior Refrigeration Mechanic

Sign Painter

Sign Shop Supervisor

Traffic signal supervisor

Traffle signal TechuieLan I

Tradiie Signal, technician rr

1672
1678
1677
1810
tata
1818
4279
1.889
1425
1430
1802
1913
1894
1.895
1955
1986
1987
~30«

Classified’ Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard
Rate Number:

STORERERPING
Police Property and Evidence Clerk.
Property and Hvidence Supervisor
“stock Clerk ,
Storekeeper I
Storekeeper IT
Storekeeper TIT
Stored Operations Bupexwigor
Senior Property and Evidence Supervisor

L729
1900
1899,
1902
A903
1904
1533

1904

155

 

 
EXHIBIT ¢ .

THE CITY OF SAN DIEGO
UNCLASSIFIED SERVICE

CLASSIFICATIONS AND STANDARD SALARY RATES

EXHIBIT ¢

TULY 1, 20100
(ReVised april 12, 2010)

Ve ‘933g NES

SRT Aue

td 2) uavol
aSAldoge

#

on

156

 
Page 1 of P

. UNCLASSIFIED SERVICE -
‘EXECUTIVE :

lassification and Class Number

Executive V: alary Rate-2051/Minimum ard: Maximum
Monthly ” $ 6,105.00 - $ 24,383.00
Biweekly  $ 2,808.00 » $ 11,215.20
Hourly $ 35.10 - $ 140.19

2141 GCify Manager (Chief Operating Officer) (UC)
2004+ City Attorney (UG)

2106 Assistarit City Attorney (UC)

2411 Assistant City Manager (Assistant Chief.Operating Officer) (UC)

2127 — Assistant'to the City Manager.(Assistént to the Chief Operating Officer) (UC)
2180 ~~ Retirement Administrator (UC)

Executive IV lary Rate-204’ and Maximum
~ ” » Monthly $4,947.00 ~- § 18,739.00
Biweekly $ 2278. 20 ~ $ 8,619.20
Hourly: $° 2844 -.$ 107.74

2153 Assistant to the City Manager (Deputy Chief Operating Officer) (UC)
2130 Budget Officer (Chief Financial Officer’) (UC)

2112 Business Center Manager. (UC) (Assistant Deputy Chief Operating Officer)
2109 City Auditor (UC)

2132 Department Director (UC)

2131 Development Services Director(UC)

2147 Engineering and Capital Projects Director. (UC)

2192 Environmental Services Director (UC)

2155 Executive Assistant Police Chief (UC)

2160 Fire Chief (UC)

2142 Independent Budget Analyst (UC)

2267 Metropolitan Wastewater Director (UC)

2179 Park and Recreation Diractar (UC)

2172 Planning Director (UC)

2173 Police Chief (UC).

2194 Public Utilities Director (UC)

2189 Transportation Director (UC)

157
2181
2105
2123
2115
2164
2276
21144
2118
2255
2140
2134
2176
2177
2157
2190

2110
2116
2124
2126
2121
2164

2182

Executive lil _ Salary Rate-2030/Minimum and Maxitnum
Monthly . $ 2;664.00 ~ $ 14,547.00
Bi-weekly $ 1,220.80 - $ 6,691.20
Hourly § 16.26 - §$ 83,64

Assistant Department Director (UC)
Assistant Development Services Director (UC)
Assistant Environmental Services Director (UC)
Assistant Financial Management Director (UC)
Assistant Fire Chief (UC)
Assistant Metropolitan Wastewater Director (UC)
Assistant Planning Director (UC)
Assistant Transportation Director (UC)
City Architect (UC)
City Librarian (UC)
Neighborhood Code Compliance Director (UC)
Purchasing Agerit (UC)
Real Estate Assets Director (UC)

~ Risk-Management Director (UC)
Treasurer (UC)

Executive Il Salary Rate-2020/Minimum and.Maximum

Monthly $ 2,207.00 + $ 13,415.00
Bi-weekly $ 1,015.20 - $ 6170.40
Hourly $ 1269 -$ 77.13

Assistant City Librarian (UC)

Assistant Purchasing Agent (UC)
Assistant Real Estate Assets Director.(UC)
Assistant Risk Management Director (UC)
Assistant Treasurer (UC)

Management Assistant to the City.
Managér (UC)

Principal Assistant to City Attorney (UC)

Page 2 of 8

158

 
2117
2160
2125
2122

Executive |

Page 3 of 8

Salary Rate-2010/Miniinum an

Monthly "8 1,699.00 ~ $ 9,858.00
Bi-weekly $ 781.60 + $ 4,834.40
Hourly $ O77 -§ 56.68

ASsistant to thé Engineering dnd Capital Projects Director (UC)
Assistant to the Neighborhood Code Compllancs Director (UC)
Assistant to the Park and Recreation Director (UC)

Assistant to the Water Department Director (UC)

159
MANAGERIAL

Classification and Cl umber

2205
2207

2209
2148

2250

2256.

2279
2266.
2202
2265

2280 .

2262
2215
2261
2273
2277
2272
2275
2244
2221
2282
2162
2243
2232

Managerial A

Page 4 of 8

Salary Rate-2070/Minimum and Maximum

Monthly $ 1,407,00 - $ 8,823.00
Biweekly’ $ 647.20 ~“$ 4,058.40
Hourly 8 8.09 - $ 50,73
Confidential Secretary to City Attormey (UC)
Confidential Secretary to City
Manager (Confidential Secretary to Chief Operating Officer) (UC)
Confidential Secretary to Police Chlef (UC) .
Secretary to Labor Relations (UC)
Managerial B Salary Rate-2073/Minimum and Maximum
‘ Monthly $ 1,924.00 - $ 11,531.00
Bi-weekly $ 884.80 - § 5,304.00
Hourly $° 41106 - $ 66.30
. Assistant Deputy Director (UC)
Assistant Investment Officer (UC)
Assistant to the Environmental Services Director (UC)
Assistant to the Executive Director, Human Relations Commission (UC)
- Building Inspection Supervisor (UC)
Central Stores Program’Manager (UC)
Child Care Coordinator-(UG)
Disability Services Coordinator (UC)
Endowment Officer (UC)
Equal Opportunity Contracting Manager (LIC)
Golf Course Operations Manager (UC)
Graffiti Program Manager
Homeless Services Coordinator (UC)
Neighborhood Services Coordinator (UC)
Parariedic Coordinator (UC)
Print Shop Mariager (UG)
Program Coordinator (UC)
Quality Management Coordinator (UC)
Resource Development. Officer (UC)
Regional Urban Information Systems Administrator (UC)

160

 
2288
2238
2045
2278
2281
2236
2204
2264
2247
2145
2018
2203
2220
2214
2253
2089
2237
2219
2995
2268
2216
2269
2280
2048
2284
2240
2246
2234
2270
2249
2071
2226

Page 5 of 8

Managerial.¢ Salary Rate-2077/Minimum and Maximum

Monthly — § 3,027.00 - $14,445.00
Bi-weekly $ 1,806.40 - $ 6,644.00
Hourly $22.58. - § 83.08

Assistant Golf Operations Manager (UC)

Assistait Police Chief (UC)

Assisignt Stadium Manager.(UC) ;
Assistant to the Development Services Director (UC)
Assistant to the Director (UC)

Assistant to the Fire Chief (UC)

Assistant to the Planning Director. (UC)

Assistant to the Police Chief (UC)

Budget Services Manager (UC).

Chief Accountant:(UG)

City. Planner (UC)

Community Davelopment Administrator (UC)

Crime Laboratory:Manager (UC)

Deputy Director (UC)

Deputy Director, Elections and Records Managettient (UC)
Deptity Director, Legislative Services. (UC)

Deputy Fire Chief (UC)

Deputy:Library Director (UC)

Deputy Planning Director (UC)

Executive Director.(UC)

Facillty Manager (UC):

. Labor Relations Manager (UC)

Lifeguard Chief (UC). .

Organization Effectiveness Program Manager (UG)
Performarice.Audit Manager (UG)

Police Commander (UC)

Police Administrative Services Director (Ue)
Prinelpal Plapnét (UC)

Program Mahiager (UC)

Youth Servicas Administrator (UC)

Reveriue Programs Manager (UC)

Zoning Administrator(UC)

161°

 
Page 6 of 8

PROFESSIONAL LEGAL
Classification and.Class Number Salary Rate-2060/Minimum and Maximum

2196
. 2224

2151
24197
2195

Monthly $ 1,489.00 -- $ 17,076.00
Bhweekly $ 684.80 - $ 7,854.40
Hourly $ 8.56 « § 98.18

Assistant Retirement General Counsel (UC)
Associate Counsel (UC)

Deputy City Attorney (UC)

General Counsel (UC)

Retirement General Counsel (UC)

OTHER MISCELLANEOUS EXECUTIVE AND MANAGERIAL
Classification and Class Number

2285
2107
2113
2119
2258
2138
2137
2166
2167
2241
2174

2180--Rotiroment-Adm!

Miscellaneous A Salary Rate-2055/Minimum and. Maximum
Monthly $ 2,901.00 - $  17,328,00
Bi-weekly § 1,334.40 - $. 7,069.60
Hourly $ 16.68 - $ 99:62

Assistant City Auditor (UC)

Assistant Comptroller (UC)

Assistant Personnel Director (UC)

Assistant Retirement Administrator (UC)

‘Binational Affairs Officer (UG) we

City Clerk (UC)

Comptroller (UC)

Executive Services Director (UC)

Governmental Relations Director (UC)

Investment Officer (UC).

Personnel Director (UC) © poe
al ‘) MOVED TO EXECUTIVE V

inigtrator-(UG)
2400—Ciiy-Auditor-(UC) MOVED TO EXECUTIVE IV

2108
2128
2183
2120

’ Miscellaneous B Salary Rate-2045/Minimum.and Maximut

Monthly $2,122.00 - $ 12,302.00
Biweekly § 978.00 ~-5 5,700.00
Hourly § 12.20 - $ 71,25

Assistant Clty. Clerk (UC)

Assistant Executive Services Director (UC)
Assistant Governmental Relations Director (UC)
Assistatit to Mayor (UC)

162

 

 

|
i
|
|
|
I
|

 
Page’? of 8
2230 Deputy-Personnel Director (UC) |

2217 Financial Operations Manager.(UC)
2174 Principal Assistant to Mayor.(UC)

Miscellaneous C Salary Rate-2035/Minimum and Maximum,

Monthly $ 1,708.00 ~- $ 12,486.00
Bi-weekly $ 786.60 - $ 6,743.20
Hourly § 9.82 = $ 74.79
2133. Council Assistant (Principal Assistant) (UG)
Miscellaneous D Salary Rate-2025/Minimum and Maxini

‘Monthly $ 1,616.00 ~ $ 12,607.00
Biweekly § 743.20 - § 5,840,00
Hourly $ 9.29 « § 73.00,

2269: Assistant:Binational Affairs Officer (UC)

2200° Assistant for Commuiilty Outreach (UC)

2143 Budget/Legislative Analyst I (UC)

2144 Budget/Legislative Analyst.II (UC)

2210 Council Committee Consultant (UC).

2213 Counell Representative Il (UC)

2188 ‘Equal Employment Investigations Manager (UC)
2257. ‘Grants Coordinator (UC).

2178 Mayor Representative Il (UC)

2228 Principal Accountant (UC)

2175 Principal Auditer(Jc) Performance Auditor (UG)
2223 Senior Council Committee Consultant (UC)

Miscellaneous E alary Rate-2015/Mihimum 4 ne
Monthly $ 1,301.00 - § 8,766.00
Biweekly $ 640.00 ~ $ 4,032,00
Hourly g 8.00 - $ 60.40

2251 Committee Consultants Secretary (UC)
2206. Confidential Secretary to Clty Council (UC)
2208 Confideritial’Secretary to Mayor (UC)

2211 Council Répresentative:| (UC),

2212 Council-Representative ll (UC)

2168, Mayor Répresentative | (UC)

163
2274

Sale

Miscellaneous

Medical Review Officer (UC)

"INTERNS

ite/Minimum an

effective 7/1/09

2185

2166

2103

2169

2186

2139

2188

Senior Legal Intern (Ue)
Legal Intern (UC)
Management Intern (UC) ”
Library Intern (UC) -
Planning Intern (uc)
Police Inter (uc)

Student Intern (UG)

aximum

 

Sa te-2014/Minimum and
Monthly $ 4,496.00 - $
Bi-weekly § 2,068.00 - $
Hourly $ 2686 - $
(2185) Monthly 3,969.00
Bi-weekly $ 1,825,60
Hourly $ = 22,82
(2166) Monthly $ 3,261.00
Bi-weekly 4,500.00
Hourly $ 18.76
(2103) Monthly 2,030.00
Bi-weekly $°. 933,60
Hourly $ 11,67
(2469) Monthly 2,030.00
Bi-weekly 933,60
Hourly $ 11.67
(2186) Monthly 2,030.00
Bi-weekly 933.60.
Hourly 11.67
(2139)Monthly  § 2,023.00
Bi-weekly 930,40
Hourly.” 11.63
(24188) Monthly 1,587.00
Bi-weekly 716.00
Hourly $ 8.95

Page 8 of 8

8,766,00
4,032.00

50.40

4,821.00
2,217.60
27.72

3,966.00
1,824.00
$ 22.80

2,442.00.
1,123.20
$ 14.04

S 2,442.00
1,123.20
B 14.04

2,442.00.
$ 1,123.20
14,04

$ 2,440,00
1,122.40
14.03

$ 1,868.00
858,40
10.73

 

164
IN WITNESS THEREOF, the undersigned agree to submit this tentative Memorandum of
Understanding, effective July 1, 2015 — June 30, 2020, to their respective constituents for

approval.
Date:

SAN DIEGO POLICE
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Bradley M. Fields, Lead Negotiator

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Brian R. Marvel, President

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Jeffery T. Jordon, Vice President

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Tom Bostedt, Secretary

(Signature on file, available upon request)

Terry Hoskins, Director

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Mike Fender, Director

(Signature on file, available upon request)

Michael Pidgeon, Director

(Signature on file, available upon request)

Paul Paxton, Director

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Ed LaValle, Director

(Signature on file, available upon request)

Jack Schaeffer, Director

CITY OF SAN DIEGO (OFFICE
OF THE MAYOR)

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Timothy L. Davis, Lead Negotiator

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Judy von Kalinowski, Human Resources
Director

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Karen DeCrescenzo, Senior Human
Resources Officer

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Shelley Zimmerman, Chief of Police

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Sarah Creighton, Assistant Chief of
Police

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Estella Montoya, Risk Management
Deputy Director

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association

 
Agreement this day of 2015.

 

i
|
For the City of San Diego, IHEREBY APPROVE the form and legality of the foregoing i

TIMOTHY L. DAVIS: |

By: |
TIMOTHY L. DAVIS, ESQ.,
BURKE, WILLIAMS & SORENSEN, LLP

 

___(Signature on File — Available Upon Request)__ i
SIGNED |
DATE

 

Memorandum of Understanding, San Diego Police Officers Association
