MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
ON
WAGES, HOURS, AND OTHER TERMS AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT

FREMONT POLICE ASSOCIATION
AND

La

CITY OF

Fremont

TERM OF AGREEMENT
JULY 1, 2013 — JUNE 30, 2015

 
ARTICLE 1 — ADMINISTRATIVE

SECTION 1:
SECTION 2:
SECTION 3:
SECTION 4:
SECTION 5:
SECTION 6:
SECTION 7:
SECTION 8:
SECTION 9:
SECTION 10:
SECTION 11:

ARTI

SECTION 12:
SECTION 13:
SECTION 14:
SECTION 15:
SECTION 16:
SECTION 17:
SECTION 18:
SECTION 19:
SECTION 20:
SECTION 21:
SECTION 22:
SECTION 23:

ARTI

SECTION 24:
SECTION 25:
SECTION 26:
SECTION 27:

SECT
SECT
SECT
SECT

FPA

TION 28:
TION 29:
TION 30:
TION 31:

 

CLE 2 - SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION ...

CLE 3 - LEAVES

CITY OF FREMONT
FREMONT POLICE ASSOCIATION
2013-2015

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

PARTIES TO UNDERSTANDING.
RECOGNITION.........cccccscseeseeeees
STATE, FEDERAL, AND LOCAL LAW COMPLIANCE
NO DISCRIMINATION
CITY RIGHTS .............
CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL..
EXISTING BENEFITS CONTINUED.
TERM OF UNDERSTANDING..
VALIDITY OF MEMORANDUM
ORGANIZATION BUSINESS.
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITI

  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 

WWWWNNNHAH AHHH

SALARIES.....
CALL BACK..
ACTING PAY ...
ON-CALL INVESTIGATOR...
OVERTIME AND WORK SCH
COURT APPEARANCEG............-.
EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE PAY
SPECIALIST PAY .........0++
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
SAFETY EQUIPMENT.......
MOTORCYCLE OFFICER UNIFORM PROVISION
POLICE CANINE UNIT

 

VACATION LEAVE PLAN EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 1994.

SICK LEAVE .......ecsssssscseseseeeeseneees 24
SICK LEAVE INCENTIVE PLAN 24
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE ... 25
HOLIDAYS........20eesee0e 25
HOLIDAY TIME BANK 26

ASSOCIATION RELEASE TIME
FAMILY CARE LEAVE

 

2013-2015 MOU
 

ARTICLE 4 —- INSURANCES
SECTION 32: HEALTH BENEFITS ALLOWANCE.
SECTION 33: RETIREE MEDICAL INSURANCE...
SECTION 34: DENTAL INSURANCE COVERAGE...
SECTION 35: LIFE INSURANCE COVERAGE
SECTION 36: LONG-TERM DISABILITY/SALARY CONTINUATION PLAN

 

 
 

 

ARTICLE 5 — RETIREMENT
SECTION 37: PERS CONTRACT AMENDMENTS...

 

 

ARTICLE 6 — MISCELLANEOUS...
SECTION 38: STANDBY STATUS.
SECTION 39: TRAINING SCHEDULES
SECTION 40: DAYLIGHT SAVINGS TIME...
SECTION 41: SHIFT CHANGE
SECTION 42: SPECIAL EVENT NOTIFICATION...

 
 
  
  
 

 

ARTICLE 7 —- GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS .
SECTION 43: BINDING ARBITRATION
SECTION 44: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ..
SECTION 45: GENERAL......
SECTION 46: PROCEDURE

 
 
  
 
 
    
   
  
  

 

SECTION 47: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SECTION 48:

SECTION 49:

SECTION 50:

SECTION 51:

SECTION 52: PROCEDURE :
SECTION 53: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ... 43
SECTION 54: JOINT LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE..........cecscssssssesesereeeeeees 44
APPENDIX A: CLASSIFICATION LIST .........::s:sssssssssssssessssesesesessssseressescseseeseseaterarecens 47
APPENDIX B: FORMULA FOR POSSIBLE MARKET ADJUSTMENT............2+0+s+0000 49
INDEX —seasssssesessssstesesesessssesesesesesseseseseseseeseseseseseeseaeseseseesesesesesseseseaeaesseseseaeaeseaseas 51

FPA ii 2013-2015 MOU
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
ON
WAGES, HOURS, AND OTHER TERMS AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT

ARTICLE 1 —- ADMINISTRATIVE

SECTION 1: PARTIES TO UNDERSTANDING

This Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) is entered into between the
representatives of the CITY OF FREMONT, CALIFORNIA (hereinafter referred to as the
“City”) and representatives of the FREMONT POLICE ASSOCIATION (hereinafter
referred to as “Association”) to provide for the wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of employment of employees in the classes of Police Sergeant and Police
Officer.

All male pronouns used in this MOU shall be understood to also include the female
gender.

SECTION 2: RECOGNITION

The City recognizes the Fremont Police Association as the exclusive representative for
the purposes of establishing wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment for full-time employees in the classified service who are employed in the
classes of positions of Police Officer and Police Sergeant, as well as position
classifications that may be added or deleted by mutual agreement in writing between
said Association and the City’s Employee Relations Officer.

SECTION 3: STATE, FEDERAL, AND LOCAL LAW COMPLIANCE

This Memorandum of Understanding complies with the provisions of Section 3500 et
seq., of the Government Code of the State of California, and Chapter 4.5, Title 2, of the
Fremont Municipal Code, in that the Employer and Employee representatives did meet
and confer in good faith and did reach agreement on those matters within the scope of
representation.

SECTION 4: NO DISCRIMINATION
The City and the Association agree that each shall not discriminate in any aspect of
employment or membership based on political affiliation, race, religious creed, color,

national origin, ancestry, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, age (over 40), medical
condition or physical disability.

FPA 1 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 1 — ADMINISTRATIVE

 

SECTION 5: CITY RIGHTS

The City reserves, retains and is vested with any management rights not expressly
granted to the Association by this Agreement, the Personnel Rules or the Employer-
Employee Relations Policy. These City rights include but are not limited to the right to:

5.1 Determine and modify the organization of City government and its constituent
work units.

5.2 Determine the nature, standard, levels and mode of delivery of City services.

5.3 Determine the methods, means, number and kind of personnel by which services
are provided.

5.4 Impose discipline subject to applicable law and the provisions of this MOU.

5.5 Relieve employees from duty because of lack of work or lack of funds or for other
legitimate reasons subject to the Personnel Rules.

Nothing in this Section shall relieve the City of its obligation to meet and confer on the
impact of the exercise of rights enumerated in this Section.

SECTION 6: CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL

It is expressly understood that this Memorandum of Understanding is of no force or
effect until approved by the City Council of the City of Fremont.

SECTION 7: EXISTING BENEFITS CONTINUED

Except as provided herein, this Memorandum of Understanding does not modify
existing benefits established by resolution and/or Ordinance. Such benefits as remain
unmodified shall continue in full force and effect throughout the term of this
Memorandum of Understanding.

This Memorandum of Understanding constitutes the full and complete agreement
between the parties on all matters within the scope of representation. This agreement
supersedes previous memoranda between the parties, except as specifically referred to
herein. Any City ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent herewith is
superseded by the terms of the Agreement. For the term of this Agreement, each party
hereto waives the right to request of the other any change in the provisions of this
Agreement, any existing City ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, or any other term
or condition of employment falling within the scope of representation, and each party
hereby unqualifiedly waives the right to request the right to negotiate thereon; provided,
however, that should the City desire to propose revisions or amendments to the
presently existing Personnel Ordinance and/or Personnel Rules or Regulations, and/or
Employee Relations Procedure, the City may require of the Association that it meet and
confer thereon prior to any proposed revisions or amendments being adopted, on either

FPA 2 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 1 — ADMINISTRATIVE

 

an individual or a “task force” (i.e., all recognized City employee organizations) basis.
Nothing contained herein shall preclude the City from such meet and confer, or
amending or revising the Personnel Ordinance and/or the Personnel Rules and
Regulations, and/or employee relations procedures.

SECTION 8: TERM OF UNDERSTANDING

This MOU incorporates all modifications regarding wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of employment. This MOU shall be effective as of July 1, 2013 and shall
terminate June 30, 2015.

SECTION 9: VALIDITY OF MEMORANDUM

Should any Article, Section, or portion thereof of this Memorandum of Understanding be
held unlawful and unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of
the court shall apply only to the specified Article, Section, or portion thereof directly
specified in the decision, and the remainder of this Memorandum of Understanding shall
not be affected. The parties shall meet and confer regarding the replacement of any
Article, Section or portion thereof found invalid in an attempt to replace the Article,
Section or portion thereof with new language reflecting the original intent.

SECTION 10: ORGANIZATION BUSINESS

The President of the Association shall be allowed time off with pay when approved by
the Municipal Employee Relations Officer (City Manager), or his/her designee (Police
Chief) for the purpose of conducting Association business. It shall be the responsibility
of the employee to advise his/her supervisor of the expected absence from regular
duties for the conduct of Association business. With respect to the meet and confer
process, three (3) Association representatives shall be the maximum number of
employees who will be allowed concurrent time off without loss of compensation. The
Association shall submit the names of all such employee representatives to the
Municipal Employee Relations Officer.

The employee representatives shall request release time from their supervisors in
advance of leaving their work assignments to attend meet and confer sessions.
Approval of release time shall not be unreasonably denied provided, however, that this
section shall not adversely affect Association benefits established by existing custom or
practice.

SECTION 11: AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT
It is the City’s intent to comply fully with the requirements of the Americans with

Disabilities Act including, but not limited to, providing reasonable accommodation to
employees with disabilities.

FPA 3 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

ARTICLE 2 - SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

SECTION 12: SALARIES

12.1

During the term of this MOU, salaries shall be adjusted as follows:

A. The salaries for the classifications listed in Appendix A of this MOU shall be
increased by 4.25% effective June 30, 2013.

B. The salaries for the classifications listed in Appendix A of this MOU shall be
increased by 2% effective June 29, 2014.

LONGEVITY PAY

12.2

12.3

12.4

12.5

12.6

SECTION 13: CALL BACK

Police Officers and Police Sergeants who have completed 19 years of service
with the City of Fremont shall receive an additional 2.5% of current base pay.

Police Officers and Police Sergeants who have completed 24 years of service
with the City of Fremont shall receive an additional 2.3% of current base pay.

Police Officers and Police Sergeants who have completed 26 years of service
with the City of Fremont shall receive an additional 4.6% of current base pay.

Police Officers and Police Sergeants who have completed 27 years of service
with the City of Fremont shall receive an additional 2.3% of current base pay.

Police Officers and Police Sergeants who have completed 28 years of service
with the City of Fremont shall receive an additional 1.2% of current base pay.

Whenever an employee is unexpectedly ordered by the supervisor to return to duty
following the termination of his/her normal work shift and departure from the work
location because of unanticipated work requirements, he/she shall receive a minimum
payment equivalent to three (3) hours of overtime pay.

 

SECTION 14: ACTING PAY

1441

FPA

An employee who has been specifically assigned in writing by the Chief of Police
or designated representative and who, pursuant to such assignment, does
perform the full range of duties and responsibilities of a position in a higher class
shall be paid at the first step of the higher class or five percent (5%), whichever is
greater for all service at the higher rank from the first day of such service. For
purposes of this section, a writing may include a posted or published shift roster.

4 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

14.2 Assignment of employees to serve in an acting capacity, as defined above, shall
be based upon methods determined by the sole discretion of the Chief of Police.

14.3 Nothing in this section shall limit management's authority to assign employees
temporarily to a position of a higher class for the purpose of providing training in
the work of the position. Such temporary training assignment shall not constitute
service in an acting capacity, as defined above, and shall not create entitlement
to acting pay.

14.4 Additional compensation shall not apply to employees assigned to a modified
duty assignment pending recuperation from an industrial or non-industrial injury
or illness.

SECTION 15: ON-CALL INVESTIGATOR

Police Officers, or such other personnel as may be assigned, shall receive, in addition
to their monthly salary, One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each full week when
assigned to and actually performing on-call investigator duties during normal off duty
hours.

Whenever an individual who is assigned to and does perform on-call investigator duties,
performs such assignment for less than seven (7) days within a week, payment for such
duties will be at the rate of Fourteen Dollars and twenty-nine Cents ($14.29) for each full
day of assigned and performed on-call investigator duties.

Employees assigned as on-call investigator shall comply with the terms and conditions
of such assignment as are established by the department and should such an employee
fail to respond to a properly transmitted call to duty, the employee shall forfeit the One
Hundred Dollar ($100.00) payment for that week of assignment.

Since Employees can use on-call time for their own pursuits, wear beepers and/or trade
on-call shifts, on-call shall not be treated as “hours worked” for purposes of calculating
overtime. Since these hours are for “on-call” hours, they should not be allocated to
straight time hours to compute the “regular rate.”

SECTION 16: OVERTIME AND WORK SCHEDULES

It is the desire of the parties to this Memorandum of Understanding to comply with the
provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act in all regards.

16.1 DEFINITIONS
16.1.1 Overtime is defined as either (a) hours worked in excess of the Employee’s
normal schedule or shift; or (b) hours worked constituting overtime as

defined by the Fair Labor Standards Act. “Hours worked” is defined pursuant
to the FLSA and generally includes time that the employee is performing

FPA 5 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 —

SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

16.1.2

16.1.3

16.1.4

16.1.5

16.1.6

16.1.7

16.1.8

16.1.9

services that are controlled or required by the Chief of Police or his/her
designee.

Work Day/Shift: For purposes of this Section a “work day/shift” is defined as
the number of hours to which each person is assigned on a regular daily
basis, i.e., 8, 9, 10 or 11 hour shift.

Work Schedule shall mean the number of consecutive days an employee is
on his/her work shift and the number of consecutive days an employee is
off-duty within the work period.

Work Period shall mean the regular recurring period of work of 28
consecutive days which remains fixed regardless of how many hours are
worked in the period before overtime is paid under the provisions of the 7(k)
exemption of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).

Detective shall mean an employee who receives Specialist Pay as a
Detective as described in Section 19.1 of the Memorandum of
Understanding.

Administrative staff shall mean Police Officers or Police Sergeants assigned
to units within the Police Department other than the Community Policing
Patrol Teams.

When Overtime is paid: Whenever overtime is due, the Employee will be
paid 1.5 times his or her “regular rate” provided, however, that the Employee
will not be paid twice for overtime that is both FLSA overtime and MOU
overtime.

Community Policing Patrol Teams shall mean the operating unit of the
Police Department with responsibility for routine preventative patrol,
responding to calls for service and conducting criminal investigations.
Excluded from this definition are employees assigned to specialized units
operated and coordinated by Division Commanders.

Investigative Services Division shall mean the Investigations Unit of the
Police Department with responsibility for investigation of crimes against
persons and property.

16.1.10 Regular Rate of Pay is defined pursuant to the FLSA. In accordance with the

FPA

FLSA, the regular rate will include acting pay, specialty pay, educational
incentive pay, and similar payments.

6 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

16.2 WORK SCHEDULE FOR COMMUNITY POLICING PATROL TEAMS

FPA

16.2.1 Effective August 11, 2013, the City will implement a new 11 hour rotational

shift schedule (2080 hours per year) for employees assigned to the
Community Policing Patrol Teams. All employees assigned to the
Community Policing Patrol Teams shall have a regular work schedule not to
exceed 171 hours within the work period of 28 days.

The new work schedule rotation is based on an eight-day cycle with each
employee working four (4) consecutive days of eleven (11) hour and twelve
(12) minute work shifts followed by four (4) consecutive days off. The eight-
day cycle will advance the employee’s workday and days off one day for
every cycle. The cycle will repeat every eight (8) weeks. In thirteen (13)
twenty-eight (28) day FLSA pay periods (one year) each employee will work
182 eleven (11) hour and twelve (12) minute regular patrol shifts totaling
2038.4 hours. Employees shall work an additional forty-one and six tenths
(41.6) hours during the thirteen (13) twenty-eight (28) day FLSA pay periods
for a total work year of 2080 hours as follows:

a. Four (4) separate ten (10) hour training days for a total of fort (40) hours
of training.

b. One and six tenths (1.6) hours of personal uniform and equipment
maintenance.

Employees concurrently assigned to the Community Policing Patrol Teams
and SWAT Team shall have a modified shift schedule.

The SWAT Community Policing Patrol Teams shift schedule rotation is
based on an eight (8) day cycle with each employee working four (4)
consecutive days of eleven (11) hour work shifts followed by four (4)
consecutive days off. The eight (8) day cycle will advance the employee’s
workday and days off one day for every cycle. The cycle will repeat every
(8) weeks. In thirteen (13) twenty-eight (28) day FLSA pay periods (one
year), each employee will work one hundred and eighty two (182) eleven
(11) hour regular patrol shifts totaling two thousand and two (2002) hours.
Employees shall work and additional seventy eight (78) work hours during
the thirteen (13) twenty-eight (28) day FLSA pay period for a total work year
of two thousand and eighty (2080) hours as follows:

a. Four (4) separate ten (10) hour training days for a total of forty (40)
hours of department training.

b. Thirty six (36) hours of SWAT Training.

c. Two (2) hours of personal uniform and equipment maintenance.

7 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 —

SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

16.2.2

16.2.3

16.2.4

16.2.5

16.2.6

16.2.7

16.2.8

FPA

Employees assigned to work in the Community Policing Patrol Teams shall
be entitled to a paid lunch period of fifty (50) minutes included within their
work shift.

Employees assigned to work in the Street Crimes Unit shall work four (4)
days per week ten (10) hours per day and shall have a 60 minute meal
period included within their work shift.

Employees assigned to work as a Detective in the Investigative Units shall
work four (4) days per week ten (10) hours per day and shall have a sixty
(60) minute meal period within their work shift.

The parties agree to meet from time to time as necessary to discuss the
effectiveness and efficiency of the Community Policing Patrol Teams shift
schedule. The City shall continue to determine shift configurations and the
starting time of work shifts based on the needs of the Police Department.
Work shift starting times may be altered to meet staffing needs.

The Community Policing Patrol Teams shift schedule will be subject to
periodic evaluations by the City. The results of the periodic evaluations will
be provided to the Association. Before a change in the shift schedule is
implemented, the parties will meet and confer and attempt to reach
agreement on the shift schedule.

Community Policing Patrol shift sign ups shall be on an annual basis, but
with an optional six month rotation, with a maximum of three (3) consecutive
years on the same shift. Officers may extend their assignment up to an
additional two (2) years. Such extensions will be granted on a case-by-case
basis and only upon the affirmative recommendation by the employee’s
supervisor and concurrence by the Watch Commander and Division
Commander for each option year requested. Sign-ups for each six month
shift will be accomplished as soon as practical, but no later than March 31*
for the July through December shift and September 30" for the January
through June shift. Primary vacation sign ups shall be completed
concurrently with each shift sign up, however only one primary vacation can
be taken during the fiscal year. This MOU does not reset determinations of
consecutive shift selections from prior years.

The department reserves the right to transfer employees in the event a work
group is reconfigured due to operational necessity, restructuring or
reallocation of resources, as well as, for performance and/or disciplinary-
related reasons at any time.

Employees assigned to work in an administrative assignment shall work four

(4) days per week, ten (10) hours per day and shall have a 60-minute meal
period within their work shift and the City reserves the right to implement

8 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

procedures to ensure that such employees are available to respond to
emergency calls.

16.3 GENERAL CONDITIONS

16.3.1

16.3.2

16.3.3

FPA

Overtime compensation (when requested by the employee in cash, rather
than in compensatory time off) shall be paid in the paycheck covering the
period in which the overtime was earned. The Association recognizes that it
will not always be possible to process over-time payments earned at the end
of the pay period for payment in the paycheck covering the period, and
should such a case arise, payment will be made no later than the next
subsequent paycheck.

Comp Time. The City agrees to maintain a voluntary compensatory time off
“CTO” bank with the following maximum accruals:

a. 240 hours (160 hours worked) for Officers and Sergeants other than
School Resource Officers (SRO’s) and DARE Officers; and
b. 480 hours (320 hours worked) for SRO’s and DARE Officers.

Employees may elect to receive overtime compensatory time off in lieu of
cash.

Employees will be required to irrevocably elect, prior to working the
overtime, whether they wish to receive cash for the overtime or accrue the
value of the overtime in a Compensatory Time Off Bank.

Employees will not be able to cash out Compensatory Time Banks, other
than at termination of employment. Once accrued overtime is banked as
CTO, the employee may only access the CTO by taking time off.

Overtime, as defined above, shall be paid to the employee, either in cash or
in compensatory time off (CTO), at the employee’s option, under the
following conditions: provided, however, that CTO shall not be paid at the
employee’s option for the performance of activities that are reimbursable to
the City in cash through other sources (e.g., Homeland Security):

a. When an employee is required to report for duty to fill an assignment
other than an employee’s regularly assigned shift.

b. Employees required to attend departmental meetings during their regular
shift hours will receive no additional compensation. Employees who are
required to attend work meetings while off duty, for which the employee
is designated to a committee, or for any other reason, shall receive
overtime at 1.5 times their regular rate of pay. When an employee is
working and a departmental meeting is required ether (1) immediately

9 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 —

SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

16.3.4

before his/her shift, or (2) at the start of his/her shift, or (3) immediately
after the end of his/her shift, he/she will not be eligible for any minimum
number of hours under this Section, but shall be compensated for such
overtime worked at 1.5 times the regular rate of pay.

The department meeting minimum, where applicable, shall be three (3)
hours, but said minimum shall not apply to employees attending
department meetings during their regular scheduled work hours or
whose appearance is required less than three (3) hours prior to the start
of their regularly scheduled work shift. Department meetings within one-
half (1/2) hour following the end of the shift, regardless of the length
thereof, shall be deemed a continuation of the shift and shall not be
eligible for the three (3) hours minimum.

c. When an employee is assigned to attend City-approved training which is
in addition to the regularly scheduled work day/shift, the employee is
eligible for paid overtime for that period of time which is in excess of the
employee’s regularly scheduled work day/shift.

d. When an employee works in excess of 147 hours in a 24-day work
period, the employee is eligible for FLSA overtime pay to the extent that
the employee has not already been paid MOU overtime for those same
hours. Effective August 1, 1999, when an employee works in excess of
171 hours in a 28-day work period, the employee is eligible for FLSA
overtime pay to the extent that the employee has not already been paid
MOU overtime for those same hours.

An employee who has been injured on duty and who is on a leave of
absence with pay under Labor Code Section 4850 and who is required to
attend court, school, training or any other departmental function in excess of
the normal hours of his/her work day shall receive no additional
compensation other than the full payment received for IOD status.

SCHOOL RESOURCE OFFICER (SRO) WORK SCHEDULES:

16.3.5

16.3.6

FPA

SRO’s will be assigned a work schedule of five (5) days a week, nine and
one-half (92) hours per day. The purpose of this schedule is to replicate, as
much as possible, the school’s calendar and to ensure, to the extent
possible, that a SRO is available during the school’s class and/or activity
hours.

SRO’s will not normally be scheduled to work the traditional three (3) weeks
during the school year that school is closed (2 weeks during winter
holidays/week for spring break) and SRO’s will be scheduled off during
Thanksgiving week via the use of comp time.

10 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

16.3.7

16.3.8

16.3.9

There may be instances of a holiday falling during a school week during the
school year. When this occurs, the SRO’s will adjust their work schedules to
a 4-10 plan and the holiday will be a regularly scheduled day off.

There are school “in-service” days during the school year. The SRO’s work
schedule would remain on the schedule outlined in 16.3.5 above when “in-
service” days occur during the school year. The following options are
available at the discretion of the Police Chief, Division Commander, or the
SRO's supervisor:

a. SRO’s may be assigned to work on special projects or,

b. SRO’s may be assigned to work patrol; or,

c. SRO’s may be assigned to work at the Junior High School level
(providing the Junior Highs are not also off on “in-service”); or.

d. SRO’s may use accrued comp time, vacation or holiday time to take an
“in-service” day off.

e. SRO’s may adjust their work schedules to a 4-10 shift during the
scheduled “in-service” week, with supervisor approval.

The parties share a mutual interest in maximizing the availability of
compensatory time off (CTO) for SRO’s. With this thought in mind, the
parties agree to increase the maximum comp time accrual for SRO’s from
240 hours to 480 hours. This increased comp time bank will apply to SRO’s
only. The parties agree it is their mutual expectation that the increased
comp time bank will be used by SRO’s for an extended absence during the
summer months.

16.3.10 SRO’s acknowledge their work schedules will include a minimum

16.3.11

assignment of two (2) weeks of summer school annually at a local high
school or junior high school.

SRO’s acknowledge their work schedules will require working special
events such as dances, graduation, sporting events, etc. Schedule
adjustments will continue to be permitted if the SRO so elects in lieu of
overtime or compensatory time.

16.3.12 Agreement to modify the SRO’s work schedule is entered into for purposes

FPA

of providing better service to community schools, enhancing the partnership
between the schools and the City of Fremont, strengthening relationships
between students and the Fremont Police Department, attracting qualified
Police Officers to serve as SRO's to provide a positive reduction in the
crime rate associated with truancy, and to most effectively manage police
resources.

11 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

16.3.13 The parties agree that if an SRO leaves the SRO Program at a time other
than the beginning of a school year, accrued comp time over 240 hours will
be handled in the following manner:

a. Upon the SRO’s Retirement or Resignation: Employees will be cashed
out at their regular hourly rate of pay;

b. Upon the SRO’s Voluntary or Involuntary Transfer: Employees will be
paid out to 240 hours.

16.4 POLICE CANINE OVERTIME

The parties recognize that care and grooming of canines can and will be
performed on-duty. The parties agree that Police Officers assigned to the Canine
Unit shall be authorized a maximum of two (2) hours per week for incidental care
and grooming at the officers home or other location other than Police
Department facilities. The Police Officers assigned to the Canine Unit shall report
use of these hours to their supervisor and the supervisor shall maintain accurate
records for FLSA purposes. All “regular” Overtime and Callbacks exclusive of
care, grooming, exercising, and matters related to the animal shall be covered by
this Memorandum of Understanding. Police Officers assigned to the Canine Unit
will not be eligible for two hours per week for incidental care and grooming while
the canine is not under the care of the police officer for seven (7) or more
consecutive days.

16.5 TRAINING AND SCHOOLS - ATTENDANCE AND TRAVEL

16.5.1. When an employee is assigned to a training course away from home, the
location of the training course shall be determined as the employee’s work
location for the period of training involved. Overtime will be paid only if
classroom time exceeds the designated work schedule. For example, in the
event that the class is twenty-four (24) hours and the class hours are
unequally distributed over three (3) work days, no overtime will be paid
unless the total classroom hours exceed twenty-four (24) hours.

16.5.2 When an employee attends school away from home, his/her schedule
during the time of training shall be considered an eight (8) hour workday and
the Department may alter the employee’s regularly scheduled days off to
provide in-lieu days off if the school attended is on a regularly scheduled day
off. When an employee attends a 40 hour, 5 day school or more, he/she
shall be considered to be on an 8-hour workday schedule and shall be
entitled to two (2) days off that week and the employee’s work schedule
shall be automatically adjusted.

For example, an employee attending a 5 day school occurring Monday-

Friday will receive the preceding Sunday and the succeeding Saturday off
for that week. Employees attending school on their days off for less than a

FPA 12 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

5-day, 40 hour school will be given the same number of days off, on a day-
for-day basis, within the same Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) cycle at
straight time. If days off cannot be scheduled, the employee will receive
compensation at the time and one-half (1.5) rate.

16.5.3 The Department shall use the most reasonably expeditious mode of
transportation. If the employee opts for alternate forms of transportation
(subject to department approval), the employee shall not receive overtime
compensation for more than the time that would have been expended in the
most reasonably expeditious mode and time of travel that would have been
chosen by the Department.

16.6 WHEN OVERTIME IS NOT PAYABLE

16.6.1 Sick Time - An employee on day shift who is on sick leave during his/her
regularly scheduled shift, but who appears in court, attends a meeting, or
attends a training class for no more than the regularly scheduled work day
will receive the normal straight-time compensation and any sick-time credits
will be adjusted to reflect the actual hours off sick during the twenty-four (24)
hour period.

16.6.2 Travel Time - Travel time, when required for travel out of the area, shall be
paid at the straight-time rate.

16.7. PART TIME EMPLOYEES

During the term of this MOU, the City shall not deploy part time employees in
patrol.

SECTION 17: COURT APPEARANCES

Employees required to attend court during normal duty hours will receive no additional
compensation.

17.1. When an employee is working and a court appearance is required either (1)
immediately before his/her shift, or (2) at the start of his/her shift, or (3)
immediately after the end of his/her shift, he/she shall not be eligible for any
minimum number of hours under this Section, but shall be compensated for such
overtime worked at 1.5 times the regular rate of pay.

17.2 An employee who appears in court on a regularly scheduled day off or on a
vacation day approved prior to receipt of the subpoena will receive payment of
four (4) hours minimum at 1.5 times the regular rate of pay. Except as provided in
Section 17.7, below, an employee, after receiving a subpoena, may not take the
day off on the date of a court appearance and also receive one and one-half time
credit during the same time period of his/her scheduled shift.

FPA 13 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

17.3

The court appearance minimum, where applicable, shall be four (4) hours, but
said minimum shall not apply to employees appearing in court during their
regular scheduled work hours or whose appearance is required less than four (4)
hours prior to the start of their regularly scheduled work shift.

17.3.1 Court Appearances at the Conclusion of Shift. Appearances in court within

one-half (1/2) hour following the end of the regular shift, regardless of the
length thereof, shall be deemed a continuation of the shift and shall not be
eligible for the 4 hour minimum.

17.3.2 Court Meal Breaks. When a court meal break exceeds one (1) hour, the

17.4

17.5

17.6

amount of the meal break in excess of one (1) hour shall be counted
towards the court appearance minimum.

In the event that an employee appears in court for a period of time prior to his/her
regular shift and subsequently takes time off during a portion of the regular shift,
the employee will nevertheless be entitled to his/her court time payable at 1.5
times the regular rate of pay.

If an employee receives a subpoena and subsequently takes sick leave for their
regular shift on the date of the actual court appearance, he/she shall receive
court time pay at 1.5 times the regular rate of pay for the court appearance, and
the four-hour minimum shall be applicable to each such appearance. This shall
not apply to employees whose normal work shift includes any portion of the
normal court hours covered by Article 2, Section 16.6.1.

When an employee is scheduled to appear in court, for an afternoon court
appearance on a day which is a regularly scheduled day off, or on a day which
has been previously approved as a vacation day and his/her court appearance is
canceled, the employee shall be notified, via assigned Department internal voice
mail, of such cancellation no later than 11:30 a.m. on the day of the scheduled
court appearance. It is the employee’s responsibility to check his/her assigned
Department voice mail at or prior to 11:30 a.m. on the scheduled court date.
Should the employee not be notified of such cancellation on or before 11:30 a.m.,
the employee shall be entitled to and shall be paid for his/her court appearance
for four (4) hours at 1.5 times the regular rate of pay.

17.6.1. If the employee is scheduled for a morning court appearance it is the

FPA

responsibility of the employee to check their assigned Department voice
mail at 6:00 p.m. the day before the court date to determine if the court
appearance has been canceled. Should the employee not be notified of
such cancellation on or before 6:00 p.m. the day prior to the court
appearance, the employee shall be entitled to and shall be paid for his/her
court appearance for four (4) hours at 1.5 times the regular rate of pay.

14 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

17.7 No employee’s shift shall be altered to prevent the payment of overtime or court

time credits, except in the case of an employee who has taken leave time during
his/her regular shift and who then works hours in excess of regular shift, in which
case the amount of overtime which would otherwise be paid to the employee
shall be reduced by the number of hours of leave taken during said shift and the
balance shall be paid at 1.5 times the regular rate of pay. This section shall not
apply to court time, and all transactions involving leave time and court overtime
occurring on the same day will be processed separately.

SECTION 18: EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE PAY

18.1

A regular employee who has completed a total of three (3) or more continuous
years of full-time service as a sworn officer or sergeant with the City, and who
attains one of the educational standards in one of the levels listed below in
addition to the requirements of the job classification, shall receive an additional
amount of the regular base salary as Educational Incentive Pay (EIP), provided
that the particular educational standard is in a field directly related to the
employee’s job. The amounts shown below are not cumulative.

Level 1:

AA or AS Degree 2.5%
60 Semester (90 Quarter) Units * 2.5%
Intermediate POST Certificate 2.5%
OR

Level 2:

BA or BS Degree 5.0%
120 Semester (180 Quarter) Units * 5.0%
MA or MS Degree 5.0%
POST Advanced Certificate 5.0%

* The City extends the continued right of only those employees hired into
the unit prior to July 1, 1989 to achieve educational incentive pay on the
basis of academic units as indicated above.

18.2 APPLICATION PROCESS FOR EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE PAY

18.2.1 On the basis of POST certificates: Upon notification and receipt of

documentation from the employee of qualifications, the Police Department
will submit the payroll change within 30 days of the date the employee
provided information to the Department.

18.2.2 On the basis of Degrees or Units: The employee is responsible for

FPA

submitting a completed Educational Incentive Pay (EIP) application and
required paperwork to the Police Department.

15 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

18.3

18.4

The above educational standards are not cumulative for determination of the
percentage. A maximum of five percent (5%) shall be allowed for employees with
three (3) to eight (8) years of continuous service with the City as a sworn officer
or sergeant.

EFFECTIVE DATE FOR EIP PAY

18.4.1 On the basis of POST Certificates: EIP pay shall be effective the first of the

month following submission of the application to POST by the Police
Department, or the first of the month following the date of eligibility for the
certificate, whichever occurs later. Employees acknowledge that failure by
POST to approve the employee’s application could result in overpayment
and the need for repayment. If repayment is required, it will be at the same
rate as it was disbursed, and over the same number of pay periods by way
of payroll deduction.

18.4.2 On the basis of Degrees or Units: EIP pay shall be effective no earlier than

18.5

18.6

the first day of the month in which the employee becomes eligible and
submits an EIP application and required documentation to the Police
Department.

After completion of eight (8) continuous years of service as a sworn Officer or
Sergeant with the City, qualified employees will be eligible for an additional two
and one-half percent (2%2%) incentive pay. At no time may the total
compensation for Educational Incentive Pay exceed 712% of the employee’s
current pay step.

If, at any time, an employee is promoted to a position requiring the higher
educational standard, the incentive pay received while in the lower position will
terminate.

18.7 At the exclusive discretion of the City Manager (or his/her designee), lateral new -

hire employees who otherwise qualify for educational incentive pay may
substitute years of full-time service as a sworn officer or sergeant at another law
enforcement agency for service at the City of Fremont under this provision.

SECTION 19: SPECIALIST PAY

All Police Officers assigned to one of the following positions shall be paid an additional
5% of base salary for the term of their assignment:

19.1
19.2
19.3
19.4
19.5

FPA

Detectives

Administrative Officer

Polygraph Officer

Special Investigator to the Chief of Police

Field Training Officers (FTO’s) while their assigned trainee is in any phase of
field training

16 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

19.6
19.7
19.8
19.9
19.10

Canine Officer

Crime Scene Investigators

Semi-permanent Traffic Officers

Commercial Enforcement Officer, or

Any other position recommended in writing by the Police Chief and approved by
the City Manager

Specialist Pay shall not apply to employees assigned to a modified duty assignment
pending recuperation from an industrial or non-industrial injury or illness if they are not
performing the specialist duties.

19.11

19.12

BILINGUAL PAY. Those Police Officers or Sergeants proficient in American Sign
Language (ASL), Mandarin Chinese, Spanish or other language needed as
approved by the Police Chief, shall be eligible for a bilingual pay incentive of
$100 per month. In order to qualify for this incentive, Officers must be able to
speak Mandarin Chinese or Spanish, or sign in ASL or other language needed as
determined by the Department. Officers must have skills sufficient to pass a
certified competency language examination as determined by the Department.

Up to a maximum of 20 Police Officers or Sergeants are eligible under this
program. Should the number of qualified officers exceed 20, award of this
incentive pay shall be by seniority. Periodic re-testing may be required in the
discretion of the Department.

POLICE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER PAY. A sworn Police Officer or Police
Sergeant who is routinely and consistently assigned to police administrative
support to the Police Chief and the command staff may receive Police
Administrative Officer Pay of up to ten (10%) of base pay. Police Administrative
Officer pay must be recommended by the Police Chief and approved by the
Human Resources Director, in writing.

The pay premium related to supervision of the Animal Shelter shall continue for
so long as the incumbent is performing those duties.

SECTION 20: UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

20.1

FPA

The City shall pay each employee fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500) per year to
compensate for the purchase and maintenance of uniforms and footwear as
specified by the City. Uniforms shall include replacement of department-
approved body armor (vest) after the initial issue of a department-approved vest,
and all safety equipment, devices, and safety-related items of uniform not
specified in Section 21 and required by any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or
order of the federal or State government, or any local governmental entity, or any
agency of the foregoing.

17 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

20.2

Payment shall be made in two equal installments, one on the first paycheck in
January of each year to cover the preceding July through December, and the
second on the first paycheck of July of each year to cover the preceding January
through June.

Employees who leave City employment for any reason or who are no longer
covered by this Understanding shall not be eligible for nor be paid the uniform
allowance for any part of the six (6) month period (i.e., January through June, or
July through December) during which departure from the City occurs. Any
adjustments in such compensation due from either the City or the employee due
to departure from City service shall be completed prior to the last date of
coverage under this Understanding.

Employees shall adhere to the maintenance standards, uniform specifications
and appearance standards previously established by the Department.

Newly hired police officers shall, as soon as is practical after the initial date of
employment, receive five hundred dollars ($500) for the purpose of reimbursing a
portion of the initial uniform expense. Employees, who, after terminating their
employment with the City, are rehired, shall not be eligible for nor receive this
initial payment upon being re-employed by the City.

Any employee who terminates employment, regardless of the reason, prior to
completing twelve (12) months of service, shall be required to repay to the City a
pro-rata amount of the reimbursement of initial uniform expense.

Such pro-rata amount shall be 1/12th of the amount specified above for each full
month of the twelve-month period commencing from the date of employment for
which service was not completed; such amount shall be deducted from the
employee’s paycheck.

On the first uniform allowance payment date following the completion of one (1)
year of employment as a sworn police officer, such employees shall receive
1/12th of the applicable annual amount specified above for each completed
month of service occurring between the end of the first year of employment and
the commencement of the next payment period beginning January 1 or July 1. In
no event shall such payment exceed one-half of the annual amount specified
above.

SECTION 21: SAFETY EQUIPMENT

This article constitutes an exclusive declaration of rights and responsibilities of the
parties with respect to safety equipment.

Safety Equipment Provided: All employees covered by this Understanding shall, as
soon as is practical after the initial date of employment, receive City furnished safety
equipment listed under Category A. It is agreed that all sworn employees presently

FPA

18 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 2 — SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

 

employed by the City have previously been furnished the safety equipment listed under
Category A.
Category A

One Regulation Semi-Auto Pistol

One 26" Baton

One Breast Badge

One Hat Piece

Chemical Weapon

Ammunition

One Department Approved Vest (Body Armor) — Upon initial hire only
One Air Purifying Mask

One Taser

All safety equipment described in Category A shall remain the property of the City and
shall be returned to the Police Chief upon request or upon the employee’s termination of
employment.

SECTION 22: MOTORCYCLE OFFICER UNIFORM PROVISION

Employees assigned to the position of Motorcycle Officer will be reimbursed for the
expense of purchasing the following approved special motorcycle uniform and
equipment: leather jacket, two pair Motorcycle Officer trousers; one pair motorcycle
boots. Prior approval must be obtained from the Division Commander before purchasing
any of the above listed equipment. The department will provide a helmet, two pairs of
motorcycle safety pants, gloves, and safety glasses.

SECTION 23: POLICE CANINE UNIT

23.1 A Police Officer assigned to the Canine Unit shall receive Specialist Pay as
described in Article 2, Section 19.9 of this Memorandum of Understanding when
assigned to the Canine Unit.

23.2 Except for the monthly training sessions, a Police Officer assigned to the Canine
Unit shall work a ten (10) hour shift, except in emergency situations as defined by
the Chief of Police or his designee. Any callback assignment shall be deemed
overtime and shall be paid according to Article 2, Section 16, of this
Memorandum of Understanding and shall not reduce the Police Officer’s regular
ten (10) hour shift. Further, Police Management reserves the right to reassign the
Police Officer from the canine assignment at any time that is, in fact, necessary
to management subject to the provisions of general law, Government Code
Section 3300 et. seq., and the City of Fremont Administrative Rules and
Regulations and this Memorandum of Understanding.

23.3 A Police Officer assigned to the Police Canine Unit shall assume the
responsibility for the handling, training, and retraining of the canine assigned to

FPA 19 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 3 — LEAVES

 

the Officer, exclusive of the costs of required training done with the Training
Contractor specified by the City.

23.4 The City shall pay all sums incurred by the Police Officer, when prior approval is
obtained from management, for care and maintenance of the animal. In addition,
City shall pay for routine and emergency veterinary maintenance and care.

23.5 A Police Officer shall provide services to the City as a canine handler for a
minimum of three (3) years. However, the term of assignment of a Police Officer
assigned to the Canine Unit shall terminate upon the occurrence of any of the
following events:

23.5.1. Termination of Police Officer's employment with the City.

23.5.2. Police Officer’s suspension from City for thirty (30) or more days; or
absence without leave for sixty (60) or more days.

23.5.3. Police Officer's voluntary change in assignment to the extent that the
services or use of a canine are not required.

23.5.4. Police Officer’s reassignment, upon request of employee or done by
management, from the canine duty.

23.5.5. Promotion of the Police Officer to the rank of Police Sergeant.

23.6 The term of assignment of a Police Officer assigned to the Canine Unit may
terminate upon the occurrence of any of the following events:

23.6.1 Death of a canine.

23.6.2 Canine’s disability to perform police work as determined by the
Department.

23.6.3. Substandard performance by the Police Officer or Canine as
documented by the Department.

ARTICLE 3 - LEAVES

SECTION 24: VACATION LEAVE PLAN EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 1994
This Vacation Leave Plan replaces all Vacation Leave Plans in effect prior to January 1,

1994. Effective January 1, 1994, the City established a New Vacation Leave Plan for
employees in this bargaining unit which will be administered as follows:

FPA 20 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 3 —- LEAVES

 

24.1 DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Section, the following terms have the meanings stated
below:

24.1.1

24.1.2

24.1.3

Old Vacation Leave Bank means all Vacation Leave accrued by the

individual employee in this bargaining unit on or before December 31,

1993.

New Vacation Leave Bank means all Vacation Leave accrued by the

individual employee in this bargaining unit on and after January 1, 1994.

Benefit Load means the premium, based on an additional cash factor

relating to the cost of benefits, which may be liquidated on Old Vacation
Leave accrued on and before December 31, 1993 upon termination of
employment with the cash value of base salary. The Benefit Load for

this bargaining unit is 33.305% of base salary.

24.2 LEAVE ACCRUAL SCHEDULE

24.2.1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Effective July 1, 2013, all eligible employees shall earn vacation credits for
continuous service based upon the following schedule based on an 8-hour
day:
Continuous Years of Annual Accrual Maximum Annual
Service Accrual
1 through 5 years 96 hours 288 hours
6 through 9 years 120 hours 360 hours
10 years 150 hours 408 hours
11 through 14 years 176 hours 480 hours
15 through 26 years 200 hours 504 hours
27 years 72 hours 504 hours
28 years 24 hours 504 hours
29 years 0 504 hours

 

 

 

For the purpose of vacation accrual, a workday is defined as the number of hours
equivalent to 0.3846% of the total number of duty hours in the normal duty year
(before deducting time off for vacation and holidays) of the employee involved.

24.2.2 The City will permit up to a maximum of two (2) Patrol Officers off per shift

24.2.3

FPA

on primary vacation.

In order to facilitate the change to a fiscal year shift schedule, vacation sign-
ups will be conducted by March 31st. Officers and Sergeants will make their
first (primary) choice for a vacation period, based on seniority for their
respective position. No more than two Officers will be allowed off per shift

21

2013-2015 MOU

 
ARTICLE 3 — LEAVES

 

24.3

24.4

24.5

FPA

on vacation each day of the year, without the Watch Commander's
approval. At the completion of this primary vacation sign-up period, there
will be an opportunity to select a secondary vacation period based on
seniority. No Officers or Sergeant can be “bumped” from their primary
choice vacation period during the secondary vacation selection period.

Should any Officer or Sergeant decline to make a choice during the primary
or secondary sign-up period, a “primary” vacation may still be declared. The
Officer or Sergeant in this case must provide a minimum of 45 days’ notice,
and may choose any group of continuous days that no two Officers or a
Sergeant have previously selected as a primary or secondary vacation. In
order to accommodate this vacation sign-up process, and due to
departmental staffing needs, the membership recognizes comp time and/or
training assignments are subject to cancellation whenever a primary
vacation is declared if shift minimums cannot be met. In the event an Officer
or Sergeant waives the secondary vacation sign-up, any additional vacation
time granted will be based on shift minimums and department needs.

MAXIMUM OLD VACATION LEAVE ACCRUAL LIMIT EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,
1994

After December 31, 1993, the Old Vacation Leave accrual balance which is
above the maximum accrual limit described above will not be liquidated for cash
during employment. This Old Vacation Leave Bank is available for use as
Vacation Leave and will be recorded separately from New Vacation Leave.

The City will draw down Vacation Leave accruals based on the “Last In First Out”
method.

TERMINATION OF LIQUIDATION OF VACATION LEAVE DURING
EMPLOYMENT

All liquidation of Old and/or New Vacation Leave during employment shall cease
with the Old Vacation Leave accrued through December 31, 1993. No New
Vacation Leave accrued on or after January 1, 1994 will be liquidated during
employment.

LIQUIDATION OF OLD VACATION LEAVE AT TERMINATION

All Old Vacation Leave Bank hours earned on or before December 31, 1993 shall
be liquidated at termination at an hourly rate based on the following formula:

The monthly base pay in effect at time of termination plus 33.305% of monthly

base pay multiplied by twelve (months in the year) divided by 2080 (the number
of work hours in a year).

22 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 3 —- LEAVES

 

24.6

24.7

24.8

24.9

FPA

New Vacation Leave accruals will not replenish or replace Old Vacation Leave
accruals.

LIQUIDATION OF NEW VACATION LEAVE AT TERMINATION

All New Vacation Leave Bank hours earned on or after January 1, 1994 shall be
liquidated at the hourly base rate in effect at termination.

An employee must take all accrued vacation and compensatory time before a
request for leave of absence will be granted, except upon approval of the City
Manager. See 25.4 below.

LIQUIDATION OF UNUSED VACATION HOURS AS OF 7-1-99
Effective July 1, 1999 and each July 1 thereafter, vacation hours accrued above

the maximum limit shall be liquidated. Said liquidation shall be at the base hourly
rate and will be up to an annual maximum as shown:

 

Years of Continuous Service Amount Per Fiscal Year
1 through 5 years 40 hours
6 through 10 years 40 hours
11 through 14 years 60 hours
15+ years 60 hours

Any vacation hours accrued above the maximum limit, and thereafter accrued
above the maximum liquidation schedule, shall be placed into a
SABBATICAL/SICK LEAVE BANK.

Sabbatical/Sick Leave Bank is a bank having a maximum accrual of 1040 hours.
These hours may be used by eligible employees for sick leave absences or, with
the City Manager's approval, for a SABBATICAL having a duration of not less
than 520 hours.

Employees will not be eligible to use SABBATICAL time until having reached 5
years of continuous service. SABBATICALS shall only be available once every
seven (7) years and are granted subject to City Manager discretion and approval.

Any sick leave credited or used under this section shall not be considered as
either sick leave used, nor as sick leave eligible for incentive payments, under
MOU Section 26.

Accrued time in the Sabbatical/Sick Leave Bank shall not be compensated for in
any manner other than discussed above in this Section 24.9.

23 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 3 — LEAVES

 

SECTION 25: SICK LEAVE

25.1

25.2

25.3

25.4

Employees may use up to forty-eight (48) hours of earned sick leave per year for
illness involving a member of their immediate family requiring the care and/or
involvement of the employee. The Department may approve the use of additional
sick leave to care for an immediate family member. If requested by the
Department, medical certification stating the necessity for such care will be
provided by the employee. “Immediate family” shall be defined as wife, husband,
child, brother, sister, parent, parent-in-law, grandparents, and grandparents-in-
law, except that a relative residing in the same household or a life partner
residing in the same household who is not a legal spouse may, for the purposes
of this section, be considered one of the immediate family. Refer to Section 31
regarding leave for family care purposes.

Sick leave granted due to an illness covered by this section shall be governed by
the definition of a workday as one regularly scheduled work shift occurring or
dated as occurring within one 24-hour day. This deduction will be on an hour-for-
hour basis.

Employees may take sick leave as earned during the first six months of
employment.

Sick leave, either with or without pay, shall not be used for any absence resulting
from illness or injury arising out of and in the course of employment by the City of
Fremont. If sick leave is claimed and awarded in error, the City shall be entitled
to recover the amount of salary paid on account thereof. Such sick leave shall
then be restored to the account of the employee upon recovery by the City of the
total amount paid.

In the event of a non-industrial injury or illness, an employee may utilize any
accrued leave to satisfy the first through the thirtieth (30) day of absence. An
employee may continue to utilize accrued leave for the thirty-first (31) through
sixtieth (60) day of absence or, at the employee’s discretion, may request to be
placed on unpaid leave of absence subject to the approval of the City Manager or
designee.

SECTION 26: SICK LEAVE INCENTIVE PLAN

26.1

26.2

FPA

At the end of each fiscal year, employees shall receive payment for some of their
accumulated but unused sick leave during the preceding year at a straight-time
hourly rate, consisting only of the base salary rate, and any applicable
educational incentive pay and specialist pay. The only days qualifying for sick
payment shall be days #3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 of the 12 days of accrued sick leave
for that fiscal year.

Eligible employees must maintain a minimum balance of 160 hours sick leave to
qualify for such payment.

24 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 3 —- LEAVES

 

26.3 Employees who terminate from City employment shall be paid for a pro-rata
portion of the sick leave entitlement provided under this Section at a straight-time
hourly rate, consisting only of the base salary rate, and any applicable
educational incentive pay and specialist pay.

26.4 Effective July 1, 2001 and each July 1 thereafter, each employee who has
completed 24 years of service with the City of Fremont as of that date will no
longer be eligible to participate in the sick leave incentive plan. At that time, the
sick leave accrual rate for such employees will change from 12 days per year to
6 days per year.

SECTION 27: BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

In the case of a death in the immediate family, employees may be granted bereavement
leave of absence with pay for the workdays falling during the period from the time of
death through the day of the funeral or one day after, not to exceed five (5) workdays.
Bereavement leave will not be charged against accrued sick leave or vacation time.
“Immediate family” is defined as wife, husband, child, brother, sister, parent or current
parent-in-law, grandparent or current grandparent-in-law, except that a relative residing
in and a member of the same household or a life partner residing in the same
household who is not a legal spouse may be considered immediate family.

For the purpose of calculating bereavement leave, a workday is defined as one
regularly scheduled work shift occurring or dated as occurring within one 24-hour day.
Employees working four 10-hour, 11-hour or 11.2 hour shifts per week will receive up to
four workdays’ bereavement leave.

SECTION 28: HOLIDAYS

28.1 The following days are designated as holidays, at the rate of 8 hours per day:

28.1.1 January 1

28.1.2 The third Monday in January, known as “Martin Luther King, Jr.
Day”

28.1.3 The third Monday in February, known as “Presidents’ Day”

28.1.4 The last Monday in May, known as “Memorial Day”

28.1.5 July 4

28.1.6 The first Monday in September, known as “Labor Day”

28.1.7 November 11, known as “Veterans’ Day”

28.1.8 The Thursday in November appointed as “Thanksgiving
Day”

28.1.9 The day following “Thanksgiving Day”

28.1.10 December 24

28.1.11 December 25

28.1.12 December 31

FPA 25 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 3 — LEAVES

 

28.2

28.3

28.1.13 One (1) floating holiday accrued as of each July 1, to be taken ona
working day mutually agreeable to the employee and the
department.

28.1.14 Every other day appointed by the President or Governor and
authorized by the City Manager, or designated by the City Council
for a public fast, Thanksgiving, or holiday.

When a holiday falls on Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed or
credited as a holiday; and when a holiday falls on a Saturday, the previous Friday
shall be observed or credited as a holiday. The following special rules shall apply
in connection with December 24-25 and December 31 - January 1 holiday
periods: (1) When December 25 or January 1 falls on a Saturday, the previous
Thursday and Friday shall be observed or credited as holidays; (2) when
December 25 or January 1 fall on a Sunday, the previous Friday and the
following Monday shall be observed and credited as holidays; (3) when
December 25 or January 1 fall on a Monday, the following Tuesday shall be
observed and credited as a holiday.

To be eligible for holiday pay, an employee must be in a paid status on the
regularly scheduled work day before and after the holiday.

SECTION 29: HOLIDAY TIME BANK

29.1

FPA

Effective with Council adoption of the contract in July, 1999 and each June
thereafter, each employee shall elect whether they want to receive holiday time
in biweekly pay (4.0 hours biweekly effective 8-1-99) or have annual holiday time
of 104 hours credited to a holiday bank. The employee’s holiday option shall
remain in effect until changed by the employee.

Employees electing holiday payment as of July, 1999, shall cash out holiday time
accrued from November 16, 1998 through July 31, 1999 on August 6, 1999.
Thereafter, employees will be paid for 4.0 hours holiday time on each biweekly
paycheck.

Employees electing to bank holiday hours shall accrue one (1) additional floating
holiday (8 hours) as of July 1, 1999. Any hours remaining in the bank as of
December of each year shall be cashed out.

Employees electing biweekly holiday payment who take a holiday off must use
comp or vacation time for such holiday, subject to department approval.
Employees with a holiday bank who take time off can use holiday time, comp
time or vacation time, subject to department approval.

Each employee recognizes that arrangements for taking time off must reflect
public need and service responsibilities of the department and that the final

26 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 3 —- LEAVES

 

29.2

29.3

29.4

29.5

29.6

29.7

FPA

decision, with no employee appeal rights regarding the scheduling of such time
off as provided by this Article, shall rest with the department.

The department retains the right to determine that certain employees, not needed
for service responsibilities, shall take holidays off as they occur.

Effective the second pay period in June 2001, and each June thereafter, each
employee shall elect whether they want to receive holiday time in biweekly pay
(4.00 hours biweekly) or have annual holiday time of 104 hours credited to a
holiday bank. The employee’s holiday option shall remain in effect until changed
by the employee.

No carry over into the following calendar year of such holiday time not taken shall
be allowed. Any balance of such unused hours shall be compensated for by pay
at the straight time hourly rate of the employee. This payment will be paid to the
employee in the first paycheck issued in December each year. Any such time-off
to be taken between December 1 and 31 must be approved by the department
prior to December 1.

Any employee who terminates employment shall only be entitled to the number
of holiday time bank hours equivalent to the number of holidays (as listed in
Article 3, Section 29) actually occurring on or between January 1 and the
employee’s last day of employment. Any unused balance of such hours shall be
compensated for by pay at the employee’s straight time hourly rate. Should such
employee have taken more hours of holiday time off than provided for by this
section, the employee will be required to repay the City for all hours taken in
excess of the number of entitled hours. The amount of repayment required shall
be deducted from the employee’s check.

Any holiday occurring as provided in Section 28.1.14 shall not be included in said
holiday time bank but shall be compensated for by pay at the employee’s straight
time hourly rate.

An employee on leave without pay when a holiday occurs shall either have
his/her holiday bank reduced by (8) hours for each holiday or shall not be paid for
4.0 hours holiday time, determined by the employee’s election of how holiday
time is treated.

Working on a Holiday: Those employees listed below in Section A, whose
regularly scheduled work day falls on a Department holiday may, with
supervisory approval, elect to work their regular assignment on the Holiday and
avoid deducting holiday hours for that day. If any of the following employees
works a partial day on said holiday, those hours not worked must be deducted in
accordance with Section 29.1 above.

27 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 3 — LEAVES

 

SECTION A
Detectives & Detective Sergeants Special Investigator
Internal Affairs Sergeant Personnel Sergeant
Training Sergeant Personnel Officer
Court Liaison Officer Street Crimes Officers
SRO Sergeant Street Crimes Sergeant
Court Liaison Sergeant Commercial Enforcement Traffic Officer

Any officer with prior approval of the Chief of Police

Those employees listed below in Section B, whose regularly scheduled work day
falls on a Department holiday may, with supervisory approval, elect to work a
patrol shift on the holiday if the patrol watch commanders believe additional
patrol members would be in the best interest of the Department. A patrol watch
commander will post the number of slots and the shifts available approximately
one week prior to the scheduled holiday. Sign up will be done on a first-come,
first-serve basis, and will be done without regard to Department seniority.

SECTION B

School Resource Officers
Any Officer with prior approval of the Chief of Police

SECTION 30: ASSOCIATION RELEASE TIME

On July 1 of each year, the City shall establish a 100-hour bank for time off as may be
needed by Association Officers or Members for Association business. With the approval
of the Chief of Police, a reasonable extension of hours may be granted. Said bank shall
not be carried over from one calendar year to the next calendar year. Requests for time
off from this bank must be signed by the President of the Association or designee and
are subject to current Department policy regarding compensatory or holiday time off.

SECTION 31: FAMILY CARE LEAVE

After twelve months and 1,250 hours of continuous service, employees may be
provided with up to twelve (12) weeks unpaid leave in any 12-month period from the
date leave commences providing such leave does not cause an undue hardship on the
City. The twelve weeks of leave may consist of one or more periods of absence, without
regard to whether such leave is granted in response to one or a series of requests.

Family care leave may be provided in the event of an employee’s serious or chronic
illness or the birth or adoption of a child or to care for a chronic or seriously ill immediate
family member. For purposes of this section, immediate family member shall be defined
as wife, husband, child under 18 years of age, brother, sister, parent, parent-in-law,
grandparent and grandparents-in-law, except that a relative living in the same
household, or a life partner residing in the same household who is not a legal spouse,
may, for the purposes of this section, be considered one of the immediate family.

FPA 28 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 4 — INSURANCES

 

Employees taking family care leave will be returned to the same or comparable job with
the same pay at the conclusion of their leave.

Family care leave shall not constitute a break in service for purposes of any employee
benefit plan. Employees returning from leave shall return with no less seniority than
accumulated on the date leave began.

The following provisions apply to Family Care Leave:

a. Employees may use accrued leave time in connection with family care leave.
However, use of sick leave shall be provided under the same regulations
governing use of sick leave. Use of paid leave does not extend the maximum
period of family care leave.

b. Should both parents work for the City, leaves granted to both parents may be
limited to an aggregate total of twelve weeks.

c. An employee must provide reasonable advance notice if the leave is foreseeable.
Requests for family care leave shall require the recommendation of the
Department Head and approval of the City Manager.

ARTICLE 4 - INSURANCES

SECTION 32: HEALTH BENEFITS ALLOWANCE

32.1 The City shall secure and make available to all eligible employees, medical care,
and dental insurance under the Alternative Benefits and Compensation Plan
(ABC Plan). The ABC Plan is a “cafeteria plan” as defined in Section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code and eligible expenses are defined in the Plan document.

32.2 The City contribution for insurance and other benefit coverage available under

the Alternative Benefits and Compensation Plan is known as the Health Benefits
Allowance (HBA).

32.2.1 Through calendar year 2013, the Health Benefits Allowance shall
continue to be set at $1580 per month.

32.2.2 Effective January 1, 2014 the Health Benefits Allowance shall increase by
$80, with a maximum set at $1,660 per month.

32.2.3 Effective January 1, 2015 the Health Benefits Allowance shall increase by
$80, with a maximum set at $1,740 per month.

32.3 In the event premiums and/or costs for the selected benefits exceed the amount
in the Health Benefits Allowance, the balance will be paid by the employee

FPA 29 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 4 — INSURANCES

 

32.4

32.5

32.6

through automatic pre-tax payroll deduction, as allowed under Internal Revenue
Code Section 125. Money not used for the purchase of benefits under the
Alternative Benefits and Compensation Plan will be paid to the employee in
taxable cash.

Effective June 30, 2013, employees who purchase medical benefits under the
Alternate Benefits and Compensation Plan shall be eligible to receive up to a
maximum of $580 per month in taxable cash for money not used for the
purchase of medical benefits under the Plan. Employees who subsequently elect
to waive medical coverage and not purchase medical benefits under the
Alternate Benefits Compensation Plan will continue to be subject to a maximum
of $580 in taxable cash in lieu of purchasing medical benefits.

The City’s contribution as established above shall be the maximum amount
required, and the City shall not be responsible for the contribution of any sum in
addition to those established by the terms of this Memorandum of
Understanding.

Except as provided in Section 32.6 below, the coverage, exclusions and
limitations of the City sponsored plans are those in effect on July 1, 1999, for the
purpose of description of said plans. As provided under the Public Employees’
Medical and Hospital Care Act (PEMHCA), medical care benefits are provided
through the Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS) medical plan.

Effective as provided herein, employees who elect coverage under PEMHCA
may also elect coverage for a domestic partner to the extent permitted by and
according to the procedures of PEMHCA Section 22873. The provision shall
become effective on the first day of the month following the month in which the
City files with PERS a certified copy of the City’s resolution electing such
coverage.

SECTION 33: RETIREE MEDICAL INSURANCE

33.1

33.2

33.3

FPA

The City shall continue to contribute $150 per month toward reimbursement of
retiree medical insurance premiums for Police Officers and Sergeants retired
from the City prior to August 1, 1999.

Officers or Sergeants who were lateral hires from other agencies and who retire
from the City of Fremont after August 1, 1999 will be given years of service credit
for up to 10 years of sworn law enforcement service with other agencies in
applying the formulas in Sections 33.4 and 33.5.

Effective January 1, 2002, for Police Officers and Sergeants who retired from the
City prior to August 1, 1999 with 20 or more years of service, the City shall
contribute an amount equal to the KHP premium for single-party coverage in
effect on January 1, 2002 for reimbursement of retiree medical insurance
premiums.

30 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 4 — INSURANCES

 

33.4 Police Officers and Sergeants retiring from the City of Fremont on or after August
1, 1999, shall receive the following amount per month for reimbursement of
retiree medical insurance premiums:

 

Cumulative Years of

Amount Per Month

 

Fremont Service at For each Year of Total
Retirement Service
0 through 14 years $0 $0

 

15 through 19 years

$6.50/mo. per year of
completed service

15 $ 97.50/mo.
16 $104.00/mo.
17 $110.50/mo.
18 $117.00/mo.
19 $123.50/mo.

 

20 through 24 years

KHP premium for single
party coverage at the date of
retirement

 

25+ years of service

 

 

 

KHP premium for two-party
coverage at the date of
retirement

 

 

During the term of this MOU, there shall be no change in the retiree medical
program for current active employees, hired on or before December 31, 2011.

a. RETIREE MEDICAL — NEW HIRES

Police Officers and Sergeants hired on or after January 1, 2012 will receive
the following retiree medical reimbursements as negotiated under the MOU:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FPA

Cumulative Years of Amount Per Month Total
Fremont Service at for Each Year of
Retirement Service
0 through 14 years $0 $0
15 through 19 years $5.00/mo. Per year 15 - $75/mo.
of completed service 16 - $80/mo.
17 - $85/mo.
18 - $90/mo.
19 - $95/mo.
20+ years $10.00/mo. Per year 20- $200/mo.
of completed service 21- $210/mo.
up to max of 22- $220/mo.
$500/mo. 23- $230/mo.
24- $240/mo.
25 + $500/mo.
31 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 4 — INSURANCES

 

The parties agree to meet and confer mid-contract to consider alternatives to the
City’s retiree medical program, such as a health savings account or PORAC
sponsored plan.

33.5 The amount of City reimbursement shall not exceed the premium required for the
retiree’s particular level of coverage in the plan selected. Retirees must comply
with the processes and procedures established by the City for verification of
enrollment, cost and other required information to maintain their eligibility for
reimbursement.

33.6 The retiree medical reimbursement amount described in Sections 33.1, 33.3 and
33.4 above shall be reduced by the CalPERS required employer portion of the
premium if the retiree purchases insurance through the CalPERS plan.

33.7 To be eligible for retiree medical reimbursement, the employee must retiree from
the City of Fremont with 120 days of separation.

33.8 The Government Code sets forth a minimum contribution for employers who
contract with CalPERS to provide medical insurance for retirees. The City will
comply with the Government Code regarding the minimum contribution for
medical coverage for those retirees enrolled in the CalPERS medical program.
The retiree’s medical coverage will not be affected when the employer’s
minimum contribution to the CalPERS medical program exceeds their maximum
retiree medical reimbursement set forth in the applicable Memorandum of
Understanding.

SECTION 34: DENTAL INSURANCE COVERAGE

Effective January 1, 2010, the City will assume administration of the dental plan. To the
extent the plan continues to be offered by Delta Dental, employees will continue to be
covered by the same dental plan design. If the same plan is no longer offered by Delta
dental, the City and the Association will meet and reach agreement on the new plan
design, which is comparable to the existing plan design.

Effective January 1, 2010, the 2009 Delta Dental premium shall be added to the Health
benefits Allowance and the City contribution towards the cost of the Fremont Police
Association’s dental coverage with the Delta Dental insurance plan will cease.

Effective January 1, 2010, the City agrees to offer a retiree dental coverage to retirees
from this bargaining unit as allowed under the coverage in affect in 2009. Retirees
electing such coverage will pay for the premium through the carrier.

SECTION 35: LIFE INSURANCE COVERAGE

The City shall continue to provide for all employees a fifty thousand dollar ($50,000.00)
group term life insurance program to be selected, administered and paid for by the City.

FPA 32 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 5 — RETIREMENT

 

The employee may choose to provide life insurance coverage to eligible dependents as
provided by the group life insurance policy at his/her own cost.

SECTION 36: LONG-TERM DISABILITY/SALARY CONTINUATION PLAN

36.1

36.2

36.3

36.4

The City shall continue to contribute forty-eight dollars and sixteen cents ($48.16)
per month per employee toward the cost of the Fremont Police Association’s
Long-Term Disability (LTD) Plan in the Association’s Insurance Trust. Effective
January 1, 2010 the City contribution to the Association’s trust shall increase to
fifty-seven dollars and sixteen cents ($57.16).

It is agreed and understood that the City shall not be held responsible or liable for
any matters, including the determination and payment of benefits arising in the
administration of this salary continuance insurance plan.

The Association shall forward said payment on behalf of all employees,
regardless of Association membership or not.

Section 25.4 regarding LTD is herein incorporated by reference as if fully set
forth.

ARTICLE 5 - RETIREMENT

SECTION 37: PERS CONTRACT AMENDMENTS

CalPERS Benefits shall be administered as follows:

FPA 33

 

Employees Employees hired from Employees hired
hired before 4/8/12 — 12/31/12 and 1/1/13 or later as
4/8/12 Classic PERS Members | new PERS

(as defined by the Public Members

Employees’ Pension
Reform Act of 2013
PEPRA)

 

Retirement Formula 3% at age 50 3% at age 55 2.7% at age 57

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Average Highest Comp. Single Three highest years Three highest years
Time highest year
Normal Member PERS 9% 9% 50% of the normal
Contribution cost (currently
11.25%)
37.1 Military service credit, as specified in Section 21024 of the Government Code
with the eligible employee required to contribute both the employer's and
employee's contributions and interest.
37.2 “Credit for Unused Sick Leave” (Section 20965 of the Government Code)

retirement benefit.

2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 6 — MISCELLANEOUS,

 

37.3 The “Increased” and the “Fourth” levels to the existing 59 Survivor Benefit
program in accordance with Section 21574 of the State Government Code.

37.4 The continuation of the Post-survivor allowance after remarriage in
accordance with Section 21551 of the State Government Code.

ARTICLE 6 - MISCELLANEOUS

SECTION 38: STANDBY STATUS

Employees shall only be required to be on standby status when ordered by a court of
law.

SECTION 39: TRAINING SCHEDULES

The Police Department shall endeavor to provide each employee with advance notice of
the schedule for required training programs. Employees involved in such training shall
be provided twenty-one (21) days’ notice prior to the commencement of the program. All
possible notice shall be provided for those programs initiated as a result of mandated
training legislation.

SECTION 40: DAYLIGHT SAVINGS TIME

For the purposes of payroll and scheduling, the annual change in hours created by
changing from daylight savings time to standard time shall result in the following:

Shift workers on duty when standard time goes into effect will work an additional hour
on their shift and be compensated at the overtime rate for that hour.

For the purposes of payroll and scheduling, the annual change in hours created by
changing from standard time to daylight savings time shall result in the following:

Shift workers on duty when daylight savings time goes into effect will be allowed to
continue working for what would be an additional hour at the employee’s regular rate of
pay or to take one hour of leave time (vacation time or comp. time) if they elect not to do
so. If the employee elects to work the additional hour, that hour will not be credited
towards any overtime pay.

SECTION 41: SHIFT CHANGE

Seven (7) calendar days’ notice shall be required when employees are rotated,
reassigned, or transferred from a regularly scheduled shift to another shift, unless an
emergency necessitates a change in rotation, assignment or transfer. “Emergency” shall
include, but not be limited to, “the necessity of replacing employees absent from work

FPA 34 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 7 — GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS

 

because of unanticipated and unavoidable illness, injury, or other unanticipated and
unavoidable good causes.”

When permanent and long-term vacancies occur within the Community Policing Patrol
Teams and transfer of an employee or employees between the A and B patrol shifts
becomes necessary, the Department shall first seek volunteer(s) from the team
identified by the Division Commander. If no volunteers are identified, the least senior
officer from the team identified by the Division Commander may be subject to
movement to another shift, watch, zone and/or slot as reasonably necessary. The
Department will provide reasonable time off, but in no case less than forty-eight (48)
hours, to avoid the working of back-to-back shifts if such a transfer becomes necessary.

SECTION 42: SPECIAL EVENT NOTIFICATION

The City shall make every attempt to provide FPA members with a minimum of fourteen
(14) calendar days’ notice prior to mandating members to work overtime created by
special events.

Mandatory staffing or adjustments to shifts shall be made by seniority if the shifts cannot
be filled on a voluntary basis. All FPA members shall be subject to special event
mandatory staffing except for SRO’s, SACNET, Gang Task Force and On-call
Investigators. Previously approved vacation and compensatory time off scheduled on
special event dates shall not be subject to cancellation to achieve special event staffing.

ARTICLE 7 - GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS

SECTION 43: BINDING ARBITRATION

The Association and the City hereby agree that, unless earlier resolved under these
procedures, the final and binding resolution of any Grievance available to an employee
covered by the provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding shall be by arbitration.

The City Council hereby formally confers upon the City Manager the responsibility to
carry out any lawful decision of the arbitrators made pursuant to this procedure.

SECTION 44: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
44.1 PURPOSE OF THE PROCEDURE
44.1.1 To establish orderly procedures providing a method of communication
between employees and management concerning matters which may be
subject to grievance.

44.1.2 To provide that the grievance procedure shall be as informal as possible.

44.1.3 To provide that grievances shall be settled as promptly as possible and at
the lowest possible level of the procedure.

FPA 35 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 7 — GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS

 

44.1.4 To provide employees, individually or with a representative of their own

choosing, and/or the Association, a systematic means of obtaining formal
consideration by higher authority, if reasonable efforts fail to resolve such
matters through informal procedure. Provided, however, that no individual
shall be accorded any relief through the grievance/appeal procedure as to
any prior action of any kind whatsoever directed specifically at his or her
individual employment status unless he or she shall prosecute such a
proceeding as a named party - whether or not joined with other parties.

44.2 MATTERS SUBJECT TO GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

44.2.1 Grievances: For the purpose of this procedure, a “Grievance” shall be

defined as any complaint or dispute concerning the interpretation or
application of any ordinance, or any rule or regulation of the City or the
Department governing personnel practices or working conditions, or the
practical consequences of a City’s rights’, decision on wages, hours, and
other terms and conditions of employment, or the interpretation or
application of any of the provisions of the Memorandum of Understanding.

44.2.2 Exclusions

44.2.2.1 The procedures set forth herein shall not apply in matters where other

methods of dispute resolution have been specifically provided for in
State or Federal law, such as, but not limited to, appeals of worker’s
compensation claims; claims made pursuant to the Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA); unemployment insurance claims; or claims of
employment discrimination based upon race, religious creed, sex, color,
physical handicap, medical condition, age, national origin, political
affiliation or marital status for which a remedy is provided by the
California Fair Employment and Practices Act (Cal. Gov. Code Sec.
12900 et seq.), or Title VII (42 United States Code 2000e et seq.),
except in cases where an employee contends his/her employment has
been terminated in violation of said Acts or the City’s existing policies
against such discrimination.

SECTION 45: GENERAL

45.1

45.2

45.3

FPA

Nothing in these procedures shall be construed to prevent discussion or
meetings between parties at any time to clarify the facts in order to conclude any
matter as promptly as possible.

The time limitations established herein may be extended by mutual consent for
valid reasons, such as legitimate absence of one or more parties or because of
injury, illness, official obligations, or unavoidable personal obligations.

If the question of arbitrability of an issue is raised by either the employee, the
Association, or the City, such questions shall be determined in the first instance

36 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 7 — GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS

 

45.4

by the arbitrator who shall, upon request of any party, make his/her determination
prior to hearing the merits of the case.

If joined by the affected employee(s), the Association may initiate a grievance
when the issue in dispute affects a member or members of the representation
unit. Grievances initiated by the Association on behalf of an employee(s) must
deal with the specific action(s) on which the grievance is based. Association
initiated grievances shall be first submitted at the second step of the process and
then proceed from that step if necessary.

SECTION 46: PROCEDURE

46.1

46.2

46.3

46.4

46.5

FPA

Informal Discussion: The affected employee, group of affected employees, or the
Association may present a grievance orally to the immediate supervisor within
ten (10) working days of the occurrence of the issue grieved or within ten (10)
working days from such time as the employee or Association should reasonably
have been aware of the occurrence.

Formal Submission: Should the grievance remain unresolved within ten (10) days
after oral presentation pursuant to Step 1, the employee or Association
representative may submit the grievance in writing to the immediate supervisor
within ten (10) additional working days. The written grievance shall make specific
reference to the statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or Memorandum of
Understanding provision alleged to be controlling and to the proposed solution.
The supervisor shall render a decision in writing to the employee and/or
Association representative within ten (10) working days after the formal
submission of the grievance.

Appeal to Department Head: Should the grievance remain unresolved, the
employee or Association representative may, within ten (10) working days after
receipt of the supervisors decision, submit the grievance in writing to the
Department Head. The Department Head or Chief or his/ her designated
representative shall respond to the grievance/appeal in writing within (10)
working days after its receipt.

City Manager — Association Staff Representative: Should the grievance remain
unresolved, the employee or Association representative may, within ten (10)
working days after receipt of the Department Head’s written response, submit the
grievance in writing to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager
or his/her designated representative, shall meet as she/he deems appropriate,
with the affected employee and with the assigned Association staff
representative within twenty (20) working days of submission and attempt to
resolve the dispute.

Alternative Grievance - Appeal Resolution: Any other dispute resolving

mechanism may be substituted for the foregoing upon mutual agreement
between the parties prior to invoking the arbitration provisions of this article.

37 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 7 — GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS

 

Should the decision appealed from, or the grievance arise from a decision of the
City Manager, the steps described in sections 48.1 through 48.4 may be omitted
by the employee(s), who may invoke arbitration pursuant to sub-paragraph 48.6,
below.

a. Facilitated Mediation: Prior to submission of a grievance or appeal to
arbitration, the parties may submit the grievance or appeal to non-binding
interest-based facilitated mediation. The purpose of this mediation is to allow
each party to present facts regarding the dispute and/or the process leading
up to the submission and ask questions of the opposing party. The parties
may also call witnesses and introduce evidence during the mediation.

Both parties must agree to use Facilitated Mediation, and must jointly select a
mediator. If both parties cannot agree on a mediator, the provisions of Section
46.6 shall be followed for such selection. Both parties shall share all costs
including the mediator’s fees. No recording devices or court reporters shall be
used during the facilitated mediation, and no formal transcripts will be
prepared. Flip chart notes may be retained and/or transcribed.

The parties may not use any information presented and statements made at
the mediation as evidence in any subsequent proceedings, and the mediator
cannot be called as a witness in any subsequent proceedings. Although the
parties are encouraged to participate in the facilitated interest-based
mediation without the assistance of counsel, attorneys are not prohibited. If
any party will be represented by an attorney during the mediation, a minimum
of ten days’ notice must be given to the other party.

Any statements by any party or witness shall not form the basis for an Internal
Affairs investigation unless such statement or evidence indicates a criminal
act has occurred or an offense has occurred which could result in the
termination of an employee.

46.6 Arbitration Process: Should the grievance not be resolved to the satisfaction of

FPA

either the Association or the City by Steps 1-5, either may request arbitration as
the final step in the grievance process by notifying the other party of their intent
to utilize the services of an arbitrator. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
provided to the other party within ten (10) working days from the date of the
decision rendered under sub-paragraph 4 or 5 supra.

Upon notice of intent to arbitrate, the affected employee and the Association and
the City shall meet to select an arbitrator. If unable to mutually agree on the
selection of an arbitrator, a list of five available arbitrators shall be obtained from
the State California Department of Industrial Relations or, if by mutual consent,
from the American Arbitration Association. Any Party may require that all
arbitrators on the list shall be attorneys. Upon receipt of such list, the parties shall
meet and if unable to mutually select an arbitrator from such list, then a coin shall

38 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 7 — GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS

 

46.7

be flipped and the party correctly calling the coin flip shall strike a name from the
list. The parties shall then alternately strike names form the list until only one
name remains and that individual shall be the arbitrator. In the event the
arbitrator so selected is not available, then the individual whose name was last
struck from the list shall be the arbitrator. If that individual is not available, then
the affected employee and/or the Association and the City shall request another
list or select an arbitrator through any other mutually agreed upon process.

Decision of the Arbitrator: The decision, opinion, and award of the arbitrator shall
be final and binding upon all parties, subject to review only under the provisions
of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1280 et seq. The arbitrator shall not
have the power to add to, subtract from, or modify any of the terms of this
Memorandum of Understanding and shall not have jurisdiction to make any
award which would not have authorized under applicable authority in the
absence of this agreement to arbitrate, except by the joint prior authorization of
the parties hereto.

SECTION 47: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

47.1

47.2

47.3

47.4

FPA

All arbitration proceedings under this part shall be governed by the California
Arbitration Act (C.C.P. Section 1280 et seq.), and any action brought by any
party to enforce the provisions hereof shall be brought solely and exclusively
under said part.

Concurrent grievances alleging violation of the same provision may be
consolidated for the purpose of this procedure to be determined in one
proceeding.

The City shall prepare in blank and deliver to the arbitrator subpoenas for
issuance. The arbitrator may, in his/her discretion, require a showing of good
cause prior to the issuance of any subpoena. On noticed application by the City,
the arbitrator may order the Association to reimburse the City for its costs
incurred in paying any City employee for time spent responding to a subpoena
issued at the request of the Association or any member thereof. Such
reimbursement shall be ordered only upon a finding that the compelled
attendance of a City employee did not contribute substantially to the resolution of
the matter being arbitrated, or that the party compelling such attendance failed to
exert reasonable efforts to minimize standby time of the City employee.

The Association and the City agree to share equally all costs of arbitration
(including, but not limited to, the arbitrator's fees and costs, the cost of court
reporters, etc.), but shall be responsible for their own respective costs of making
their presentation to the arbitrator, including, but not limited to, their own
attorney's fees, expert witness fees, regular witness fees, etc.

39 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 7 — GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS

 

47.5 lf by mutual agreement or requirement of the arbitrator, services of a court
reporter are utilized, the parties agree to equally share the cost of such service.
Any cost for transcription shall be borne by the party requesting it.

47.6 While either the employee or the Association may initiate a grievance under the
formal procedure (or they may join together in the procedure), once the
grievance has been initiated, no other grievance concerning the incident or action
upon which the complaint is based may be initiated.

47.7. The Association, when the initiating party, shall be subject to all policies and
assume all rights and responsibilities of the grievance procedure which are
granted to or required of the employee.

SECTION 48: DISCIPLINARY APPEALS

The Association and the City do hereby agree that, unless earlier resolved under these
procedures, the final resolution of any Appeal available to an employee covered by the
provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding shall be by arbitration. In agreeing to
this method of resolving Appeals, both parties understand and agree that the City
Council hereby formally confers upon the City Manager the responsibility to carry out
any lawful decision of the arbitrators made pursuant to this procedure.

48.1 PURPOSE OF THE PROCEDURE

48.1.1 To establish orderly procedures providing a method of communication
between employees and management concerning matters which may be
subject to appeal.

48.1.2 To provide that the appeal procedure shall be as informal as possible.

48.1.3 To provide that appeals shall be settled as promptly as possible and at the
lowest possible level of the procedure.

48.1.4 To provide employees, individually or with a representative of their own
choosing, and/or the Association, a systematic means of obtaining formal
consideration by higher authority, if reasonable efforts fail to resolve such
matters through informal procedure. Provided, however, that no individual
shall be accorded any relief through the appeal procedure as to any prior
action of any kind whatsoever directed specifically at his or her individual
employment status unless he or she shall prosecute such a proceeding as a
named party — whether or not joined with other parties.

SECTION 49: APPEALS
For the purpose of this procedure, an “Appeal” shall be defined as a complaint or

dispute as to any disciplinary or punitive action directed specifically at an individual
employee’s employment status and shall include:

FPA 40 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 7 — GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS

 

a. dismissal;

b. demotion;

c. suspension;

d. reduction in salary;

e. transfer imposed for punishment or to correct deficient performance.

SECTION 50: EXCLUSIONS

50.1

50.2

50.3

The procedures set forth herein shall not apply in matters where other methods
of dispute resolution have been specifically provided for in State or Federal law,
such as, but not limited to, appeals of worker's compensation claims; claims
made pursuant to the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA); unemployment
insurance claims; or claims of employment discrimination based upon race,
religious creed, sex, color, physical handicap, medical condition, age, national
origin, political affiliation or marital status for which a remedy is provided by the
California Fair Employment Practices Act (Cal. Gov. Code Sec. 12900 et seq.),
or Title VII (42 United States Code 2000e et seq.), except in cases where an
employee contends his/her employment has been terminated in violation of said
Acts or the City’s existing policies against such discrimination.

Written reprimands may be appealed to the City Manager within ten (10) days of
receipt. The City Manager or designee shall review the circumstances and render
a written decision within fourteen (14) days of review. The decision of the City
Manager/designee shall be final and conclusive.

Probationary employees who are rejected during probation shall have no right to
appeal such action, except in cases where they allege that their rejection was
predicated, in whole or in part upon their race, religious creed, sex, color,
physical handicap, medical condition, age, national origin, political affiliation or
marital status.

SECTION 51: GENERAL

51.1

FPA

Nothing in these procedures shall be construed to prevent discussion or
meetings between parties at any time to clarify the facts in order to conclude any
matter as promptly as possible.

a. Facilitated Mediation: Prior to submission of a grievance or appeal to
arbitration, the parties may submit the grievance or appeal to non-binding
interest-based facilitated mediation. The purpose of this mediation is to allow
each party to present facts regarding the dispute and/or the process leading
up to the submission and ask questions of the opposing party. The parties
may also call witnesses and introduce evidence during the mediation.

Both parties must agree to use Facilitated Mediation, and must jointly select a

mediator. If both parties cannot agree on a mediator, the provisions of Section
46.6 shall be followed for such selection. Both parties shall share all costs

4 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 7 — GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS

 

51.2

51.3

including the mediator’s fees. No recording devices or court reporters shall be
used during the facilitated mediation, and no formal transcripts will be
prepared. Flip chart notes may be retained and/or transcribed.

The parties may not use any information presented and statements made at
the mediation as evidence in any subsequent proceedings, and the mediator
cannot be called as a witness in any subsequent proceedings. Although the
parties are encouraged to participate in the facilitated interest-based
mediation without the assistance of counsel, attorneys are not prohibited. If
any party will be represented by an attorney during the mediation, a minimum
of ten days’ notice must be given to the other party.

Any statements by any party or witness shall not form the basis for an Internal
Affairs investigation unless such statement or evidence indicates a criminal
act has occurred or an offense has occurred which could result in the
termination of an employee.

The time limitations established herein may be extended by mutual consent for
valid reasons, such as legitimate absence of one or more parties or because of
injury, illness, official obligations, or unavoidable personal obligations.

If the question of arbitrability of an issue is raised by either the employee, the
Association, or the City, such questions shall be determined in the first instance
by the arbitrator who shall, upon request of any party, make his/her determination
prior to hearing the merits of the case.

SECTION 52: PROCEDURE

The procedure for the pre-disciplinary meeting shall be as described by the
Administrative Regulation.

52.1

FPA

Selection of Arbitrator: Should the employee or Association not be satisfied with
the results of the pre-disciplinary meeting, the Association may request
arbitration of the decision. Upon notice of intent to arbitrate, the Association and
the City shall meet to select an arbitrator. If unable to mutually agree on the
selection of an arbitrator, then a list of available arbitrators shall be obtained from
the State of California Department of Industrial Relations or, if by mutual consent,
from the American Arbitration Association. Upon receipt of such list, the parties
shall meet and if unable to mutually select an arbitrator from such list then a coin
shall be flipped and the party correctly calling the coin flip shall strike a name
from the list. The parties shall then alternately strike names from the list until only
one name remains and that individual shall be the arbitrator. In the event the
arbitrator so selected is not available, then the individual whose name was last
struck from the list shall be the arbitrator. If that individual is not available then
the Association and the City shall request another list or select an arbitrator
through any other mutually agreed upon process.

42 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 7 — GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS

 

52.2

52.3

52.4

Decision of the Arbitrator: The decision, opinion, and award of the arbitrator shall
be final and binding upon all parties, subject to review only under the provisions
of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1280 et seq. The arbitrator shall not
have the power to add to, subtract from, or modify any of the terms of this
Memorandum of Understanding and shall not have jurisdiction to make any
award which would not have been authorized under applicable authority in the
absence of this agreement to arbitrate, except by the joint prior authorization of
the parties hereto.

In any disciplinary appeal from a termination, suspension, reduction in pay,
transfer, or demotion, any relief which the arbitrator may grant shall be limited to
a recession of the action appealed from, a restoration of any lost pay and
benefits, and, where the arbitrator deems it appropriate, the imposition of
substitute discipline composed of a suspension without pay of not more than six
(6) months, a reduction in pay, a transfer to an established position, a demotion,
remedial training, or a combination of any or all of these forms of disciplinary
action.

The Association and the City endorse the principle that disclosure of information
relating to contemplated impositions of employee discipline may, in many
instances, serve no public purpose and may be harmful to the City, the
Association, and the employee concerned. This endorsement of principle is not
intended to create any enforceable rights on the part of any person or entity.

SECTION 53: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

53.1

53.2

53.3

53.4

FPA

All arbitration proceedings under this part shall be governed by the California
Arbitration Act (C.C.P. Section 1280 et seq.), and any action brought by any
party to enforce the provisions hereof shall be brought solely and exclusively
under said part.

Concurrent appeals alleging violation of the same provision may be consolidated
for the purpose of this procedure to be determined in one proceeding.

The City shall prepare in blank and deliver to the arbitrator subpoenas for
issuance by him/her. The arbitrator may, in his/her discretion, require a showing
of good cause prior to the issuance of any subpoena. On noticed application by
the City, the arbitrator may order the Association to reimburse the City for its cost
incurred in paying any City employee for time spent responding to a subpoena
issued at the request of the Association or any member thereof. Such
reimbursement shall be ordered only upon a finding that the compelled
attendance of a City employee did not contribute substantially to the resolution of
the matter being arbitrated, or that the party compelling such attendance failed to
exert reasonable efforts to minimize standby time of the City employee.

The Association and the City agree to share equally all costs of arbitration
(including, but not limited to, the arbitrator's fees and costs, the cost of court

43 2013-2015 MOU
ARTICLE 7 — GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS

 

53.5

53.6

53.7

reporters, etc.), but shall be responsible for their own respective costs of making
their presentation to the arbitrator, including, but not limited to, their own
attorney's fees, expert witness fees, regular witness fees, etc.

If by mutual agreement or requirement of the arbitrator, services of a court
reporter are utilized, the parties agree to equally share the cost of such service.
Any cost for transcription shall be borne by the party requesting it.

While either the employee or the Association may initiate a grievance under the
formal procedure (or they may join together in the procedure), once the
grievance has been presented, no other grievance concerning the incident or
action upon which the complaint is based may be initiated.

The Association, when the initiating party, shall be subject to all policies and
assume all rights and responsibilities of the grievance procedure which are
granted to or required of the employee.

SECTION 54: JOINT LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

The parties agree to continue the Joint Labor Management Committee meetings to
discuss topics currently of interest to the parties or topics which emerge during the
course of the contract. The Chief of Police and the Association will meet to discuss the
JLMC framework. Discussion of topical areas by the JLMC does not replace the meet
and confer process nor does it modify agreements set forth in the MOU. Issues of
financial interest to the Association and/or the City are not topical areas for the JLMC.

SECTION 55: PERSONNEL RULES & LAYOFF ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATION

The City and FPA agree to meet and confer on the City’s Personnel Rules (Resolution
No. 688) and Administrative Regulation 2.20: Layoff Procedure Implementation during
the term of this Memorandum of Understanding.

FPA

44 2013-2015 MOU
AGREEMENT

 

AGREEMENT

Executed this 7 day of du “ , 2014, by the Employer-Employee Representatives

whose signatures appear below.

 

~ a FPA Preside

Fred Diaz, ALal A Wea

 

 

Z ee
tan wre cé-D rector at Large

 

Rains Lucia Stern, PC

FPA

Brian Stott, HR Director

(D_ 2 L—

Allen DeMers, HR Manager

Lisa Velasco, HR Manager

ies aaa Police Captain

Arthur Hartinger, Negotiator

Meyers Nave

Approved as to Form

“WW dan W Lore,
Debra Margolis, Assistant City Attorney

45

2013-2015 MOU
AGREEMENT

 

Intentionally left blank for 2-sided copying

FPA 46 2013-2015 MOU
APPENDIX A

 

FPA

APPENDIX A

CITY OF FREMONT
FREMONT POLICE ASSOCIATION
CLASSIFICATION LIST

3350 POLICE OFFICER

3540 POLICE SERGEANT

47 2013-2015 MOU
APPENDIX A

 

Intentionally left blank for 2-sided copying

FPA 48 2013-2015 MOU
APPENDIX B

 

APPENDIX B

FORMULA FOR POSSIBLE MARKET ADJUSTMENT

Should the parties agree that the City conduct a salary survey for a possible market
adjustment for the ranks of Officer and Sergeant, the following cities will be used:
Alameda, Berkeley, Concord, Hayward, Milpitas, Palo Alto, Pleasanton, San Jose, San
Mateo, Santa Clara, and Vallejo.

The survey shall determine the top step base salary (monthly equivalent) being paid for
each classification. Any payments made by a survey city on behalf of the employee
toward the 9% employee contribution to PERS shall be added to the base monthly pay,
if not already included.

Upon completion of the survey, excluding Santa Clara, the average of the five highest
paid agencies shall be determined.

The resulting survey average for Officer and for Sergeant will be compared to the step 5
base salaries of the respective classifications for the City of Fremont.

FPA 49 2013-2015 MOU
APPENDIX B

 

Intentionally left blank for 2-sided copying

FPA 50 2013-2015 MOU
INDEX

 

CITY OF FREMONT

 

 

FPA MOU
2013 - 2015
INDEX
ACTING PAY .....cscscsceseseseesstsseteeeeneneee 4 LONGEVITY PAY......c:cccccceseseesesseeseeees 4
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES LONG-TERM DISABILITY/SALARY
CONTINUATION PLAN.........:.:00000+ 33
APPEALS MATTERS SUBJECT TO GRIEVANCE
APPLICATION PROCESS FOR PROCEDURE .........:c:csccceseseeseeeeeeees 36

EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE PAY.. 15
ASSOCIATION RELEASE TIME
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.
BILINGUAL PAY .........
BINDING ARBITRATION .
CALL BACK .....sssseeeceeeees 4
CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL..
CITY RIGHTS
CLASSIFICATION LIST

(APPENDIX A)
COURT APPEARANCES
DAYLIGHT SAVINGS TIME
DENTAL INSURANCE COVE
DISCIPLINARY APPEALS
EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE PAY
EXCLUSIONS .
EXISTING BENEFITS CONTINUED....2
FAMILY CARE LEAVE......:cscssssssssseees 28
FORMULA FOR POSSIBLE MARKET

ADJUSTMENT (APPENDIX B)....... 49
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE..... .
GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS.
HEALTH BENEFITS ALLOWAN
HOLIDAY TIME BANK
HOLIDAYS
INSURANCES
JOINT LABOR MANAGEMENT

COMMITTEE.

 
   
 
 
  

 

   
  
  

 

 

 

 

 

  

LIFE INSURANCE COVERAGE :
LIQUIDATION OF NEW VACATION.
LEAVE AT TERMINATION............. 23
LIQUIDATION OF OLD VACATION
LEAVE AT TERMINATION............. 22
LIQUIDATION OF UNUSED VACATION
HOURS AS OF 7-1-99.....eeccceeeee 23

FPA

51

MAXIMUM NEW VACATION LEAVE
ACCRUAL LIMIT BEGINNING
JANUARY 1, 1994

MISCELLANEOUS...

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 39, 43

MOTORCYCLE OFFICER UNIFORM
PROVISION... «19

NO DISCRIMINA

ON-CALL INVESTIGATOR.

ORGANIZATION BUSINESS.

OVERTIME AND WORK SCHEDULESS

PARTIES TO UNDERSTANDING........ 1

PERS CONTRACT AMENDMENTS... 33

POLICE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER

 

    
   

 

POLICE CANINE OVERTIME
POLICE CANINE UNIT...
RECOGNITION............
RETIREE MEDICAL INSURANCE
RETIREMENT..............
SAFETY EQUIPMENT.
SALARIES...
SCHOOL RE:
WORK SCHEDULES.
SHIFT CHANGE ...
SICK LEAVE.........
SICK LEAVE INCENTIVE PLAN
SPECIAL EVENT NOTIFICATION
SPECIALIST PAY ....

 
   
 
 
  
  
 
   
  

STANDBY STATUS.

STATE, FEDERAL, AND LOCAL LAW
COMPLIANCE ..........ccesesesseessesesereeee 1

TERM OF UNDERSTANDING............-. 3

TERMINATION OF LIQUIDATION OF
VACATION LEAVE DURING
EMPLOYMENT..........c:ccccseseesesseeeeee 22

2013-2015 MOU
INDEX

 

TRAINING AND SCHOOLS -
ATTENDANCE AND TRAVEL........ 12

TRAINING SCHEDULES -

UNIFORM ALLOWANCE 17

 

VACATION LEAVE PLAN EFFECTIVE
JANUARY 1, 1994.0... cceeceeetees 20

FPA

52

VALIDITY OF MEMORANDUN ........... 3

WHEN OVERTIME IS NOT
PAYABLE.........0ccscscsesssseseseseseseeeneeees 13

WORK SCHEDULE FOR COMMUNITY
POLICING PATROL TEAMG............ 7

2013-2015 MOU
