2013 — 2015

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

CITY OF SANTA CRUZ

AND

SANTA CRUZ POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
SECTION

SECTION 1.00

SECTION 2.00

SECTION 3.00
SECTION 4.00
SECTION 5.00
SECTION 6.00
SECTION 7.00

SECTION 8.00

SECTION 9.00

SECTION 10.00

SECTION 11.00

SECTION 12.00

2013 -- 2015
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY OF SANTA CRUZ
AND
SANTA CRUZ POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TITLE PAGE

 

1.01 - Commencement of Negotiations for a Successor

  

1.02 - Impact of Extraordinary Fiscal Circumstances

 
 

2.01 - Quarterly Meetings ... 6
NO ABROGATION OF RIGHTS ......cssssssssessesssssessssssssssnssessessessessessessessees 6
FULL UNDERSTANDING, MODIFICATION, WAIVER.......cscssssseseeeee 6
PAST PRACTICES........cccccssssscsssssssssssscssssssesssssssesescsssssssssssessesessssseees 7
NO DISCRIMINATION ..........cccccecccccsssssssssscccecseseesseeeeesssssseseseseaes 7
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS.

 

RECOGNITION AND PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS
8.01 - Recognitio
8.02 - Payroll Deduction

 
  
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ASSOCIATION RIGHTS .
9.01 - Access to City Facilities
9.02 - Access to City Bulletin Boards
9.03 - Access to the City’s Internal Mail System
9.04 - Electronic Mail (E-Mail) and Computer Usags

 

UNION NOTIFICATION. ........cccsssssessssesessssesssesessesesesscsesssseseeseseeeenenceneees 10
RELEASE TIME. ........scssssssessssssescecssssesessecceescsseseseseeneaeaeseeseseseeeeeeaeeeenes 10

PERSONNEL ACTIONS .
12.01 - Personnel Files
12.02 - Performance Evaluations...

12.02.01 - Late Evaluations

 
 

 
SECTION 13.00

SECTION 14.00

12.03 - Probation
12.03.01 - Probationary Period .
12.03.02 - Objective of Probationary Period .
12.03.03 - Rejection of Probationary Employee
12.03.04 - Extension of Probation

 

 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

WORK ASSIGNMENTS/SCHEDULES..
13.01 - Rotation/Reassignments
13.02 - 4 Day/10 Hour Plan.
13.03 - Minimum Staffing
13.04 - Schedulin
13.05 - Absences/Time Off .

PAY RATES AND PRACTICES
14.01 - Salary Steps...
14.01.01 - Salary Rates Upon Appointment
14.01.02 - Advancement within the Range
14.01.03 - Longevity

 

 

 

14.02 - Retirement/PERS ..........ccsssssssssssessesesesseseseesesessesessesesessesesseeesesneeeseees 6
14.02.01 - Employees Hired on or Before Sept. 2, 2011 (Tier I). 6
14.02.02 - Employees Hired on or After Sept. 3, 2011 (Tier II) 7
14.02.03 - Employees Hired on or After Jan. 3, 2013 (Tier III)......18

 

14.03 - Overtime
14.04 - Working Out of Classificatio
14.05 - Call-back
14.05.01 - Definition
14.05.02 - Compensation

14.06 - Standby oo. ceceeeceeeceneeeeeeeneeneeeeseteeeeeeteeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
14.07 - Investigations Premium Pay
14.08 - Special Duty Pay
14.09 - Special Events
14.10 - Training Officer
14.11 - Tuition Reimbursement
14.12 - Bilingual Pay
14.13 - Motorcycle Allowance
14.14 - Shift Differential ..
14.15 - Uniform Allowance and Replacement
14.16 - Personal Property
14.17 - K-9 Duty
14.18 - Education Incentive
14.19 - Overpayments ..

 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 15.00

SECTION 16.00

SECTION 17.00

SECTION 18.00

SECTION 19.00

 

HOLIDAYS
15.01 - Holiday Hours & Scheduling
15.02 - Holiday Accrual
15.03 - Holiday Pay-Off/Carry Ove
15.04 - Eligibility 0.0... cece ee eeceseeeeeeeessseeeeeessseseeeeseeaeeeeees

  
  

VACATION .uesssssssssssssssssssscssssnssessessessesseesssncsssensssssnssnssessssnssessessessesseeseenees
16.01 - Accrual
16.02 - Rate of Maximum Vacation Accrual .
16.03 - Sell Back of Vacatio
16.04 - Injury or IlIness While on Vacation .

 

 
 
 
  
 

SICK LEAVE
17.01 - Definition
17.02 - Accrual...
17.03 - Limitations
17.04 - Sick Leave Incentive Program

 

 

LEAVES OF ABSENCE
18.01 - Military Duty....
18.02 - Workers’ Compensation.
18.03 - Light Duty wees
18.04 - Medical or Personal Leave.
18.05 - Pregnancy Disability Leave
18.06 - Family Leave
18.07 - Continuation of Insurance Benefits During
Unpaid Leaves of Absence.
18.07.01 - Personal Leave
18.07.02 - Family Leave .

18.08 - Blood Donations.
18.09 - Absence for Examination

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

BENEFITS
19.01 - Medical Plan . .
19.01.01 - Optional Benefits ............ccceeeseeeereeeeteeeeseeeeeeeeeteeeeee 33

 

19.02 - Principal Domestic Partners
19.03 - Retiree Medical Plan...
19.04 - Retiree Medical Incentive
19.05 - Dental and Vision Program
19.06 - Long Term Disability
19.07 - Life Insurance
19.08 - Counseling Services

 
  
  
 
  
 
SECTION 20.00

SECTION 21.00

SECTION 22.00

SECTION 23.00

SECTION 24.00

SECTION 25.00

SECTION 26.00

SECTION 27.00

SECTION 28.00

SECTION 29.00

SECTION 30.00

EXHIBIT A

EXHIBIT B

EXHIBIT C

EXHIBIT D

EXHIBIT E

EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITY ..

 

 

EMERGENCY MEALS .........ccsscsssessesssesseseeesesseesseneeessenseeeeesenseensens 36

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
24.01 - Purpose.
24.02 - Definition ...
24.03 - Limitations .
24.04 - Procedures..

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 

DISCIPLINARY APPEALS PROCEDURE
25.01 - Definition
25.02 - Pre-Action Procedur
25.03 - Post Action Appeal .

WRITTEN REPRIMAND ........ccscsssssessssesessssesescsesssscsesncsesesscseeneneeeenenees 41

ENFORCEMENT OF TERMS

 

SEVERABILITY.......ccscccsssssssssssesssscsesesessssesessesesnesesesncsessssesesneseeeseneeneneees 41

LAYOFF POLICY & PROCEDURE
29.01 - Layoffs
29.02 - Bumping.
29.03 - Notification
29.04 - Reinstatement

 
 
 
 
 
 

POLICE DEPARTMENT RESOURCE ALLOCATION
COMMITTEE

 

POLICE CLASSIFICATIONS .......ccssscsssssesssscsessssesesseseessscsesscseeneneeeeneses 45

STATEMENT OF EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
AND NON-DISCRIMINATION POLICY.........scssssssssesesssseseeseseeeeseseeneee 46

DISCRIMINATORY HARASSMENT POLICY.

 

K-9 AGREEMENT ......cccssssssssssessssesessssesssncsesssnesesncsesnssesesnesesesseseencaeeneneeees 55

SCPD POLICY #1001 (ABSENCES/TIME OFF) ........scsssssesssseessseeeeseeee 58
2013 -- 2015
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

CITY OF SANTA CRUZ AND
SANTA CRUZ POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

SECTION 1.00 - TERM

The term of this Memorandum of Understanding shall commence September 14, 2013 and shall
expire September 11, 2015.

1.01 Commencement of Negotiations for a Successor MOU

Either party may serve upon the other party a demand to commence bargaining for a
successor MOU on or before February 15, 2015. In the event either party serves its
demand by February 15, 2015, the parties will commence negotiations for a successor
MOU no later than March 1, 2015, unless a later date is mutually agreed upon by the
parties in writing. In the event demand is served after February 15, 2015, the parties will
commence bargaining on a mutually agreed upon time and date.

1.02 Impact of Extraordinary Fiscal Circumstances

The parties acknowledge that this MOU was negotiated in a transitioning economic
environment with uncertainty regarding budget stability and revenue growth. The City
values the POA’s commitment to meeting the needs of the City throughout the past and
currently difficult economic times. As such, the City is committed to maintaining
competitiveness as an employer and supporting recruitment and retention, and to the
extent economic conditions allow, restoring prior concessions made, particularly the
retirement contribution.

SECTION 2.00 - PREAMBLE

This Memorandum is entered into by the City of Santa Cruz (hereinafter referred to as the City)
and the Santa Cruz Police Officers’ Association (hereinafter referred to as the Association). For
the purpose of this Memorandum, employee shall mean a regular status employee employed in
the classifications listed in Exhibit A. Any part-time regular employees covered by this
agreement will receive benefits included in the agreement on a prorated basis, given the ratio of
the budgeted work schedule to full time. This Memorandum is subject to Section 3500-3510 of
the Government Code of the State of California, the City of Santa Cruz Charter and Municipal
Code, and the City of Santa Cruz Personnel Rules and Regulations Resolution.

The City and the Association have met and conferred in good faith and have arrived at an
understanding concerning wages, hours, working conditions, and other terms of employment.

The City and the Association recognize their obligation to provide services of the highest quality
and efficiency to the community.
The City and the Association affirm the principal that harmonious labor/management relations are
to be promoted and furthered.

2.01 Quarterly Meetings

To encourage harmonious labor/management relations, the Chief of Police and
Association representatives (in accordance with Section 11.00 (Release Time) of this
memorandum) will meet no less than once every three (3) months to informally present
and discuss issues and ideas that are of potential interest to both parties. During the
course of these meetings, the Chief and the Association may discuss the benefits and
costs of conducting an employee satisfaction survey or other similar program designed
to provide department management with information about employees’ level of job
satisfaction.

SECTION 3.00 - NO ABROGATION OF RIGHTS

The parties acknowledge that the City’s responsibilities and rights, and management
responsibilities and rights, as indicated in current Appendix A, Article 1, Section 1 of the City of
Santa Cruz Personnel Rules and Regulations resolution and all applicable State or Municipal laws
and rights of the City Council, are neither abrogated nor made subject to the meet and confer
process by the adoption of this Memorandum.

The parties further acknowledge that the rights of employees are neither abrogated nor
diminished by the adoption of this Memorandum of Understanding.

SECTION 4.00 - FULL UNDERSTANDING, MODIFICATION, WAIVER

This agreement, plus any written departmental rules or regulations, sets forth the full and
entire understanding of the parties regarding the matters set forth herein and any other prior or
existing understanding or agreements by the parties, whether formal or informal, regarding any
such matters are hereby superseded or terminated in their entirety.

It is agreed and understood that each party, hereto voluntarily and unqualifiedly, waives its right
to negotiate and agrees that the other party shall not be required to negotiate, with respect to any
matter covered herein.

It is further agreed and understood that, except in cases of emergency, the City shall not
implement any changes to any matter within scope, as defined by the Meyers, Milias, Brown
Act, as amended, not covered herein without first having met and conferred with the Association.
For purposes of this Agreement, emergency means any sudden and unforeseeable incident or
occurrence. Changes implemented pursuant to this paragraph shall only be in effect for the
duration of the emergency causing the change. No agreement, alteration, understanding,
variation, waiver, or modification of any of the terms or provisions contained herein shall in
any manner be binding upon the parties hereto unless made and executed in writing by all
parties hereto and, if required, approved by the City and ratified by the membership of the
Association.

The waiver of any breach of any term or condition of this Agreement by either party shall not

6
constitute a precedent in the future enforcement of all its terms and provisions.

SECTION 5.00 - PAST PRACTICES

The parties agree that they shall adhere to established labor relations principles in handling
past practices. Specifically, in handling past practice issues within the scope of representation:

1. Past practices superseded by revised MOU language are null and void.

2. Past practices which contradict existing MOU language or written City rules shall be
null and void upon reasonable notice from the City that the language will be followed.

3. Past practices within scope which are not covered by MOU language or City rules
shall remain in effect through the term of the MOU unless changed through mutual
agreement.

SECTION 6.00 - NO DISCRIMINATION

The Association recognizes City Council policies pertaining to equal employment and
discriminatory harassment as listed in Exhibits B and C, as well as applicable Federal and
State discrimination laws.

SECTION 7.00 - EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

Unit employees shall have the right to form, join, and participate in the activities of employee
organizations of their own choosing for the purpose of representation on all matters of employer-
employee relations pertaining to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment.
Unit employees shall have the right to refuse to join or participate in the activities of the
Association and shall have the right to represent themselves individually in their employment
relations with the City. No employee shall be interfered with, intimidated, restrained, coerced, or
discriminated against by the City of Santa Cruz or by any employee organization because of the
exercise of these rights.

SECTION 8.00 - RECOGNITION AND PAYROLL DEDUCTION
8.01 Recognition

Pursuant to Meyers-Milias-Brown and the City’s Personnel Rules and Regulations, the
Association is certified as the recognized employee organization representing regular
status employees listed in Exhibit A.

8.02 Payroll Deduction

The City shall deduct Association membership dues and any other mutually agreed
upon payroll deductions from the monthly pay of member employees. Deductions must
be authorized in writing by the employee on a form acceptable to the City and the
Association. The City shall remit such amount to the Association in a timely manner.
SECTION 9.00 - ASSOCIATION RIGHTS

The City of Santa Cruz has an interest in promoting positive labor relations with the Santa Cruz
Police Officers’ Association (hereinafter referred to as “Association”), the exclusive representative
of regular status employees listed in Exhibit A of the current Memorandum of Understanding. In
furtherance of that interest, the City recognizes that communications both between the City and the
Association and communications between the Association and its members are essential and may
take various forms. Due to the nature of the employment of bargaining unit members, the City and
the Association recognize that it is not possible to schedule meetings at a time when all bargaining
unit members may attend during their off duty time and that any meeting scheduled cannot
interfere with or affect City needs, workflow, or mission. Accordingly, the parties recognize that
communications involving bargaining unit members may need to take various forms. To assist in
the communications process, the parties hereby mutually agree to the following as it applies to
members of the Santa Cruz Police Officers’ Association Bargaining Unit:

9.01 Access to City Facilities

The Union shall be allowed the use of areas normally used for meeting purposes for
meetings of Association members when:

a. Such space is available;

b. There is no additional cost to the City (with the exception of incidental costs
such as those for heat and light);

c. It does not interfere with normal, safe, efficient or secure City operations;

d. Employees in attendance are either not scheduled for duty or are on duty and
leave the meeting promptly when duty calls; and

e. The meeting is either for the purpose of an Association Board meeting or for a
General Membership meeting, except as prohibited below.

The Association may use City facilities for purposes of conducting an Association Board
meeting as reasonably necessary. Association Board meetings conducted at City facilities
shall be concluded as expeditiously as reasonably possible without interfering with normal
duties.

The Association may use City facilities for purposes of conducting a General Membership
meeting as needed and will be reserved as any other City or Public Organization would
have to do. General Membership meetings conducted at City facilities shall be reserved
and concluded in the time reserved for the meeting.

The use of City equipment and/or supplies (other than items normally used in the conduct
of business meetings, such as desks, chairs, blackboards and projection/sound equipment)
is prohibited, even though such equipment and/or supplies may be present in the meeting
area.

The Association shall maintain proper order during any meeting held at a City facility and
ensure that the space is left in a clean and orderly condition. The City reserves the right to
revoke permission to use City facilities for meetings if the Association fails to maintain
9.02

9.03

order during a meeting or if facilities are not left in a clean and orderly condition.

Access to City Bulletin Boards

The Association shall have access to City bulletin boards located in those buildings in which
bargaining unit members are assigned to work for the purpose of posting the following types
of notices (these are examples only and not intended to be a complete list):

a. Notice of recreational and social affairs sponsored by the Association;
b. Notice of Association meetings;

c. Notice of Association elections;

d. Reports from Association committees;

e. Rulings on Association policies; and

f. Association newsletters.

All posted material must be legibly signed or initialed and dated by the Association’s
President or designated representative. No notice or announcement which contains
defamatory statements about the City, including any City Department, any City official, or
any City employee(s) shall be posted on City bulletin boards. Any violation of this section
shall entitle the City to immediately cancel the provisions of this section and revoke the
Association’s privilege to use bulletin boards pursuant to this section. In the event non-
authorized material is posted, it shall be promptly removed by the Association or its
representative on notification by the Department. The City reserves the right to remove
material that contains defamatory statements before providing notification to the
Association; if such action is taken the City shall notify the Association as soon as
possible.

Access to the City’s Internal Mail System

As used in this section, “the City’s internal mail system” does not include the City’s e-mail
system (E-mail usage is discussed in Section 4 below).

The Association may request that notices be delivered to bargaining unit members through
the City’s internal mail system. Notices which may be sent through the City’s internal mail
system are limited to those types of notices which may be posted on bulletin boards, as
described in section 9.02. No notice or announcement which contains defamatory
statements about the City, including any City Department, any City official, or any City
employee(s) shall be distributed using the Department’s internal mail system. The City
reserves the right to refuse to allow notices to be distributed by Departmental mail that
interferes with the Department’s operational needs, workflow, or mission. Notices must
be legibly signed or initialed and dated by the Association’s President or designated
representative. The Association must provide a sufficient number of copies of any notice
that it requests be distributed through departmental mail.

Any mail placed in the City’s internal mail system destined for deposit in the United States
Postal Service system must contain sufficient postage when so placed; the City will not
pay for postage.
Any violation of this section shall entitle the City to immediately cancel the provisions of
this section and revoke the Association’s privilege to use the City’s internal mail system
pursuant to this section.

9.04 Electronic Mail (E-Mail) and Computer Usage

The Association recognizes that the City’s Electronic Mail (E-Mail) Use Policy and Police
Department General Orders prohibit the use of the City’s e-mail and computer systems for
personal use, that the City’s e-mail and computer systems are to be used solely for City-
related business activities, and that the City has the right to access and inspect City
computers, including but not limited to viewing any messages sent or received through the
City’s e-mail system or any temporary or permanent files stored on the City’s electronic
systems and/or equipment.

The City and the Association agree that the Association may be permitted to use City e-mail
for the purposes described in this section. Notices which may be sent through the City’s e-
mail system are limited to those types of notices which may be posted on bulletin boards, as
described in section 9.02. No notice or announcement which contains defamatory statements
about the City, including any City Department, any City official, or any City employee(s)
shall be sent through the City’s e-mail system. The City reserves the right to refuse to allow
notices to be sent through the City’s e-mail system that interfere with the Department’s
operational needs, workflow, or mission.

Any violation of this section shall entitle the City to immediately cancel the provisions of
this section and revoke the Association’s privilege to use the City’s e- mail system pursuant
to this section. It is expected that once the Association Board is aware of any such
violations, they would be afforded the opportunity to rectify the situation.

SECTION 10.00 - UNION NOTIFICATION

Except in cases of bona fide emergencies, the Association shall be given seven (7) working days
advance written notification of any ordinance, rule, resolution, or regulation relating to matters
within the scope of representation proposed to be adopted by the City Council, or management,
and shall be given the opportunity to meet with a City representative prior to its adoption.

SECTION 11.00 - RELEASE TIME

During the term of this agreement, a reasonable number of Association members — up to three (3)
— shall be allowed a reasonable amount of paid release time off for meet and confer or meet and
consult sessions scheduled with the City Council’s designated representative, providing there is
no disruption of work in the employee’s division. The exact number to be released shall be
determined by mutual agreement prior to the session and shall vary by the type of issue being
discussed (i.e., single division affected, multiple divisions affected, etc.) The Association shall
notify the Human Resources Director in advance of the meeting of the names of members who
will be in attendance. Such Association members shall obtain permission through supervisory
channels before leaving their work or work locations. Ground rules for negotiating successor
agreements shall specify the number of Association members allowed for the meet and confer
sessions with the City Council’s representatives.

10
SECTION 12.00 - PERSONNEL ACTIONS

12.01

12.02

12.03

Personnel Files

There shall be only one personnel file which shall be maintained in the City’s Human
Resources Department. Employees shall have the right to review their personnel file or
authorize, in writing, review by their representative. No adverse material will be placed
in an employee’s personnel file without prior notice and a copy given to the employee.
Employees may cause to be placed in their personnel file responses to adverse material
inserted therein. This provision excludes training, supervisory, and internal affairs files.

Performance Evaluations

It is compulsory that all regular employees receive an annual written performance
evaluation from their supervisor. All employees serving their twelve (12) month
probationary period will be evaluated at the completion of their third, sixth, and twelfth
month of service. All regular employees will be evaluated on their merit review date.

Evaluations are intended to be a summary of the employee’s performance over the course
of the evaluation period. Evaluations are also to be used as a tool to motivate the
employee’s level of performance. To this end, the supervisor and the employee will
meet and discuss work responsibilities, job standards and objectives, review progress and
plan for the employee’s future development prior to the evaluation being placed in the
employee’s personnel file.

Any additions, corrections, deletions, or changes on the original evaluation form require
initialing by both the maker of the amendment and the employee to indicate that the
changes have been discussed and understood. No evaluation shall be made on hearsay
statements. Employees may also choose to discuss performance evaluations with the
Chief of Police and/or the Human Resources Director and formally enter a response to
the evaluation in their personnel file. Disputes regarding performance reviews shall not
be subject to the grievance process.

12.02.01 Late Evaluations

Failure of the supervisor to present the employee with the evaluation within ninety (90)
calendar days of the due date, unless an extension is mutually agreed upon in writing,
shall result in a recommendation of step advancement in conjunction with Section
14.01.02 (Advancement within the Range). However, as soon as possible thereafter,
the supervisor shall conduct a performance evaluation in accordance with Section 12.02
(Performance Evaluations).

Probation

12.03.01 Probationary Period

All original, promotional, and re-hire appointments shall be subject to a probationary
period of twelve (12) months. Any time spent by an employee on unpaid status or paid
leave shall not be counted as qualifying service toward completion of the probationary
period.

11
12.03.02 Objective of Probationary Period

The probationary period shall be regarded as part of the selection process and shall be
utilized for training the new employee on work assignments and standards, and observing
and evaluating the employee’s performance.

12.03.03 Rejection of Probationary Employee

During the probation period, an employee may be rejected at any time by the appointing
authority without the right of appeal. Notification of rejection shall be served to the
probationary employee in writing.

Any promoted employee who is rejected during the probationary period shall be
reinstated to the position from which the promotion occurred; unless the rejection is due
to discharge in which case no reinstatement shall occur.

12.03.04 Extension of Probation

All efforts will be made to sufficiently evaluate the probationary employee during the
assigned period. An extension of the probationary period may, however, be
recommended by the appointing authority when good cause exists. Such extensions shall
be for a specific period of time not to exceed three (3) months. The employee shall be
informed in writing of the reasons for the period of the extension at least seven (7)
calendar days prior to the scheduled end of the probationary period.

SECTION 13.00 - WORK ASSIGNMENTS/SCHEDULES

13.01

13.02

Rotation/Reassignments

It is understood and agreed that employees covered by this Memorandum are expected to
rotate among shifts and are subject to periodic reassignments (such as TO’s, motorcycle
duty, investigations). If these changes are a normal part of their work and are not
disciplinary, then the reassignment is not subject to the grievance process even though
employees may lose or gain eligibility for compensation (such as shift differential or other
premium pays). If the reassignment is considered to be disciplinary by the Chief of
Police, then the employee maintains his/her right to appeal as in Section 25.00
(Disciplinary Appeals Procedure). In any event, the employee will be notified as to the
reason for the reassignment. The Chief of Police or his/her designee will announce
anticipated openings for specialized assignments department-wide and fill those positions
through a standardized selection process. The standardized selection process may be
unique to each specialized unit but consistent for all employees being considered for
assignment to that unit.

4 Day/10 Hour Plan

The normal work schedule for all employees covered by this Memorandum (except
Police Trainees and new police officers during their non-uniform orientation period) will
be a four-ten plan, indicating four (4), ten (10) hour workdays and three (3) consecutive
days off each week. The specific assignments not subject to this rule are as follows:

12
13.03

13.04

1. School Resource Officers when school is in session, including summer school
when it is held in the City of Santa Cruz.

2. Employees assigned to Investigations who will be assigned to a 9/80 schedule
in lieu of the 4/10 schedule.

3. CSO’s assigned to Property.

4. Victim Advocates who will be assigned to a 9/80 schedule in lieu of
the 4/10 schedule.

For employees assigned to a 9/80 schedule plan, each week’s work days will be
scheduled consecutively (followed by consecutive days off). In the event of operational
necessity, the Chief of Police may suspend this schedule on a temporary basis not to
exceed 30 days.

The Chief of Police may suspend this rule if s/he determines that there are insufficient
personnel to maintain the safe day to day operations of the organization. In addition,
unforeseen catastrophic events such as earthquake, civil unrest, etc., may necessitate a
suspension of this rule. The Chief of Police shall notify all affected personnel and the
Association thirty (30) days prior to the change or with as much notice as possible given
the nature of the particular emergency.

The Association will have two (2) weeks to meet and respond to the Chief of Police and
present alternative scheduling plans for his/her review. The Association will also have
the opportunity to meet and confer with the Chief of Police over matters within the scope
of representation effected by the suspension of the 4/10 schedule.

In the event the suspension of the 4/10 schedule lasts more than ninety (90) days, the
Association will have the opportunity to meet with the Chief to ensure that the conditions
for the suspension still exist. This review will be conducted at least quarterly until the
suspension ends.

Minimum Staffing

The Chief of Police will maintain minimum staffing levels for patrol shifts in writing.
The intention of maintaining written guidelines for minimum staffing is to provide
guidelines and promote consistency between supervisors and managers when making
decisions regarding staffing. The Chief of Police will meet and confer on impacts within
the scope of bargaining as defined by the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act (MMBA) if the
written minimum staffing levels are changed.

Scheduling

Employees assigned to the Operations Division will be allowed to select their shift based
on seniority and as set forth by the Chief of Police. The schedule will be completed no
less than thirty (30) days and no more than twelve (12) months prior to shift change.
Seniority is determined by the employee’s last uninterrupted date of hire in a
classification. A baseline seniority list is incorporated in this MOU and hereby attached
as Exhibit F. For employees hired on the same date, seniority will be determined by the

13
date of release from their field training program. Ties will be determined by coin toss.

Exceptions:

1.

yor YN

Training Officers (TO’s): will select their shifts based on seniority as set forth
by the Chief of Police along with the rest of patrol personnel. This selection
may be overruled by the Chief, however, in favor of the requirements and
continuity of the Training Program.

Canine Program: exempt.
Street Crimes Unit: exempt.
Downtown Unit: exempt.

Traffic Section: exempt. Seniority for shift selection within the unit is
determined by date of assignment to the unit. If all positions are not filled,
assignments will be made starting with the least senior non-probationary
officer.

Probationary employee: exempt.

Exemption: through the evaluation process, disciplinary action, medical
reasons, or extenuating circumstances, or as identified in Section 13.02 (4
Day/10 Hour Plan) of this Memorandum, an officer may be assigned or
reassigned to a certain shift.

Leaves of Absence (medical, military, pregnancy disability, etc.): a
reasonable expectation must exist that the officer will be able to report for full
duty at the start of a new shift. In the absence of a reasonable expectation,
those officers will be exempt from this scheduling procedure.

Restricted positions: Positions restricted to specific assignments because
of funding sources or other external circumstances. If more than one
restricted position is assigned to the same unit, seniority for shift selection
within that unit is determined by date of assignment to the unit.

13.05 Absences/Time Off

Absences and time off will be regulated based on the practices and procedures set forth
in Policy 1001 in the Santa Cruz Police Department Manual as of the date of this
Memorandum. Any discrepancies between this Memorandum and the policy will be
superseded by this Memorandum. The policy is attached as Exhibit E.

SECTION 14.00 - PAY RATES AND PRACTICES

14.01 Salary Steps

Each classification in the bargaining unit shall be assigned a salary range that increases
by 5% between steps.

14.01.01

Salary Rates Upon Appointment

New employees shall be hired at the first step of the classification’s salary range;

14
unless a higher starting step is recommended by the appointing authority based on the
employees advanced qualifications for the position and such recommendation is approved
by the Human Resources Director and City Manager.

Promoted employees shall be appointed to the first step in the salary range for the new
classification. However, if such employee is already being paid at a rate equal to or higher
than the first step of the higher range, she/he shall be placed at the next higher step in the
new range of at least a five (5) percent increase in total compensation.

14.01.02

A.

Advancement within the Range

Advancement within a classifications salary range shall normally be granted
on the employee’s scheduled merit review date. Such advancements shall be
based solely on meritorious job performance as documented by a satisfactory
performance evaluation submitted by the department head and approved by
the Human Resources Director.

All new Police Officer Trainees shall be advanced to step A of the Police
Patrol Officer classification upon successful completion of the police
academy. These employees shall then begin their twelve (12) month probation
and be eligible for subsequent merit increases as shown below.

All employees shall be eligible for their first merit increase at the end of the
first six (6) months of their twelve (12) month probation. After successful
completion of the full probation, the employee shall be eligible for subsequent
merit increases after each full year on paid status from the last merit review
date, continuing until the top of the salary range is attained.

. Merit increases shall normally be from one pay step to the next higher pay

step. Increases of two steps may, however, be recommended by the Chief of
Police when exceptional performance has been demonstrated by the
employee. Such step increases must be approved by the City Manager.

A merit increase may be denied by the department head when an employee’s
job performance falls below the acceptable work standards for the duties
assigned. The department head may, in such a case, recommend that the
employee’s work performance be reviewed again at a specific time before
the next review date. If a merit increase is granted at that time, the
employee’s original review date shall not change and she/he shall be eligible
for the next merit increase after one year on paid status from the original
review date.

An employee’s scheduled merit review date shall be adjusted for any time
spent by the employee on unpaid status.

. When an employee’s position is reclassified to a classification with a higher

salary range, the employee’s new pay shall be set at the first step of the new
range or the next higher step in the new range that provides the employee a
salary increase of at least five (5) percent. This increase shall have no effect
on the employee’s original merit review date.

15
14.02

H. Exclusive of special evaluation and upon receipt of a satisfactory annual
evaluation, the effective date for a merit increase shall be the first day of
the pay period, which includes the employee’s anniversary date.

14.01.03 Longevity

Upon completion of ten (10) years of continuous regular service employees shall receive
a 2 %% longevity pay increase. Upon completion of fifteen (15) years of continuous
regular service, employees shall receive and additional 2% longevity pay increase.
Longevity is calculated from the date of hire into a regular status position or a fully
benefited special status position. It is understood that longevity pay is considered
“additional compensation” for the purposes of PERS and tax computations.

Retirement/PERS

14.02.01 Employees Hired on or Before Septem

ber 2, 2011 (Tier I)

 

This section 14.02.01 shall apply to members hired on or before September 2, 2011, who

are contributing members of CalPERS.

A. Final Compensation Based on the Single Highest Year

 

For purposes of determining a retirement benefit, final compensation for
members covered by this section 14.02.01 shall be based on the single
highest year, defined by CalPERS as any consecutive one-year period with
the highest average pay rate and special compensation.

. 3.0% @ 50 Pension Formula for Sworn Members

The 3.0% @ 50 pension formula shall be available to all sworn members
covered by this section 14.02.01 who are contributing members of CalPERS.
Additionally, the City provides the Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2W
Death Benefit to members covered by this section 14.02.01.

. 2.0% @ 55 Pension Formula for Non-Sworn Members

 

The 2.0% @ 55 pension formula shall be available to all non-sworn members
covered by this section 14.02.01 who are contributing members of CalPERS.
Additionally, the City provides the Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2W
Death Benefit to members covered by this section 14.02.01.

 

. Required Employee Contribution

Sworn members covered by this section 14.02.01 will contribute the
employee contribution amount established by CalPERS for the 3.0% @ 50
pension formula. The required contribution amount was 9.0% as of the date
of this MOU.

Non-Sworn members covered by this section 14.02.01 will contribute the
employee contribution amount established by CalPERS for the 2.0% @ 55
pension formula. The required contribution amount was 7.0% as of the date
of this MOU.

16
E. Additional Required Employee Contribution

i. Year 1 Additional Employee Contribution of 5.22%
In addition to the required employee contribution, starting with the
pay period beginning September 14, 2013, both sworn and non-sworn
members covered by this section 14.02.01 will contribute an
additional 5.22%. This amounts to a total employee contribution of
14.22% for sworn members and a total employee contribution of
12.22% for non-sworn members.

ii. Year 2 Additional Employee Contribution of 5.08%
In addition to the required employee contribution, starting with the
pay period beginning September 13, 2014, members covered by this
section 14.02.01 will contribute an additional 5.08%. This amounts
to a total employee contribution of 14.08% for sworn members and a
total employee contribution of 12.08% for non-sworn members.

 

Upon the expiration of this contract, the additional employee
contribution will revert to 11.25% for a total employee contribution of
20.25% for sworn and 18.25% for non-sworn members.

14.02.02 Employees Hired On or After September 3, 2011 (Tier II)

 

This section 14.02.02 shall apply to employees hired on or after September 3, 2011 and
prior to January 1, 2013 who are contributing members of CalPERS.

A. Final Compensation Based on Three Year Average
For purposes of determining a retirement benefit, final compensation for
employees covered by this section 14.02.02 shall be based on the member’s
highest three year average, defined by CalPERS as any consecutive three-
year period with the highest average pay rate and special compensation.

B. 3.0% @ 55 Pension Formula for Sworn Members

The 3.0% @ 55 pension formula shall be available to all sworn members
covered by this section 14.02.02 who are contributing members of CalPERS.
Additionally, the City provides the Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2W
Death Benefit to members covered by this section 14.02.02.

 

C. 2.0% @ 60 Pension Formula for Non-Sworn Members
The 2.0% @ 60 pension formula shall be available to all non-sworn members
covered by this section 14.02.02 who are contributing members of CalPERS.
Additionally, the City provides the Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2W
Death Benefit to members covered by this section 14.02.02.

 

D. Required Employee Contribution
Sworn members covered by this section 14.02.02 will contribute the

employee contribution amount established by CalPERS for the 3.0% @ 50
pension formula. The required contribution amount was 9.0% as of the date
of this MOU.

Non-Sworn members covered by this section 14.02.02 will contribute the
employee contribution amount established by CalPERS for the 2.0% @ 55

17
pension formula. The required contribution amount was 7.0% as of the date
of this MOU.

E. Additional Required Employee Contribution

i. Year 1 Additional Employee Contribution of 5.22%
In addition to the required employee contribution, starting with the
pay period beginning September 14, 2013, both sworn and non-sworn
members covered by this section 14.02.02 will contribute an
additional 5.22%. This amounts to a total employee contribution of
14.22% for sworn members and a total employee contribution of
12.22% for non-sworn members.

 

ii. Year 2 Additional Employee Contribution of 5.08%
In addition to the required employee contribution, starting with the
pay period beginning September 13, 2014, both sworn and non-sworn
members covered by this section 14.02.02 will contribute an
additional 5.08%. This amounts to a total employee contribution of
14.08% for sworn members and a total employee contribution of
12.08% for non-sworn members

 

Upon the expiration of this contract, the additional employee
contribution will revert to 11.25% for a total employee contribution of
20.25% for sworn and 18.25% for non-sworn members.

14.02.03 Employees Hired On or After January 1, 2013 (Tier III)

 

This section 14.02.03 shall apply to employees hired on or after January 1, 2013 who are
contributing members of CalPERS.

A. Final Compensation Based on Three Year Average
For purposes of determining a retirement benefit, final compensation for
members covered by this section 14.02.03 shall be based on the member’s
highest three year average, defined by CalPERS as any consecutive three-
year period with the highest average pay rate and special compensation.

B. 2.7% @ 57 Pension Formula for Sworn Members
The 2.7% @ 57 pension formula shall be available to all sworn members
covered by this section 14.02.03 who are contributing new members of
CalPERS. Additionally, the City provides the Pre-Retirement Optional
Settlement 2W Death Benefit to members covered by this section 14.02.03.

 

Employees covered by this section 14.02.03 who are classic members as
defined by CalPERS may be eligible for a different pension formula.

C. 2.0% @ 62 Pension Formula for Non-Sworn Members
The 2.0% @ 62 pension formula shall be available to all non-sworn members
covered by this section 14.02.03 who are contributing new members of
CalPERS. Additionally, the City provides the Pre-Retirement Optional
Settlement 2W Death Benefit to members covered by this section 14.02.03.

 

Employees covered by this section 14.02.03 who are classic members as
defined by CalPERS may be eligible for a different pension formula.

18
D. Required Employee Contribution

i.

ii.

Year 1 Employee Contribution
Starting with the pay period beginning September 14, 2013, sworn

members covered by this section 14.02.03 will contribute the
employee contribution amount established by CalPERS for the 2.7%
@ 57 pension formula. The required contribution amount was
12.25% as of the date of this MOU.

Starting with the pay period beginning September 14, 2013, non-
sworn members covered by this section 14.02.03 will contribute the
employee contribution amount established by CalPERS for the 2.0%
@ 62 pension formula. The required contribution amount was 6.75%
as of the date of this MOU.

Year 2 Employee Contribution
Starting with the pay period beginning September 13, 2014, both

sworn and non-sworn members covered by this section 14.02.03 will
contribute half of the normal cost as established by CalPERS.

In the event employee contribution rates are adjusted by CalPERS
during the term of this MOU, the member contribution will be
recalculated based upon the updated required member contribution
rate established by CalPERS.

E. Additional Required Employee Contribution

14.03 Overtime

i.

ii.

Year 1 Additional Employee Contribution of 5.22%

In addition to the required employee contribution, starting with the
pay period beginning September 14, 2013, both sworn and non-sworn
members covered by this section 14.02.03 will contribute an
additional 5.22%. This amounts to a total employee contribution of
17.47% for sworn members and a total employee contribution of
11.97% for non-sworn members.

 

Year 2 Additional Employee Contribution of 5.08%

In addition to the required employee contribution, starting with the
pay period beginning September 13, 2014, both sworn and non-sworn
members covered by this section 14.02.03 will contribute an
additional 5.08%.

 

Upon the expiration of this contract, the additional employee
contribution will revert to 11.25% for sworn and non-sworn members.

The City desires to keep overtime work at a minimum but recognizes that from time to
time it may be required. To the extent possible, employees will be given advanced

notification.

1. Overtime hours described in subsection 4(a) and 5(a) below will be

compensated at one and one-half times the employee’s base hourly rate.

19
2. Fair Labor Standards Act (F.L.S.A.) overtime will be compensated at one and
one-half times the employee’s regular rate of pay as defined by F.L.S.A.

3. Police Trainees

a. Overtime is defined as all authorized hours on paid status in excess of
forty (40) hours in a workweek.

b. F.L.S.A. overtime is defined as all hours required by management and
actually worked by the employee in excess of forty (40) hours in a
work period as defined by the City.

4. Regular Personnel

a. For all employees other than Police Trainees, overtime is defined
as all authorized hours on paid status in excess of the regularly
scheduled 10 hour work day and/or 40 hour work week. Paid status
includes sick, holiday, or vacation time used.

b. F.L.S.A. overtime is defined as all hours required by management and
actually worked by the employee in excess of the non-overtime hours
allowed in the work period. Pursuant to the 7K exemption under
F.L.S.A., 171 non-overtime hours are allowed in a 28-day work
period. The City has the right to decide whether or not the 7K
exemption, provided for under the F.L.S.A., shall apply to Police
Patrol Officers and Sergeants. The City also has the right to select
alternate work periods, as defined by the F.L.S.A. If the City
exercises its right to invoke the 7K exemption, the Association
maintains its right to meet and confer over the effects of the City’s
decision on matters within the scope of representation.

5. Compensatory Time Off

a. Police Officer Trainees shall receive the first 53.34 hours of overtime
accrued in the police academy at the rate of one and one-half times the
hours worked, up to a total of eighty (80) hours of banked compensatory
paid leave. All additional overtime in the academy shall be paid at the
overtime rate as specified in the Police unit’s Memorandum of
Understanding (M.O.U.).

In the event that Police Officer Trainees do not successfully complete the
academy, any compensatory hours not used will be compensated in salary.

b. The use of compensatory time off shall be in accordance with
department policy and the FLSA. All regular employees may choose, in
lieu of overtime payment, to have overtime hours worked converted to a
compensatory time bank at the rate of one and one-half time the hours
worked. The employees’ compensatory time bank shall not exceed one
hundred (100) hours. If the Department is unable to schedule and grant
the time off within one year from the date of the request, cash payment
shall be made in lieu of the compensatory time off requested. Otherwise,
there shall be no payment for compensatory time unless the employee
terminates City employment or is promoted to a management position.

20
14.04 Working Out of Classification

Upon specific assignment by the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative, an
employee may be required to perform the duties of a higher-level classification on a
temporary basis due to a termination, vacation, leave of absence, workers’ compensation-,
or extended sick leave.

Assignments will be made with the following considerations:

1. All out-of-class assignments scheduled to last for an extended period of time
(e.g., more than one pay period), must be implemented and approved on a
Personnel Action Form (PAF). Assignments shall be given to employees
who currently meet the stated minimum qualification of the higher-level
classification. Employees appointed on this basis will receive out-of-class
pay beginning on the first day of the assignment.

2. Qualified Police Patrol Officers may be directed by the management
personnel on duty to assume the duties of an absent Police Sergeant on an
“acting” basis for a given shift. Such assignments can only be made after the
officer has been qualified and authorized on a premium pay form to serve as
acting Sergeant.

3. An employee must spend a majority of the scheduled shift performing the
duties of the higher-level classification. Out-of-class or acting pay will be the
next highest pay step in the classification to which the employee is assigned.
In all cases, such pay will not be less than a five (5) percent increase.

In accordance with the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act (PEPRA),
working out of classification pay is not pensionable compensation for
employees who are “New Members” of CalPERS, as defined by California
Government Code Section 7522.04(f).

14.05 Call-back
14.05.01 Definition

Call-back is defined as any time including court appearances an employee is directed to
work and actually works for a period not contiguous with his/her regular shift. For
purposes of this Memorandum, the word contiguous will mean any more than fifteen (15)
minutes after the end of shift. If an employee is called in less than four (4) hours prior to
his/her regular shift, s/he will receive overtime pay only up to the start of the regular shift.
If an employee, who was called back to work and has completed his/her assignment
and left work is again called back to work, s/he will not receive another minimum if the
time of return is within the previous callback minimum.

An employee required to attend court under this provision, will not be required to perform
additional station work if the court assignment is less than four (4) hours.

When an employee is called back to work for any reason including a court appearance

while the employee is on pre-approved time off using vacation, holiday, or compensatory
hours, the employee will be compensated based on these call-back rules.

21
14.06

14.07

14.08

14.09

When an employee has completed an assigned shift, or is on a regular day off, and is
called by a superior officer or anyone acting at the direction of a superior officer, the
Chief of Police or his/her designee, such employee shall receive compensation in the form
of overtime pay. Compensation will be paid in one quarter (.25) hour increments based
upon the duration of the call. Such pay shall not be required for telephone calls involving
staffing availability, shift assignment, or shift coverage. Messages left on an employee’s
answering machine shall not qualify for payment unless the superior officer expressly
requires the call be returned.

14.05.02 Compensation

All callback hours shall be paid at the applicable overtime rate. A minimum of four (4)
hours of overtime compensation shall be paid for all callback periods of less than four (4)
hours.

Standby

Police Patrol Officers and Sergeants requested by police commanders to remain at home
and available for emergency call-back duty shall be compensated at time and one-half
with four (4) hours minimum.

Investigations Premium Pay

Sworn personnel assigned to the investigation section will be required to be on duty
assignment for call-back on a seven-day period rotational basis. During periods of duty
assignment, officers will be required to have an investigation vehicle and associated
equipment immediately available and either keep the Communications Center advised of
their location or maintain call-back availability by carrying a pager. Officers and
Sergeants assigned to the investigation section will receive five percent (5%) additional
compensation added to their base pay in lieu of duty assignment (on-call) pay.

Special Duty Pay

Unit employees scuba diving in the line of active duty (not training) and on orders from a
commanding officer shall be compensated at double-time and one-half their hourly rate,
with a minimum of four (4) hours. Sufficient training as determined by the Chief of
Police within the overall training program of the department shall be provided at City
expense for unit employees assigned such special duty.

Special Events

A special event is defined as an assignment in which the City is reimbursed by an
event’s sponsor, through the Finance Department, for police services. Officers assigned
to cover special events will be paid a minimum of four (4) hours overtime at one-and-a-
half times their hourly rate. Officers assigned to cover a special event during their
regularly scheduled shift, shall be compensated on a “straight time” basis for all hours
which fall within their regular shift. All hours worked outside of the officer’s regularly
scheduled shift, shall be compensated pursuant to Section 14.04.04(a) of this agreement.
Seniority sign-up will apply to all events not sponsored (all or in part) by the City of
Santa Cruz.

22
14.10

14.11

14.12

14.13

All other employment not meeting the guidelines of the above policy will be
considered outside employment and will be subject to approval in accordance with
Departmental policy.

Training Officer

At least seven (7) Police Patrol Officers and one (1) Community Service Officer, as
operational needs dictate and as determined by the Chief of Police, may be assigned
as Training Officers and shall receive a 5% differential of base pay for the duration of
this assignment.

If the Chief of Police determines seven (7) Patrol Training Officers are insufficient due to
the employment of new officers, this limit may be exceeded by the ratio of one Training
Officer to one new hire. The appointment of the additional Training Officers is subject to
the approval of the City Manager.

In the event that an officer who is not regularly assigned as a Training Officer - but is
a POST certified Training Officer - is assigned a trainee for an entire shift, they will
also receive a 5% differential of base pay for that shift. The department will make every
reasonable effort, however, to assign all trainees to regularly assigned Training
Officers. This section does not apply to trainees who are assigned only to complete a “ride-
along” with an officer.

Tuition Reimbursement

The City shall reimburse employees up to $500 per fiscal year for tuition and books upon
successful completion of City-approved college or university courses or other course
directly related to an employee’s job duties.

To be eligible for reimbursement, employees must receive approval of the Chief of Police
prior to attending classes and comply with applicable department and City regulations.

Bilingual Pay

Upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police and approval of the Human Resources
Director, the City shall provide a monthly allowance five percent (5%) differential of
base pay for bilingual speaking skills. To qualify for this compensation, employees must
be certified by the Human Resources Director as conversant in a foreign language utilized
frequently in the line of duty.

Motorcycle Allowance

A five percent (5%) differential of base pay shall be paid to officers and sergeants
regularly assigned by management to motorcycle duty.

The City shall provide, replace, or resole motorcycle boots and any other safety

equipment approved by the Chief of Police to all employees as determined necessary by
management who are approved to ride a motorcycle in an enforcement capacity.

23
14.14

14.15

14.16

14.17

Shift Differential

Employees whose regular scheduled shift includes 5 or more hours between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. shall receive a two and one half percent (2%%) shift
differential in addition to their regular base rate of pay.

Shift differential shall be paid for entire shifts worked and will not be paid for hours not
worked, regardless of paid status.

Uniform Allowance and Replacement

The Association agrees that the appearance and cleanliness of unit employees shall be
maintained in keeping with departmental standards. To this end the department will
maintain a uniform purchase for new hires, replacement and cleaning program. The
department will maintain administration procedures for the purchase and replacement of
uniforms. In addition, the City and Association agree unit employees will comply with
departmental standards with regard to appearance and cleanliness. The City will maintain
an account at a dry cleaning establishment located within the city of Santa Cruz. For its
part, the Association agrees its members will (a) deliver and retrieve uniforms from the
dry cleaning establishment, and (b) not do so while in uniform or a marked Police or City
vehicle. The City agrees to consider the use of a dry-cleaning pick-up and delivery service,
if it is cost effective.

The City agrees to replace uniforms on an as-needed basis, as determined by the Chief of
Police. It shall be the responsibility of each unit employee to arrange for purchasing,
fitting, pick up, delivery, return, repair and control of uniform items.

The parties agree that for PERS reporting purposes, the value of the uniform and cleaning
service is five hundred and twenty dollars ($520). Employees shall pay the employee
PERS cost of the value of cleaning service. Such payment shall be made through a
payroll deduction out to her-his paycheck each pay period. The amount of the
deduction shall be determined by multiplying the employee’s PERS contribution rate by
twenty dollars ($20).

Personal Property

Should a unit employee, while in the line of duty damage his or her watch,
prescription eyeglasses, or other personal property authorized for use by the department,
the City agrees to reimburse employee for the cost of replacement (in kind) up to $150
per incident. In the event the cost of repair or replacement exceeds $150, the employee
may be reimbursed for any additional sums that are found to be reasonable. The
reasonableness of any such additional sums shall be determined by the Chief of Police.
The decision of the Chief of Police is final and non-grievable.

K-9 Duty

Up to two (2) employees may be assigned by the Chief of Police to the K-9 unit as
handlers. Compensation for this assignment shall be in accordance with the agreements
and procedures included in Exhibit D (K-9 Agreement) of this Memorandum of

24
14.18

14.19

Understanding.

Education Incentive

Sworn personnel (Police Patrol Officers and Sergeants) are eligible for the following
education incentive compensation.

A. Police Officers
AA/AS Degree or Intermediate POST Certificate - 2.5% differential of base
pay
BA/BS Degree or Advanced POST Certificate - 5% differential of base pay

B. Police Sergeants
AA/AS Degree or Advanced POST Certificate - 2.5% differential of base pay

BA/BS Degree or POST Supervisory Certificate - 5% differential of base pay

Police Officers with an Advance POST Certificate who promote to Police Sergeant will
be allowed to maintain their Advance POST incentive pay for a maximum of twenty-four
(24) months to enable them to achieve eligibility criteria for a POST Supervisory
Certificate.

Employees are only eligible for one incentive program and these pay differentials will not
be combined. The education incentive is reportable as income to PERS.

Overpayments

The City will not attempt to recover overpayments made to employees as a result of an
error made by the City which are over twelve (12) months old. The Association and
those employees who receive overpayments acknowledge that repayments must be made
to the City by payroll deduction. The City will notify employees prior to the
implementation of such deductions. Deductions shall be no greater than 5% of gross
pay per pay period until repaid in full, without the employee’s consent.

SECTION 15.00 - HOLIDAYS

15.01

Holiday Hours & Scheduling

All employees shall be granted 104 hours of holiday on the first pay day after the start of
the fiscal year. This is to reflect the paid holidays currently observed by the City.

New Year’s Eve Day (1/2 day)
New Year’s Day

Martin Luther King’s Birthday
President’s Day

Memorial Day

Independence Day

Labor Day

Veterans’ Day

Thanksgiving Day

Friday after Thanksgiving

25
15.02

15.03

15.04

Christmas Eve (1/2 day)
Christmas Day

When a holiday falls on Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed. When a
holiday falls on Saturday, the proceeding Friday shall be observed.

Employees required or approved to work on any of the above-listed holidays or
employees whose regular day off falls on a holiday, shall receive equivalent time off
at a later date. Whenever possible, employees are expected to observe the City’s holiday
schedule by taking the actual holidays off, with pay.

Holiday Accrual

Employees shall accrue up to 104 hours of holiday pay and shall be credited with 104
hours on the first day of the pay period that includes July 1 of each year. Beginning with
the pay period that includes July 1, 2014, this amount shall be reduced to 80 hours. This
amount will be prorated for new hires. Employees will be permitted to use up to the
maximum amount available. Upon separation, employees shall receive the value of their
unused accrued holiday leave. Accumulation of holidays shall not exceed 104 hours
until the pay period that includes July 1, 2014 when the accumulation of holidays shall
not exceed 96 hours.

For the pay period that includes July 1, 2016, the number of hours accrued and credited
will revert to 104 with all other terms of this provision intact.

Holiday Carry-Over

Up to forty-eight (48) hours of unused holiday time will transfer to employees’ vacation
balances. At the end of this contract term, the number of hours that will transfer to
employees’ vacation balances will revert to forty (40).

Eligibility

To qualify for holiday pay, an employee must be on paid status on his/her last scheduled
workday before the holiday and his/her first scheduled day after the holiday.

SECTION 16.00 - VACATION

16.01

Accrual

Vacation accrual will be on a monthly basis beginning at date of hire. Employees must
be on paid status at least 50% of the pay period to accrue vacation leave. Upon
authorization by a manager, a probationary employee may use accrued vacation leave,
with an equal, corresponding extension of the probationary period of regular hours
worked.

Annual vacation accrual shall be based on continuous service, as follows:

26
16.02

16.03

16.04

Up to five (5) years: 80 hours
Six (6) to ten (10) years: 120 hours

Eleven (11) or more years: 120 hours, plus eight (8) hours for each year
of service after ten (10) years, to a maximum of 160
hours.

Rate of Maximum Vacation Accrual

Vacation accumulation may not exceed twice the annual rate of accrual, unless prior
written authorization for a specified amount of hours and a specified amount of time
is received from the Chief of Police and the Human Resources Director. Employees will
receive at least sixty (60) days’ notice prior to exceeding their maximum accrual rate.

Sell Back of Vacation

Subject to IRS regulations, during the first full pay period of November of each year,
employees with at least five (5) years of service may sell back up to forty (40) hours of
vacation time. In order to take advantage of this option, a balance of at least forty (40)
hours of vacation must be maintained after the vacation sell back.

Injury or Illness While on Vacation

An employee who becomes ill or is hospitalized while on vacation and provides a written
statement from a licensed medical practitioner to this effect shall have the period of
illness charged against sick leave and not vacation leave.

SECTION 17.00 - SICK LEAVE

17.01

17.02

Definition

The purpose of this article is to provide paid leave time to be used by employees in the
event of a non-work related illness, injury, or other medical necessity.

In the event that the City exercises its right to withhold immediate payment of
industrial disability benefits, and until such time that a coverage determination is
made, employees may elect to utilize accrued paid leave, including sick leave, for the
interim period.

Accrual

Full-time employees in paid status at least 50% of the pay period shall accrue sick leave
at the rate of eight (8) hours per month.

When accrued sick leave must be used, an employee will notify his/her immediate
supervisor of the cause of the leave and its probable duration at least two (2) hours prior
to the regular scheduled starting time.

Sick leave shall not be granted unless such report or advance reporting has been made,

27
17.03

17.04

provided; however, that the Chief of Police may grant an exception to this policy when it
is determined that the employee’s failure to notify was due to extreme circumstances
beyond the control of the employee.

Up to forty-eight (48) hours of accrued sick leave per calendar year may be used when
the employee’s personal attendance is required to care for an immediate family member
who is ill or injured. For the purposes of this provision, immediate family is defined
as a wife, husband, son, daughter, father, mother, or close relation residing in the
employee’s household. This forty-eight (48) hour limitation may be extended by the City
Manager with good cause.

An employee may utilize accrued sick leave for purposes of bereavement. A leave of
absence with pay of up to forty (40) hours per incident is available to an employee in the
event of a death in the employee’s family which shall, for the purpose of this article,
include spouse, parent, son, daughter, grandparent, sibling, mother-in-law or father-in-law,
registered principal domestic partner, grandchild or the employee or spouse, son-in-law,
daughter-in- law, grandparent-in-law, or a close relation residing in the employee’s
household. In rare cases when the individual has no other legal relationship other than a
foster or step-parent, the Human Resources Director or City Manager has the
discretion to approve that leave upon application.

In accordance with departmental time off procedures, employees may use up to twenty-
four (24) hours per fiscal year of their accrued sick leave for the purpose of personal
business which shall not include recreational activities.

Limitations
The Chief of Police may require an employee to submit verification of an illness or

injury from a licensed medical practitioner prior to any use of sick leave being authorized.

In cases of chronic absenteeism or medical work restrictions, the Chief of Police may
have an employee examined by a City-selected physician. The City shall pay the cost of
the any such medical exam.

Sick Leave Incentive Program

1. On an annual basis, employees who have accumulated more than 400 hours
of sick leave must choose one of the following options:

A. To receive a cash pay-off, or equivalent vacation hours, of all hours
in excess of 400 at the rate of 33% of their current rate of pay.

B. To “bank” all hours in excess of 400. Banked hours may not later
be converted to cash and will be used as sick leave only when all
other sick leave is exhausted.

2. Employees who have an excess of 400 hours of unbanked sick leave at the
time of separation from the City will receive a payoff of all hours over 400
hours at the rate of 33% of the employee rate of pay.

3. Employees who retire and are eligible for retiree health coverage, pursuant to

28
Section 15.05 of this agreement, shall be eligible to receive the equivalent
dollar credit for retiree health coverage at the rate of 33% of their current rate
of pay for all unused sick leave hours. This amount will be maintained by the
City for the reimbursement of retiree health coverage. (This section will not
be available to employees who chose to utilize the PERS sick leave Service
Credit option.)

SECTION 18.00 - LEAVES OF ABSENCE

18.01

18.02

18.03

Military Duty

An employee who is a member of the National Guard or any reserve component of the
armed services of the U.S. shall be granted up to thirty (30) days per year of paid leave
for any active duty scheduled during the employee’s regular work hours. The
employee must give his/her supervisor forty-eight (48) hours advance notification of the
need for such leave and must present a copy of the “notice” for such duty. All other
military leaves shall be granted pursuant to relevant state and federal statutes.

Workers’ Compensation

A non-safety employee who is unable to work due to a work-incurred illness or injury that
is compensable under the California Workers’ Compensation Act shall continue to receive
the full amount of their salary during the first thirty (30) calendar days of such absence.
City leave payments so made to the employee shall be decreased in the amount of any
temporary disability payments received by the employee so that the employee shall not
receive total payments in excess of his/her full salary.

After the first thirty (30) calendar days of such leave, an employee who is entitled to
continued temporary disability payments may use accumulated sick leave or vacation to
supplement such payments to an amount equal to his/her full salary. After depleting of
any accrued paid leaves the employee shall be eligible for benefits only in the amounts
prescribed by the workers’ compensation laws.

Safety employees shall receive workers’ compensation benefits pursuant to Section 4850
of the Labor Code.

Light duty assignments may be made in accordance with medical authorization.

Light Duty

The City recognizes the importance of providing support and encouragement to police
department employees who are recovering from an injury or illness in an effort to assist
in making a complete and healthy recovery. Therefore, the City agrees to temporarily
provide at least two (2) light duty assignments which are less strenuous and less hazardous
for police department employees who are recovering from an injury or illness,
including pregnancy. The availability of additional assignments is at the sole discretion
of the Chief of Police. Priority will be given to accommodating temporary light duty
requests from employees recovering from work-related injuries or illnesses. The intent
of a temporary light duty assignment is to provide modified work duties which are

29
18.04

18.05

beneficial to the employee by keeping him/her productively active, involved, and
informed in department activities, and beneficial to the City by the employee’s work
contributions and involvement during the recovery period. This is not intended to
deprive the employee of using accumulated sick time if s/he so desires. The temporary
assignment will be consistent with the employee’s physical abilities and department
needs. The modified duties will reflect recommendations and limitations prescribed by
the attending physician. Following are conditions for providing an employee with a light
duty assignment:

1. That the temporary assignment may result in a change of shift but not a
change in the employee’s schedule as defined in Section 13.02 (4 Day/10
Hour Plan). An employee may lose shift differential pay as a result of this
shift change.

2. That the duties to be performed in said temporary assignment shall be those
designated by the Chief of Police provided that the duties shall be consistent
with the written recommendations of the employee’s physician.

3. Said employee shall not be increased or reduced in pay or benefit solely by
virtue of said temporary assignment but may forfeit incentive pays if they are
no longer eligible.

4. Provided that the City may verify said disability by having said employee
examined by a physician of City’s choosing at City’s expense.

5. If an employee on temporary light duty assignment is required to remain
available by radio, cell phone, or other means, during his/her meal break then
the meal break will be paid. If an employee on temporary light duty
assignment is not required to remain available as above during his/her meal
break, then the meal break will be unpaid. Unpaid meal breaks will not
exceed thirty (30) minutes.

Medical or Personal Leave

Leave of absence without pay may be granted to an employee in a case of extended illness
or disability, personal emergency or other situation where such absence would not be
contrary to the best interests of the City. Such unpaid leave will only be granted after
an employee has depleted all appropriate paid leaves. The department head may grant a
leave of absence of up to thirty (30) consecutive calendar days; additional leave may only
be granted by the City Manager and may not exceed a total of twelve (12) months. No
vacation, holidays, sick leave, or any other paid benefit shall be accrued or earned during
such leave. All requests for unpaid leaves of absence must be made in writing and
include specific begin and end dates for the leave.

Denials of unpaid leaves of absence shall be given in writing and contain the reason
therefore.

Pregnancy Disability Leave

An employee may take a leave of absence of up to four (4) months in length for the
purpose of pregnancy disability leave. The City may request a licensed medical

30
18.06

practitioner’s opinion regarding any work restrictions that may exist prior to or after
delivery.

Requests for pregnancy disability leave must be made in writing to the Chief of Police at
least thirty (30) days in advance of the anticipated starting date. Such requests must
include specific begin and end dates for the leave. Starting dates should be as accurate
as possible barring any unforeseen medical issues related to the pregnancy or earlier or
later birth than expected. Any requests for extension of pregnancy disability leave must
be made in writing to the Chief of Police at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the
scheduled end of the existing leave.

The employee may elect to use any appropriate paid leave either before or after an
approved pregnancy disability leave, within the use limitations of these leave provisions.
No combination of pregnancy disability leave, family leave, sick leave, or vacation may
exceed one year total or seven (7) months post-partum.

Any additional post-partum leave, not to exceed one (1) year total, may be approved by
the City Manager or his designee after consideration of the nature of the request and the
operational needs of the department.

Upon return to work, the employee shall be assigned to the same position but not
necessarily to the same assignment.

Family Leave

In accordance with the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act and the California
Family rights Act, the City will grant job protected unpaid family and medical leave to
eligible employees for up to twelve (12) weeks, (continuous or cumulative), per twelve-
month calendar year period for any one or more of the following reasons:

A. The birth of a child and in order to care for such child or the placement of a
child with the employee for adoption or foster care (leave for this reason must
be taken within the twelve-month period following the child’s birth or
placement with the employee); or

B. In order to care for an immediate family member (spouse, domestic partner,
child, or parent) of the employee if such immediate family member has a
serious health condition; or

C. The employee’s own serious health condition that makes the employee unable
to perform the functions of his/her position.

D. Military family leave.
Conditions covering the leave shall include the following:

E. Eligible employee means having been employed by the City for twelve (12)
months and has worked for at least 1,250 hours during the twelve-month
period immediately preceding the commencement of the leave;

31
18.07

18.08

F. Medical verification is required for employee or ill family member for medical
leave period;

G. Employees are required to give at least thirty (30) days written notice in the
event of a foreseeable leave. In unexpected or unforeseeable situations, an
employee should provide as much written notice as is practicable.

H. Employees are required to use accrued vacation as a part of the family leave
period. Use of sick leave is not required, but may be used pursuant to the
applicable provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding.

I. Pregnancy disability is not covered under this section and is covered by the
California Fair Employment and Housing Act which allows up to four (4)
months of leave depending on the actual disability (see Section 14.04).

J. Employees retain “employee” status while on family care leave. The leave
does not constitute a break in service for purposes of longevity, and/or
seniority. Upon return to work, employee will be reinstated to an equivalent
position with equivalent pay and benefits.

K. Any request for additional leave may be made pursuant to Section 14.03.
Requests for leave time using multiple time off provisions may not exceed
the total amount allowed pursuant to Section 14.03.

L. Any other conditions or interpretations of this leave shall be based upon the
Federal Family and Medical Leave Act and the California Family Rights Act.

Continuation of Insurance Benefits during Unpaid Leaves of Absence

City-sponsored insurance benefits may be continued during unpaid leave of absence
under the following conditions:

18.07.01 Personal Leave

The City shall continue to pay benefit premiums during a personal leave of thirty (30)
calendar days or less.

For leaves of more than thirty (30) calendar days the following shall apply:

Employees may continue premium payments at their own cost, in accordance with
appropriate PERS or other appropriate medical plan provisions.

18.07.02 Family Leave

Benefit premiums shall be made in accordance with the Federal Family and Medical
Leave Act and the California Family Rights Act. Under the current law, the City will
continue to maintain coverage under the same conditions as coverage would have been
provided if the employee had been continuously employed during the leave period.

Blood Donations

An employee may be granted paid release time of up to a maximum of one (1) hour
for donating blood during regularly scheduled hours of work. The length of such leave

32
18.09

must be approved by the supervisor and is dependent upon the nature and scheduling of
the work performed and the travel distance required.

Absence for Examination

An employee will be granted paid release time to participate in any part of an
examination process for promotion or transfer within the City workforce that is
scheduled during the employee’s regular hours of work. The employee shall notify
his/her immediate supervisor twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such an absence. In
the event operational necessity as determined by the Chief of Police precludes an
employee from being granted paid release time to participate in any part of an
examination process, the city shall make accommodations to offer the affected employee
an opportunity to complete the testing process.

SECTION 19.00 - BENEFITS

19.01

Medical Plan

The City will provide medical insurance through the California Public Employees’
Retirement System (CalPERS). The City will contribute a monthly amount to
CalPERS pursuant to Government Code Section 22892 of the Public Employees Medical
and Hospital Care Act (PEMHCA).

In accordance with IRS Code Section 125, the City will provide a flexible benefits
plan (“cafeteria plan”) to all eligible employees. If an employee elects to participate in a
medical plan, the maximum monthly City contributions to the cafeteria plan is the cost of
the Blue Shield Access+ HMO Plan (for the Bay Area/Sacramento region) less the
following employee contribution amounts:

Employee Only: $0
Employee and One Dependent: $37.80
Family: $45.00

In no event will the maximum monthly City contribution exceed the premium for the plan
in which the employee is enrolled. In no event will employees be credited with and
receive cash back based on the plan chosen.

Each unit member participating in a medical plan will make an additional $35.00
contribution per pay period towards the cost of health care benefits through the end of
this agreement. This pre-tax contribution is made during pay periods where employee
deductions for health care benefits are taken (24 pay periods).

19.01.01 Optional Benefits

Through the cafeteria plan, employees may enroll in the following optional benefits and
elect to pay premiums on a pre-tax basis:

1. Medical reimbursement account (MRA)
2. Dependent care assistance plan (DCAP)
3. Cancer and Critical Illness Protection Insurance

33
19.02

19.03

19.04

Employees may also enroll in the following optional benefits and elect to pay premiums
on a post-tax basis:

4. Additional life insurance
5. Accident protection insurance
6. Long term care insurance

Employees may elect to waive City medical coverage and receive a cash benefit. In
order to receive the medical waiver benefit, the employee must provide proof to the City
of other current medical coverage. Full-time employees who waive medical coverage
are eligible to receive $200 per month; part-time employees shall receive a pro-rated
amount, based upon their full-time equivalency (FTE). The medical waiver amount may
be applied toward the purchase of any pre-tax or post-tax optional benefits, or paid as a
taxable cash benefit.

Employees receiving the medical waiver benefit must notify the Human Resources
Department if they cease to be covered by any other medical plan, thereby making them
ineligible for the medical waiver benefit.

Principal Domestic Partners

The City will provide medical, dental, and vision benefits to employees with Principal
Domestic Partners equivalent to those provided to an employee’s spouse. Employees
may enroll their eligible Principal Domestic Partners and the eligible dependents of their
Principal Domestic Partners subject to eligibility requirements established either by
CalPERS or the City and subject to tax regulations of the State of California and the
Internal Revenue Service of the United States government.

Retiree Medical Plan

Covered employees who retire under the provisions of the City’s contract with CalPERS,
are currently eligible to continue CalPERS medical coverage. The City will continue
contribute a monthly amount to CalPERS pursuant to Government Code Section 22892
of the Public Employees Medical and Hospital Care Act (PEMHCA).

The City contribution will be:
2013: $115.00 per month
2014 and beyond: CPI adjustment as determined by CalPERS

Retiree Medical Incentive

Employees currently on the City’s retiree medical plan and future covered employees
who receive a regular service retirement from PERS and have at least five (5) years of
continued service with the City and are at least fifty (50) years of age will receive a
retiree medical incentive in the amount of $139 per month in addition to the City’s
contribution listed in Section 19.03 (Retiree Medical Plan). This incentive will continue
as long as the employee continues PERS medical coverage through the City of Santa
Cruz and until such time the retiree is eligible for Medicare (currently age 65) or other
federal or state health programs, solely on account of age.

34
19.05

19.06

19.07

19.08

Retirees eligible for the PERS retiree incentive listed above, with more than twenty (20)
years of City service, will have their medical incentive increased to 75% the cost of the
employee-only coverage of the second highest PERS HMO plans from only among those
plans available in Santa Cruz County at the time of ratification of this agreement (less the
contribution listed in 19.03 (Retiree Medical Plan).

Dental and Vision Program

The City shall provide a dental plan for employees and their eligible dependents at no
premium cost to employees with the following minimum benefit provisions:

In-Network Out-of-Network
Annual Deductible None None
Annual Benefit $2,500 per person $2,500 per person
Maximum, Excluding
Orthodontia for Children
Preventative 100% 100%
Basic Benefits 90% 85%
Prosthodontic Benefits 60% 60%
Orthodontia 50% up to $2,500 50% up to $2,500
lifetime maximum per __ lifetime maximum per
person, up to age 23 person, up to age 23

The City shall provide a vision plan for employees and their eligible dependents at no
premium cost to employees with the following minimum benefit provisions:

Co-pays $7.50 (does not apply to contacts)
Exam 100% every 12 months
Prescription Lenses 100% every 12 months
Frames 100% up to$105 plus 20% off any out-of-
pocket costs every 24 months
Contacts 100% (in lieu of glasses) up to $100 every 12 months
Long Term Disability

The City shall contribute full cost of the City-sponsored long-term disability program.
This benefit shall be considered taxable income.

Life Insurance

The City shall contribute the full cost toward the following City-sponsored term life
insurance program:

Basic Life: $50,000

Counseling Services

a. Critical Incident Stress Debriefing (CISD)
The City agrees to provide adequate funding for the duration of this contract
so as to make available the necessary Critical Incident Stress Debriefing

35
counseling utilizing the service of the present provider, except that the City
may change providers after consultation with the Police Officer Association.

b. Psychological Counseling

The City agrees to provide sufficient funding for the duration of this contract
for psychological counseling services which will address duty related
stress/trauma. Counseling services made available will also include an alcohol
abuse treatment component. Maintenance of confidentiality will be held
within the legal confines of the client-therapist relationship. The provider
shall supply, on an annual basis, all current documentation to confirm
appropriate credentials and liability coverage. The provider of this service
shall be mutually selected by the City and the Police Officers’ Association.

SECTION 20.00 - EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITY

In case any officer is named in a civil suit resulting from his/her official duties with the City, the
City will defend such officer within the limit of the law.

SECTION 21.00 - VESTS

The City agrees to provide safety vests for Police Patrol Officer, Sergeants, and Community
Service Officers. Police Patrol Officers and sergeants agree to wear department issued fitted
safety vests at all times while in uniform. The wearing of safety vests shall be optional for
officers assigned to work in plain clothes. Upon the receipt of sufficient medical evidence, an
employee may be exempted from this provision by the Chief of Police.

SECTION 22.00 - SERGEANT PROMOTIONAL EXAM

When a promotional eligible list (as defined in the Personnel Rules and Regulations) is used to
fill a Sergeants position and that promotional list includes employees represented by this
agreement, the Human Resources Director shall certify the top five (5) eligibles, in alphabetical
order, if there be that number, on the relevant promotional list to the Chief of Police. If there
be more than one vacancy in the same class, the Human Resources Director shall certify one
additional eligible for each additional vacancy, if there be candidates available on the eligible list.

SECTION 23.00 - EMERGENCY MEALS

Employees will be entitled to emergency meals in accordance with current practice and
relevant department and City regulations.

SECTION 24.00 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

24.01 Purpose

To assure prompt and fair treatment of employee grievances related to employment.
Any employee covered by this Memorandum may file a grievance.

36
24.02 Definition

A grievance is defined as an alleged violation, misinterpretation or misapplication of the
provisions of this Memorandum, the City’s Personnel Rules and Regulations or the
department’s general orders.

24.03 Limitations
1. A grievant may be represented by any representative of his or her
choosing in preparing and presenting a grievance.
2. No reprisal shall result against any employee who presents a bona fide
grievance under this procedure.
3. Time limits may be extended by written mutual agreement of the parties.

4. A grievance shall be considered settled in favor of the other party, if at any
step, a decision is not rendered or appealed within the specified time limit.

5. Only upon mutual written agreement between the parties may Step I of the
grievance procedure be waived.

24.04 Procedures

Step I

The grievant will first attempt to resolve the grievance through informal discussions with
successive levels of supervision beginning with his/her immediate supervisor through the
chain of command exclusive of the Chief of Police. These discussions must be
initiated within ten (10) workdays of when the employee knew, or reasonably should
have known of the incident upon which the grievance is based. Every attempt will be
made by the parties to settle the issue at this level.

Step II

If the grievance is not resolved through the informal discussions the employee may,
within ten (10) workdays after the informal discussion, submit a written appeal to the
Chief of Police.

The written appeal must contain in clear, factual and concise language:

1. A brief statement as to the date of the occurrence on which the grievance is
based and the facts as the grievant sees them.

2. The rule, regulation, act or law enforcement code of ethics on which the
grievance is based.

The action the grievant believes will resolve the grievance.
4. Signature of the employee.
The Chief of Police shall have ten (10) workdays following receipt of the appeal to

review the matter and prepare a written response. Copies shall go to the parties
involved and the Human Resources Department.

37
Step II

If the grievance is not resolved, the grievant may, within ten (10) workdays following
receipt of the Chief’s response, appeal to the City Manager or his/her representative,
stating in writing the basis for the appeal.

The City Manager or his/her representative shall set a hearing within ten (10) working
days of receiving the appeal. The grievant, his/her representative and other parties
summoned by the City Manager or representative shall attend the hearing and present
testimony or evidence concerning the grievance. The parties may bring a reasonable
number of witnesses to the hearing.

The City Manager or his/her representative shall render a written decision to all parties
directly involved within fifteen (15) working days following the hearing.

Step IV
If the grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of the grievant at the conclusion of Step

Ill, the grievant may appeal the decision of the City Manager to a neutral arbitrator,
provided he/she so informs the City in writing within ten (10) working days following
receipt of the City Manager’s decision.

Within ten (10) working days from the date of receipt of the appeal, the parties may
mutually agree on a neutral party from an independent source to serve as an arbitrator. In
the event the parties fail to agree on the neutral party, they shall immediately thereafter
jointly request the California State Mediation and Conciliation Service to submit to them
a list of five (5) persons qualified and available to act as arbitrator.

If such a list is requested from the State Mediation and Conciliation Service, the parties
within ten (10) working days of receipt of the list, shall mutually agree upon the person
on the list who shall be the Arbitrator. If one person is not mutually agreed upon, the
parties shall within ten (10) days after receipt of the list of names alternately strike two
(2) names from such list with the last remaining name to be the person serving as
Arbitrator. The party having first choice to strike a name from the list shall be determined
by lot.

The Arbitrator shall have no authority to add to, detract from, alter, amend or modify any
provision of this Agreement, or impose on any party hereto a limitation or obligation not
explicitly provided for in this Agreement, or to alter any wage rate or wage structure.
The decision of the Arbitrator shall be rendered after the evidence and arguments are
presented to him/her by the parties in the presence of each other and in post-hearing
briefs, if necessary. The decision of the Arbitrator shall be final and binding upon the
parties.

The Arbitrator is requested to expedite the decision as the parties normally expect a
decision to be issued within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the hearing.

The Arbitrator’s expenses, if any, shall be borne equally by the parties. Each party shall
bear the cost of its own representation.

38
SECTION 25.00 - DISCIPLINARY APPEALS PROCEDURE

25.01

25.02

Definition

For the purposes of this article, disciplinary action shall mean suspension, demotion,
disciplinary reduction in salary or discharge.

The appeal procedure described herein shall apply to cases of disciplinary action
affecting regular employees. It shall not be applicable to probationary employees.
Employees have the right to representation at any or all stages of the appeal process.

Pre-Action Procedure

Step 1

Prior to imposing disciplinary action, the supervisor shall first provide the employee a
preliminary written notice of the proposed action stating the effective date and the
specific grounds and particular facts upon which the action will be taken. The employee
shall have access to any known written materials, reports or documents upon which the
action is based. If the employee decides to exercise his/her right to respond to the charges
(Skelly hearing), s/he shall advise the Chief of Police of his/her desire to exercise his/her
rights within five (5) working days from receipt of notice. The Chief of Police and the
employee (or the employee’s representative) shall then schedule the Skelly hearing within
five (5) working days of the employee’s notification of his/her request to have a Skelly
hearing. If the department head is personally involved in the initial investigation and
notice process, the City Manager or Human Resources Director shall appoint a designee
to hear the response.

The employee may request an extension of the time to respond for justifiable
reasons.

Failure to respond within the time specified will result in the employee’s waiver or
his/her procedural rights and final action will be taken.

Step II

Following a review of a proposed disciplinary action, the Chief of Police, within five (5)
working days of receiving the employee’s response, shall render a written decision and
send it by registered mail or personal delivery to the employee. A copy shall also be
mailed to the employee’s representative.

The employee has the right, within five (5) working days after receiving the decision, to
file a request for appeal with the City Manager. The appeal shall be a written statement,
signed by the appellant, explaining the matter appealed from, stating the action
desired by the appellant, with his/her reasons, therefore, and stating that the pre-action
procedures have been exhausted.

If, within the five-day appeal period, the employee involved does not file such appeal,

unless good cause for the failure is shown, the Chief of Police’s decision shall be final and
shall take effect as prescribed.

39
25.03 Post Action Appeal

Step III

If the employee files a timely appeal, the City Manager shall, within ten (10) working
days after receiving the appeal, designate a hearing officer who shall schedule a hearing
not less than ten (10) working days from the date the appeal was received.

The hearing officer may conduct such independent investigation of the matter as he/she
deems necessary. The appellant shall be given the opportunity to answer or present
evidence in opposition to the findings of this independent investigation.

The appellant shall appear personally at the scheduled hearing unless physically unable to
do so. The appellant or his/her representative may produce relevant oral or documentary
evidence at the hearing.

Within fifteen (15) working days following the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a
written decision to all parties involved. The hearing officer has the authority to
affirm, repeal or modify the disciplinary action.

For discipline equivalent to the severity of suspension of three (3) days or less, there shall
be no appeal beyond Step III and the City Manager’s decision shall be final.

Step IV

If the appeal (except as exempted above) is not resolved to the satisfaction of the appellant
at the conclusion of Step III, the employee may appeal the decision of the City Manager
to a neutral arbitrator, provided it so informs the City Manager in writing within ten (10)
working days following receipt of the City Manager’s decision.

Within ten (10) working days from the date of receipt of the appeal, the parties may
mutually agree on a neutral party from an independent source to serve as an arbitrator. In
the event the parties fail to agree on the neutral party, they shall immediately thereafter
jointly request the California State Mediation and Conciliation Service to submit to them
a list of five (5) persons qualified and available to act as arbitrator.

If such a list is requested from the State Mediation and Conciliation Service, the parties
within ten (10) working days of receipt of the list, shall mutually agree upon the person
on the list who shall be the arbitrator. If one person is not mutually agreed upon, the
parties shall within ten (10) days after receipt of the list of names alternately strike two
(2) names from such list with the last remaining name to be the person serving as
arbitrator. The party having first choice to strike a name from the list shall be determined
by lot.

The arbitrator shall have no authority to add to, detract from, alter, amend, or modify any
provision of this agreement, or impose on any party hereto a limitation or obligation
not explicitly provided for in this agreement, or to alter any wage rate or wage
structure. The decision of the arbitrator shall be rendered after the evidence and
arguments are presented to him/her by the parties in the presence of each other and in
post-hearing briefs, if necessary. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding

40
upon the parties.

The arbitrator is requested to expedite the decision as the parties normally expect a
decision to be issued with fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the hearing.

The arbitrator's expenses shall be borne equally by the parties. Except that each party
shall bear the cost of its own representation.

SECTION 26.00 - WRITTEN REPRIMANDS

A written reprimand may be issued by an employee’s supervisor if an employee has violated a
City rule, provision of the M.O.U., or if his/her performance is in need of improvement. Written
reprimands shall be placed in the employee’s personnel file for a period not to exceed five (5)
years, after which they will be destroyed. An employee shall have the right to prepare a written
response to the reprimand and have said response placed in his/her personnel file. An employee
may appeal the supervisor’s decision to issue a written reprimand to the Chief of Police by filing
a written appeal to the Chief of Police within ten (10) working days of receipt of the
reprimand. The written appeal may include a request to present the appeal orally to the Chief of
Police. If the Chief is not reasonably available, s/he will render a decision from the written
appeal. An employee may request an extension of the time to respond for justifiable reasons.

The Chief of Police’s decision regarding the written reprimand shall be final; unless, the
reprimand originated with the Chief of Police in which case the employee shall have the right to
appeal the department head’s decision to the City Manager.

SECTION 27.00 - ENFORCEMENT OF TERMS

The Association agrees to enforce the terms of this Memorandum and recognizes the right of
management to institute a grievance against the Association in the event the Association does
not, through a member, comply with this Memorandum.

SECTION 28.00 - SEVERABILITY

This Memorandum is subject to all current, future and applicable federal and state laws,
state regulations, the Santa Cruz Charter, and the State Constitution.

Should any of the provisions herein contained be rendered or declared invalid by reason of State
or Federal legislation or court action, such invalidations of such part or portions hereof shall not
invalidate the remaining portions hereof and they shall remain in full force and effect, insofar as
such remaining portions are severable.

SECTION 29.00 - LAYOFF POLICY & PROCEDURE (SIDE LETTER)

All represented employees shall be subject to the layoff policy and procedure provided in
this section.

41
29.01

29.02

29.03

29.04

Layoffs

The City reserves the right to reduce its workforce by layoff of employees for reasons of
economy or changes in departmental operations. When one or more employees assigned
to the same classification within the department are to be laid off, the order of layoff shall
be as follows:

Casual on-call
Temporary

Casual, less than half time
Probationary

Regular

YRWNP

The order of layoffs shall be governed by seniority in classification from the date of hire
in the classified position.

Bumping

Bumping is defined as a voluntary movement of an employee to be laid off from
his/her current classification to a previously held lower classification or reclassified
position held by an employee with less seniority. Bumping privileges may be exercised
within the Police Department. An employee with sufficient seniority to bump an
employee in a lower classification shall bump the least senior person in that classification.

For bumping purposes, seniority shall be defined as time in the affected classification
added to time in a directly related higher classification.

Notification

Employees to be laid off shall be given not less than fifteen (15) business days written
notice prior to the reduction in force. An employee wishing to bump to a lower
classification shall provide written notice to the City within ten (10) days of receiving their
layoff notice.

Reinstatement

Should there be a vacancy in the classification from which an employee was laid off
within thirty-six (36) months the employee shall be eligible for reinstatement. It shall be
the employee’s responsibility to notify the Human Resources Department of his/her
current address. Every effort shall be made to notify the affected individual of any
reinstatement opportunity. Reinstatement shall be in the reverse order of layoff.

SECTION 30.00 - POLICE DEPARTMENT RESOURCE ALLOCATION COMMITTEE

The parties shall convene an Advisory Police Department Resource Allocation Committee
(“Committee”) to explore and discuss resource allocation within the Santa Cruz Police
Department. The Committee meetings shall not constitute “meet & confer” as defined by the
Meyers-Millas-Brown Act, but is intended to serve as a collaborative effort to ensure officer
safety, minimize waste, improve efficiency, and identify the most desirable uses of available

42
resources.

The Committee shall consist of at least two (2) members of the Association and at least two (2)
swom members of SCPD management. The parties agree that committee members may change
depending on the subject matter. Any findings, recommendations, or conclusions of the
Committee are advisory and shall not be binding. The Committee shall meet a minimum of twice
per year and may be requested by either party.

43
DATED:

POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
OF THE CITY OF SANTA CRUZ

Mark Eveleth

Joe Hernandez

Carter Jones

44

CITY OF SANTA CRUZ

Tina Shull

Timothy Davis

Marcus Pimentel
501

503

504

505

506

CITY OF SANTA CRUZ

POLICE CLASSIFICATIONS

Community Service Officer I
Police Officer Trainee
Police Patrol Officer

Police Sergeant

Victim Advocate

45

EXHIBIT A
EXHIBIT B

COUNCIL POLICY 25.2

POLICY TITLE DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT POLICY

 

POLICY STATEMENT:

It is the policy of the City of Santa Cruz to maintain and promote a working environment free from
discrimination and harassment; and to provide all current and prospective employees with equal
opportunity in employment regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, religion,
disability, medical condition, sex, gender (including gender identity and gender expression),
physical characteristics, marital status, age, sexual orientation, organizational affiliation or veteran
status (later referred to as “Protected Categories”).

This policy pertains to all aspects of employment with the City or the application for employment
with the City including, but not limited to, recruitment, selection, placement, assignment,
compensation, benefits, training, transfer, promotion, evaluation, discipline, and termination.

Definitions:

Discrimination as used in this policy is defined as the treatment or consideration of, or making a
distinction in favor of or against, an employee on the basis of the above listed protected categories
including but not limited to any of the following forms:
a) basing an employment decision on job applicant’s or employee’s protected status
b) treating an applicant or employee differently with regard to any aspect of employment
because of their protected status
c) engaging in harassment, as more specifically defined below
d) taking adverse employment action (i.e. demotion, transfer, discipline, termination)
against an employee based on the employee opposing discrimination in the workplace;
assisting, supporting or associating with a member of a protected category who
complains about discrimination, or assisting in an investigation of discrimination.

Harassment as used in this policy is defined as the persistent disturbance or irritation of an employee
on the basis of the above listed protected categories including but not limited to any of the following
forms:

a) verbal harassment such as epithets, derogatory comments or slurs;

b) physical acts such as assault, impeding or blocking movement;

c) visual insults such as derogatory posters, drawings or photographs;

d) unwanted sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other acts of a sexual nature.

Employee as used in this policy is defined as an individual performing business activities under
direct supervision of another City employee and includes full time, part time, temporary employees
and volunteers.

Equal Employment Opportunity Committee (EEOC) as used in this policy is an advisory body
consisting of nine (9) members including representatives from the community appointed by the City

 

46
Council, employees appointed by the City Manager and employees appointed by various labor

groups

Responsibilities:

1. The City of Santa Cruz shall take reasonable steps to prevent discrimination and harassment
from occurring in the employment environment, including the following:

a)
b)
°°
qd)

e)

affirmatively raising the subject of discrimination and harassment;

expressing strong disapproval;

maintaining and developing appropriate sanctions;

informing employees of their right to raise and how to raise the issue of discrimination
and harassment under the law;

maintaining and developing methods to sensitize all concerned.

Such discrimination or harassment shall not be tolerated, condoned or trivialized. The City is
committed to take action (against any harasser) which will end the discriminating or harassing
conduct. If a City employee, the harasser shall be subjected to appropriate discipline, including
possible dismissal, upon consideration of the findings and recommendations of the City
Manager or his/her representative.

2. The City Manager shall fully accept and support the City’s commitment to prevent
discrimination and harassment as a means to assure full equal employment opportunity for all
prospective and current employees including the following:

a)
b)

°
qd)

e)

defining and assigning specific responsibilities throughout the organization for the
development, implementation, and monitoring of this policy;

appointing one department head and three employee representatives to the EEO
Committee;

ensuring all department heads support this policy;

reviewing the recommendations of the EEO Coordinator on the resolution of complaints
appealed under the Administrative Procedure Order APO) Discrimination/Harassment
Policy Implementation and Complaint Procedure, and making final decisions in each
such complaint;

ensuring that an EEO Report is completed and submitted annually to the City Council.

3. The Administrative Services Department (ASD) Director shall be responsible for:

 

a)
b)

9°

qd)

e)

ensuring that this policy, its definition of discrimination and harassment, and the
complaint procedures are disseminated to all employees;

providing guidance, training sessions and assistance to department heads, managers,
supervisors and employees on dealing with discrimination and harassment within their
areas of responsibility;

investigating, resolving and making findings and recommendations on complaints of
discrimination and harassment that are reported according to established informal and
formal grievance procedures as set forth in Administrative Procedure Order (APO)
Discrimination/Harassment Policy Implementation and Complaint Procedure;
coordinating the annual EEO report, to include data on the make-up of the City
workforce and the representation of protected classes, distributing the report to the City
Council, City staff, the public and federal and state agencies as requested or required;
regularly reviewing and revising personnel policies, procedures, and practices to
eliminate non-job-related criteria, minimize the opportunity for discrimination and

47
harassment, and ensure compliance with all legal requirements for equal employment
opportunity; designing, implementing, and monitoring a recruitment program to draw all
qualified applicants;

f) designating an EEO Coordinator, who will assist the ASD Director with EEO related
activities and staff the EEO Committee.

4. Department Heads, Managers and Supervisors shall all be responsible for:

a) giving their full support to this policy through active cooperation, leadership, and
personal example;

b) informing employees in their respective departments or areas of responsibility of their
rights and responsibilities regarding discrimination and harassment under this policy;

c) ensuring that their employees have equal access to training and promotional
opportunities;

d) acting to prevent discrimination and harassment of any employee;

e) cooperating with the ASD Director in resolving complaints involving employees in their
respective departments.

4. Employees of the City shall be responsible for lending their personal support and cooperation in
maintaining equal employment opportunities in the City. Employees shall cooperate fully with
all investigations of discrimination and harassment and implementation of remedial measures
and shall not retaliate against complainants or witnesses. All employees shall attend sexual
harassment and cultural diversity training.

5. The EEOC shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining to EEO
and be responsible for serving as a communication channel between City employees, the
community, the City Manager, and the EEO Coordinator on any EEO activities and concerns.

Additional Applications and Considerations:

 

Complaints may be filed by any individual who feels discriminated against or harassed, or a
representative of their choice, on their behalf. The procedure for resolving complaints
alleging discrimination or harassment are set forth in APO Discrimination/Harassment
Policy Implementation and Complaint Procedure.

Contracts with the City of Santa Cruz which contain an equal employment opportunity/non-
discrimination clause shall also include language which requires those contractors to be
responsible for ensuring that effective policies and procedures concerning the prevention of
discrimination and harassment exist in their companies.

All Memoranda of Understanding entered into by the City and any employee organization
shall contain an appropriate non-discrimination/harassment clause.

In applying this policy, the rights of free speech and association shall be accommodated
consistently with the intent of this policy. Nothing in these regulations may be construed as
limiting the City's right to take reasonable disciplinary measures which do not discriminate
on a basis enumerated in this policy.

Sexual harassment prevention and cultural diversity awareness training is mandatory for all

48
City employees and City Councilmembers.

e All City employment announcements, brochures, procedures, advertisements, and
application forms will state that the City is an Equal Opportunity Employer. The Human
Resources Division will also inform all outreach recruitment and referral sources of the
City’s Discrimination and Harassment Policy and request that sources actively recruit and
refer qualified applicants from all sectors of the community.

e In support of recruitment and retention efforts, City management shall consider the viability
of participating in or developing supportive programs on such areas as: job-related skill
training and education, job development, career counseling, transportation, day care, health
care.

e Where groups of employees are featured in the City’s publications and communications (i.e.,
text and photographs), insofar as possible the materials should illustrate that the City’s
workforce is as diverse as the populace it serves.

AUTHORIZATION: Council Policy Manual Update of November 17, 1998
HISTORY: Revision by Resolution No. NS-28,533 July 24, 2012

(CityPublic)M:\Agenda\View\Council Policies\25-02.doc

49
EXHIBIT C

City of Santa Cruz II-1A
Administrative Procedure Order
Section II, #1A (January 30, 2014)

SUBJECT: DISCRIMINATION/HARASSMENT POLICY IMPLEMENTATION AND
COMPLAINT PROCEDURE

 

PURPOSE

The purpose of this document is to confirm the City’s commitment to prohibit and prevent unlawful
discrimination and harassment in employment; and provide a City complainant an investigation
procedure to resolve complaints of alleged discrimination or harassment in violation of the law or
City Council Policy 25.2 (Discrimination and Harassment Policy).

POLICY STATEMENT

It is the policy of the City of Santa Cruz to maintain and promote a working environment free from
discrimination and harassment; and to provide all current and prospective employees with equal
opportunity in employment regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, religion,
disability, medical condition, sex, gender (including gender identity and gender expression),
physical characteristics, marital status, age, sexual orientation, organizational affiliation, or veteran
status (later referred to collectively as “Protected Categories”).

This policy is promulgated in recognition of the fact that discrimination and harassment of the type
prohibited by this policy, if allowed to exist, not only violates Federal, State and municipal law but
also serves to undermine employee integrity, create low employee morale, reduce employee
productivity, and cause skilled and valuable workers to leave their City employment. All of this, in
turn, is detrimental to the general health and welfare of the community, which depends upon a
highly motivated and skilled body of City employees to deliver essential municipal services.

The City Council acknowledges and understands that in order to implement a non-
discrimination/non-harassment policy, it is essential that all persons who witness or experience
discrimination or harassment report that discrimination or harassment immediately in order to
facilitate early, effective, efficient, and impartial investigation and intervention by the City.
Accordingly, any retaliation against a person for filing a discrimination or harassment complaint,
reporting discrimination or harassment which he or she has witnessed, or assisting in a
discrimination or harassment investigation is strictly prohibited. Employees found to have
participated in retaliatory action in contravention of this policy shall, therefore, be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including termination.

In implementing the policy, the rights of free speech and association shall be accommodated in a

manner consistent with applicable Federal and State law and in a manner consistent with the intent
of the policy.

50
DISSEMINATION OF POLICY AND TRAINING

 

All employees, supervisors, and managers shall receive a copy of this APO and City Council Policy
25.2 and shall also attend sexual harassment and cultural diversity training according to the
following schedule:
1) All new employees — Harassment and Cultural Diversity courses within the first year of hire.
2) Supervisors — Harassment training within six months of gaining supervisory responsibilities
and a refresher no less frequently than every two years.

Posters explaining local, State, and Federal non-discrimination laws will be prominently displayed in
the Human Resources Office. The City’s EEO Policy will also be posted on the Human Resources
Office bulletin board and the City’s internal and external websites.

REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION FOR DISABILITY (as required by the Americans with
Disabilities Act)

 

Disability is defined as: a) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more
major life activities; b) having a documented record of such an impairment; or
c) being regarded as having such an impairment.

Accommodation is any change in the work environment or in the way things are customarily done
that enables an individual with a disability to enjoy equal employment opportunities. It means
modifications or adjustments to: a) a job application process to enable an individual with a
disability to be considered for the position; b) the work environment in which a position is
performed so that a person with a disability can perform the essential functions of the position; and
c) enable individuals with disabilities to enjoy equal benefits and privileges of employment as
employees without disabilities enjoy.

1. Inclusions
Accommodation includes making existing facilities and equipment used by employees readily
accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. Accommodation applies to: a) all
employment decisions and to the job application process; b) all services and programs provided
in connection with employment;
c) non-work facilities provided in connection with employment; and d) known disabilities only.

2. Exclusions
Accommodation is not required if: a) it eliminates essential functions of a position from the
person’s job; or b) adjustments or modifications requested are primarily for the benefit of the
person with a disability. The law does not require an accommodation that imposes an “undue
hardship” on the operation of the City. Undue hardship means significant difficulty or expense
incurred in the provision of accommodation relative to the operation of the City’s program and
includes, but is not limited to, financial difficulty. Undue hardship refers to any accommodation
that would be unduly costly, extensive, substantial, disruptive, or that would fundamentally alter
the nature or operation of the City. Whether a particular accommodation will impose an undue
hardship is determined on a case-by-case basis. The following factors will be considered in
determining whether an accommodation would create undue hardship: a) the nature and cost of
the accommodation; b) the financial resources of the City; c) the number of employees; and d)
the type of operations of the City, including the composition and functions of its workforce.

51
3. Determining the Appropriate Accommodation

Where a particular accommodation would result in an undue hardship, the City must determine
if another accommodation is available that would not result in an undue hardship. If a qualified
individual with a disability requests the provision of a reasonable accommodation, the City shall
engage in an informal, interactive process with the person with a disability which identifies the
precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential accommodations that could
overcome those limitations. The accommodation process shall generally involve five (5) steps.

e First, the City shall analyze the particular job at issue and determine its purpose and
essential functions.

e Second, the City shall consult with the individual with a disability to ascertain the precise
job-related limitations imposed by the individual’s disability.

e Third, the City shall consult with the individual with a disability and, if desired by the
agency, the appropriate rehabilitation or ergonomics consultant to identify potential
accommodations and the necessary modifications.

e Fourth, the City shall assess the effectiveness of each potential accommodation with
regard to enabling the individual to perform the essential functions of the position.

e Finally, the City shall consider the preference of the individual to be accommodated and
select and implement the accommodation that is most appropriate for both the employee
and the agency.

DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT COMPLAINT PROCEDURE

This complaint procedure is available to City of Santa Cruz employees and individuals who believe
that they have been subjected to discrimination and/or harassment in relation to employment with
the City of Santa Cruz.

Complainants, and employees alleged to have engaged in discrimination or harassment, may choose
to be represented at any or all steps in the complaint process.

I.

Filing a Complaint
Complaints may be submitted to an employee’s immediate supervisor, any supervisor or

manager within or outside the department, the department head or the Human Resources
Director within one (1) year of the date the alleged action occurred. Any City of Santa Cruz
supervisor, manager, or department head who receives a discrimination or harassment complaint
shall notify the Human Resources Director immediately upon receipt of the complaint.
Complaints may be presented orally or in writing.

Written complaints should include the following information:

e The name, address, and telephone number of the complainant.

e The basis for the alleged discrimination or harassment (protected category and/or
retaliation).
The specific discriminatory practice(s) or incident(s) that have occurred.
The names of any persons thought to be responsible for the discrimination/ harassment.
The remedy the complainant is seeking as a result of the complaint.
The name, address, and telephone number of the complainant’s representative, if any.

52
I.

If complainants wish to file the complaint in person and receive assistance, they may contact the
Human Resources Department to schedule an appointment with a staff investigator.

Investigation and Resolution

After reviewing the discrimination or harassment complaint, the Human Resources Director
shall determine if an investigation is necessary to resolve the issues of the complaint and, if so,
authorize and supervise the investigation of the complaint. The complainant will be contacted
by the investigator upon the investigator’s receipt of the complaint and will be kept apprised of
the status of the investigation. Every effort will be made to conclude the investigation within
one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days of receipt of the complaint.

The Human Resources Director will not proceed with the investigation of a complaint if the
complaint contains no assertion that the alleged acts occurred based on one or more of the
protected categories or if a nexus cannot be established between the alleged act(s) and
discrimination based on any of the protected categories. When the investigation is completed,
the Human Resources Director will determine if there is sufficient evidence to substantiate a
violation of the City’s Discrimination and Harassment Policy and if remedial action is necessary
to resolve the issues of the complaint. The complainant, alleged perpetrator/harasser, and
department head will be notified of the director’s determination. If discipline is imposed, the
discipline will not be communicated to the complainant.

If it would present a conflict (or the appearance of such) for the review and investigation of a
complaint to be conducted by the Human Resources Department, the City Manager will be
responsible for this process.

III. City Manager Review

Iv.

Complainants who are not satisfied with the Human Resources Director’s determination may
request a review by the City Manager (or his/her representative), in writing, within ten (10)
workdays following receipt of the Human Resources Director’s determination. The City
Manager (or his/her representative) shall review the complainant’s written appeal and the
investigative findings and shall render a written decision within thirty (30) workdays following
the review.

Additional Remedies

Current City employees covered by a memorandum of understanding that includes arbitration as
the final step in the grievance process may request that the matter be taken to arbitration in
accordance with the specific procedures contained in the applicable memorandum of
understanding.

In addition, all complainants may file complaints of discrimination or harassment with the State of
California Department of Fair Employment and Housing and the Federal Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, whether or not complainants choose to use the City of Santa Cruz’
complaint procedure. Time limits for filing complaints with State and Federal compliance
agencies vary and those agencies should be contacted directly for specific information. The
addresses and telephone numbers (as of the revision date of this procedure) are:

Department of Fair Employment and Housing
2570 North First Street, Suite 480

53
San Jose, CA 95131

Phone: (408) 325-0344 or (800) 884-1684
Videophone for the DEAF (916) 226-5285
E-mail: contact.center@dfeh.ca.gov

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
San Jose Office

96 North Third Street, Suite 250

San Jose, CA 95112

Phone: (800) 669-4000

Fax: (408) 291-4539

TTY: (800) 669-6820

54
EXHIBIT D

K-9 AGREEMENT

THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this day of 5

by and between the CITY OF SANTA CRUZ, a municipal corporation (“CITY”), and

, a Police Patrol Officer (“EMPLOYEE”),

 

(Employee)

employed by CITY.

RECITALS

A. CITY now operates a canine program with the CITY’s Police Department.

B. CITY owns a police dog named

 

C. CITY and EMPLOYEE desire that EMPLOYEE participate in the canine program.

D. It is the desire of the parties to confirm their relationship during the period of

to

AGREEMENT

1. The term of the Agreement shall be to

2. During the term of this Agreement, EMPLOYEE shall keep the dog under EMPLOYEE’s care
and control at all times, and EMPLOYEE shall do the following:

A.
B.

oO = | o

House and feed the dog in a manner consistent with good practices.
Keep the dog clean, well groomed, and in good health.

Provide such veterinary care as is necessary to maintain the dog free from disease,
defect, or injury.

Maintain the dog at a high level of operational ability.
Keep the dog available for police work at all times.
Respond with the dog to calls as directed by EMPLOYEE’s supervisors.

Handle the dog at the scene as directed by EMPLOYEE’s supervisors.

55
10.

CITY and EMPLOYEE have reasonably estimated that the time spent on non-police work care
of dog averages approximately thirty (30) minutes per day. Further, it has been determined that
said time is substantially similar to the care given to a household pet or other dog. The rate of pay
for care and feeding shall be $13.08 per hour and an overtime rate of $19.62 per hour. The
monthly compensation for routine care shall be $298 per month ($19.62 per hour x 30 minutes
X 365 days divided by 12 months). Any additional hours spent in extraordinary care (e.g., time
spent in non-routine/emergency veterinary care) shall be reported and compensated at the rate
stated herein.

A. CITY and EMPLOYEE agree that CITY has acted in good faith and has reasonable
grounds for believing that this Agreement complies with the FLSA.

In addition to the monthly compensation, CITY shall provide, on a contract basis, for the
animal’s food, grooming supplies, training supplies, disinfectants, and all veterinary care.
Further, CITY shall provide the pay for any and all necessary training of the animal.

EMPLOYEE shall be deemed to be acting within the scope of employment during any
department authorized activities connect with the training of the dog and police work involving
the dog. CITY shall compensate EMPLOYEE for police work and training of the dog in
accordance with the Memorandum of Understanding.

CITY shall hold EMPLOYEE harmless for any liability occurring to EMPLOYEE by reason of
EMPLOYEE’s participation in the canine program, excepting acts which are willful, malicious or
outside the course and scope of employment. The obligation set forth in this paragraph shall
protect EMPLOYEE from any liability, whether said liability arises during EMPLOYEE?’s regular
working hours or otherwise.

EMPLOYEE agrees to recertify the dog for participation in CITY’s canine program on an
annual basis, as well as at such other times as CITY may reasonably require.

This Agreement shall be terminated by the occurrence of any of the following:
A. Death of the dog or inability of the dog to perform police work.
B. The furnishing by CITY of thirty (30) days’ notice to EMPLOYEE.

C. The furnishing by EMPLOYEE of thirty (30) days’ notice to CITY. Additional notice
beyond thirty (30) days is strongly encouraged.

D. Termination of EMPLOYEE’s employment with CITY.
The attached general provision regarding the canine program shall be a part of this Agreement.
This Agreement shall constitute the entire Agreement between the parties and shall supersede any
previous agreements, whether verbal or written , concerning the same subject matter. No

modification of this Agreement shall be effective unless and until evidence by a writing is signed
by both parties.

56
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this Agreement was executed on the date hereinabove written.

CITY OF SANTA CRUZ EMPLOYEE
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
CITY ATTORNEY UNION REPRESENTATIVE

57
etd

EXHIBIT E
i a) a) af Santa Cruz Police Department

Policy Manual

 

 

Absences/Time Off

1001.1 PURPOSE AND SCOPE

It is the policy of this Department to set forth procedures and guidelines for time off requests,
absences and injuries, and surrendering departmental equipment in cases of leaves of
absence.

1001.2 PROCEDURE

1001.2.1 TIME OFF REQUESTS

The Department will strive to facilitate time off requests in a timely manner. It is necessary to
balance employees’ needs for time off with the mandate that the organization provide public
safety services for the City of Santa Cruz. In order to do this it is required that time off
requests be made sufficiently in advance so that proper consideration may be given to the
needs of the employee, City and the Department.

(a) All employees, permanent, part time, or temporary must put in writing their time
requests.

(b) Time off requests may be submitted up to one (1) year in advance of the date(s)
requested.

(c) Requests shall be for vacation, management vacation, holiday, floating holiday,
compensatory time off, maternity leave, leave of absence, military leave, or family leave.

1. Requests may be for any or a combination of all of the above.

(d) Requests for forty hours or more should be made thirty days in advance of the
requested time off.

1. Reasons of legitimate exigency may be accepted by a supervisor in the event
that thirty days notice does not occur.

(e) Requests for more than eighty hours will require approval from the Deputy Chief of
Police and should be made a minimum of sixty days in advance of the requested time off.

1001.2.2 RESPONSIBILITIES

(a) The requesting employee is responsible for making the request in a timely manner and for
knowing and requesting only that time which they have earned and may, therefore, take
legally.

1. It is the employee's responsibility to notify the Financial Services
Unit/payroll/purchasing clerk of any changes or cancellations of a time off request
that was previously submitted.

(b) The unit/detail supervisory is responsible for evaluation staffing levels and for insuring
that sufficient staffing is available if the request is approved.

 

58
Santa Cruz Police Department

Policy Manual

Absences/Time Off

 

1. Every effort should be made to avoid the use of overtime when granting leave.

2. The supervisor must check the special events calendar, sergeants’ calendar and
the master schedule.

3. The staffing available will be listed on the request form by the supervisor so it
may be reviewed by the Team Commander.

4. If approved, enter the information on the sergeants’ calendar. If the date is for
some time beyond the current four-week period, the Administrative Assistant will
enter it on the appropriate four-week schedule.

5. Sign the request form both as to approval and entry on the master schedule.

6. The master schedule and the sergeant’s calendar are the reference documents
used to allocate personnel. They must be maintained in an accurate condition at
all times.

(c) The managers are responsible for reviewing the requests and insuring that sufficient
staffing remains available.

1. Management will strive to provide a maximum of seven (7) day turnaround on all
time off requests.

2. An exception may occur if a request is made prior to the master schedule being
established.

(d) The Payroll/Purchasing Clerk will log all time off requests on their calendar and be able to
provide information to supervisors, managers and employees when it is requested.

1. The Payroll/Purchasing Clerk will insure that approved time off is recorded onto
the payroll sheet as required by City Payroll procedures. (This does not negate
the employee or supervisor’s responsibility to record it on the time sheet for the
affected payroll period.)

2. The time off request forms, once approved, will be maintained by the
Payroll/Purchasing Clerk.

1001.2.3 ORGANIZATIONAL INTENT

(a) It is the intent of the organization to facilitate time off requests to the extent economically
and operationally feasible.

(b) Normally, overtime will not be authorized to replace an employee so they can obtain
time off.

(c) Exceptions may be made for good cause but will require approval of the Division
Commander. Items to be considered are:

1. Time of year.
Special events.
Negative impacts on remaining working employees.

Budgetary restraints.

ag PF WN

Long term impacts on both the organization and the requesting employee.

 

59
Santa Cruz Police Department

Policy Manual

Absences/Time Off

 

(d) Employees should strive to take the bulk of vacation or holiday time off during time
other than mid-June through August due to the department’s summer workload.

(e) Time off requests will be considered in the order in which they are submitted. Seniority in
rank will be a determining factor when time off requests are made by more than one
person, submitted on the same day and requesting the same time off, or a large
percentage of it.

1001.3 ABSENCES AND INJURIES
1001.3.1 NOTIFICATION OF ABSENCE

(a) Any employee who is unable to report for duty as scheduled shall notify the appropriate
Watch Commander/Section Commander. Notification shall be as far in advance as
possible. A minimum of two hours is required. The reason for such absence shall
be reported.

1. In the event the Watch Commander/Section Commander is not available to
receive the call, the employee receiving the notification shall forward the
information to the Watch Commander as soon as practical, with minimum of
the following information.

(a) Name of absent employee.

(b) Time called.

(c) Reason for absence.

(d) Length of absence (if known).

(e) Location of employee.

(f) Telephone number where employee can be reached.

2. The employee calling in ill shall leave a telephone number where he/she can be
reached by their supervisor.

(b) Availability of Employee.
1. Employees shall inform their respective Watch/Section Commander of their
location during their respective (normal) duty hours while absent.
(c) Checks on Absentees

1. Any employee should expect a personal visit or phone contact from a
Department representative during their period of recuperation. Such contact
shall be at the discretion of the appropriate supervisor, Watch Commander,
Division Commander, or the Chief of Police. Priority shall be given to absences in
conjunction with days off.

(d) Procedure for returning to full duty from an off-duty injury or illness.

1. Absence of three (3) working days or less: If an employee is absent from work for
a period of three consecutive working days or less, the following procedure will
apply:

 

60
Santa Cruz Police Department

Policy Manual

Absences/Time Off

 

(a) Approval to return to work can be approved by the employee’s immediate
supervisor.

(b) Sick leave affidavit must be completed.

(c) If questions arise concerning the employee’s health or ability to work, the
employee may be referred to a physician for re-examination.

2. Absences in excess of three (3) working days: For the benefit of the employee's
health, and the health and welfare of those persons who will work with and
depend on the returning employee, on absences in excess of three (3)
consecutive working days the following will apply:

(a) The absence must be support by a completed sick leave form and a
Medical release from employee’s physician.

(b) If a question arises concerning the employee's health or ability to work,
the employee may be referred to a physician for an examination.

(e) Industrial Injuries or Illness.

1. All injuries on duty and all work-incurred diseases shall be reported to the
employee’s immediate supervisor as soon as possible following the injury.

2. If an injury or disease requires the attention of a physician, the supervisor
receiving the injury report will direct the employee to a physician or medical
center listed on the City's Medical Service order form.

(a) Exception: In the case of needed emergency attention, the supervisor will
direct that the employee be transported to the nearest medical center.

(b) The employee, if able, or the employee's supervisor, shall advise the
attending physician or medical center that the injury or disease is a
Workers Compensation injury.

(c) If, however, an employee notifies the employer in writing prior to the date
of injury that he/she has a personal physician, the employee shall have the
right to be treated by that physician from the date of injury after emergency
treatment, if necessary, has occurred.

3. Completing the City of Santa Cruz Report of Personal Injury to City Employee
and City of Santa Cruz Medical Service Order.

(a) The injured employee’s supervisor shall complete the Medical Service
Order form as soon after the injury as possible and in all cases prior to
termination of the shift.

(b) The injured employee's supervisor shall complete the Employer’s Report
of Occupational Injury or Illness form as soon after the injury as possible
and, in all cases, prior to termination of the shift.

4. Completing the SCPD Physician's Statement

(a) In every industrial injury or illness situation, the SCPD Physician's
statement must be completed by the attending physician.

(b) The SCPD Physician’s Statement must be completed by the attending

 

61
Santa Cruz Police Department

Policy Manual

Absences/Time Off

 

physician after any subsequent examinations that result in:
1. A continuation of restricted duty status.
2. A modification to restricted duty status.
3. A continuation of limited duty status.
4. A modification to limited duty status.

5. Or whenever requested by the employee's supervisor.
5. Treating Physician

(a) It is necessary for an employee to be examined by the same physician
or medical facility who made the first examination and diagnoses and
treatment on the industrial injury or illness during the first 30 days
subsequent to the injury or illness, unless the physician refers the
employee to another medical facility or permission is received from the
Worker's Compensation Administrator and/or the City Human Resources
Department Benefits Coordinator.

1001.3.2 LIMITED DUTY STATUS
(a) Supervisor’s Responsibility

1. It shall be the responsibility of each Division Commander to make the most
productive use of limited duty personnel under their command.

2. Each Watch/Section Commander shall contact the Division Commander to
ascertain information on the returning employee to see what duty limitations or
restrictions have been imposed by his physician. If the physician's instructions
are not clear, the Division Commander shall contact the physician and have
him/her restate the medical work restrictions in concise written terms.

3. The employee’s proposed assignment shall be put in writing, including any
limitations placed on their activities. After approval of the Division Commander,
personally serve the employee with a copy of their assigned duties. Discuss the
assignment with the employee to ensure there are no misunderstandings or
that you are not asking them to perform a task that they feel they should not be
doing because of risk of re-injury and/or delaying recuperation time. Have the
employee sign the memo.

4. Distribution/routing of memo:
(a) Copy to employee.
(b) Copy to Administration Division Commander.
(c) Copy to Operations Division Commander.
(d) Copy to the Chief of Police.
(e) Original to employee’s personnel file.

(f) Copy to Personnel Department.

 

62
Santa Cruz Police Department

Policy Manual

Absences/Time Off

 

(b) Employee's Responsibility:

1. Inform their supervisor of any physical limitations that they may have prior to
acceptance of assigned duties that they feel they are incapable of safely
performing.

2. Any employee returning in a limited duty capacity shall be exempt from normal
scheduling provisions and may be assigned to any unit/section within the
Department that is tin the best interest of the Department.

3. All employees working in a limited duty status shall dress in business-like attire.
S.C.P.D. polo shirts are acceptable. No jeans or collarless shirts.

(c) Reporting Outside Employment

1. Department employees engaged in outside employment who are placed on
disability leave, limited duty or restricted duty, will inform or remind their
commanding officer of their outside work authorization in writing.

(d) Outside Employment while Disabled/Injured

1. The Chief of Police or a designee has final authority to determine when an
employee’s outside employment should be discontinued. When discontinued, a
notice of revocation of the employee’s work authorization shall be attached to the
original work request form. The employee shall also receive a copy.

2. Criteria for revoking the outside work authorization includes, but is not limited
to, the following elements:

(a) The outside work is detrimental to the total recovery of the
disabled employee as indicated by the employee's treating
physician and/or City designated physician.

(b) The outside work performed requires the same physical ability as would
be required of an on-duty officer.

3. When the disabled member returns to duty, a written request to the Chief of
Police shall be made to restore the outside work authorization.

(e) Returning to full duty from a Limited Duty Status.

1. Prior to an employee returning to full duty after being on a limited or
restricted duty status, the employee must furnish the Department with a
medical release signed by their physician that the employee is capable of
returning to full duty status.

2. Routing of medical release form:

(a) Copy to Administration Division Commander.
(b) Copy to Operations Division Commander.
(c) Copy to the Chief of Police.

(d) Copy to city Personnel Department.

 

63
Santa Cruz Police Department

Policy Manual

Absences/Time Off

 

(e) Original to employee's police personnel file.

1001.3.3 INABILITY TO REPORT FOR WORK
(a) Options available to sick and/or injured employees:

1. Health and fitness is a condition of employment. It is the responsibility of
the employee to maintain themselves in a healthy and fit condition.

2. If feasible, the Department will attempt to put an injured or ill employee
into a productive work slot for a reasonable period.

3. If a productive work position is not available, or if there does not appear to
be a likelihood that the employee will return to full duty status, a number of
options are available:

(a) Use of accumulated sick leave.
(b) Long term disability.

(c) Worker’s Compensation claim, if injury/illness was incurred during
course and scope of employment.

(d) Retirement.
(e) Resignation.

(f) Dismissal.

1001.3.4 DISCIPLINARY ACTION
(a) Abuse of sick leave.

1. Documentation of an abuse of sick leave may result in any one or combination of
the following:

(a) Reprimand-oral or written.
(b) Suspension.
(c) Reduction in pay or rank.

(d) Dismissal.
1001.3.5 RECURRENCE OF PRIOR INDUSTRIAL INJURY

No worker's compensation time will be allowed unless there is a physician’s note. Example:
Employee has an old back injury that was work-related and treated as a worker's
compensation injury. Three months later, employee’s back is hurting. Employee calls in
to take time off. No worker’s compensation time off can be approved unless the injury is
verified by a physician as a continuation or re-injury of a previous worker’s compensation

injury.

 

64
Santa Cruz Police Department

Policy Manual

Absences/Time Off

 

1001.4 THE SURRENDER OF DEPARTMENTAL PROPERTY IN CASES
OF LEAVES OF ABSENCE

(a) Leaves of Absence:

1. When any departmental personnel are placed on administrative leave, leave of
absence, medical leave of absence, worker's compensation, or any leave of
absence due to disciplinary action, and the leave of absence is for more than
one work week, they shall report to the Administrative Division Commander at
the discretion of the Administrative Commander.

2. The involved personnel may be required to surrender their badge, identification
card, and duty weapon. In any case involving the above-mentioned situations, it
shall be the responsibility of the Administrative Deputy Chief to retrieve these
items.

(b) In all cases, the Division Commander of the affected personnel shall notify the Chief of
Police by way of departmental memorandum of the circumstances of the action.
Included in this memorandum should be:

1. Employee's name.
Employee's present rank.
Employee’s present assignment.

Projected length of leave.

gy PF wn

Reason for leave.

(c) The Administrative Deputy Chief shall be responsible for the proper storage of the
above property, and the return of the property to the employee when the employee
returns to active duty.

(d) The employee, while on this leave, shall not in any way act as a peace officer.

 

65
