AGREEMENT

BETWEEN

THE CITY OF MADISON

AND

MADISON PROFESSIONAL
POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

FOR THE PERIOD

JANUARY 1, 2012 TO DECEMBER 31, 2015

 
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART
ART

 

CLE |
CLE II
CLE Ill
CLE IV
CLE V
CLE VI
CLE VII
CLE VIII
CLE Ix
CLE X
CLE XI
CLE XIl
CLE XIll
CLE XIV
CLE XV
CLE XVI
CLE XVII
CLE XVIII
CLE XIX
CLE XX
CLE Xxl
CLE Xxll

APPENDIX A
APPENDIX B
APPENDIX C

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CONSIDERATION
NEGOTIATIONS. ...
RECOGNITION..
ASSOCIATION ACTIVITIES.
EMPLOYER RIGHTS. .........ccccccccscsescscscseeeeeeeeseeeesssssscecseseeteteneeeeeeseseeeees
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
PROHIBITION OF STRIKES

 

  
  

 

PAY POLICY
HOURS OF WORK & DUTY ASSIGNMENTS............0:::cccccsesesesseseeeeeeees 20
AUTHORIZED LEAVE..........c.c:csccecesesesesesesesescscssssseeeesesescsestesesssasieaeeeens 24

INSURANCE RETIREMENT...
UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT. ve
SUPPORTING SERVICES............cccccccccsssssseeeeeeeeeeeeseesesesecseseneeneeeeseseaes 36
AID TO CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS OF CONTRACT .............. 37
SAVINGS CLAUSE
OTHER RIGHTS RESERVED
LEGAL PROTECTION ve
NOTICE. 0. .eeeeececescceeeeeeeeeeeeesesessesscssseseneeenensesesesescssesssssisssiseseaeaeeees 38
MAINTENANCE OF BENEFITS...
PROMOTIONAL PROCEDURE
DISCIPLINE
DURATION OF AGREEMENT ............ccccccccessscececseeeeseseseeeetetssesstesseeeeeeee 42
EDUCATION AND INCENTIVE PROGRAM AND PAY PLAN...............++ 43
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING PROGRAM
DEATH AND PERMANENT DISABILITY CALCULATIO!

 

 

  
 

 

  
 

 

 

 

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE |
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

2012-2015 AGREEMENT

CITY OF MADISON AND
MADISON PROFESSIONAL POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (MPPOA)

PREAMBLE

THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into at Madison, Wisconsin, by and between the City of
Madison, a municipal corporation, as municipal employer, hereinafter referred to as “City”, and
the Madison Professional Police Officer's Association, as the representative of certain
employees who are employed by the City of Madison in the Police Department, hereinafter
referred to as “Association”.

WITNESSETH:

WHEREAS, the Union and the City understand that building trust in the workplace is a joint
responsibility of the parties. The Union and the City also recognize their common obligation to
work together to solve our mutual problems, understanding that cooperation and collaboration
between management, the Union, City officials and citizens results in the best services provided
to the citizens of Madison. The City and the Union further recognize that without the expressed
cooperation and commitment of front line employees, the quality of service suffers and that
confrontation does not drive solutions that are in the best long-term interests of citizens, the City
and City employees; and,

WHEREAS, in the interests of the public, the Union and the City, the parties agree to work
together in joint labor-management committees to improve the delivery of services to the
citizens, solve problems which may arise in the workplace and confer on other issues of
concern to either party. The parties agree that open and regular communication between labor,
management, City officials and citizens is an essential element in maintaining an atmosphere of
trust in the department and continuing to provide the high quality of service for which the
department is known and which our citizens expect. Further, the parties agree that they will
communicate regularly on all issues of concern to either party, both through joint committees
and any other avenues which may be established; and,

WHEREAS, both of the parties to this Contract are desirous of reaching an amicable
understanding with respect to the employer employee relationship which exists between them
and to enter into a complete agreement covering rates of pay, hours of work, and conditions of
employment; and,

WHEREAS, the parties do hereby acknowledge that this Contract is the result of the unlimited
right and opportunity afforded to each of the parties to make any and all demands and
proposals with respect to the subject of rates of pay, hours of work, and conditions of
employment and incidental matters respecting thereto; and,

WHEREAS, it is intended that the following contract, implemented pursuant to the provisions of
Section 111.70 Wisconsin Statutes, shall be consistent with that legislative authority which
devolves upon the Common Council of the City of Madison, the statutes and, insofar as
applicable, the rules and regulations relating to or promulgated by the Police and Fire
Commission and the Chief of Police, and compensation provided for under appropriate
Municipal Budget Law of the Wisconsin Statutes; and,

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 1
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

WHEREAS, it is intended by the provisions of this Contract that there be no abrogation of the
duties, obligations, or responsibilities of any agency or department of City government which is
not expressly provided for respectively either by: State Statutes, Ordinances and Resolutions of
the City of Madison except as expressly limited herein; and,

WHEREAS, it is intended by the parties hereto that the employer employee relationship which
exists now and has heretofore existed by and between the City and the members of the
Association, who are employed by the City, shall continue to be the same in the event this
contract is terminated or by virtue of its terms becomes terminated.

ARTICLE |
CONSIDERATION

A. Consideration: The consideration for the execution of this binding Contract is the
covenants mutually expressed herein and arrived at by the parties hereto.

B. Agreement _on Behalf of Association: The Association hereby and herewith covenants,
agrees, and represents to City that Association is duly authorized and empowered to
contract for and on behalf of all employees in the bargaining unit and represents that it
and its members will faithfully and diligently abide by and be strictly bound to all of the
provisions of this Contract as herein set forth. The parties agree that in conferences and
negotiations, the Association will represent all employees in the bargaining unit.

Cc. Agreement_on Behalf _of City: The City hereby and herewith covenants, agrees, and
represents to Association that City, under the express limitations of this Contract, is duly
authorized and empowered to contract for and on behalf of City and for itself represents
that it will faithfully and diligently abide by and strictly be bound to all of the provisions of
this Contract as herein set forth.

D. Non-Discrimination: The City and the Union agree not to discriminate against any
employee for any reason prohibited by applicable City, State and/or Federal laws. The
City and the Union agree that any dispute related to the interpretation or application of
the various statutes shall be resolved in accordance with the statutory dispute resolution
procedures. Whenever a personal pronoun is referred to in this Agreement, the intent is
to apply to either sex.

E. No Verbal Statement: The following constitutes an entire agreement between the parties
and no verbal statement shall supersede any of its provisions.

F. Conflicting Ordinances and Resolutions: The terms and conditions of this Contract shall
supersede ordinances and resolutions wherein there is a conflict with the terms of this
Contract.

G. Compliance with Terms: It is agreed that all expenditures or compensation to be paid
employees in accordance with this Contract must first meet the requirements and
procedures required by law under the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes and the
Madison General Ordinances.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 2
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Extra Territorial Police Duty:

1.

Whenever members of the Association are required to perform police duties
outside of the territorial limits of the City, the provisions of Wisconsin law shall
apply.

Whenever the City contemplates a contractual agreement with a third party for
police services utilizing members of the Association and such police services are
not subject to the provisions of paragraph (I) above, the terms of any such
agreement involving wages, hours of work and conditions of employment shall be
subject to negotiations with the City of Madison.

Special Duty: The President of the Association shall recommend to the Chief of Police at
the beginning of each year the hourly rate of pay for special duty arranged through the
Department. The rate of pay shall be subject to the approval of the Chief of Police.

1.

All requests for Special Duty Officers shall be subject to the following provisions:

a. Payment for all such services shall be through City Payroll with
appropriate benefits and an administrative fee of 4%.

b. All such duty shall be strictly voluntary.

c. The City shall continue to encourage the use of City Police Officers to
provide services in conjunction with any event requiring a city permit.
When traffic direction is necessary, the use of City Police Officers will
help insure that coordination occurs with other city agencies and that total
community needs are considered.

Officers working Special Duty pursuant to this section, which because of their
complexity require significant department planning and/or supervision, shall be
subject to the regular contractual rates.

When officers are working at the Special Duty pay rate, no other officers who are
working at regular contractual rates may be assigned to that Special Duty
employment. This would not apply to unanticipated emergencies requiring the
short-term response of other on-duty officers and/or supervisors or to incidental
work of officers assigned to the area.

Except as in 3., above, if the Madison Police Department assumes immediate
direction and control of officers on Special Duty, regular contractual hourly rates,
including overtime if applicable, will apply to the work of such officers, following
assumption of direction and control of the Department.

Officers who are required to work beyond the hours set by the Special Duty
employer, as a result of law enforcement action taken during those hours, will be
compensated at the applicable hourly rate as specified in the contract, including
overtime, if the work is authorized by the Department.

For example, an Officer is working a Special Duty assignment prior to the start of
their regular shift. Their shift is to start at 10:00 p.m. The Special Duty
Assignment was from 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. An incident takes place where they
continue to work (and the work has been authorized by the Department) on the

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 3
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

incident until 1:00 a.m. The officer would receive time-and one-half (1-1/2) of
their regular hourly rate of pay for the time between 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m.
They would receive their regular straight time pay for working during their
scheduled shift on this incident from 10:00 p.m. until completion at 1:00 a.m.,
when they resume their daily assignment. If the same fact situation occurs on a
regular day off, while working this special duty assignment the officer would
receive time-and one-half (1-1/2) of their regular hourly rate of pay for the time
worked from 9:00 p.m. until 1:00 a.m.

Any officer assigned on any basis less than the full school year to perform ERO
duties within any of the District's high schools shall be compensated at the rate of
the assigned officers’ regular rate of pay pursuant to the agreement, including
any premium pay provisions therein, including but not limited by enumeration, to
the following: shift premium, overtime, holiday, or any other additional pay
authorized by the agreement. Such replacement employment shall not be
performed pursuant to the Special Duty provisions of Article 1,1. of the
agreement.

No special duty assignments for those filling-in for ERO.

Officers scheduled to work a special duty assignment shall allow adequate time
to arrive at their special duty assignment on time after completing their regular
work shift or another special duty assignment. Officers working a special duty
assignment prior to the start of a regular work shift must allow adequate time to
complete their scheduled special duty assignment and arrive for work on time.

J. Special Duty at the Overture Center:

 

1. When sworn Law Enforcement Officers are requested for Special Duty by the
Overture Center, such officers shall be members of the City of Madison Police
Department who will report to Civic Center management for assignment.

2. Payment for such services shall be through City Payroll with appropriate benefits,
at the same hourly rate of pay as established under Article |, Section | (Special
Duty).

3. All such duty shall be strictly voluntary.

4. Provisions listed under Article |, Section |, Para. 2, 3, 4, & 5 will also apply to
work being performed for the Overture Center.

K. Special Duty at the Monona Terrace Convention Center:

1. When sworn Law Enforcement Officers are requested for Special Duty by the
Monona Terrace Convention Center, such officers shall be members of the City
of Madison Police Department who will report to Monona Terrace Convention
Center management for assignment.

2. Payment for such services shall be through City Payroll with appropriate benefits,

at the same hourly rate of pay as established under Article |, Section | (Special
Duty).

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 4
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

3. All such duty shall be strictly voluntary.

4. Provisions listed under Article |, Section |, Para. 2, 3,4, & 5 will also apply to work
being performed for the Monona Terrace Convention Center.

L. Special Duty at the Warner Park Community Center:

1. When sworn Law Enforcement Officers are requested for Special Duty by the
Warner Park Community Center, such officers shall be members of the City of
Madison Police Department who will report to Warner Park Community Center
management for assignment.

2. Payment for such services shall be through City Payroll with appropriate benefits,
at the same hourly rate of pay as established under Article |, Section | (Special
Duty).

3. All such duty shall be strictly voluntary.

4. Provisions listed under Article |, Section |, Para. 2, 3, 4, & 5 will also apply to
work being performed for the Warner Park Community Center.

ARTICLE II
NEGOTIATIONS

A. Negotiations: Either party to this Contract may select for itself such negotiator or
negotiators for purposes of carrying on conferences and negotiations under the
provisions of Section 111.70, Wisconsin Statutes, as such party may determine. No
consent from either party shall be required in order to name such negotiator or
negotiators.

B. Timetable: Conferences and negotiations shall be carried on by the parties hereto in
2010-2012 as follows:

Submission of written proposals shall be made on a simultaneous basis by both parties,
and negotiating meetings shall commence on or before the October 1 preceding the
expiration date of this Agreement.

ARTICLE Ill
RECOGNITION

A. Recognition: The City recognizes the Madison Professional Police Officer's Association
as the exclusive collective bargaining agent for the position classifications of Police
Officer, Investigator, Detective, and Sergeant for the purpose of engaging in conferences
and negotiations with respect to wages, hours and conditions of employment.

B. Unit of Representation: In the event new positions not now covered by the Recognition
provisions of this Contact are created by the City through action of the Common Council,
and said positions would be embraced within the bargaining unit, provided the parties
agree that the new positions should be embraced within the bargaining unit, then the

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 5
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

employees appointed to such positions shall be deemed part of such bargaining unit,
and shall be represented by the Association and they shall also be covered by Contract
between the Association and the City.

ARTICLE IV
ASSOCIATION ACTIVITIES

Association Negotiating Committee: Six representatives from the Association shall be
paid regular salary for time spent in negotiations during regular working hours, except no
payment will be made for negotiating time outside the representatives’ normal workday.

The names of the duly chosen representatives of the bargaining unit shall be submitted
to the Labor Relations Manager and Police Chief sufficiently in advance of regularly
scheduled bargaining meetings, so as to permit scheduling for continuity of operations
within the department.

Association representatives shall be granted time off without pay to attend City meetings
pertaining to the welfare of members of the Association, provided those representatives
shall be limited to six (6) members and that 24 hours' advance notice is given to the
Chief of Police.

Limitations Upon Association Activity: No Association member or officer shall conduct
any Association business on City time except as specified in this Contract or as
authorized by the proper department head, except that members of the Board of
Directors of the MPPOA may be approached by a member during duty hours for the
purpose of apprising him/her of an existing or potential problem related to the application
of this Contract. Such communications on duty time shall be limited to only that time
necessary to inform the Board Member of the issue. If the Board Member believes the
matter is of such a critical nature so as to demand additional immediate attention, he/she
shall first apprise his/her commanding officer of the situation and request permission to
immediately follow up on the matter. Such requests will be granted when Departmental
operational functions can accommodate a temporary diversion from a work assignment
to foster overall work harmony.

Bulletin Boards: The City shall provide bulletin board space for Association use in areas
authorized by the City. Material posted thereon shall be the responsibility of the
Association and shall relate only to Association meetings, elections, social events,
reports of Committees or the Association Board of Directors and decisions affecting the
Association or employees in the bargaining unit.

Material placed on the bulletin board shall not contain anything political or controversial,
or anything reflecting upon the City, any of its employees or officers, or any labor
organization among its employees, and no material, notices or announcements which
violate the provisions of this section shall be posted.

The Department will post seminar announcements which are available for the general
membership of the Association. Interested employees may apply for consideration for
such seminars through their Commanding Officer.

Dues Deductions: The employer agrees to deduct regular Association biweekly
membership dues and initiation fees in an amount certified to be current by the

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 6
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Treasurer of the Association from the wages of those members of the association who
individually request in writing that such deductions be made.

The City agrees to deduct a sum (fee) from the pay of employees within the bargaining
unit as their proportionate share of the cost of the collective bargaining process and
contract administration. Such amount deducted shall in no instance exceed the dues
uniformly required of all members of the unit as certified by the Officers of the
Association. Such deductions shall be made from the employee's pay period in which
he/she has sufficient earnings to cover the same deductions for taxes, insurance,
retirement and other deductions. In the event that an employee shall not have sufficient
earnings due him/her during the pay period when dues or fees are normally withheld to
equal or exceed the amount of the certified deduction, no fees shall be withheld and the
City shall have no obligation to subsequently withhold dues or fees that may have been
due for that pay period. The provisions of this clause shall be subject to the duty of the
Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission as specified by State Statute 111.70(2)
entitled, “Rights of Municipal Employees.” The provisions of that paragraph shall be
implemented upon submission of written notice to the Labor Relations Manager by the
Association.

The termination notice must be given both to the employer and to the Association. The
City shall be saved harmless in the event of any legal controversy with regard to the
application of this provision.

Not withstanding Article IV(A) Paragraph 3 above, the City may provide for the President
of the Association or their designee to attend meetings agreed to by the City, during
regularly scheduled on-duty hours, which pertain to issues of mutual concern.

ARTICLE V
EMPLOYER RIGHTS

The rights and responsibilities of the Employer shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:

1. To hire, promote, transfer, assign and utilize employees.

2. To suspend, discipline, demote, discharge or lay off employees in accordance
with the provisions of Wisconsin Statutes Sec. 62.13.

3. To determine work standards; the quality and quantity of work performed by
employees and to determine whether employees meet said standards.

4. To establish departmental policies, rules, regulations and procedures. Whenever
reasonably practicable, the Employer agrees to furnish the designated
representative of the Association with a copy of newly established or amended
policies, regulations and procedures which are applicable to Association
members at least ten (10) calendar days prior to their effective date.

5. To establish work schedules and to assign overtime work.

6. To establish and utilize methods, processes and technology by which
departmental work is to be performed.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 7
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

10.

11.

12.

To determine the number of personnel to be employed.
To operate and administer facilities, equipment and operations.

To establish, expand, transfer, consolidate or terminate functions, programs and
operations.

To contract and subcontract matters relating to departmental operations.

To transfer any governmental operation to another unit of government. Such
transfer shall not require any prior negotiations or the consent of the Association
and furthermore, upon transfer, all agreements are terminated including this
Contract as pertains to personnel of the department affected by the transfer.

To determine the organizational structure.

B. The rights and authority which the Employer has not officially abridged, delegated or
modified by the terms of this Contract are retained by the Employer.

ARTICLE VI
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
A. Definition: A grievance shall be defined as a dispute or disagreement as to the
interpretation, application or enforcement of any term(s) specifically expressed in this
Contract.
B. General Provisions:
1. Class grievances involving the general interpretation, application or enforcement

of the terms of this Contract may be initiated by the Union at Step Three of the
grievance procedure.

All grievances must be filed within thirty (30) calendar days of knowledge of the
act giving rise to the grievance and in no case later than ninety (90) calendar
days from the date of occurrence of such act(s).

The City shall recognize two (2) Association grievance representatives. The
employee and/or Association representatives may process the grievance without
loss of pay if it is necessary to process the grievance during their regular working
hours, provided the commanding officer is appraised of the situation and
provided the departmental operational functions can accommodate a temporary
diversion from a work assignment to foster overall work harmony.

Decisions made at any level below that of the Chief shall not be interpreted as
setting a precedent, and the Chief reserves the right to take official action without
prejudice, based on his/her own findings in each grievance.

Items exempt from consideration for processing under this grievance procedure
shall include, but not necessarily be limited to the following: all disciplinary
matters involving the Police and Fire Commission.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 8
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

The filing of a grievance concerning Article XX Promotional Procedures and/or
Article XXI Discipline shall preclude the employee(s) and/or Association from
seeking other remedy from any other governmental agency or tribunal. If an
employee(s) and/or Association have sought a remedy from another
governmental agency or tribunal, they shall be precluded from filing a grievance
under the provisions of this Article.

Departure from the steps of the grievance procedure or the time limits in each
step may be made by mutual written agreement of the Employer and the
employee and/or grievance representatives. If the Employer does not answer a
grievance or appeal thereof within the specified time limits, the Association may
elect to treat the grievance as denied at that step and immediately appeal the
grievance to the next step.

Cc. Steps of the Grievance Procedure:

Step One: An employee's grievance or those grievances submitted by the

Association shall be made in writing to the employee's immediate
management supervisor with a copy submitted to the Labor Relations
Manager. The written grievance shall set forth the nature of the
grievance, the fact(s) upon which it is based, the provision(s) of the
Agreement allegedly violated and the relief requested. The employee's
immediate management supervisor or his/her designated representative
shall submit a written reply giving the reason(s) for his/her determination
to the employee(s) and/or grievance representative within ten (10)
calendar days after the receipt of the written grievance.

Step Two: The grievance shall be considered settled on the basis of the Employer's

answer at Step One unless within ten (10) calendar days after the
management supervisor's written answer in Step One, the grievance is
again reduced to writing and submitted to the next higher level of
management supervisor. The management supervisor or his/her
designated representative shall submit a written reply giving the reason
for his/her determination to the employee and/or grievance
representatives within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the written
grievance.

Step Three: The grievance shall be considered settled on the basis of the Employer's

answer at Step Two unless within ten (10) calendar days after the
management supervisor's written answer on Step Two, the grievance is
again reduced to writing and presented to the Chief of Police. The Chief
of Police or his/her designated representative shall give a written answer,
giving the reasons for his/her determination to the grievance within ten
(10) calendar days of receipt of the written grievance.

Step Four: If both parties, having exhausted the grievance procedure herein, cannot

settle a grievance, the Association and/or City may submit the issue(s) in
dispute to an arbitrator by filing a request within fifteen (15) calendar days
after the Chief of Police or his/her representative's answer in Step Three.
A copy of said request shall be forwarded to the Labor Relations

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 9
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Manager. In the event the parties are unable to agree upon an impartial
arbitrator within ten (10) calendar days after referral of such matter to
arbitration, then the parties shall request provision of a panel of five (5)
arbitrators, by the Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission, with the
parties to alternately eliminate names until an arbitrator has been
selected. The flip of a coin shall decide which party is to eliminate the first
name.

D. Duties of Arbitrator: The arbitrator shall have no right to amend, modify, nullify, ignore,
add to, or subtract from the provisions of this Contract. He shall consider and decide
only the specific issues submitted to him/her in writing by the Employer and the
Association, and shall have no authority to make a decision on any other issue not so
submitted to him/her. The arbitrator shall submit in writing his/her decision within thirty
(30) calendar days following the close of the hearing or the submission of briefs by the
parties, whichever is later, unless the parties agree to an extension thereof. The decision
shall be based solely upon his/her interpretation of the meaning and application of the
express terms of this Contract. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on
both the Employer and the Association. No award of any arbitrator may be retroactive for
a period greater than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the presentation of the grievance
in Step One.

E. Fees and Expenses: The fees and expenses for the arbitrator's services and
proceedings shall be borne equally by the Employer and the Association provided that
each party shall be responsible for compensating its own representatives and witnesses.
If both parties request that a stenographic record of the hearing be made and transcripts
provided, the parties shall equally share the entire cost of such service and the cost of
the provision of a transcript to each party and the Arbitrator.

ARTICLE VII
PROHIBITION OF STRIKES

The Association shall neither cause nor counsel its members, or any of them, to strike for any
reason during the term of this Contract, nor shall it in any manner cause them directly or
indirectly to commit any concerted acts of work stoppage, slowdown, or refusal to perform any
customarily assigned duties for the municipal Employer for any reason during the term of this
Contract. The occurrence of any such acts or actions prohibited in this section by the
Association shall be deemed a violation of this Contract and shall render the

Association subject to the penalties provided herein. In applying the provisions of this section,
all of its terms used herein shall be given the meaning commonly understood in the community.
The Association shall not be liable where the acts or actions hereinbefore enumerated are not
caused or authorized directly or indirectly by the Association. However, whether or not the
Association is liable for such acts or actions, any employee who commits any of the acts
prohibited in this section may be subject to penalties prescribed by law or departmental
regulation.

Upon notification confirmed in writing by the City to the Association that certain of its members
are engaged in a wildcat strike, the Union shall immediately order in writing such members to
return to work immediately, provide the City with a copy of such an order, and a responsible
official of the Association shall publicly order them to return to work. Such characterization of the
strike by the City shall not establish the nature of the strike. Such notification by the Association

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 10
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

shall not constitute an admission by it that a wildcat strike is in progress or has taken place or
that any particular member is or has engaged in a wildcat strike. The notification shall be made
solely on the presentation of the City. In the event that a wildcat strike occurs, the Association
agrees to take all reasonable effective and affirmative action to secure the members’ return to
work as promptly as possible. Failure of the Association to issue such orders and/or take such
action shall be considered in determining whether or not the Association caused or authorized,
directly, or indirectly, the strike.

ARTICLE VIII
PAY POLICY

A. Salary Schedule:
There shall be a 3% wage increase effective December 11, 2011.

The 3% wage increase effective December 11, 2011, shall be reduced by .1% for every
full one percent (1%) increase in health insurance premiums beyond eleven percent
(11%) in that calendar year. The increase in health insurance shall be calculated by
comparing the cost of a Family Plan from the lowest bidder among the health care
providers offered in the Wisconsin Public Employers’ Group Health Programs.

Example: Presume the lowest bidder among the Family Plans offered in 2010 is
$900.00, and the lowest bidder in 2011 is 12% higher (or $1008). The wage increase
effective December 11, 2011, would be two point nine (2.9%). If the health insurance
increase was eleven percent (11%) or less, the wage increase effective December 11,
2011, would be three percent (3%).

In no case would the 2011 wage increase be less than 2.5%.

There shall be a 2% wage increase effective December 9, 2012. Effective the last pay
period of 2013, 2014, and 2015, there shall be a three percent wage increase in each
year.
Recently hired officers who will be in the “accelerated” training program will have a
starting wage equivalent to the six (6) month level and proceed through the remaining
salary steps as outlined in the contract.

BIWEEKLY BASE RATE SALARY SCHEDULE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CG 11 Start 6 mos. 18 mos. 30 mos. 42 mos.
RANGE 01 1 2 3 4 5
12/11/2011 1671.97 1859.11 1907.85 1964.40 2026.43
12/09/2012 1705.41 1896.29 1946.01 2003.69 2066.96
LPP 2013 1756.57 1953.18 2004.39 2063.80 2128.97
LPP 2014 1809.27 2011.78 2064.52 2125.71 2192.84
LPP 2015 1863.55 2072.13 2126.46 2189.48 2258.63

 

 

 

 

 

POLICE OFFICER

 

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 11
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

cG 11
RANGE 02 1
12/11/2011 2127.74
12/09/2012 2170.29
LPP 2013 2235.40
LPP 2014 2302.46
LPP 2015 2371.53
INVESTIGATOR
DETECTIVE 1
cG 11
RANGE 03 1
12/11/2011 2229.02
12/09/2012 2273.60
LPP 2013 2341.81
LPP 2014 2412.06
LPP 2015 2484.42
SERGEANT
B. Overtime: Overtime shall be defined as any authorized work performed in excess of the

employee's regular eight (8) hour work day exclusive of the fifteen (15) minute early
report requirement, or any authorized work performed in excess of the employees'
regular work schedule. Work performed under Article |, Section | (Special Duty) and
Section J, Special Duty at the Overture Center, and Section K (Special Duty at the
Monona Terrace Convention Center) shall not be included under the provisions of this
paragraph. Scheduled overtime shall be assigned as equally as reasonably possible
among the employees who normally perform the work within their assigned operational
unit. For purposes of computing overtime compensation, overtime hours shall not be
pyramided.

When overtime is being assigned, the amount of overtime (excluding special duty)
earned in the calendar year will be considered; the employee having earned the least
amount of overtime will be offered the overtime opportunity first. This does not apply if
specialized skills, training or employees of a specific rank/position are needed for a
particular overtime assignment, or if circumstances makes consideration of prior
overtime impractical. This process does not apply to making special duty assignments.

Patrol assigned personnel will have the first opportunity to be assigned to patrol overtime
assignments.

1. Compensation for overtime shall be paid at the rate of time-and one-half (1-1/2)
the employee's regular rate of pay. All grant-funded* overtime is at this rate of
pay.

2. Compensation for each continuous hour worked in excess of twelve (12)

consecutive hours shall be paid at the rate of two (2) times the employee's
regular rate of pay, except any overtime accrued due to grant-funded* activity,
which is paid at time-and one-half (1-1/2). Any grant-funded* work performed
before or after an employee's regular work shift will not be considered continuous
service for the purposes of compensation.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 12

 
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

*This does not apply to grant-funded work performed under grants managed and
administrated by the Dane County Narcotics and Gang Task Force. Grant-funded
work performed under Task Force grants (i.e., JAG, Byrne) will be compensated
at the “overtime rate” allowed by contract, to include the rate of two times (2x) the
employee’s regular rate of pay for continuous work in excess of twelve (12)
hours. Any officer performing work under Task Force grant-funding must meet
the 24 hour drug training requirement and be approved by a Task Force
supervisor.

Limitation on Compensatory Overtime:

a. At their option employees may elect to accrue compensatory leave in lieu
of the overtime cash payments provided in Paragraph B of this Article up
to a maximum accumulation of 150 hours.

b. At their option employees may elect to convert seventy-five (75) hours of
accrued compensatory leave per calendar year to cash based on the
employee's regular hourly rate of pay.

c. All overtime hours in excess of the maximum accumulation shall be paid
in cash in the pay period following such excess accumulation.
d. Once the employee reaches the age of 40, s/he may elect to raise the

limits, on a one-time basis, in paragraph (a) to 180 hours and in
paragraph (b) to seventy-five (75) hours for a period not to exceed four
(4) consecutive years. The employee must provide the employer written
notice of at least six (6) months prior to January 1st of the year s/he
wishes to elect this option.

Whenever an off-duty officer initiates law enforcement action, the officer reverts
to on-duty status and is compensated at time-and one-half (1-1/2) for the exact
amount of time worked, subject to supervisory review. No minimums apply and
there is no continuous service for purposes of compensation.

Cc. Shift Differentials and Undesirable Hours:

1.

Effective December 28, 2008, employees regularly assigned to a shift falling
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. shall be paid a shift differential of
$9.11 per biweekly pay period. After December 31, 2012, this shift differential
shall be adjusted by the percentage of wage increase negotiated on the date of
the effective wage increase.

Effective December 28, 2008, employees regularly assigned to a shift falling
between the hours of 10:30 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. shall be paid a shift differential of
$27.99 per biweekly pay period. After December 31, 2012, this shift differential
shall be adjusted by the percentage of wage increase negotiated on the date of
the effective wage increase.

Effective December 28, 2008, employees regularly assigned to a shift falling
between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 1:00 a.m. shall be paid a shift differential of
$37.79 per biweekly pay period. After December 31, 2012, this shift differential
shall be adjusted by the percentage of wage increase negotiated on the date of
the effective wage increase.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 13
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Effective December 28, 2008, employees regularly assigned to a shift falling
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. shall be paid a shift differential of
$41.96 per biweekly pay period. After December 31, 2012, this shift differential
shall be adjusted by the percentage of wage increase negotiated on the date of
the effective wage increase.

Effective December 28, 2008, employees regularly assigned to a shift falling
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. shall be paid a shift differential of
$44.75 per biweekly pay period. After December 31, 2012, this shift differential
shall be adjusted by the percentage of wage increase negotiated on the date of
the effective wage increase.

Effective December 28, 2008, employees regularly assigned to work more than
one (1) shift during a biweekly pay period shall be paid a shift differential of
$41.96 per biweekly pay period, providing the starting times for the shifts differ by
a minimum of three (3) hours. After December 31, 2012, this shift differential
shall be adjusted by the percentage of wage increase negotiated on the date of
the effective wage increase.

Sunday Hours: Effective December 30, 2007, employees with shifts starting work
on Sundays shall be paid an additional $1.05 per hour. Persons called to work on
Sundays for other than a complete shift will also receive an additional $1.05 per
hour. Each year hereafter, the amount will be adjusted by the percentage of
wage increase negotiated, with the amount rounded off to the nearest five (5)
cents. Effective in 2009, the amount will remain at $1.05. Effective December
11, 2011, the amount will be $1.10 and effective the last pay period of 2013 that
amount shall increase to $1.15. Effective the last pay period of 2014 and through
2015 that amount shall be $1.20..

Saturday Hours: Effective December 30, 2007, employees with shifts starting
work on Saturdays shall be paid an additional $.50 per hour. Persons called to
work on Saturdays for other than a complete shift will also receive an additional
$.50 per hour. Each year hereafter, the amount will be adjusted by the
percentage of wage increase negotiated, with the amount rounded off to the
nearest full five (5) cents. Effective December 11, 2011, the amount will be $.50.
Effective the last pay period of 2013 that amount shall increase to $.55.

Note: This subsection shall apply to all work normally recorded on the payroll as
Sunday or Saturday work. It shall not apply to shifts which begin on Friday and
end on Saturday or begin on Saturday and end on Sunday, but it will apply to
entire shifts which begin on Saturday but may end on Sunday or begin on
Sunday but may end on Monday.

D. Holiday Work:

1.

Employees performing authorized work on a day designated as a holiday by this
Contract shall be compensated at a rate equal to two (2) times the employee's
regular straight time rate for all hours worked. Such employees shall be afforded
an opportunity to work a full shift.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 14
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Employees scheduled for duty on a Contract designated holiday as part of their
regular work week shall be charged holiday leave time for any part of the shift not
worked.

In addition to the above, employees performing authorized work on a Contract
designated holiday shall be granted a mutually agreeable day off as
compensatory time, or at the employee's option, a day's pay at the regular
straight time rate.

E. Call Back and Court Appearances:

1.

a. Employees, on an off duty day, on vacation, or who are assigned to a
shift starting at 8pm or later, on a workday or off-duty, who are called
back to duty or are ordered by the Employer or subpoenaed to give
testimony about events arising out of their employment, shall be paid or
compensated for a minimum of three (3) hours at the rate of time-and
one-half (1-1/2) the employee's regular rate of pay.

b. Two hours of pay or compensatory time at the employee's discretion at
the rate of 1-1/2 times the employee’s regular rate of pay shall be paid to
employees who are called back or ordered to work for Rhythm and
Booms or comparable Independence Day Celebration if the employer
rescinds that order or call-back within twenty-four hours of the time they
were ordered or called-back to work.

Employees, on a duty day, except employees who are assigned to a shift
starting at 8 pm or later, who are called back to duty or are ordered by the
Employer or subpoenaed to give testimony about events arising out of their
employment, shall be paid or compensated for a minimum of two (2) hours at the
rate of time-and one half (1-1/2) the employee's regular rate of pay, unless such
work is scheduled less than 59 minutes of the employee's regular duty shift. Shift
adjustments shall not be exercised in such a manner so as to avoid the payment
of the premiums provided in this paragraph.

a. Court Appearance Cancellation: Two hours of pay or compensatory time
at the rate of 1-1/2 times shall be paid to employees scheduled to appear
in court if the employee is notified of a court appearance cancellation
within twenty four (24) hours of the scheduled court appearance time.

b. Accrual of overtime under the provisions of E(1), above shall continue
while the employee is required to be present in court outside of the
employee's regular duty hours, and shall include the time during noon
recess of the court.

An employee(s) shall not be eligible for the benefits provided in paragraphs (1)
and (2) of this section if he/she makes:

a. Any appearance related to a labor dispute including but not limited to
grievance arbitration and interest arbitration;
b. An appearance as a defendant against whom the Chief of Police has

either taken disciplinary action or recommended disciplinary actions.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 15
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Retired employees who are subpoenaed by the City of Madison, the Dane
County District Attorney or the Dane County Corporation Counsel and appear to
give testimony in civil or criminal judicial proceedings about events arising from
their employment shall be compensated at the rate of time-and-one-half (1-1/2)
the employee's regular rate of pay, but not less than three (3) hours of pay. The
rate of pay is to be determined by the salary schedule in effect at the time of the
employee's retirement.

Employees who are off-duty and who are contacted by phone by the employer
regarding a work related issue, or by a prosecutor regarding testimony about
events arising out of their employment, shall be compensated at time-and one-
half (1-1/2) of the employee’s rate of pay for any phone call that exceeds ten (10)
minutes or more. No compensation will be provided for phone calls less than ten
(10) minutes duration and no other compensation minimums apply. Employees
may be required to verify requests for compensation under this provision
following prescribed Departmental procedures.

F. Shift Adjustment Premium: Employees shall be paid at the rate of time-and one half

(1-1/2)

the employee's regular rate of pay for hours worked outside of their regularly

assigned shift when said shift is temporarily adjusted in accordance with the provisions
of Article IX (D).

G. Vacation Leave Pay: Employees shall be permitted to receive a biweekly paycheck in

advance

1.

e of the normal biweekly payday provided that:

The employee requests to receive the advance biweekly paycheck no earlier
than nineteen days prior to the normal payday and no later than fourteen days
prior to the normal payday.

The request to receive the advance biweekly paycheck is approved by the
Department or Division Head.

The employee will be on paid vacation leave for five consecutive days, one of
which shall be the normal biweekly payday and one of which shall be the day
preceding the normal biweekly payday.

H. Longevity Pay: All permanent full time employees shall receive longevity pay calculated
to the nearest dollar, subject to the following schedule and terms and conditions:

1.

Schedule:

a. Three (3%) per cent of the base pay at the beginning of the fifth (5) year
of continuous employment.

b. An additional 3% (total of 6%) of base pay at the beginning of the tenth
(10) year of continuous employment.

c. An additional 2% (total of 8%) of base pay at the beginning of the
fourteenth (14) year of continuous employment.

d. An additional 1% (total of 9%) of base pay at the beginning of the
sixteenth (16) year of continuous employment.

e. An additional 1% (total of 10%) of base pay beginning with the eighteenth
(18) year of continuous employment.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 16
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

f. An additional 1% (total of 11%) of base pay beginning with the twentieth
(20) year of continuous employment.

g. An additional 1% (total of 12%) of base pay beginning with the twenty-fifth
year (25) of continuous employment.

Longevity payments shall be effective on the first day of the biweekly pay period
following the completion of the required length of service.

For purposes of longevity pay, authorized leaves of absence without pay in
excess of twelve (12) days, and any time spent on layoff status, shall not act to
break the condition of continuous employment as it applies to this Article. Nor
shall such time be considered employment in determining qualifications for the
periods of employment set forth in Schedule 1 of H of this Article.

All longevity provisions of this Section shall be made only in compliance with the
existing rules of the Employer.

Educational Incentive Pay:

1.

The Education Incentive Program and Pay Plan for the Madison Police
Department as set forth in the Memorandum of Understanding of July 13, 1995
(see Appendix 1) shall be considered as part of this agreement as though more
fully set forth. Such education incentive program is negotiable and subject to the
grievance procedure contained in Article VI.

Effective December 26, 1976, the Police Education Incentive Program shall be
amended to eliminate the annual in service training examination. However, the in
service training examination will be retained and will be used as a part of
employee evaluation.

All employees hired prior to December 26, 1976 are hereby qualified and eligible
following twenty four (24) months of employment and shall be granted a
minimum of five (5) points. Incentive points based on qualification by annual
written exam will be credited to each eligible employee based on the employee's
highest exam grade of the past two (2) years. Furthermore, the Police Education
Incentive Program shall be amended effective December 26, 1976 to provide that
employees shall not be eligible to receive Education Incentive pay until the
completion of forty two (42) months of continuous employment as a
commissioned member of the Police Department.

Reimbursement of Educational Expenses:

a. Tuition reimbursements for all eligible members of the bargaining unit will
be the prevailing per credit hour charges levied by the following
institutions: University of Wisconsin-Madison, Edgewood College, Upper
lowa University, Concordia College, Bellevue University, Herzing College
and Madison Area Technical College. In the event a unit member desires
to attend any institution not set forth in the above list, tuition
reimbursement for approved courses taken shall be at the discretion of
the Police Chief. Reimbursement rates will be established annually using
the prevailing rates for per credit hour charges in effect on January 1.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 17
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Pre-approval shall be required prior to enrollment in courses for which an
employee is intending to make application for tuition reimbursement
and/or incentive points. The approval process is as follows:

1) Employees must submit the tuition reimbursement form to the
Chief by November 15th of the year preceding the year in which
the employees intends to attend classes.

2) The form should provide the name of the college that the
employee will be enrolled in, the number of classes that you will
be taking in the calendar year and the cost of each course of
study, if you will be requesting tuition reimbursement.

3) The Chief will review all outstanding requests and inform the
affected employee by December 31st.

Tuition reimbursement for any college credits associated with a Master's
Degree will not be allowed except if approved by the Police Chief and ina
related field.

Reimbursement for tuition expenses for graduate degree courses or
undergraduate degree courses for members who already possess a
Master's Degree or an undergraduate degree respectively will not be
granted, except for those college courses approved by the Chief that are
a prerequisite for acceptance into an approved Master's Degree Program.
Employees seeking tuition reimbursement will be required to submit a
copy of the final passing grade for each class and a receipt for payment
of tuition or a bill for tuition if the institution offers a deferred payment
option to the Department Budget Office upon completion of each class
semester. To be eligible for educational incentive points, you must also
submit a copy of all class transcripts (that include the total number of
credits earned) to your Department payroll clerk. Reimbursement for
books, interest, late fees, service charges or any fees not directly
associated with a credited course will not be allowed.

Incentive points for college credits or reimbursement for application costs
for college credits that are awarded for the completion of the basic recruit
training program, for any component thereof or for any assigned on-duty
in-service training will not be granted. Incentive points for the completion
of those components associated with required basic recruit training or
assigned on-duty in-service training will not be granted.

Incentive points or reimbursement for application fees for college credits
that are awarded for engaging in an_ individual's recreational,
unsupervised, unmonitored pursuit such as bowling, weight lifting and
jogging will not be granted.

All members shall be required to submit for review papers required in
conjunction with internships for which college credits are awarded.

If any employee, who has received reimbursement of educational
expenses, leaves the department in less than five (5) years of service,
following receipt of such reimbursement, the employee will reimburse the
City for the total amount of educational reimbursement that they have
received. This shall not apply to employees who leave the department
because they are eligible for Wisconsin Retirement Fund annuities, Social
Security benefits, or other public employment fund annuities. It shall also

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 18
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

not apply for employees who have received approval for educational
expenses through the end of December, 1998.

J. Early Reporting Time: The fifteen (15) minute daily early reporting period shall remain in
effect. Employees shall be compensated at the rate of one and one half (1-1/2) for the
early report period when worked. Such time credit shall be granted during in service
training, military leave and special short-term assignments (two (2) weeks or less).

At their option, employees may elect to receive pay or compensatory time credit at the
rate of one and one half (1-1/2) their regular rate of pay.

K. Positions Filled in Temporary or Acting Capacity:

1. When members of this Association are assigned by the Employer to fill a position
in a higher rank classification in an acting capacity, they shall be entitled to the
salary pertaining thereto, but not less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) per shift. This
subsection shall not apply on those occasions when a sergeant is assigned to fill
the Officer-In-Charge Position in an Acting Capacity.

2. When a sergeant works a minimum of one (1) hour or more as an Acting Officer-
In-Charge, he/she shall be paid two dollars ($2.25) per hour for all time worked in
such capacity.

L. Field Training:

1. When members of the Association are actively engaged in performing the duties
of Field Training Officers, they shall be granted one (1) hour of straight pay for
each eight (8) hours that a Field Training Officer has a probationary officer. This
amount can be prorated for working a partial day.

2. When members of this Association are actively engaged in performing the duties
of Detective Training or Investigator Training, they shall be granted one (1) day
off with pay for each of the designated Field Training Evaluation Periods in which
they are involved.

3. When members of this Association are actively engaged in performing the duties
of Field Training Supervisors, they shall be granted one (1) day off with pay for
each of the designated Field Training Periods in which they are involved.
Members assigned as Field Training Supervisor shall also receive one (1)
additional eight (8) hour day of pay at straight time for monitoring and completing
all necessary paperwork for all (regardless of how many) probationary officers,
functioning in a solo patrol capacity, are assigned to them. Payment for these
services will be on the last paycheck of each year and will be contingent upon the
completion of monthly evaluations on time and turning these evaluations in to the
Field Training Officer Coordinator, for all probationary officers assigned to them.

4. All days off with pay taken pursuant to this section shall be taken off at a mutually
agreed time as decided by the affected member and the Chief of Police. Under
no circumstances shall pay be granted in lieu of time off provided in this section.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 19
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

M.

Senior Patrol Officer, Detective, Sergeant, and Investigator Additional Pay:

1.

Beginning February 7, 2010, the six (6) most senior patrol officers having ten (10)
years in rank or more, on any shift starting between 12:00pm and 5:59pm; and
the six (6) most senior patrol officers having ten (10) years in rank or more, on
any shift starting between 6:00pm and 1:00am shall, in addition to receiving shift
differential premiums identified in Article VIII, C, be paid $50.00 per pay period
for working those shifts. Each year hereafter, the amount will be adjusted by the
percentage of wage increase negotiated, with the amount rounded off to the
nearest five (5) cents. Beginning the last pay period of 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014,
and 2015, that amount shall be $51.50, $52.55, $54.10, $55.75, and $57.40.

Beginning February 7, 2010, the five (5) most senior Detectives having at least
ten (10) years in rank shall, in addition to receiving shift differential premiums
identified in Article Vill, C, be paid fifty dollars ($50.00) per pay period if they
have primary duty assignments starting between 12:00pm and 1:00am. Each
year hereafter, the amount will be adjusted by the percentage of wage increase
negotiated, with the amount rounded off to the nearest five (5) cents. Beginning
the last pay period of 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015, that amount shall be
51.50, $52.55, $54.10, $55.75, and $57.40.

Beginning February 7, 2010, the three (3) most senior Sergeants having at least
ten (10) years of experience in rank shall, in addition to receiving shift differential
premiums identified in Article VIII, C, be paid $50.00 per pay period if they are
assigned to a shift starting between 12:00pm and 1:00am. Each year hereafter,
the amount will be adjusted by the percentage of wage increase negotiated, with
the amount rounded off to the nearest five (5) cents. Beginning the last pay
period of 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015, that amount shall be $51.50,
52.55, $54.10, $55.75, and $57.40.

Beginning February 7, 2010, the two most senior Investigators having at least ten
(10) years of experience in rank shall, in addition to receiving shift differential
premiums identified in Article VIII, C, be paid $50.00 per pay period if they are
assigned to a shift starting between 12:00pm and 1:00am. Each year hereafter,
the amount will be adjusted by the percentage of wage increase negotiated, with
the amount rounded off to the nearest five (5) cents. Beginning the last pay
period of 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015, that amount shall be $51.50,
52.55, $54.10, $55.75, and $57.40.

Handgun Reimbursement: All members will receive $500.00 on each tenth (10th)
anniversary of employment. Beginning in 2011, this amount will increase to $750.00. In
the pay period including January 1, 2010 and January 1, 2011, each member will receive
a onetime additional payment of $100.00.

 

ARTICLE IX
HOURS OF WORK & DUTY ASSIGNMENTS

Work Day Work Week:

1.

The regular work day shall consist of eight (8) consecutive hours. The City shall
maintain the present practice of permitting employees not less than eight (8)

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 20
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

minutes prior to the end of their tour of duty to file reports, and to clean and store
equipment.

2. The regular average annual work week shall consist of thirty-seven and one-half
(37-1/2) hours, exclusive of the fifteen (15) minute early report requirement.

3. New employees, while attending the MPD Academy on a predominantly Monday
through Friday work schedule, shall work a regular forty (40) hour work week.
When a probationary officer is performing patrol duties in Field Training, their
regular work week shall conform with A.2.

Upon successful graduation from the Academy and being assigned to Patrol,
new employees’ work week will thereafter conform to the provisions in Section 2.

Work Shifts: The Chief of Police shall establish, publish, and assign employees to such
permanent work shifts as he/she may designate in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph A., 1. and 2. and 3. and paragraph H. below.

Permanent Shifts: Permanent regular work shifts established by the Chief of Police or
his/her designee may be changed with seventy-two (72) hours notice to the affected
employees.

Temporary Shift Adjustments: The Chief of Police may adjust individual work shifts on a
temporary basis, without the advance notice required in paragraph C. above, provided
the employee so affected shall be paid the shift adjustment premium specified in Article
VIII, F., for those hours worked outside of the employee's permanent regular shift.

Flexible Shift Assignment: Officers volunteering for special assignments which by the
peculiarity of the duty to be performed requires a flexibility in duty hours, may adjust their
hours of work with the approval of the Chief of Police. The adjustment of hours under
this provision will not be subject to the shift adjustment premium specified in Article
VIII, F.

Work Day: First Detail Detectives shall be assigned to an 8 hour day, which includes a
paid lunch period, conforming with the practice in other divisions or bureaus of the
department. Deviations up to one hour in such daily work schedule may be made without
the notice requirements set forth in paragraph IX, C. of the Contract, pertaining to
changes in work schedules. Every effort shall be made by the Chief to give the
individuals involved at least eight (8) hours notice of said deviation from the individual's
regular schedule. Should the Chief deviate the shift by more than one consecutive hour,
the overtime provisions of Article IX, D. will apply.

Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Chief of Police from scheduling employees not
currently required to be present at the 15 minute briefing session into a work day which
requires a 15 minute briefing session, if he/she deems it desirable for any reason.

Adjustment of Hours: Hours of work shall not be adjusted if the avoidance of overtime is
the one and only purpose for such an adjustment.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 21
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

H. Hours of Work and Duty Assignments:

1.

At least once a year, assignments to Patrol and Community Policing Teams will
be open for bidding with selection based upon classification seniority.

Initial assignments and all subsequent assignments as Court Services Officer
and Municipal Court Bailiffs will be based upon classification seniority, provided
that the employee, at the time of the assignment, is able to meet the needs of the
assigned work area and has a willingness and necessary qualifications to
accomplish the duties of the position. The initial assignment as a Court Services
Officer or Municipal Court Bailiff shall be for a period of three years, with
subsequent reassignments for one year.

Shift assignment of employees within a rank classification within a work unit or
section shall be made on the basis of seniority, except:

a. Newly hired or promoted personnel may be assigned to various shifts and
assignments for training purposes for not more than one year, but such
assignments shall not be considered permanent.

b. Management reserves the right to determine staffing levels on the various
shifts for all ranks.

Beat assignments within Patrol will be offered following the annual assignment of
employees. It is the intent of this paragraph, consistent with past practice of the
department, to utilize classification seniority in the selection of patrol beats, and
the retention of those beats until the next assignment of beats, providing that the
employee demonstrates the willingness and ability to address problems
(including taking appropriate enforcement action, etc.) within the assigned beat.

Initial assignments and all subsequent assignments to the following positions will
be based on classification seniority, provided that the employee, at the time of
assignment, is able to meet the needs of the assigned work area and has a
willingness and necessary qualifications to accomplish the duties of the position.
The assignment period for each of these positions is four (4) years, with the
Chief's option to extend an officer in said assignment for a period of one (1) year.
Members who have completed an assignment rotation in any of these positions
may not reapply for future vacancies in that unit for two (2) years.

a. Traffic Enforcement Safety Team Officer/Sergeant, with exception noted
below: Motorcycles have specific eligibility requirements and may be
granted year-to-year extensions in their assignment beyond four (4) years
with the approval of the Chief of Police, unless another employee applies
for and meets the specific eligibility requirements for this position.

 

Assignment to work units and sections not open for bidding shall be made at the
discretion of the Employer based upon the needs of the department as
determined by the Employer with due consideration given to the interests of the
affected employees, as well as the order of their classification seniority. Affected
employees shall be provided, whenever reasonably practicable, with written
notice at least ten (10) days prior to any such assignments. These positions,
hereafter referred to as closed and competitive, will be filled following the process

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 22
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

outlined below. Vacant positions for Canine Officer, Training Sergeant/Officer
and Task Force Sergeant/Officer may have additional requirements.

Process for Filling Closed and Competitive Position Vacancies

1.

Employee must submit a written expression of interest by memo and attach a
resume and a completed supervisory input form.

Members who receive an adverse report from a supervisor may still compete for
the position and have the option of attaching a written rebuttal to the supervisory
input form.

Candidates will participate in an oral interview.

The oral interview board will be comprised of a minimum of three (3) participants
to include: A commanding officer or supervisor of the work unit with the vacancy,
a MPPOA member who currently works in or had worked in the unit, and a
civilian (preferably from within the department).

The commander or supervisor responsible for creation of the oral board should
give consideration to establishing a panel that reflects the diverse makeup of the
organization to the extent possible.

The oral board will create interview questions on an annual basis.

The oral board will make a recommendation to the Chief of Police following the
process. When two (2) candidates are equal, seniority will be the determining
factor in making the final recommendation to the Chief.

The highest-ranking member of the oral board will provide feedback to
candidates if desired.

Closed and competitive positions include the following positions, which will have
assignment periods of four (4) years with the Chief's option to extend said
assignment for a maximum period of one (1) year or when no other employee
with the necessary qualifications applies for the position. In the event no other
employee applies for any of the listed positions, the Chief has the discretion to
extend the employee currently in the position on an annual basis.

CIS Officer and Sergeant

Education Resources Officer

Crime Stopper Officer

Crime Prevention/ Gang Unit Officer
Safety Education Officer

Public Information Officer

Traffic Specialist

Neighborhood Police Officer

saroa9oD

Other closed and competitive assignments include the following positions, which
may have additional selection criteria as well as assignment periods determined
by the Employer:

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 23
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Canine Officer

Mounted Officer

Canine/Mounted Sergeant

Training Officer/Sergeant

Task Force Officer 1 Detective/Sergeant

goa009

Classification seniority is defined as the amount of continuous service in a given
rank or classification.

ARTICLE X
AUTHORIZED LEAVE

A. Vacation Leave:

Employees shall be granted vacation leave with pay during the calendar year subject to
the following terms and conditions:

1.

Satisfactory employee completion of six (6) months probationary period. This
provision may be waived to allow vacation scheduling for probationary training
academy members. In such a case, the employee will be required to pay back
the vacation time used, but not earned, if the employee is terminated prior to
completion of six (6) months service.

Vacation leave which is not taken within the calendar year in which it was earned
and prior to separation from service shall be deemed to have been waived,
except:

a. With the permission of the Police Chief.

b. When an employee successfully completes the original employment six
(6) months probationary period in December or within the first six (6)
months of the calendar year.

Vacation leave shall be accrued on the basis of continuous service, including
periods of paid absence time. Authorized leave of absence without pay in excess
of twelve (12) working days and periods of layoff shall not qualify as service time.

Vacation leave schedules shall be developed by the Employer and all such leave
shall be subject to the staffing requirements of the City.

Initial vacation leave will be selected, on a seniority basis, in increments of a
minimum of one (1) week. Such requests must be delivered to the respective
work sections on or before the day the annual shift change takes place for the
respective sections. The Employer will take all reasonable steps to notify
employees of that specific date each year and to notify them as soon as possible
of the status of those requests. For those employees entitled to more than one
work week vacation, subsequent vacation leaves may be taken in one hour
increments. Vacation leave may, at the option of the employee, begin on any day
of the week. However, all vacation leave shall be subject to the staffing
requirements of the City.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 24
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

6. Vacation leave shall accrue at the rate of:

a. Ten (10) work days after one full year of continuous service, or,

b. Twelve and one-half (12-1/2) work days per year after completion of three
(3) years of permanent continuous service, or,

c. Fifteen (15) work days per year after completion of seven (7) years of
permanent, continuous full time service, or,

d. Seventeen and one-half (17-1/2) work days per year after completion of
eleven (11) years of permanent, continuous full time service, or,

e. Twenty (20) work days per year after completion of fifteen (15) years of
permanent continuous full time service, or,

f. Twenty five (25) work days per year after completion of nineteen (19)
years of permanent continuous full time service.

g. Twenty-seven (27) work days per year after completion of twenty-seven

(27) years of permanent continuous full-time service.

7. Eligible employees shall accrue a proportional part of vacation at the completion
of service for each pay period. Vacation earned through a calendar year may be
taken during such year. However, should an employee's service be terminated
prior to the end of the year, he/she shall reimburse the City for any unearned
leave he/she has taken. There shall be deducted from his/her last wages an
amount sufficient for that purpose.

8. Eligible employees shall adhere to the existing rules of the Employer in applying
for vacation leave.

9. Full vacation credit for the contract year in which an employee retires or dies.

10. Employees may elect to convert up to eighteen (18) days of his/her annual
vacation or a combination of vacation and floating holidays to an amount of cash
equivalent calculated on the regular earnings of said employee. The employee
shall apply for such conversion option in accordance with Department procedure
and such amount shall be paid in a manner determined by the Employer.

B. Sick Leave: All permanent full time employees shall be eligible for sick leave benefits for
absence necessitated by illness; bodily injury (when not a Worker's Compensation
case); exposure to contagious disease (when confirmed by a physician), and serious
illness or death in the immediate family of the employee.

The term “immediate family” shall be defined as the employee’s spouse or designated
family partner (in accordance with reasonable rules and regulations adopted by the City
for such designation of family partners, APM 2-37) and the employee’s spouse’s or
family partner's Father, Mother, Father-in-law or Mother-in-law, Children, Step-Children,
Foster-Children, Grandchildren, Grandparents, Brother, Sister, Brother in law, Sister in
law, and employee’s Step-parents. All such leave shall be subject to the following terms
and conditions:

1. Sick leave shall be earned at the rate of one half (1/2) day per biweekly pay
period of service, but shall not exceed thirteen (13) days earned in any calendar
year.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 25
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Sick leave credits may be accumulated to a total not to exceed 150 days, except
as provided in B(5), (6) and (7), of this Article.

During the original employment probationary period, permanent fulltime
employees may draw in advance on the six (6) days sick leave credits which may
be earned in the probationary period, provided such unearned leave shall be
repaid to the City if the employee's service is terminated prior to the completion
of the probationary period.

In order to qualify for sick leave, an employee shall:

a. Notify his/her supervisor in advance of the absence.

b. Keep his/her supervisor informed of conditions and estimated day of
return to work.

c. Attendance is an essential function of any job. When the amount of sick

leave used appears to have a pattern indicative of sick leave abuse, the
employer may take the following steps to rectify the apparent problem.

1) Request a meeting with the employee and, if the employee
desires, the employee’s personal representative. The purpose of
this meeting will be to discuss the apparent pattern. Management
will also present the employee with a written document describing
the pattern and a clear directive to rectify the problem The
employee will be afforded the opportunity to respond to this
document in writing.

2) If, after this initial meeting, the apparent pattern of sick leave
usage continues, the employer may request another meeting with
the employee and, if the employee desires, the employee’s
personal representative. At this meeting, management may issue
written orders requiring the employee to provide a note from a
medical professional when using sick leave for a period of time
proscribed in the written orders.

3) If the employee fails to comply with the written orders, then the
employee may be subject to discipline.

d. Apply for sick leave benefits in compliance with the rules of the Employer.

Employees who retire or who are disabled and who are eligible to receive Social
Security benefits or Wisconsin Retirement Fund annuities or other public
employment fund annuities shall receive the cash equivalent of up to one
hundred percent (100%) of their accumulated unused sick leave credits, not to
exceed 163 working days’ compensation computed at the prevailing rate plus any
longevity pay and educational incentive pay in effect at the time of the
employee's retirement, or in the case of disability, as soon as the employee's
disability has been established by either the Social Security Office or the
Wisconsin Retirement Fund Board.

Should an employee die while employed by the City, any accrued unused sick
leave shall be added to the last pay due the employee.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 26
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

7. Employees earning sick leave in excess of 150 days shall receive a 100% cash
sum equivalent to the employee's regular salary for any unused excess days.
Payment is to be made on the pay day immediately preceding December 15th.

Cc. Holidays: The following days are established as paid holidays for permanent full>-time

employees:

New Year's Day 01/01/2012; 01/01/2013; 01/01/2014; 01/01/2015
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day 01/16/2012; 01/21/2013; 01/20/2014; 01/19/2015
Easter Sunday 04/08/2012; 03/31/2013; 04/20/2014; 04/05/2015
Memorial Day 05/28/2012; 05/27/2013; 05/26/2014; 05/25/2015
Independence Day 07/04/2012; 07/04/2013; 07/04/2014; 07/04/2015
Labor Day 09/03/2012; 09/02/2013; 09/01/2014; 09/07/2015
Thanksgiving Day 11/22/2012; 11/28/2013; 11/27/2014; 11/26/2015
Day after Thanksgiving 11/23/2012; 11/29/2013; 11/28/2014; 11/27/2015
Christmas Day 12/25/2012; 12/25/2013; 12/25/2014; 12/25/2015

Four Floating Holidays

The floating holidays are to be taken on a day selected by the employee, subject to the
approval of the department head. Employees have the option of taking cash for the
floating holiday as described in Section A, Paragraph 10.

All holiday leave shall be subject to the following terms and conditions:

In the event that any of the designated holidays fall on an off duty day, the employee
shall be granted a day off at a time which is agreeable to the employee and the
supervisor, or at the option of the employee, be granted payment equal to one day pay
at his/her regular rate of pay.

D. Paid Leave Time: Employees shall receive eight (8) hours compensatory leave credit for
December 24 and December 31. Such compensatory leave time shall be taken off at a
mutually agreeable time or paid in cash at the option of the Employer.

E. Bereavement Leave:

1. Permanent full time employees shall be allowed up to three (3) work days leave
with pay in the event of the death of such employee's spouse or designated
family partner (in accordance with reasonable rules and regulations adopted by
the City for such designation of family partners, APM 2-37) or the death of the
employee’s or the employee’s spouse’s or family partner’s Great-grandparents,
Grandparents, Father, Stepfather, Mother, Stepmother, Children, Stepchildren,
Foster Children, Grandchildren, Brother, Sister, Brother-in-Law, and Sister-in-
Law, to be used within two weeks of the qualifying death, funeral, or memorial
service. Extensions to the two week limitation may be approved after written
request to the Chief of Police or his designee.

2. In the event of the death of a member of the employee's family, other than those
set forth in paragraph 1 of this section, leave may be granted at the discretion of
the Police Chief and Personnel Director and such leave shall be charged against
the compensatory time balance of the employee. In the absence of
compensatory time, the leave may be charged to accrued sick leave.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 27
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

G.

Military Leave:

1.

Employees who are duly enrolled members of the reserve components of the
Armed Forces of the United States, shall be granted a leave of absence not to
exceed three (3) weeks or a period of fifteen (15) work days in the calendar year
for the purpose of attending duly ordered field camps of instruction or instruction
from schools.

Employees who are called to duty by reason of national or international civil
disobedience, disorder, or insurrection, shall be granted a leave of absence not
to exceed three (3) calendar weeks or a period of fifteen (15) work days.

Employees granted leave under paragraphs 1 and 2 of this section shall be
entitled to reimbursement when their daily military salary is less than their regular
daily salary from the Employer, in an amount equal to the difference.

Any employee who has exhausted his/her leave under X (F) 1 or 2 in any
calendar year and who needs additional leave during the federal fiscal year that
“overlaps” the last one-quarter of the calendar year may use any or all of the
military leave available for the subsequent calendar year for purposes of such
additional leave; provided, however, that no such employee may use more than
the leave available in the subsequent year.

Jury Service Leave:

1.

Employees who are called for jury service in any court of the State of Wisconsin
or of the United States, shall be granted a leave of absence to serve as a juror.

Employees granted leave under paragraph one of this section shall be eligible for
reimbursement of lost salary, subject to the following terms and conditions:

Where the fee paid for such jury service, exclusive of transportation expenses
and meals is less than the salary paid by the City to such employee, for a
comparable period of time, the City shall reimburse the employee for the loss
occasioned by such difference.

Leave of Absence Without Pay:

1.

The Chief of Police may, in appropriate circumstances, grant leave of absence
without pay, limited to twelve (12) working days.

Leave of absence without pay in excess of twelve (12) working days, may be
granted by the Chief subject to the written approval of the Human Resource
Director.

Disability Leave of Absence: Those employees incurring disabilities not duty connected
shall be entitled to a leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed six (6)
months, subject to the following provisions:

1.

The employee shall apply for such leave, in writing, to the Chief of Police.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 28
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

The employee shall submit a physician's report, including a statement regarding
the nature of the disability and whether or not the employee is able to work.

The employee shall submit to the Chief of Police, a physician's statement of
release for work before returning to work.

During such period of leave, the City will continue to make its normal contribution
towards health insurance premiums.

Compensatory Leave: Employees who elect compensatory leave as the method of
compensation for overtime work may be granted such leave in accordance with the
following provisions:

1.

All compensatory leave time shall be taken off at a time mutually agreed to by the
employee and the Chief of Police.

Unused accrued compensatory time shall be paid upon termination of
employment.

ARTICLE XI
INSURANCE RETIREMENT

Health and Hospital Coverage:

1.

For calendar year 2012-2015, the City will contribute toward the monthly
premium for family coverage or toward the monthly premium for single coverage
a dollar amount equal to 105% of appropriate premium rates of the lowest bidder
among the health care providers offered in the Wisconsin Public Employer's
Group Health Insurance program's Dane County service area plans.

The City will contribute toward the monthly premium for family coverage or
toward the monthly premium for single coverage a dollar amount equal to ninety
percent (90%) of the appropriate premium rates of the lowest bidder among the
health care providers offered in the Wisconsin Public Employer's Group Health
Insurance program’s Dane County service area plans for an employee who
selects to retire and is eligible for Wisconsin Retirement fund benefits between
the age of fifty (60) and fifty-four (54). Such contributions shall be discontinued
when an employee reaches the age of fifty five (55).

For calendar years 2012-2015, retired employees may, at their option, continue
to participate in the health insurance plans referenced above. However,
premiums for such insurance must be paid for by the retiree except as provided
in paragraph 2 above.

The provisions of Section 1 above as to the City contribution toward the monthly
premium for family coverage or for single coverage shall:

a. survive the expiration date of this agreement;

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 29
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

b. represent the contribution basis for health care continuation from the
expiration date of this agreement until the ratification of a successor
agreement;

c. serve as the basis for the negotiation of a successor collective bargaining

agreement, if any.

Current bargaining unit employees who wish to enroll in a plan offered by the
Wisconsin Public Employers Group Health Plan and who are required to enroll in
the Group’s “Standard Plan” for a specific period in order to obtain coverage shall
have the full cost of a single coverage plan paid by the City during that period.
Contributions by and on behalf of employees affected by this plan shall revert to
the provisions set forth in Paragraph 1 above, during the next Dual Choice
Enrollment.

Registered Domestic Partners shall be covered for health insurance when any of
the City’s insurance carriers provide for such coverage provided; however, that
any employee who desires such coverage must enroll in a program which offers
that benefit.

Payment will be made of a one-time reimbursement for the three-month premium
gap prior to retirement that occurs when an employee decides to utilize the City
health insurance program, but must pay the excess beyond 105% of the
Standard Plan until they get to the Dual Plan State. Payment will follow
retirement and will not exceed the actual dollars spent by the employee.

Effective January 1, 2003, employees who have spouses or registered domestic
partners who are employed by the city shall not be allowed to maintain two family
coverage health insurance plans unless it can be shown that an otherwise
eligible family member would not be covered or would not have access to a
specialist without the dual coverage. Employees may continue to maintain
individual single coverage plans or a single coverage plan and a family plan.

Life Insurance:

1.

The City will provide a Life Insurance Program through the Lincoln National Life
Insurance Company.

The City agrees to provide a life and total disability insurance benefit for all
commissioned members of the Police Department, equal to two year's pay in
addition to Worker's Compensation benefits. The City shall pay such individual
employee premiums required for the purposes of such insurance. The 2 years’
pay shall be determined by the amount certified for purposes of death or duty
disability as outlined in the Memorandum of Understanding dated January 21,
2000 (included in the back of the contract).

Payment under the terms of the insurance shall be made in case of duty incurred
death or total disability sufficient to cause the granting of pension under the
respective pension programs.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 30
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Cc. Wisconsin Retirement Fund:

1. The City will contribute on behalf of the employees the full cost of the employees’
share of contribution to the Wisconsin Employee Retirement Fund, unless
otherwise specifically prohibited from doing so by statute.

Effective January 1, 2012, each employee will pay a portion of the contribution
required by the Wisconsin Retirement System equal to 3% of gross wages.

Effective January 1, 2013, each employee will pay a portion of the contribution
required by the Wisconsin Retirement System equal to 5% of gross wages.

Effective January 1, 2014, each employee will pay a portion of the contribution
required by the Wisconsin Retirement System equal to that required by General
Municipal Employees (for example, that amount was determined to be 5.8% in
July, 2011, and will be 5.9% on January 1, 2012).

Effective January 1, 2012, those employees hired after July 1, 2011, will be
required to pay a portion of the contribution required by the Wisconsin
Retirement System equal to that required by General Municipal Employees.

2. The City will provide that employees may make additional contributions to the
Wisconsin Retirement Fund through payroll deduction.

D. Worker's Compensation: In the event any employee covered by the terms of this
Contract is entitled to receive compensation for temporary total disability in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 102, Wisconsin Statutes, said employee shall continue to
be paid by the City at 90% of the employee's wage rate but in no event at less than the
employee's pre injury net regular rate of pay. Said pay shall include his/her Worker's
Compensation benefit and shall continue for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty
(180) working days or thirty six (36) working weeks and during such period the employee
is receiving full pay under the provisions of this paragraph, said employee shall continue
to accrue sick leave and vacation in accordance with the provisions of this Contract,
provided that no employee by reason of this paragraph shall receive pay for more than
fifty two (52) weeks in any calendar year. Payment provided herein shall include the first
three (3) days said employee is absent from work.

E. Income Protection Plan: The insurance policy known as the Income Protection Plan
presently in force for City employees shall be maintained.

F. Dental Insurance: The City will make available a payroll deduction for dental insurance.
The deducted amount will be for 100% of the premium as indicated by the provider.
There will be no City contribution towards the premium. The City will make no
representation as to benefits provided or premium rates.

G. Post Employment Health Plan:

Post Employment Health Plan: The City will make a contribution each pay period into a
Post Employment Health Plan (PEHP) for each eligible employee according to the
schedule below. The PEHP Plan, selected by the Union, will specify plan benefits,
limitations, eligibility requirements and enrollment procedures.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 31
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

The Union shall be responsible for selecting the administrator of the plan and for the
general financial operation of such. The City will be held harmless in the administration
of the plan, and from making any additional individual contributions to the plan during the
term of the contract. Beginning with the start of the 2005 wage increase, and each year
thereafter, the amount will be adjusted by the percentage of wage increase negotiated.
On December 11, 2011, the amount was $29.28 and was increased to $30.16 to reflect
the 3% raise. No payments will be made for the calendar year of 2012. On
December 9, 2012, the amount is increased to $30.76. The last pay period of 2013 that
amount shall increase to $31.68. The last pay period of 2014, that amount shall
increase to $32.64. The last pay period of 2015, that amount shall increase to, $33.61.

Employees who meet the criteria to retire under the Wisconsin Retirement System
(WRS) will, upon retirement, have fifty percent (50%) of their unused sick leave accrual
applied to the Post Employment Health Plan.

Domestic Partner Health Insurance: The City shall reimburse employees for health
insurance premiums paid for qualified domestic partners on the following basis:

1. To qualify for reimbursement for health insurance premiums paid by a domestic
partner, the employee and partner shall be:

a. In a relationship of mutual support, caring and commitment and intend to
remain in such a relationship in the immediate future; and

b. Not related by blood closer than would bar marriage in the State of
Wisconsin; and

c. Not married or legally separated and if either party has been a party to an

action or proceeding for divorce or annulment, at least six (6) months
have elapsed since the date of the judgment terminating the marriage;
and

d. Neither domestic partner is currently registered in a domestic partnership
with a different domestic partner and, if either partner has previously been
registered as a domestic partner in a domestic partnership, at least six (6)
months have elapsed since the effective date of termination of that
registration; and

e. Eighteen (18) years of age or older; and

f. Competent to contract; and

g. Occupying the same dwelling unit as a single, non-profit housekeeping
unit, whose relationship is of permanent and distinct domestic character;
and

h. Not in a relationship that is merely temporary, social, political, commercial

or economic in nature; and

i. Jointly responsible for each other’s common welfare and share financial
obligations which could be demonstrated upon request by providing proof
of the existence of:

1) Designation of Domestic Partner as primary beneficiary in either
my or my Domestic Partner’s will, or life insurance, or retirement
plan

OR

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 32
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

2) Two (2) of the following:

. Joint mortgage or lease or other appropriate written
evidence of common residence such as joint utility bills

. Durable property or health care power of attorney

. Joint ownership of motor vehicle

. Joint checking account or joint credit account

2. Change in Domestic Partnership: The employee agrees to notify the City of
Madison Human Resource’s Department within thirty (30) days if any eligibility
requirements listed above and certified by the employee on a form provided by
the City are no longer satisfied which would make the Domestic Partner no
longer eligible for the City of Madison Health Insurance Premium Reimbursement
Plan. If the Domestic Partner relationship terminates, a subsequent registration
of Domestic Partnership can be filed six (6) months after a Termination of
Domestic Partnership letter of the previous partnership has been submitted to the
City of Madison Human Resources Department.

3. Acknowledgment: Employees applying for this benefit shall certify that:

a. Their domestic partner does not have access to any employer sponsored
health insurance (i.e., where the Employer would pay at least fifty percent
(50%) of the cost). Any such access must be reported immediately and
will serve to negate their domestic partner’s eligibility for this benefit.

b. The benefits for their Domestic Partner using this registration will remain
in effect as long as they remain an active City employee and continue to
meet the health insurance eligibility requirements or until alternative
health insurance coverage is provided through the State of Wisconsin
Insurance Board and that the percentage level of City contribution shall
be consistent with that established for the employee.

c. The filing of false, inaccurate, or misleading information, or the failure to
correct any such information which may result in the repayment of
unauthorized benefits, may subject the signing employee to discipline,
and may result in other legal and/or financial penalties as provided by
law.

d. The City of Madison retains the right to verify, at any time, any and/or all
of the information set forth in the registration.

e. This registration affects only health insurance benefits. The sick leave,
bereavement leave, and family leave benefits to City employees
registered with the Human Resources Department remain the same and
unaffected by this registration.

f. That it is the employee’s responsibility to periodically (not more frequently
than monthly) request said reimbursement through the appropriate form
available from the Human Resources Department.

4. The City of Madison will reimburse qualifying employees for the amount of the
premium paid by their qualified domestic partner, but no more than an amount
equal to the difference between 105% of the cost of the lowest family plan health
insurance option and 105% of the cost of the lowest single plan health insurance

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 33
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

option. Permanent part-time and hourly employees are eligible for this benefit
based on the pro-rated share that the City pays for their health insurance.
Reimbursements will be made on the City employee’s payroll check and
withholding will be taken for federal, FICA, Medicare and State tax purposes.

ARTICLE XII
UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT

A. Subject to the rules of the Police Department, the City shall provide the original complete
uniform and equipment, with the exception of the duty handgun(s), to all new employees.
The City also shall provide all necessary or uniform equipment as determined by the
Chief, for employees assigned to specialized units, including, but not limited to the
Emergency Response Team, Special Events Team, Honor Guard, Arson Unit,
Motorcycle Unit and Canine Services Unit. These items will remain the property of the
City for the first five (5) years of employment. Items obtained through the employee's
uniform and equipment account shall remain the property of the individual employee.

1. Exceptions:

a. All uniform and equipment items purchased for new employees by the
City or through an employee’s uniform account must be returned if the
employee terminates employment with the City within five (5) years of the
date of hire, regardless of the reason. The Captain of Personnel and
Training maintains a current list of items.

b. All members who retire from active service must return specific
equipment items to the City upon retirement. These items include the
following:

1) Department Identification Card(s)
2) Department access card

3) Pager (if issued)

4) Cell phone (if issued

5) Portable radio

6) City he1 card(s)

7) All issued keys (traffic box, jail elevator, other Medeco)
8) Policy Manual or disk
9) Basement parking bar code (if issued)

10) — Any specialized equipment issued to the employee

2. Maintenance: The City shall contribute 100% of the annual uniform expense of
any member required to wear a uniform in their primary duty assignment, not to
exceed $500 per year, except that the contribution for the 2012 calendar year
only shall be $250. Individual employee accounts may be accumulated over a
period of three (3) years, but shall not exceed a maximum accumulation of
$1,000.

3. Damage:

a. The City shall replace each employee's uniform item or piece of
equipment damaged as a result of the performance of his/her duty,
however, work related equipment not issued by the Department will

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 34
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

remain the responsibility of the employee, and no repair or replacement
will be made at Department expense except as provided for within this
contract. Department approved personally owned firearms that are
damaged or destroyed while on duty may be repaired or replaced at the
sole discretion of the employer on a case by case basis. The denial of a
repair or replacement shall not be subject to the grievance process. All
worn out or lost uniform and equipment items shall be paid for out of the
employee's uniform and equipment account.

b. All worn out or lost uniform and equipment items shall be paid for out of
the employee’s uniform and equipment account.

4. Clothing Allowance:

a. In lieu of the uniform provisions provided by this Article and subject to the
approval of the Chief of Police, any member not assigned to wear a
uniform by virtue of their primary assignment, shall receive a clothing
allowance of sixty five dollars ($65) per month, except that for the 2012
calendar year only, this amount shall be thirty two dollars and fifty cents
per month ($32.50).

b. Members who receive the monthly clothing allowance must pay for all
uniform and equipment items out-of-pocket, since this allowance is meant
to cover these expenses, unless there are remaining funds in the officer's
uniform account during the year that the employee switches over to a
monthly clothing allowance. Since each commissioned member is
expected to have a full military-style Police uniform available for
immediate use, any remaining funds in the officer’s uniform account will
be set aside and may be used by the employee to purchase approved
uniform items until that money is exhausted. Once the money is
exhausted, the employee is responsible for maintaining a military-style
uniform and full duty belt and equipment at their own expense.

B. Uniform item requests shall require sufficient funds in the individual employee's account.
Items requested shall be from among those approved by the Chief of Police. The
Department Purchasing Clerk will issue a list of authorized uniform account items by
February 1st of each year. The selection and quantity of approved items selected will be
at the discretion of the individual employee with the following limitations on an annual

basis:

. One (1) pair of binoculars

. One (1) multi-lock tool

. One (1) knife

. Two (2) flashlights

. One (1) equipment bag

. Two (2) sweaters

1. An officer must have the approval of their Captain to exceed the limits described

above, based upon an extenuating circumstance. The Captain will review each
officer request and provide written authorization, when appropriate, to the Police
Department Purchasing Clerk.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 35
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

2. Duty weapons may not be purchased with the uniform and equipment account.

3. Approved uniform items for all employees shall include, but not be limited to,
uniform outerwear suitable for climatic conditions (hats, jackets, sweaters, gloves
and boots) and general uniform items (shirts, pants, name tags, badges, shoes
and belts).

4. Other uniform items may be approved for employees when they are assigned to
a specialized unit.

5. Approved equipment items for all employees shall include, but not be limited to,
items routinely used in the course of duty including duty belt, ammunition
pouches, and other gear designed to carry equipment on the duty belt,
handcuffs, baton, flashlights, equipment bag, duty handgun accessories
(magazines, speed loader and repair parts), and practice ammunition sold
through the front counter. Business cards may be charged to the Uniform
Account through approved City process when ordered at the “Group” rate.

6. The Employer shall provide a subsidy of $550.00 for bullet-proof vests for all
bargaining unit members whose vests require replacement due to normal wear
and tear. The difference between the cost of the vest and this subsidy can be
taken from the uniform account by the employee when adequate funds are
available.

All employees, when they reach the age of 40, may elect, on a one-time basis, to receive
a clothing allowance for up to three (3) consecutive years, in lieu of the Uniform and
Equipment Account, provided they notify the employer in writing at least six (6) months
prior to the January 1st of the year they wish to elect this option. The dollar amount for
this option will be the same as provided in A(4).

ARTICLE XIll
SUPPORTING SERVICES

Electronic Locking Devices: The City will provide in appropriate vehicles electronic
locking devices to allow for the safe storage of weapons.

Stenographic Support: The City, when possible and reasonable, will attempt to provide
stenographic support for the Patrol and Traffic Teams on a twenty four (24) hour per
day, seven (7) days per week basis.

Vehicle Allowance: Employees who may on occasion be required by the City to use their
own automobiles for City business shall be provided the IRS Rate, except for employees
using their personal vehicle for attending specialized training who shall receive twenty-
two (22) cents per mile.

Bus Pass Subsidy: For the exclusive use of employees who purchase one of the bus
passes specified below and who utilize such pass for their mode of transportation to and
from work, the Employer shall provide a subsidy for such employees toward the cost of
such bus passes as provided in the following schedule:

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 36
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

 

 

 

 

Madison Metro Passes Employer Subsidy
Commuter Pass $15.00
Monthly Pass $15.00
Adult QUIK-TIX Tickets $7.50

 

 

 

 

E. Contract Printing: The City shall provide for the typing and printing in book form of a
sufficient number of copies of the Agreement that all members of the bargaining unit will
receive a copy. The Association shall arrange for distribution of the copies. The City and
the Association shall share equally the cost of typing and printing the copies of the
contract.

ARTICLE XIV
AID TO CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS OF CONTRACT

It is intended by the parties hereto that the provisions of this Contract shall be in harmony with
the duties, obligations and responsibilities which by law devolve upon the Common Council and
these provisions shall be applied in such manner as to preclude a construction thereof which will
result in an unlawful delegation of powers unilaterally devolving upon the Common Council.

ARTICLE XV
SAVINGS CLAUSE

If any article or section of this Contract, or any addenda thereto, shall be held invalid by
operation of law by a tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or if compliance with or enforcement of
any Article or section should be restrained by such tribunal, the remainder of this Contract and
addenda shall not be affected thereby and the parties shall enter into immediate collective
bargaining negotiations for the purpose of negotiating a substitute clause for such Article or
section.

ARTICLE XVI
OTHER RIGHTS RESERVED

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Contract to the contrary, the City and the
Association reserve the right to enforce any other legal rights to which they are entitled.

ARTICLE XVII
LEGAL PROTECTION
A. Attorney Fees:
1. In the event an employee is proceeded against or is the defendant in an action or

special proceeding in his/her official capacity, or arising out of his/her
employment by the City, the City agrees to pay all reasonable attorney's fees
required by the provisions of Sec. 62.115, 895.46 and/or 895.35 of the Wisconsin
Statutes governing the obligations by the City to such employee, except in the
event the action or special proceeding is brought by the City against the
employee, and provided, however, in any event, the City Attorney shall determine
whether legal counsel shall be furnished to such employee by the City Attorney
or his/her designee.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 37
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

2. In the event an action or special proceeding is prosecuted by a third party before
the Police and Fire Commission, the City agrees to pay reasonable attorneys’
fees provided the employee is found by the Police and Fire Commission to have
acted within the scope of his/her employment and the employee is exonerated by
the Police and Fire Commission of all charges or the charges are otherwise
dismissed or withdrawn.

B. Compensatory Damages: For intentional torts the Employer agrees to pay up to $5,000
each person and $25,000 each incident for compensatory damages which an employee
may become legally obligated to pay because of personal injury, bodily injury and/ or
property damage committed within the scope of his/her employment, for which such
employee may be held liable to the party injured in an action at law, suit inequity, or
other property proceeding for redress. Personal injury shall be defined as false arrest,
erroneous services of civil papers, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution, assault
and battery, libel, slander, defamation of character, violation of property rights or
deprivation of any rights, privileges or immunities secured by the Constitution and laws
of the United States of America. Bodily injury shall be defined as bodily injury, sickness
or disease sustained by any person or persons accidentally caused by an act of an
employee. Property damage shall be defined as damage to or destruction of property
including loss of use thereof. In cases involving judgments in excess of the above
mentioned limits, employees may seek further relief according to the provisions set forth
in City Ordinance Sec. 3.41.

ARTICLE XVIII
NOTICE

All written notices sent by the Association to the City shall be directed to the Labor Relations
Manager.

All written notices sent by the City to the Association shall be directed to the Association
Secretary.

ARTICLE XIX
MAINTENANCE OF BENEFITS

It is agreed by the parties that all benefits authorized by this Contract or ordinances of the City
of Madison or resolution of the City Council of the City of Madison which are not specifically
referred to or modified by this Contract shall be maintained in the same manner.

It is further agreed and understood by the parties that this particular provision is subject to any
and all rights retained by the Employer as spelled out more fully in Article V (Employer Rights).

ARTICLE XX
PROMOTIONAL PROCEDURES

A. Definition: Except as otherwise specifically provided in any Memorandum of
Understanding between the parties for the period of that Memorandum, the following
promotional procedures shall apply: A promotion shall be defined as the movement of
any employee from one job classification to a higher job classification with a higher
salary range within the bargaining unit.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 38
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Eligibility Requirements for Promotion:

1. Eligibility Requirements for the Rank of Detective or Investigator: Four (4) years
or more Police Officer experience with MPD from the date of hire to the starting
date for the investigative academy.

2. Eligibility Requirements for the Rank of Sergeant:

a.

b.

Five (5) years or more experience as a Police Officer on MPD before the
starting date for the Leadership Academy or,

Four (4) years or more experience as a Police Officer on MPD and one
(1) year or more experience as a MPD Detective or Investigator before
the starting date for the Leadership Academy.

Description of the Eight-Step Promotion Process:

Step 1:Announcement:

a.

b.

Captain of Personnel and Training determines the number of anticipated
vacancies in each rank on an annual basis.

Formal announcement of the number of projected vacancies for each
rank (and the subsequent size of each panel) and publication of the dates
and times of the Leadership and Investigative Academies. This
announcement will include a request for personnel intending to compete
in the process to submit a buckslip formally declaring their intention to
compete.

Eligible personnel submit a buckslip to the Captain of Personnel and
Training expressing their intention to compete in the promotional process
and the rank for which they intend to compete.

Step 2: Screening Process for Admission to the Leadership or Investigative Academy

a.

Current Supervisor submits input, based on the employee’s performance
in the last twelve (12) months, to the Captain of Personnel and Training
by completing the appropriate form.

Candidates who are eligible to attend either the Leadership or
Investigative Academy on-duty are identified and notified with the
publication of a formal eligibility list prepared by the Personnel and
Training team.

Eligible candidates submit a résumé to the Captain of Personnel and
Training, who distributes it to members of the oral interview board for
each rank.

Step 3:Successful Completion of the Leadership or Investigative Academy

a.

Personnel and Training coordinate and offer Leadership Academy,
consisting of the following two parts for the ranks of sergeant and
lieutenant.

1) General quality improvement methods and leadership skills.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 39
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

2) Technical competence skills that are rank specific.

Personnel and Training coordinate and offer Investigative Academy,
consisting of the following two parts for the ranks of detective and special
investigator.

1) General quality improvement methods.
2) Technical competence skills that are rank specific.

Promotional candidates attend appropriate academy, while on duty, and
must successfully complete written pass/fail and practical exams
associated with the academy they are attending.

Step 4:Formation of the Promotional Boards for each rank.

a.

Captain of Personnel and Training Team announces the formation of
promotional boards for each rank and solicits interested promotional
board nominees.

Members of the Personnel and Training Team put together the
promotional boards, consisting of five (5) people for each board, based on
the following compositional criteria for each rank:

1) Investigator Board
One lieutenant.
One sergeant from the identification lab.
One police officer.
One investigator.
One outside representative who is a resident of the City of
Madison.
2) Detective Board
One lieutenant from the detective team.
Two detectives or detective supervisors (or one of each).
One police officer.
One outside representative who is a resident of the City of
Madison.
3) Sergeant Board
One lieutenant.
One sergeant.
One detective supervisor, detective or investigator.
One police officer.
One outside representative who is a resident of the City of
Madison.

These selections will be reviewed and approved by the Chief of Police.
The outside representatives must be somebody from outside the
department who is familiar with the values and philosophy driving
Leadership and Quality Improvement methods.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 40
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Step 5: Oral Interviews

a. The Captain of Personnel and Training Team schedules oral interviews
for each eligible promotional candidate.
b. Promotional boards conduct oral interviews.

Step 6: Identification of Panels for Each Rank

a. Promotional board reviews résumés and results of oral interviews.

b. Promotional boards evaluate and compare candidates within each rank to
each other. Seniority will be considered and weighed favorably in the
evaluation of each candidate.

c. Promotional boards identify the panels for each rank, consisting of the
number of annual anticipated vacancies in the rank, plus three (3), with
no movement onto panels allowed after a promotion.

d. Highest ranking person from MPD on each promotional board provides
feedback on request to any candidate that did not make the panel.

Step 7:Individual(s) Promoted

a. Chief makes promotion from panel. Permanent promotions are subject to
approval of Board of Police and Fire Commissioners.

b. The panel expires after a period of one (1) year unless extended by the
Chief of Police.

c. After the panel expires, the Chief of Police provides feedback to all

members of panels who did not get promoted.

Step 8:Promotion becomes permanent after candidate successfully completes
probationary period.

Cc. A standing committee shall be created to review the Department's promotional
procedures as they affect bargaining unit employees. The committee shall consist of
three persons selected by Management and three persons selected by the MPPOA. All
MPPOA committee members are to be in pay status during any meetings of the
committee.

ARTICLE XxXI
DISCIPLINE

The Chief of Police or his/her designated representative shall have the right to discipline for just
cause. Written notice shall be provided to the affected employee(s) at the time the disciplinary
action is taken. This notice shall include the reason(s) for such action and the penalty to be
imposed. Probationary employees shall not have the right to appeal through the grievance
procedure any disciplinary actions or discharge occurring during the first eighteen (18) months
of their employment.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 41
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

ARTICLE XXII
DURATION OF AGREEMENT

Except as otherwise provided, this agreement shall be effective and retroactive from January 1,
2012, through December 31, 2015.

All calendar dates in the expired 2010-2012 agreement will be adjusted to reflect the above
provision.

Either party shall be entitled to request that the labor contract be reopened one time for each
year, 2014 and 2015, for the limited purpose of collectively bargaining wage adjustments,
described in the salary schedule, for employees in the bargaining unit. The requests to reopen
must be made on or before August 1, 2013 to reopen 2014 wages and August 1, 2014, to
reopen 2015 wages.

The labor contract shall be reopened only one time in each of those years for the subsequent
contract year. Requests to reopen shall be in writing. Upon receipt of such request, the labor
contract shall be opened, and the parties shall meet at mutually agreeable times and places for
the purposes detailed in this reopener provision.

Dated at Madison, Wisconsin, on this day of , 2012.

CITY OF MADISON MADISON PROFESSIONAL POLICE
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

 

 

 

 

 

MAYOR PRESIDENT

COMPTROLLER VICE PRESIDENT

CITY CLERK SECRETARY

LABOR RELATIONS MANAGER TREASURER

Approved as to form only, on this day of , 2012.
CITY ATTORNEY

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 42
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

APPENDIX A
EDUCATION AND INCENTIVE PROGRAM AND PAY PLAN

A. Introduction: The role of the municipal law enforcement agency is constantly undergoing
rapid changes. These changes are being brought about because of public demand.
Because of the complexities of the duties of law enforcement today, higher standards
are needed. There is a continuing need to induce college-trained persons to enter the
police field. To recruit the college-trained personnel, incentive pay program goals should
be attainable primarily through continuous training and education.

The following program provides technical police training, which can be provided by the
departments, in conjunction with formal and advanced education acquired at institutions
of higher learning. Through this approach, it is believed that police personnel can
increase their effectiveness with the changing role of police in today’s society.

B. General Information:

1. Eligibility for Tuition Reimbursement: Successful completion of the pre-service
academy and all field training phases.

2. Eligibility for Educational Incentive Pay:

a. All commissioned personnel through the rank of Sergeant will be eligible
for incentive pay after forty-two (42) months of service, provided that they
have met the other requirements of the program. Approved leaves of
absence do not reduce already credited months of service, but additional
months do not accrue during the leave.

b. Attainment of required incentive pay point totals, as outlined in Section Ill.

3. Incentive pay will be provided as a percentage above the basic salary (not
including longevity) for each individual eligible. It is recommended that there be
eight (8) incentive salary steps above the basic salary, as outlined in Section Ill.

4. The basis for qualifying for incentive pay shall include both formal education and
qualifying specialized training.

5. Approved courses previously taken by members of the department at various
institutions of higher learning will count toward the points required to achieve
incentive salary levels. Credit for approved seminars, applicable military courses,
short courses, and other appropriate courses, above the basic level, and
previously taken, will be given as outlined below, with proof of satisfactory
completion of such courses to be furnished by personnel seeking such credit. No
expenses shall be reimbursed for courses taken prior to the inception of this
program. The following guidelines were approved for the initial implement of the

program:

a. The term “above basic level” means above minimum departmental
requirements.

b. Additional vocational school courses, including those with non-

transferable as well as transferable credits, would be given full credit
value as advised by the school attended. Vocational courses and military

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 43,
MPPOA

Cc.

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

courses taken which are non-accredited would be evaluated on the
formula of 1/48 point per hour of attendance.

c. Required on-the-job-non-military training in prior vocations will not be
credited unless it is shown that the subjects taken could be vocational
school accredited and so certified.

Tuition costs for approved courses as defined in the contract bargaining
agreement at institutions of higher learning, including those named in the
collective bargaining agreement, will be paid for by the City, for those personnel
who take such courses while working full-time for the Police Department. Such
tuition payments will be refundable to the personnel involved upon presentation
of evidence of satisfactory completion of the courses. The cost of books and
other supplies, if any, will be born by the person involved, who will retain
ownership of the books and supplies. One hundred percent (100%) of the tuition
will be reimbursed upon satisfactory completion of the course, with credits
awarded by the institution.

Administrative control of this program, including, but not limited to, the approval
of courses, credits given or earned, tuition payment, etc. will rest with the Police
Chief. It shall be the responsibility of the Chief to make sure that any member of
his/her department who is participating in this incentive program does so without
any interference with the normal duties expected of Madison police officers.
Subject to the grievance arbitration similar to other contract provisions, the Police
Chief shall be the final authority for decisions affecting the program, of his or her
department.

ncentive Pay Program: Advancement to each of the incentive salary steps shall be on a
point system as follows:

 

Increase Above

 

Incentive Step Basic Salary Points Required

 

8th 22% Graduate Degree

 

7th 18% B.A. or B.S.

 

6th 16% 150 Points

 

5th 15% 96 College Credits or 130 Points

 

4th 12% 85 Points

 

3rd 9% 45 Points

 

2nd 6% 25 Points

 

 

 

ist 3% 15 Points

 

 

it should be noted that unless a person has a college degree, the 6th step, or 16%, is the

limitation of his or her advancement under this program.

Points shall be awarded on the following basis:

1.

2.

A 22 percent level for a graduate degree (beyond the Bachelor’s Degree).

An 18 percent level for a B.A. or B.S. degree.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 44

 
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

A 15 percent level, for three years (96 college credits) of completed higher
education.

Seventy points for an Associate Degree.

On point for each approved semester hour credit obtained, either in residence or
by correspondence, in a college, technical institute, or other institution of higher
learning.

One point for each full year of service in the department, to be given on each
officer’s anniversary date, with no further breakdown being made.

1/16 of a point for each class hour at approved seminars, short courses, etc.,
conducted by state, federal, or other training agencies, outside the in-service
training programs of the departments.

D. Conclusion: The intent of this document is not to diminish any benefits by the MPPOA
members by contractual obligation or established past practice(s). Management shall
reserve all of their established prerogatives as well. This document is intended to clarify
management rights and contractual obligations.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 45
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

APPENDIX B
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING PROGRAM

A. Policy:

The City of Madison and MPPOA, recognize that illegal drug use/controlled substances
misuse, the use of prescription drugs other than as prescribed, and misuse of alcohol by
employees are threats to the public welfare and the safety of departmental personnel. It
is the goal of this program to eliminate illegal drug use/controlled substances misuse, the
use of prescription drugs other than as prescribed, and the misuse of alcohol through
education, treatment, rehabilitation, and as appropriate, discipline of the affected
personnel consistent with the provisions of this program. The unlawful manufacture,
distribution, dispensing, possession, possession with intent to deliver illegal
drugs/controlled substances, or illegal drug use/controlled substances misuse, the use of
prescription drugs other than as prescribed, or misuse of alcohol is prohibited.

Nothing herein shall preclude the employer from establishing and enforcing its rules,
regulations, policies and/or procedures. This program supplements existing work rules.

B. Informing Employee About Drug and Alcohol Testing:

All employees shall receive a copy of and be fully informed of this drug and alcohol
testing program. Employees will be provided with information concerning the impact of
the use of alcohol and drugs on job performance. In addition, the Employer shall inform
employees on how the tests are conducted, what the test can determine and the
consequences of testing positive for illegal drugs, controlled substances, or use of
prescribed drugs other than as prescribed, or for testing positive for alcohol while on
duty. All newly hired employees will be provided with this information during the Recruit
Academy. No employee shall be tested before this information is provided to him/her.
Prior to any testing, the employee will be required to sign a consent and release form.
Failure or refusal to do so is a violation of this program.

Cc. Employee Testing:

1. Reasonable Suspicion Testing. A reasonable suspicion test may be based on the
following: Specific, contemporaneous, articulable observations of a trained
supervisor or trained City official concerning the appearance, behavior, speech or
body odors of the employee resulting in the reasonable belief that the employee
is using, under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs/controlled substances or
has misused prescription drugs while on duty. Such observations may include
but are not limited to one or more of the following:

Slurred speech

Odor of alcohol

Inability to walk in a straight line; staggered gait
Exaggerated, excited state of emotions

Bizarre or erratic behavior

Rapid, dramatic mood swings

m~oao7D

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 46
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

5.

g. Observation of the ingestion or possession of alcohol or a controlled
substance as defined herein during working hours, or while on City
property, or while operating a City vehicle off-duty or personal vehicle for
City business or while representing the City.

When the Employer believes, based upon objective and articulated factors, that
the employee, whether on or off duty, has possessed, used, manufactured,
dispensed, distributed, or sold any illegal drug or controlled substance not
prescribed by a licensed physician, or used a prescribed drug other than as
prescribed, the employee may be immediately placed on administrative leave
with pay and may be subject to discipline up to and including discharge. The
following evidence shall be required to make such a determination:

a. Reliable evidence of drug use, possession, distribution on or off premises
or on or off-duty, provided by a law enforcement officer and documented
in an officer's report.

b. Reliable evidence of drug use, possession, distribution on or off premises
or on or off-duty, provided by a reliable and credible source, which has
been independently corroborated by a third party.

c. Possession of paraphernalia normally associated with improper,
unauthorized or illegal use of controlled substances as provided in
paragraph (a) or (b) above.

Post Accident Testing. An employee will be tested for illegal drugs/controlled
substances and/or alcohol after involvement in a fatal or serious bodily injury
accident while on-duty. A serious bodily injury accident includes any bodily injury
which creates a substantial risk of death, or which causes serious permanent
disfigurement, or which accuses a permanent or protracted loss or impairment of
the function of any bodily member or organ or other serious bodily injury.

Return-to-Duty Test. A return-to-duty test is an alcohol and drug test
administered prior to an employee being permitted to return to duty, when the
employee has violated this program. The employee may not return to duty
without a negative test.

Follow-Up Test. A follow-up test is an alcohol and drug test administered to an
employee who has violated the prohibitions of this program and who has been
permitted to return to duty after passing a return-to-duty alcohol and drug test.
The number and frequency of any such tests shall be determined by the
Substance Abuse Professional, and shall consist of at least six tests in the first
12 months following the employee's return to duty. Follow-up testing shall not
exceed 60 months after the employee's return to duty. The Substance Abuse
Professional may terminate such tests at any time after the first six tests have
been administered if s/he determines the tests are no longer necessary.

Specimen Collection will be completed in accordance with Mayoral APM 2-23.

E. Drug Testing will be completed in accordance with Mayoral APM 2-23.

F. Alcohol Testing will be completed in accordance with APM 2-23.

 

CITY OF MADISON

PAGE 47
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

Medical Review Officer:

The Medical Review Officer must be a licensed physician with a knowledge of substance
abuse disorders." The Medical Review Officer shall be familiar with the characteristics of
the drug tests (sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value), the laboratories running the
tests and the medical conditions and the work exposures of the employees. The role of
the Medical Review Officer will be to review and interpret the positive test results. The
Medical Review Officer must examine alternate medical explanations for any positive
test results. This action shall include conducting a medical interview with the affected
employee, review of the employee's medical history and review of any other relevant
biomedical factors. The Medical Review Officer must review all medical records made
available by the tested employee when a confirmed positive test could have been
caused by legally prescribed medication.

Laboratory Results:

The laboratory will advise only the employee and the Medical Review Officer of any
positive results. The results of a positive drug or alcohol test can only be released to the
Human Resources Director by the Medical Review Officer once he/she has completed
his/her review and analysis of the laboratory's test. The Human Resources Director will
make every effort to keep the results confidential, consistent with the Wisconsin Open
Records law. The Human Resources Director may release test results to the parties and
to an adjudicator as part of an arbitration or other legal proceeding.

Testing Program Costs:

The Employer shall pay for all costs involving the initial and confirmation drug and
alcohol testing as well as the expenses incurred from the Medical Review Officer. The
Employer shall also reimburse each employee for his or her time and expenses,
including travel time incurred, if any, related to off-duty testing, involved in the testing
procedure. If the employee requests that the split drug specimen be tested, the cost of
the split specimen test shall be paid by the employee. If the test of the split specimen
does not reconfirm the presence of the drug(s) or drug metabolite(s) found in the primary
specimen, the employee shall have any paid leave used after the initial positive test
restored and shall be reimbursed for the costs associated with having the split specimen
tested.

Voluntary Rehabilitation Program:

Employees who have an alcohol issue or a drug issue which does not include the
unlawful manufacture, sale, distribution, dispensing or possession with intent to deliver
illegal drugs/controlled substances and who were not already under investigation for
possible criminal activity or violation of a Department Rule and who voluntarily come
forward and ask for assistance shall not be disciplined for coming forward. However, if it
later becomes known that the employee was under any investigation at the time the
employee came forward, the provisions of this section shall not apply. An employee may
voluntarily enter rehabilitation without a requirement for prior testing. The employee shall
authorize the Substance Abuse Professional to advise the Human Resources Director of
the employee's progress in rehabilitation. The treatment and rehabilitation costs shall be
paid for by the employee's insurance program. Such employees will be allowed to use
their accrued and earned leave, exchanges, or unpaid leave ‘for the necessary time off

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 48
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

involved in the program. If the Substance Abuse Professional advises the Human
Resources Director that the employee requires additional treatment beyond what was
originally recommended, the employee shall be solely responsible for any costs not
covered by insurance. Due to the significant interest of the public, the City and
Department personnel in protecting the welfare and safety of all, the employee in
rehabilitation under this section shall not be permitted to return to regular duty unless
and until the treating Substance Abuse Professional informs the Human Resources
Director that the employee can safely perform all of his or her duties.

However, any employee who does not voluntarily come forward under this section and
tests positive for illegal drugs/controlled substances under the procedures contained in
this Agreement or who tests positive for alcohol while on duty or otherwise violates this
program may be subject to discipline up to and including termination according to the
Department Rules and Regulations.

Duty Assignment:

Following a determination by a Substance Abuse professional that the employee is in
need of assistance in resolving problems associated with alcohol misuse and/or use of
illegal drugs or misuse of controlled substances, the employee shall comply with all
requirements prescribed by the Substance Abuse Professional and shall remain in
compliance with any and all prescribed and recommended rehabilitation and/or
treatment programs.

If the employee has violated the illegal drugs/controlled substances prohibitions he or
she shall undergo it return-to-duty drugs/controlled substances test with a result
indicating a verified negative result for drugs/controlled substances use and the
Substance Abuse Professional shall inform the Human Resources Director that the
employee may safely perform his/her regular duties before the employee may return to
duty.

Right of Appeal:

The employee has the right to challenge the results of the drug or alcohol tests in the
same manner that any other Employer action under the terms of this agreement is
grievable. The employee has the right to appeal any discipline imposed before the
Madison Board of Police and Fire Commissioners.

Employer Responsibility.

This drug and alcohol testing program was initiated at the request of the Employer. The
Employer assumes sole responsibility for the administration of this program and shall be
solely liable for any legal obligations and costs arising out of the administration of this
program by City personnel.

Discipline.

Just cause for discipline up to and including discharge may be established when an
employee engages in any conduct in violation of the provisions of this program or when
an employee uses illegal drugs or misuses controlled substances, or uses prescription
drugs other than as prescribed, or misuses alcohol in violation of this program or refuses

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 49
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

to submit to testing. Failure to cooperate with the Substance Abuse Professional and to
comply with any required evaluation by a Substance Abuse Professional, failure to
comply and remain in compliance with any and all prescribed or recommended
rehabilitation and/or treatment programs, or testing positive for a different illegal drug or
controlled substance during a treatment program may establish just cause for discipline
up to and including discharge.

Changes in Testing Procedures:

The parties recognize that during the life of this agreement, there may be improvements
in the technology of testing procedures which provide more accurate testing or if
regulations required to be followed by the laboratories change, any such change will be
incorporated into this program only upon the agreement of the parties.

Conflict With Other Laws:

This Article is in no way intended to supersede or waive any constitutional or other rights
that the employee may be entitled to under federal, state, or local laws.

Definitions:

Alcohol: Alcohol means the intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or other
low molecular weight alcohols including methyl and isopropyl alcohol.

Alcohol Concentration (or Content): Alcohol concentration (or content) means the
alcohol in a volume of breath expressed in terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of
breath as indicated by an evidential breath test.

Alcohol Use: Alcohol use means the consumption of any beverage, mixture, or
preparation, including medication, containing alcohol.

Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT): A Breath Alcohol Technician is an individual who
instructs and assists individuals in the alcohol testing process and operates the
evidential breath testing device.

Confirmation Test:

1. For alcohol testing, a confirmation test means a second test following a
screening test with a result greater than 0.00 that provides quantitative data of
alcohol concentration. Confirmation of the screening test must be by an
Evidential Breath Testing (EBT) device listed on the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration's (NHTSA) Conforming Products List (CPL) and must be
capable of printing out each test result and air block, and must sequentially
number each test.

2. For drugs/controlled substances testing, a confirmation test means a second
analytical procedure to identify the presence of a specific drug or drug metabolite
which is independent of the screen test and which uses a different technique and
chemical principal from that of the screen test in order to ensure reliability and
accuracy. (Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GCIMS) is the authorized

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 50
MPPOA

01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

confirmation method for cocaine, marijuana, opiates, amphetamines, and
phencyclidine).

Evidential Breath Testing Device (EBTI: An evidential breath testing device is a device
approved by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) and placed on
the NHTSA's Conforming Products List and is used for the evidential testing of breath.

Follow-Up Test: A follow-up test is an alcohol and/or drug/controlled substances test
administered to an employee who has violated the prohibitions of this policy and who
has been permitted to return to duty after passing a return-to-duty alcohol and/or
drug/controlled substances test.

Medical Review Officer (MRO): A Medical Review Officer is a licensed physician
(medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy) responsible for receiving laboratory results
generated by the City's drug testing program who has knowledge of substance abuse
disorders and has appropriate medical training to interpret and evaluate an individual's
confirmed positive test result together with his or her medical history and any other
relevant biomedical information.

Refusal to Submit (to a Drug, Alcohol or Controlled Substances Test:

1. An employee fails to provide an adequate amount of breath during testing without
a valid medical explanation after he or she received notice of the requirement for
breath testing.

2. An employee fails to provide adequate urine for drugs/controlled substances
testing without a valid medical explanation after he or she has received notice of
the requirement for urine testing.

3. An employee fails to be readily available for post-accident testing.

4. An employee fails to report to, and undergo alcohol and drugs/controlled
substances testing, at a collection site as required.

Return-To-Duty Testing: A return-to-duty test is an alcohol and/or drugs/controlled
substances test administered prior to an employee being permitted to return to duty,
when the covered employee has violated this policy.

Screening Test (also known as Initial Test):

1. In alcohol testing, a screening test-means an analytical procedure to determine
whether a covered employee may have a prohibitive concentration of alcohol in
his or her system.

2. In drugs/controlled substances testing, a screening test means an immunoassay
screen (or other DHHS-approved test) to eliminate "negative" urine specimens
from further consideration.

Substance Abuse Professional (SAP): A substance abuse professional is a licensed
physician (Medical Doctor or Doctor or Osteopathy), or a licensed or certified
psychologist, social worker, or addiction counselor (certified by the National Association

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 51
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors Certification Commission) with knowledge of
and clinical experience in the diagnosis and treatment of alcohol and drugs/controlled
substances-related disorders.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 52
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT
OF NOTIFICATION OF DRUG/ALCOHOL TEST PROGRAM

| acknowledge that | have received a copy of and have been duly informed about the Police
Department's Drug and Alcohol Testing Program (the Program) and related procedures, which
are contained in the collective bargaining agreement (the Agreement) currently in effect
between the Madison Professional Officers Association (MPPOA) and the City of Madison (the
City). | have been provided with information concerning the impact of the use of alcohol and
drugs on job performance. In addition, | have been informed about how drug and alcohol tests
are conducted, what those tests can determine, and the consequence of violating the Program.

| also have been informed of the City's Employee Assistance Program (the EAP). | understand
that if | voluntarily come forward under Section 10 of the Program and ask for professional
assistance to deal with a drug use or alcohol misuse issue, | will not be disciplined by the
Employer, provided that there are no aggravating circumstances present, as described in the
Agreement. | understand how drug/alcohol test specimens are collected and further understand
that these specimens are subjected to medical tests that are conducted under the auspices of a
Medical Review Officer (the MRO), as defined in the Agreement. | understand that the MRO will
review and interpret any positive test results, and that | will have an opportunity to be
interviewed by the MRO to review my status, my medical history, and any relevant biomedical
factors prior to the Human Resources Director being informed whether the test results are
positive or negative. | also acknowledge that | will be asked, as a condition of my continued
employment, to sign a Consent to Release of Information relating to my test results and about
me as provided in the Agreement.

| understand that a confirmed positive drug or alcohol test result will result in my referral to a
Substance Abuse Professional under the Program. Finally, | understand that a violation of the

provisions of the Program or my testing positive for drugs on or off duty or for alcohol while on
duty may establish just cause for discipline up to and including discharge from the Department.

Printed or Typed Name of Employee:

Signature of Employee:

Date:

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 53
MPPOA 01/01/2012-12/31/2015

 

APPENDIX C
DEATH AND PERMANENT DISABILITY CALCULATION

BACKGROUND: Discussions were held between the parties relative to how to calculate the
death and/or permanent disability pension for officers that die or become permanently and
totally disabled as the direct result of bodily injury or occupational disease which arises out of
and in the course of employment with the employer. The parties agreed to the following:

1. If employee dies as the direct result of bodily injury or occupational disease which arises out
of and in the course of employment the employer; or

2. If an employee becomes permanently* and totally disabled as defined below, as a direct
result of injury or occupational disease which arises out of and in the course of employment for
the employer, for which you have been approved to receive a permanent disability pension
according to the applicable Wisconsin statutes then in effect; then upon receipt of satisfactory
proof of your death or permanent and total disability, the Hartford will pay you or your estate an
amount equal to 2 (two) times your annual rate of earnings subject to a maximum of
$1,000,000.00. Your annual rate of earnings is defined as your regular base salary and any
longevity and incentive pay entitlement on your last day of active full-time work at your usual
occupation without physical restrictions (i.e., the day immediately preceding the date of said
debilitating bodily injury or occupational disease) plus a factored overtime supplement. The
factored overtime supplement shall be 'computed by multiplying the average number of annual
overtime hours+ worked in the previous five (5) years by the hourly factor of the annual rate of
earnings. If you have worked for the employer for less than five (5) years, the average will be
determined over the time worked.

 

CITY OF MADISON PAGE 54
