 

 

 

AGREEMENT

Between

STATE OF HAWAII
CITY & COUNTY OF HONOLULU
COUNTY OF HAWAII
COUNTY OF MAUI
COUNTY OF KAUAI

and
STATE OF HAWAII ORGANIZATION OF POLICE OFFICERS
BARGAINING UNIT 12

JULY 1, 2011 - JUNE 30, 2017

 

 
TABLE OF

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ARTICLES
Number ALPHABETICAL ORDER Page
6. Access to Employer's Premises
5. Bulletin Boards
14. Changes in Departmental Rules
54. Compensation Adjustments...
44. Death or Injury to Employees
2. Definitions...
13. Discipline and Dismissal
4. Discriminatiot
57. Drug Testing
3. Dues, Service Fees and Deductions
36. Duration of Agreement.
41. Duties .
9. Educational and Informational Meetings.
26. Encouraging Advanced Education
53. Entirety Clause ...
32. Grievance Procedure...
49. Hawaii Employer-Union Health Benefits Trust Fun
39. Holidays...
27. Hours of Work.
56. Housing...
37. Layoffs and Re-Employment ....
8. Leaves of Absence for Union Business
25. Leaves of Absence With Pay.
29. Maintenance of Facilities .....
33. Maternity...
46. Meals...
34. Miscellaneous Provisions
10. Negotiating Committee ....
38. No Strike; No Lockout..
16. Orientation...
55. Other Leaves of Absence Without Pay
45. Outside Employment...

 

1 SHOPO 2011-2017
CONTENTS

 

 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

Number ALPHABETICAL ORDER Page
15. Overtime...
19. Parking..
31. Pay Differential ...
28. Personnel Information . os
12. Police Officer's Protection - Administrative Investigations and Interrogations.. 20
48. Police Officer's Protection - Criminal Investigations and Interrogations........... 60
43. Pre-Retirement Planning .
35. Prior Rights
21. Probationary Period
47. Promotions ..
1. Recognition..
11. Rights of the Employer
22. Safety and Health
30. Salaries ....
50. Savings Clause.
23. Seniority ....
18. Subsidized Automobiles
40. Supplemental Weapons.
51. Temporary Assignments
42. Trading Time....
20. Transfers
52. Travel Allowance.
17. Uniform and Equipment
7. Union Officials, Stewards and Representatives ..
24. Vacation Leave...

Salary Schedules

MOA, MOU, SUP.

 

EXHIBITS

 

AGREEMENTS

 

SHOPO 2011-2017 2
ARTICLES

Number NUMERICAL ORDER Page

1. RECOGNITION
A. Recognitiot
B. Copy of Agreement Furnished to New Employees / Others ..
C. Consultation ....
D. Mutual Consent
2. DEFINITIONS...
Department
Employee ..

 

 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  

 

Elected Official
Appointed Official
Union Representative
Operating Unit .
Patrol Officer
Interrogation ..
Discipline
Transfer.
. Reassignment .
UES, SERVICE FEES AND DEDUCTIONS.
Deduction of Member Fees
Deduction of Service Fees
Collection of Fees ..
Insufficient Earnings
Employee List..
New Employees
Religious Exemption from Fee:
ISCRIMINATION
Discriminatior
Interference ..
ULLETIN BOARDS.
Bulletin Boards
Video Bulletin Boards ....
.CCESS TO EMPLOYER’S PREMISES
Access to Employer's Premise:
Notification
INION OFFICIALS, STEWARDS AND REPRESENTATIVES
Recognition of Union Officials .
Union Stewards / Formula
Steward Coverage...
Transfer or Reassignment of Union Officials
List of Union Officials.

 

MOODS>EM> SOY MD M>UONMOODFOZEFACH-TONMOOWD

 

3 SHOPO 2011-2017
Number NUMERICAL ORDER Page

10.

11.
12.

13.

LEAVES OF ABSENCE FOR UNION BUSINESS
A. Leaves of Absence without Pat
1. Time Limit......
2. Accrual of Benefits

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 

Notification of Department Head .
DDUCATIONAL AND INFORMATIONAL MEETINGS
Procedures for Meetings
Inappropriate Subjects
NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE.
A. Notice of Time Off...
B. Negotiating Committee Members
C. Joint Labor-Management Workshops.
RIGHTS OF THE EMPLOYER.
POLICE OFFICER'S PROTECTION - ADMINISTRATIVE INVESTIGATIONS
AND INTERROGATIONS
A. Applicability of Articl
B. Administrative Investigations and Interrogations of Internal and
External Complaints
1. Definition and Scope.
2. — Limitations .
Internal / External Complaints
Notification of Investigation ..
Personnel File...
Personal Accountability.
Polygraph Examination
Interrogation Requirements
Location of Interrogation ..
Interrogation Procedures
Answering Questions During Interrogation .
Time Limit on Interrogation Sessions
Offensive Conduct During Interrogatiot
Record of Interrogation
Statute of Limitations ...
Psychological and/or Psychiatric Evaluatior
Garrity Rights.
C. Critical Incidents...
DISCIPLINE AND DISMISSAL..
A. _ Discipline Shall be For Cause .
B.
Cc.
D.

p>moop

  
 
    
   
   
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 

 

     

Son grat senpaoge

Immediate Discipline
Written Reprimand / Employee's File
Disciplinary Procedures.....
1. Disciplinary Notice / Acknowledgment .
2. Effective Dates...
3. Written Notice of Conditions
4. Confidentiality ...

 

SHOPO 2011-2017 4
Number NUMERICAL ORDER Page

14. CHANGES IN DEPARTMENTAL RULES ..
A. Written Notice...

B. Meet and Confer / Response Time.

15. OVERTIME...
A. Occurrence of Overtime Work When Earned .

1. When Overtime Occurs

a. Excess of Eight Hours

After Scheduled Shift.
Excess of 40 Hours
Legal Holiday...
Scheduled Day Off ....
New Shift / Less Than Twelve Hours Res
\dditions to the above provisions are as follows
Split-Shift Work
Call-Back.......
Court Attendance..
Occurrence of Overtime Work with Respect to
Official Leave with Pay or Compensatory Time
e. Change of Shift with Less Than 48 Hours Notice
f. | Change of Day Off with Less Than 48 Hours Notice
g. Scheduled Overtime During Off-Duty Hours...
h.
i,
j.

 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 

N
aoopEpreaog

 

  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 

Seventh Day Provision ..
Stand-By Time Pay.
Lack of Rest .....
k. Consultative Calls
Compensation for Overtime Work .
1. Basic Compensation Formula
2. Cash Payment Formula...
3. | Cash Payments for Overtime / Budgeted .
4. Cash Payments for Compensatory Time Upon Termination
5. Conversion to Compensatory Time / Formula
Ce
1
2.
3.
4.

  

ompensatory Time Off ....
. Accumulation of Compensatory Time
. Use of Compensatory Time ..
. Compensatory Time Considered Leave with Pai
. _ Conversion to Sick Leave..
D. Assignment of Overtime Work and Stand-By Duty
1. Equitable and Fair Assignment.
16. ORIENTATION
A. Union Orientation
B. Union's Health Benefit / Insurance Programs.
17. UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT
A. Uniform and Equipment Committee
1. Composit
2. Meetings
3. | Recommendations.

 

5 SHOPO 2011-2017
Number NUMERICAL ORDER Page

18.

19.
20.

21.

B. Employer Rights - Uniforms ..
1. Safety and Comfort
2. Neckties...
3. Police Hat:
Issued Equipment / Uniform Replacement
Uniform Maintenance Allowance .
Firearm Maintenance Allowance .
Supply Room...

Damaged, Worn, Lost or Stolen Equipment ..
Reimbursement for Clothing, Shoes, Eyeglasses & Watches .
1. Employer's Liability Limit.
2. Payment...
SUBSIDIZED AUTOMOBILES.
Providing of Automobile Allowances
Determination...
Vehicle Specifications
Replacement Vehicle..
On Duty Damages...
Allowance During Leaves of Absence
Required Equipment.
Insurance .
Notification
Changes to Subsidized and/or Fleet Vehicle Programs
Installation and Removal of Required Equipment
Automobile Allowance Schedule .
County of Maui / County of Kauai
1. Private Automobiles Used for Official Duty .
2. — Limitations se
Condition of Vehicle / Employee Responsi
Gasoline Issued / Rate for On-Duty Miles
Time Limit on Use of Subsidized Vehicles
. _ Window Tin
PARKING
TRANSFERS..
. _ Placement of Employee:
B. Seniority / Hardship
C. Requests for Transfer.

D. _ Disciplinary Transfers

E. — Intergovernmental Transfers
F.

G

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 

Zrommoo

EDACHTONMMVOD>

 

O70z

>

No Requirement to Live in District
Notice of Denial
H. Written Transfer
I. Length of Time Requests are Valid.
PROBATIONARY PERIOD ....
A. Initial Probationary Period / New Employees

SHOPO 2011-2017 6
Number NUMERICAL ORDER Page

B. Promotional Probations . 34

1. Purpose of Promotional

2. Rights of Promotional Probationary Employee:

22. SAFETY AND HEALTH

A. Composition of Committee / Meeting:

B. Functions...

C. Compliance with Laws.

D. Unsafe Equipment / Third Party Determination ..

23. SENIORITY ..

A. Master Seniority List.

B. Contents of Master Seniority List.

C. Determination of Seniority / Limitations

1. Authorized Leaves

Resignation / Termination

3. Suspension / Unauthorized Leave

4. Temporary Assignment...

5. Same Date of Employment.

6. Same Date of Promotion
7,
8.
9.

  
   
  
  
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 

 

Demotion .

Promotion

. Unsuccessful Completion of Promotional Probationary Period.

10. PO-9..

24. VACATION LEAVE
Vacation Leave Earned .
Exceptions to Earning Vacation Leave ..
Accumulation of Vacation Leave
Application for Vacation Leave ...
Administering Vacation Leave ....
Selection and Scheduling of Vacation Leave .
Granting of Vacation Leave
Recall from Vacation Leave
EAVES OF ABSENCE WITH PAY
Leave for Death in the Family .
Personal Leave ..
Military Leave with Pa)
Sick Leave...

1. Sickness
Sick Leave Earned...
Exceptions to Earning Sick Leave
Accumulation of Sick Leave
Application for Sick Leave ..
Granting of Sick Leave ...
Sick Leave During Vacation
Physical Examination...
Forfeiture / Non Forfeiture of Sick Leave
Investigation of Sick Leave...

 

25.

DOM>E TOMMoOmM>

BOSNDARON

S

7 SHOPO 2011-2017
Number

26. ENCOURAGING ADVANCED EDUCATION

27.

28.

D> VNMOOByYT MOOD

99

29. MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES...

JOURS OF WORK...

ERSONNEL INFORMATION.

NUMERICAL ORDER Page

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Family Leave. 40
1. Definitions 40
2. Family Leave Requirement. 40
Other Leaves of Absence With Pay 40

Witness or Juror

 

Policy...
Granting Leave.
Notice of Training
Mileage Compensation
Specialized Training / Union Recommendations

 

Normal Work Week .
Normal Work Day.
Meal Period ....
Watch Rotation ..
Modification to Normal Work Week
Day Off Rotation..

Examination of Personnel File.
Derogatory Material.
1. Relevance....
2. Removal of Derogatory Material
3. Review of Materials
4. Destruction of Derogatory Material After Four Years. 42
Confidentiality of Records .....
Information Provided to the Union.
1. Personnel Transactions
2. List of New Employees

A. Maintenance.
B. Lockers...
C. Adequate Toilet Facil
30. SALARIES....
31. PAY DIFFERENTIAL
A. _ Night Differential
1. Scheduled Work Hours
2. Overtime Hours.
3. Portion of an Hour.
B. Hazardous Pay....
1. Positions Granted Hazardous Pa) 46
2. Basic Unit of Payment ..
3. Differential Not Contained in Contract
4. Grievance Procedure...
C. Standard of Conduct Differential.

 

SHOPO 2011-2017 8
Number NUMERICAL ORDER Page

D. Other Differentials
1. Bomb Technicians.
2. Explosive Canine Handlers.
3. Canine Handlers...
32. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
A. — Statement of Intent
B. Definitions
1. Grievance ....
2. Adverse Action Resulting from a Civil Service Employee's
Failure to Meet Performance Requirements
3. Arbitrator
4. — Civil Service Employee
Processing of Grievance without the Union
Filing / Corresponding Step.....
Step Not Applicable / Informal Settlement
Time Limits ....
1. Filing of Grievance
2. — Relevant Information.
3. Extension...
4. Miscellaneous .
Designated Employer Representativ
All Issues Shall be Raised at the Initial Step
Step | (Appropriate Administrative Level) .
1. Formal Grievance...
2. Submittal of Grievance
3. | Opportunity to Meet / Settle Grievance
4. Decision...
J. Step Il (Chief of Police / Chief's Representative)
1. Appeal
2. Opportunity to Meet / Settle Grievance
3. Decision...
K. Step Ill (Employer / Employer Representative)
1. Appeal
2. Opportunity to Meet / Settle Grievance
3. Decision
L. Step IV (Arbitration
1. Notification of Intent to Arbitrate
2. Grievance Must Involve an Alleges
or Misapplication of a Specific Provision of the Agreement...
Grievances Arising Between Termination of Agreement
and Effective Date of New Agreement
Consolidation of Grievances .
Selection of an Arbitrator
Dispute Over Arbitrability
Pre-hearing.
Discovery ..

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 

mmoo

“zo

 

 

 

»

 
 
 
 
 
 

ONO

9 SHOPO 2011-2017
Number NUMERICAL ORDER Page

33.
34.

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

SHOPO 2011-2017

9. Arbitration Award
a. Decision...
b. Final and Binding
10. Arbitrator's Fees and Costs
M. — Step IV (Arbitration of an Adverse Action Resulting from an
Employee's Failure to Meet Performance Requirements) ..
1. Notification of Intent to Arbitrate...
Performance Requirements or Disciplinary Reasons Dispute
3. Performance Judge
4. — Selection of the Performance Judge
5. Standards Used by the Performance Judge
6.
7,

 
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
   
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Performance Judge's Authority ....
. Decision...
8. Performance Judge's Fees and Costs

Workers’ Compensation
Survivor's Rights .
Physical Examinations
K-9 Program
Strike Post...
Traffic / Security / Stationary Post
Union Recommendations ..
Accidental Injury Benefits ..
.  Reassignment
RIOR RIGHTS...
Rights, Benefits and Perquisites.
Modifications .....
DURATION OF AGREEMENT
LAYOFFS AND RE-EMPLOYMENT
A. Layoffs

1. Processing of Layoffs

2. Notification of Layoff

3. Recall List
B. Re-employment
NO STRIKE; NO LOCKOUT..
Prohibited Action
Assisting Other Labor Organizations Prohibited
Refusal to Cross Picket Line:
Notification of Prohibited Action
No Lockout...
Violations.
OLIDAYS....
Established Holidays
Observance of Holidays
Forced-Off Policy.

D>VO-TONMOOW>

 

D> MMOOD>D

9°
Number NUMERICAL ORDER Page

40.

a1.

42.
43.
44,

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.
50.

SUPPLEMENTAL WEAPONS ..
A. Firearms Qualification
B. Supplemental Weapons
C. Mileage Compensation..
DUTIES...
A. Employee Assignments .
B. Other Duties ....
TRADING TIME.....
PRE-RETIREMENT PLANNING
DEATH OR INJURY TO EMPLOYEES
A. Employer to Notify Uniot
B. Burial
OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
Approval Required...
1. Appeal Procedure.
B. Types of Employment Permitted .

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 

2. y.
C. Conditions / Limitations to Outside Employment .
1. Police Functions / Civil Process

2. — Collections... 58
3. Liquor Establishment Job: 58
4. — Liquor Business... 59
5. Taxicab / Towing Busines: 59
D. Liability of Employer 59

MEALS:
A. Meal Payment Schedule
B. Less than 24 Hours Notice to Work Overtime .
1. Post-Shift Overtim
2. Pre-Shift Overtime
C. Twenty Four (24) Hours or More Prior Notice.
D. Scheduled Day Off.
E. Special Assignment
PROMOTIONS .
A. Posting Requirements
B. Fair Standards of Merit and Ability
C. Non-Selection..
POLICE OFFICER'S PROTECTION - CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS AND
INTERROGATIONG.....
A. Employee Who May be a Suspect ..
B. Constitutional Rights ..
HAWAII EMPLOYER-UNION HEALTH BENEFITS TRUST FUND..

SAVINGS CLAUSE...

1 SHOPO 2011-2017
Number NUMERICAL ORDER Page

51. TEMPORARY AND SPECIAL ASSIGNMENTS...
A. Temporary Assignments
1. Definition...
2. — Limitations
B. Special Assignment
1. Definition...
2. — Limitations
52. TRAVEL ALLOWANCE.
A. Applicable Rules, Ordinances, and Policies
B. Travel Occurring on Same Island..
1. Maui and Hawaii County...
2.  Mountainous / Remote Areas.
C. — Off-Island Travel to Mountainous or Other Remote Areas ..
1. Responsibility of Employer
2. Mutual Agreement.
D. Intrastate Travel...
1. Daily Per Diem; Overnight Travel.
2. Per Diem/ Fraction of a Day
3. | One-Day Trips.
4. Authorized Leave
E. Out of State Travel...
1. Daily Per Diem...
2. Per Diem/ Fraction of a Day
3. Authorized Leave...
F. Reimbursement for Per Diem Related Expenses Exceeding the
Per Diem Rate...
G. Furnished Lodging
H. Furnished Meals..
|. Advanced Per Diem:
J. Higher Travel Allowance
53. ENTIRETY CLAUSE ...
54. COMPENSATION ADJUSTMENTS
General Provisions...
1. Basic Rate of Pay.
2. Service...
3. Order for Making Pay Adjustments .
4. Leaves of Absence Without Pay...
5. Pay Adjustments / Less Than a Normal Month
6. Personal Injury.
7. Overpayment
B. Compensation Adjustment Upon Promotion
1
2.
3.
Ce
1
2.

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
  

 

  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
  
 

 

 

Compensation ...
Promotion Within 12 Months of Demotion
Return to Perm. Appointment Following Limited Term Promotion
ompensation Adjustment Upon Demotion.
Definitions...
Disciplinary or Involuntary Demotion .

SHOPO 2011-2017 12
Number

mo

=o

M.

55. OTHER LEAVES OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PA\

A.

NUMERICAL ORDER Page

3.  Demotion to Avoid Layoff, Demotion Due to Reorganization;

Service Connected Disability Demotion.
4. Non-Service Connected Disability Demotion
5. Voluntary Demotion ......
Compensation Adjustment Upon Transfer
Compensation Adjustment Upon Reallocatiot
1. Definitions
2. Compensation: Reallocation Upward:
3. Compensation: Reallocation Downwards
4. Compensation: Class / Same Pay Range
Compensation Adjustment Upon Repricing
1. Class in a Higher Pay Range...
2. Class in a Lower Pay Range .....
Compensation of New Employees Entering the Bargaining Unit.
Compensation for Temporary Assignment Performed .
1. Compensation
2. Exceptions..
pomporary Differential Pay

Calculation of Temporary Differential Pay ..
2 Temporary Differential Not Considered as Part of Base Pay.......... 70
3. Reductions Following Promotion, Upward Reallocation or

Repricing Upwards ..
4. Continuation of Temp. Differential Following Demotion, Transfer

or Reallocation to a Class in the Same or Lower Pay Range
Temporary Step Differential .....
1. Calculation of Temp. Step Differential Pay
2. Temporary Step Differential Not Consid. as Part of Base Pay
3. Reductions in Temp. Step Differential Following Step Movement

Promotion, Upward Reallocation or Repricing Upwards
4. Continuation of Temp. Step Diff. Following Demotion, Transfer

or Reallocation to a Class in the Same or Lower Pay Range 71
Step Movements
1. Definitions
2. — Eligibility for Step Movement.
3. Creditable Service for Step Movements...
4. Recognition of Experienced Journey Level Officer
Compensation Adjustments Following an Intergovernmental
Movement Made Pursuant To Law.....
1. Class in a Higher Pay Range.
2. Class in the Same Pay Rang
3. Class in a Lower Pay Range
Other Compensation Adjustments.

 

  
  
 
  
   
 
 

 

 

  
 
  
 
  

 

  
 
  

 

 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 

Approval and Reasons for Leaves of Absence Without Pay
1. Regular Employee...
2. Non-Regular and Regular Employees

13 SHOPO 2011-2017
Number NUMERICAL ORDER Page

B. Duration of Leaves of Absence Without Pa

  
 
 
  
  
 

 

 

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  

 

1. 73
2. Military Leave 74
3. Industrial Injury 74
4. Employment Loan 74
5. Good of the Service . 74

C. Rights of Leave of Absence Without Pay 74
1. Conditions...
2. Reinstatement - Regular Employee...
3. Reinstatement - Non-Regular Employee 74
4. Failure to Return to Duty.
5. Promotional Exams...
6. Termination upon Acceptance of Other Employment...

D. Military Leave for Active Duty with the Armed Forces of the U.S. 74

—. Unauthorized Absences from Work 75

F. Leave Pending Investigation 75

G.___Leaves Involving Holidays

56. HOUSING.....
A.
B.
57. DRUG TESTING.
A. Serious Adverse Effects of Drug Use
B. Purpose of Drug Testing....

1. Identification / Referral.
2. Promote Voluntary Admission
3. Deterrence / Prevent Adverse Effects
C. Drug Testing Program
1. Prohibition...
2. Application...
3. Types of Testing.
a. Required Testing

b. Random Testing...

c. Mandatory Testing

4. Amount of Testing ..

 

D. Jurisdictional Procedures .
E. Training
F. Condition:
1. Threshold Levels
2. — Notification...
3. Specimen Collection Procedures ..
4. Specimen Testing Procedures
5. Laboratory Procedures .......
G.__ First Confirmed Positive Test Resul
1. Notification...
2. _ Disciplinary Action.
3. Leave Status...
H. Second Confirmed Positive Drug Test Result.

SHOPO 2011-2017 14
Number

s

OZErA

NUMERICAL ORDER Page

Voluntary Admission
1. Conditions
2. — Limitations
Confidentiality...
1. Test Results
2. — Limitations on Disclosure
Failure / Refusal to Submit to Drug Testing
Employer's Rights ...
Disputes ..
Savings Clause
Constitutional Challenges.

  
  
 
 
  
 
  

15 SHOPO 2011-2017
THIS AGREEMENT
is made and entered into by and between the STATE OF HAWAII, the CITY AND.
COUNTY OF HONOLULU, the COUNTY OF HAWAII, the COUNTY OF MAUI, and
the COUNTY OF KAUAI, hereinafter collectively called the EMPLOYER, and the
STATE OF HAWAII ORGANIZATION OF POLICE OFFICERS (SHOPO), hereinafter
called the UNION.

ARTICLE 1. RECOGNITION

A. Recognition - The Employer recognizes the Union as the exclusive
representative for public employees in the police officers unit, both supervisory and
non-supervisory, except for officers and employees who are excluded or may be
excluded from the bargaining unit by law and/or the Hawaii Labor Relations Board.
B. Copy of Agreement Furnished to New Employees / Others - The Union
agrees to furnish a copy of the Agreement to all employees hired after the signing of
the Contract. The Employer agrees to furnish other personnel not within the
bargaining unit but charged with the administration of the Agreement.

C. Consultation - The Employer agrees that it shall consult the Union prior to the
final formulation and implementation of personnel policies and practices affecting
employee relations on wages, hours or conditions of employment.

D. Mutual Consent - No changes in wages, hours or other conditions of work
contained herein may be made except by mutual consent.

ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS

A. Department - means the respective police departments of each county.

B. Employee - as used herein unless the context otherwise requires, shall include
all employees covered by this Agreement.

C. Employer - as used herein shall mean the respective Mayor of each county or
the Mayor's designated Representative.

D. Police Officer - as used herein shall include commissioned police officers,
helicopter pilots, cadets, and police matrons.

E. Lawful Acti - as used in Article 4 means participating in the activities of the
Union and/or testifying at any administrative hearing, or being a Union
representative.

F. Elected Official - one who is elected by State or chapter membership.

G. Appointed Official - one who is appointed by an elected official, or body of
elected officials.

H. Union Representative - an elected or appointed official, business agent,
steward, or director of the Union, or other like Union official.

|. Operating Unit - shall refer to 1) watches within the District in which the patrol
officer works, 2) all other Division work units.

J. Patrol Officer - shall mean a police officer who works in the patrol division,
works in the field and can be uniform or non-uniform personnel.

K. Interrogation - shall mean the questioning of an employee during or in the
course of an investigation by a police official in charge of the investigation, or by any
other person acting in the scope of a departmental or divisional investigation, or by
any superior, whether inside or outside the chain of command of the employee
involved.

L. Discipline - shall mean the administrative action taken against an employee for
violation of a department rule, Standard of Conduct, directive, policy, or for other just
cause but shall not include the use of forms utilized to record the evaluation or
counseling of an employee.

 

 

 

SHOPO 2011-2017 16
M. Transfer - shall mean the lateral movement of personnel between operating
units, which requires a change of position description number.

N. Reassignment - shall mean the movement of personnel within the same
operating unit.

ARTICLE 3. DUES, SERVICE FEES AND DEDUCTIONS

A. Deduction of Member Fees - The Employer agrees, upon written
authorization of an employee, to deduct membership dues, initiation fees, and fees
for Union benefits in amounts certified by the Union to be current from the payroll of
any present or future employee who is a member of the Union and to deduct other
employee authorized and Employer approved assignments.

B. Deduction of Service Fees - The Employer agrees to deduct from the payroll
of any present or future employee a service fee as required by law.

C. Collection of Fees - Such deductions shall be collected twice a month by the
Employer and transmitted to the Union by check drawn to the order of the Union no
later than the 15th day of the following month. Upon the issue of such check and
transmission of same to the Union, all responsibility on the part of the Employer shall
cease with respect to any amount so deducted. The Employer shall not be bound in
any manner to see to the application of the proceeds of any such check, nor to
investigate the authority of any designated officer of the Union to sign any
certification, to accept any such check, or to collect the same. The Union hereby
undertakes to indemnify and hold blameless the Employer from any claim that may
be made upon it for or on account of any such deduction from the wages of any
employee.

D. Insufficient Earnings - Whenever an employee does not receive earnings
during any payroll period sufficient to cover the employee's dues and/or service fee,
the Employer shall not make such deductions which become past due, provided that
upon reinstatement, after disciplinary action such as suspension or dismissal, the
Employer, with employee authorization, shall make reasonable arrangements in
order that the employee becomes current with all dues or service fees in arrears.

E. Employee List - The Employer shall maintain lists of bargaining unit
employees showing Union deductions and service fee deductions. The lists shall be
transmitted monthly to the Union without cost on a form supplied by the Employer.

F. New Employees - The Employer shall furnish the Union each month the
names and position titles of all employees hired during the prior month.

G._ Religious Exemption from Fees - The Union agrees to comply with Chapter
89-3.5 Hawaii Revised Statutes concerning any employee who is a member of a
bona fide religion which has historically held conscientious objections to joining or
financially supporting the Union.

ARTICLE 4. DISCRIMINATION

A. Discrimination - The Employer and the Union agree that neither party will
discriminate against any employee because of Union membership or non-
membership or lawful activity in the Union or lawful political activity.

B. Interference - The Employer and the Union agree that they will not interfere
with the right of any employee to join or refrain from joining the Union. Employees
will secure no advantage nor more favorable consideration or any form of privilege
because of membership or non-membership in the Union.

ARTICLE 5. BULLETIN BOARDS

A. Bulletin Boards - The Employer shall provide the Union with designated space
on available bulletin boards, or provide bulletin boards, if none are available, upon
which the Union may post its information and materials. All posted information and

17 SHOPO 2011-2017
materials must be signed or initialed by the Union President, respective Chapter
Chair or their authorized representative (i.e. vice chair, secretary or treasurer). The
Union will submit a copy of each item of information and material to keep the
Employer informed of what is posted. Unlawful, derogatory, or material of a political
nature shall not be posted.

B. Video Bulletin Boards - Upon request and with the consent of the Chief of
Police, the Employer shall permit the Union access to their video monitors, if
available and provided that departmental operations are not affected, in order to
provide current information to employees. Information provided by the Union shall
not include unlawful, derogatory or material of a political nature.

ARTICLE 6. ACCESS TO EMPLOYER’S PREMISES
A. Access to Employer’s Premises - Union representatives shall be permitted
on the Employer's premises for the purpose of:

1. investigating grievances that have arisen, ascertaining whether or not the
Agreement is being observed, or providing service to individual employees, and/or

2. providing current union information to its members during briefings, line
ups, and meetings upon approval by the Chief of Police or the Chief's Designee.

While on the Employer's premises or job site, the representative will not
interfere with normal operations of the Department.
B. Notification - The Union agrees that its representatives shall notify the
appropriate supervisor of the purpose of the visit and shall restrict activities to the
stated purpose of the visit.

ARTICLE 7. | UNION OFFICIALS, STEWARDS AND REPRESENTATIVES
A. Recognition of Union Officials - The Employer recognizes and agrees to deal
with Union officials, stewards and representatives in all matters covered by this
Agreement. Matters relating to grievances arising out of alleged violations of this
Agreement or disputes on the interpretation or application of this Agreement shall be
in accordance with the provisions of Article 32, Grievance Procedure. A Union
official, steward or representative shall be allowed time off to represent an employee
at any grievance proceeding.
B. Union Stewards / Formula - The election or appointment of Union stewards is
the function of the Union; provided, however, that the number of stewards shall be
governed by the following formula:

1. One (1) authorized steward to each operating unit with twenty (20) or less
assigned employees.

2. One (1) additional authorized steward for each additional twenty (20)
employees, or major fraction of twenty (20) employees.
C. Steward Coverage - Steward coverage provided by the Union shall be subject
to consultation between the Union and the Employer.
D. Transfer or Reassignment of Union Officials - The Employer shall not
transfer nor reassign employees who are elected officials, employees appointed to
elective positions or stewards of the Union from their present position during their
terms of office because of their official capacity with the Union nor for their
performance of same unless:

1. the employee requests such transfer or reassignment; or

2. the employee freely or voluntarily consents thereto; or

3. upon prior proof by the Employer that the transfer or reassignment is due
to the normal rotation (without acceleration) of officers within the unit; or

4. due to an operational need for special skills which the employee
possesses; or

SHOPO 2011-2017 18
5. — due to the inability of the employee to perform the essential tasks of the
employee's assigned duties.
E. List of Union Officials - The Union shall provide the Employer with a list of
Union officials, stewards and representatives and maintain its currency.

ARTICLE 8. LEAVES OF ABSENCE FOR UNION BUSINESS

A. Leaves of Absence without Pay - Leaves of absence without pay shall be in
accordance with the then existing rules, regulations and statutes except those
supplemented herein.

1. Time Limit - Any employee elected or appointed to an office in the Union
shall if such office requires the employee's full time in the exercise and discharge of
the Union's duties, be given a leave of absence without pay not to exceed two (2)
years.

2. Accrual of Benefits - Unless otherwise provided by law, no employee on
leave of absence without pay shall be entitled to accrue or accumulate vacation
allowance, sick leave, service credit for increments and longevity increases or other
rights and benefits for the term of the employee's leave but shall accrue seniority for
the purpose of determining length of service.

B. Any employee who is an elected or appointed official or delegate of the Union,
if requested, may be granted earned compensatory time off or accrued vacation
leave when the duties of the employee's position with the Union require the
employee's participation at meetings, conferences or conventions including any
reasonable travel time.

C. The Employer shall insofar as practicable, accommodate elected or appointed
Officials of the Union to attend meetings of boards and/or committees (Safety &
Health Committee, Uniform & Equipment Committee, Legislative Committee and
Stewards Committee) of which they are members.

D. Notification of Department Head - The Union is required to notify the
Department head in writing at least a week in advance of the date(s) of such
meetings, conferences or conventions. In the event of a special or emergency
meeting, notification may be made by telephone conversation followed by a written
confirmation.

ARTICLE 9. © EDUCATIONAL AND INFORMATIONAL MEETINGS

A. Procedures for Meetings - The Union may hold educational and informational
meetings once every calendar quarter, to be conducted by Union representatives
and which shall be open to all employees in the bargaining unit, including members.
and non-members of the Union. The Department shall permit its employees time off
with pay and reasonable travel time, to attend one such meeting per quarter held
during working hours and such meeting shall be limited to not more than two (2)
hours. The Union shall give written notice to the Employer at least twelve (12) days
prior to the date of the meetings, and within four (4) days thereafter the Department
shall respond to the Union’s request. If the request is denied, the Department shall
give its reason for such denial. Such meetings shall be allowed at dates, times, and
places which do not interfere with the operations of the respective Departments. The
Department shall provide meeting sites as available. These meetings may include
multiple sessions in order to accommodate employees in the bargaining unit.

B. Inappropriate Subjects - Matters not appropriate for educational and
informational meetings are engaging in political endorsements and engaging in
demonstrations.

19 SHOPO 2011-2017
ARTICLE 10. NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE

A. Notice of Time Off - Members of the Negotiating Committee shall be allowed
sufficient and reasonable time off to participate in the collective bargaining process,
to include preparation for negotiations, conducted by the Union during regular
working hours without loss of regular salary or wages in accordance with Chapter 89,
HRS. The Union shall give the Employer reasonable prior notice when requesting
such time off.

B. Negotiating Committee Members - The Union shall provide the names of its
Negotiating Committee members to the Employer; likewise, the Employer shall
provide the names of their representatives to the Union.

C. Joint Labor-Management Workshops - To facilitate and enhance
communication between management and the Union, a joint meeting shall be held
no more than four (4) times a year to discuss issues of mutual concern. Attendance
shall include but not be limited to the chiefs and/or deputy chiefs of police, the
directors of personnel and/or civil service of the four counties and the Union's
negotiating committee. The parties shall mutually agree to an agenda for each
meeting at least two (2) weeks before the meeting is held. Representatives from the
Employer and the Union shall develop the agenda for each meeting at least two (2)
weeks before the meeting is held.

 

ARTICLE 11. RIGHTS OF THE EMPLOYER

A. Management Rights - The Employer reserves and retains, solely and
exclusively, all management rights and authority, including the rights set forth in
Section 89-9(d)(1)-(8), Hawaii Revised Statutes, except as specifically abridged or
modified by this Agreement.

ARTICLE 12. POLICE OFFICER'S PROTECTION - ADMINISTRATIVE
INVESTIGATIONS AND INTERROGATIONS
A. Applicability of Article - This Article shall apply only to administrative
investigations or interrogations of an employee conducted by the Chief of Police or
the Chief's authorized representatives related to any incident which:

1. Occurred during the employee's on-duty or off-duty hours, and/or

2. Could lead to discipline, demotion, or dismissal of any employee for a
violation of any departmental rule, regulation, order or command.
B. Adi istrative Investigations and Interrogations of Internal and External
Complaints

1. Definition and Scope - Except for a criminal investigation or
interrogation, an investigation or interrogation shall be considered to be of an
administrative nature whenever such investigation or interrogation is conducted to
determine the possibility of or to establish a basis for discipline or dismissal of an
employee, regardless of whether such investigation or interrogation originated by an
internal or external complaint. An administrative investigation or interrogation is to
be used for internal departmental purposes only, and not for official criminal
investigations. This Article shall not apply to communications between the employee
and the employee's present chain of command, except that in the case of counties
which do not have a specific internal investigative unit, when the Employer appoints
a special investigator or interrogator from within the employee's chain of command to
conduct a third party administrative investigation or interrogation which could result
in such employee's discipline or dismissal, i.e., as when the Honolulu Police
Department's Internal Affairs Division participates in an administrative investigation,
communications shall be subject to the limitations set forth below.

 

  

SHOPO 2011-2017 20
2. Limitations:

a. Internal / External Complaints - Internal complaints which may
result in disciplinary suspension, disciplinary transfer, demotion, dismissal, written
reprimand or any combination thereof, shall be in writing, except as provided by law.
All external complaints shall be in writing and sworn to by the complainant, except as
provided by law.

b. Notification of Investigation - The employee shall be informed of
the nature of the investigation or interrogation and shall be given a copy of the
written complaint. The employee shall then be afforded a reasonable time to answer
such complaints in writing.

c. Personnel File - No materials concerning a complaint shall be
entered in any personnel file of the employee in cases where the employee has been
exonerated, or in which the complaint is determined to be unfounded.

d. Personal Accountability - An employee is required to account only
for the employee's own time and shall not be disciplined for lack of such knowledge
of the activities of other employees.

e. Polygraph Examination - No officer shall be asked or be required
to submit to a polygraph examination.

f. Interrogation Requirements - The interrogation of an employee
shall be conducted at a reasonable hour, preferably at a time when an employee is
on duty with reasonable notice being given, unless the seriousness of the
investigation is of such a degree that an immediate interrogation is required, and if
such interrogation does occur during the off-duty time of the employee being
interrogated, the employee shall be compensated for such off-duty time in
accordance with Article 15.

g. Location of Interrogation - The interrogation shall take place at the
office of the command of the investigating officer, the local station, bureau, unit in
which the incident allegedly occurred as designated by the investigating officer, or
any other place agreeable to both parties.

h. Interrogation Procedures - The employee prior to an interrogation
shall be informed of the rank, name, and command of the officer in charge of the
investigation, and of the interrogating officer(s). No persons other than the
interrogator(s), the employee, and the employee's representative(s) shall be
permitted at the interrogation except by mutual agreement. All questions directed to
the employee being interrogated shall be asked by and through no more than one
interrogator at a time; provided, however, the employee may request and shall be
entitled to have present one representative of the employee's choice for each
interrogator present. The employee's representative(s) present shall limit the
employee's representative(s) involvement to the consultations between the
employee's representative and the employee being interrogated and shall not
become involved in asking or answering questions with the investigator or
interrogator nor interfere with or interrupt the proceedings other than in engaging in
consultations with the employee.

i. Answering Questions During Interrogation - Each employee shall
answer only those questions specifically, directly, and narrowly relating to the
employee's duties and actions while performing in the official capacity of the Police
Department.

j. Time Limit on Interrogation Sessions - Interrogation sessions
shall be for reasonable periods and shall be timed to allow for such personal
necessities and rest periods as are reasonably necessary provided that no period of
continuous questioning shall be longer than thirty (30) minutes of duration without
the employee's consent.

21 SHOPO 2011-2017
k. Offensive Conduct During Interrogation - The employee being
interrogated shall not be subjected to offensive language or threatened with transfer,
or other disciplinary action. No promise of reward shall be made as an inducement
to answering any question. Nothing herein is to be construed as to prohibit the
investigating officer from informing said employee that any disrespectful conduct
during the interrogation can become the subject of disciplinary action.

L Record of Interrogation - The complete interrogation of the
employee, including notations indicating the beginning and ending of all recess
periods, shall be recorded, and there shall be no unrecorded questions or
statements except by mutual agreement. At the written request of the employee, a
transcribed copy of the interrogation, if transcribed, shall be furnished to the
employee within five (5) working days after the request. If a tape recording is made
of the interrogation, the employee shall, upon written request, have access to the
tape. The original tape shall remain the property of and in the custody of the Police
Department. Expenses incurred in the reproduction of the tape and/or transcription
of the interrogation(s) shall be borne by the employee as occasioned by the
employee's request. Copies shall be made only by the Employer and shall be
certified to be true. The employee may, at the employee's option, have the
interrogation session recorded on the employee's personal tape recorder.

m. Statute of Limitations - No employee shall be subjected to an
administrative investigation of a complaint that has been filed more than one (1) year
from the date of the alleged incident, unless otherwise provided for by law. However,
administrative investigations involving criminal misconduct may be initiated at
anytime within the criminal statute of limitations as provided by law.

n. Psychological and/or Psychiatric Evaluation - The Employer may
require an employee to submit to a psychological and/or psychiatric evaluation when
the Employer has reason to believe the employee is not fit for duty. Such evaluation
shall be at no cost to the employee and shall be conducted by qualified personnel.

Whenever an employee is evaluated, the reasons for referring the
employee for such evaluation shall be provided to the employee. Psychological
and/or psychiatric evaluations shall not be used to justify disciplinary action or
considered a disciplinary action.

Psychological and/or Psychiatric evaluations shall be kept confidential. All
such reports shall be filed with the Chief of Police or the departmental psychologist,
as applicable. Such reports shall be limited to the use of determining whether an
officer is fit or not fit for duty, may include a recommended plan of action for the
employee to retain full duty status, and shall be in accordance with federal and state
medical privacy laws.

o. Garrity Rights - Prior to any administrative investigation or
interrogation of an employee, the Employer shall inform the employee in writing of
the employee's Garrity Rights as follows:

It is my understanding that this statement is made for administrative, internal Police
Department purposes only and will not be used as part of an official criminal
investigation. This statement is made by me after being ordered to do so by lawful
supervisory officers. It is my understanding that refusing to obey an order to make
this statement that | can be disciplined for insubordination and that the punishment
for insubordination can be up to and including termination of employment. This
statement is made only pursuant to such orders and the potential
punishment/discipline that can result for failure to obey that order.

Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493, 87 S.Ct. 616, 17 L.Ed.2d 562 (1967).

SHOPO 2011-2017 22
In the event an employee is scheduled in advance by the Employer or the
Employer's representative for an interview or investigation which the employee
reasonably feels may lead to disciplinary action, the employee may request to have
a Union representative present to advise the employee of the employee's Garrity
Rights prior to the interview and/or interrogation of the employee by the Employer.

C. Critical Incidents

1. The departments shall consult with the Union to develop policies and
procedures governing a Critical Incident Protocol, which shall include, but not be
limited to the following incidents:

a. Whenever a firearm is discharged at a suspect(s) by the employee;
or

b. Whenever the employee inflicts death or serious bodily injury to a
person; or

c. Whenever the employee is seriously injured and requires immediate
medical attention; or

d. Whenever the employee is involved in a vehicle pursuit or on duty
motor vehicle collision that results in death or serious bodily injury of any person; or

e. Whenever the employee is involved in an in-custody incident
resulting in death or serious bodily injury.

2. An employee directly involved in a critical incident as provided in C.1.
shall not be required to submit a written administrative or police report until the
officer has had a reasonable period of time, not to exceed four (4) hours, to consult
with counsel of choice or a Union representative.

3. No disciplinary action shall be imposed on an employee for failing to
submit a written administrative or police report in accordance with departmental rule,
regulation, policy or procedure, if the delay was as a result of C.2. above, or at the
direction of the assigned investigator. However, the employee shall be required to
provide sufficient verbal information at the scene in order to establish probable
cause, or information necessary to initiate an investigation and/or preserve the crime
scene (such as suspect information, vehicles involved, etc.). The Employer may
require additional interrogation(s) after a reasonable period of time has elapsed as
provided for in C.2. above. When an employee is identified as a suspect, the
employee shall be afforded Miranda rights.

ARTICLE 13. DISCIPLINE AND DISMISSAL

A. Discipline Shall be For Cause - The discipline and/or discharge of regular
employees shall be for cause. When it becomes necessary for the Employer to
initiate and impose disciplinary actions against any employee, such actions shall be
administered in a fair and impartial manner, with due regard to the circumstances of
the individual case. Discipline shall be deemed to include written reprimands,
suspensions, dismissals, disciplinary transfers and disciplinary demotions.

B. Immediate Discipline - The Employer may immediately discipline any
employee if the Employer, after considering the circumstances of each individual
case, deems it necessary that prompt disciplinary action be administered. In a case
where an employee suffers unusual hardship because of a loss of wages or other
economic benefits, the Employer may, after considering the circumstances of the
case, give additional consideration in effectuating the discipline.

C. Written Reprimand / Employee's File - When it becomes necessary to enter
a written reprimand of any nature whatsoever into an employee's file, such employee
shall be given a copy of the reprimand. The employee shall acknowledge the
delivery of said copy, by the employee's signature. An employee shall be permitted
to file a written statement as to any disagreement with the facts relating to such
written reprimand, which shall also be filed in such employee's file.

 

23 SHOPO 2011-2017
D. Disciplinary Procedures - Notwithstanding any other provision herein when
an employee is disciplined, the following procedures shall be followed:

1. Disciplinary Notice / Acknowledgment - The employee and the Union
shall be furnished the reason(s) therefor in writing including the allegations or
charges, rule(s) or regulation(s) upon which the discipline or dismissal is based, on
or before the effective date of the discipline or dismissal. Upon service thereof, the
employee shall acknowledge receipt thereof by the employee's dated signature.
Where the need to impose disciplinary action is immediate, the employee and the
Union shall be furnished the foregoing in writing within 48 hours after the action has
been taken.

2. Effective Dates - All written notifications of disciplinary actions involving
discipline and discharge shall include the effective dates of the penalties to be
imposed as may be applicable.

3. Written Notice of Conditions - Any conditions placed upon the
employee upon which return to work from a suspension or dismissal is contingent
shall be included in such written notification.

4. Confidentiality - All matters under this article, including investigations,
shall be considered confidential.

 

COMMENTARY
The parties acknowledge that this section may conflict with the provisions of Chapter
92F, HRS, and may be subject to legal challenge.

ARTICLE 14. CHANGES IN DEPARTMENTAL RULES.

A. Written Notice - The Employer agrees to furnish the Union and the respective
chapter chairperson with a written notice of the Employer's intention to make
changes in departmental rules, policies or procedures that would affect the working
conditions of employees or equipment peculiar to police work, and a copy of such
proposed changes. Such notice shall be mailed no later than thirty (30) days before
the starting date of the intended change; however, the change may be implemented
earlier upon agreement by the parties. The Employer shall also provide the Union
with copies of available resource materials, studies, or data relating to the merits of
the proposed changes.

B. Meet and Confer / Response Time - If the Union wishes to meet and confer
on the proposed changes, it shall respond in writing within ten (10) working days of
the receipt of the Employer's written notice. Should the Union respond within ten
(10) working days from the date of receipt of such written notice, the Employer
agrees to meet and confer with the Union within ten (10) days after receiving the
Union's request to meet to freely exchange information, opinions and proposals
relating specifically to the proposed changes prior to their enactment. If the Union
does not respond in writing within ten (10) working days of the date of receipt of such
written notice, the Employer may assume that the Union does not wish to meet and
confer on the proposed changes.

ARTICLE 15. OVERTIME

A. Occurrence of Overtime Work When Earned - The following provision on
overtime shall apply except as waived or modified by mutual agreement as provided
under Article 27, Hours of Work.

1. When Overtime Occurs - Overtime work will occur when an employee
expends time or renders service in response to (a) the direction or request of a
proper authority, (b) rule or regulation, or (c) police emergency:

a. Excess of Eight Hours - If such time or service is in excess of eight
(8) hours a work day;

SHOPO 2011-2017 24
b. After Scheduled Shift - If such time or service is in excess of eight
(8) hours whenever an employee, after completing the employee's scheduled eight
hour shift, is directed to continue working without stopping and works into the next
calendar day;

c. Excess of 40 Hours - If such time or service is in excess of forty
(40) hours per week;

d. Legal Holiday - If such time or service is on any day which is
observed as a legal holiday, except that whenever the major portion of a shift falls on
such a day, work performed during the entire eight-hour shift shall constitute
overtime work provided that no further credit because of the overtime work shall be
granted notwithstanding any other provisions of these rules and regulations;

e. Scheduled Day Off - If such time or service is on the employee's
scheduled day off and there has been no change in the work schedule; or

f. | New Shift / Less Than Twelve Hours Rest - In operating units
subject to shift work when an employee is required to report to a new shift with less
than a lapse of twelve (12) hours of rest. In such event, the employee shall continue
to earn overtime until such rest period is granted. This subsection (f) shall not be
applicable whenever an employee is deprived of the employee's twelve (12) hours
rest period as a result of a change at the employee's own request.

2. Additions to the above provisions are as follows:

a. Split-Shift Work - An employee who works a split shift will be
credited with one and one-half (1-1/2) hours for each hour worked which exceeds ten
(10) hours, exclusive of time for meals, calculated from the time the employee starts
and ends the work day. The one and one-half (1 1/2) hours credit for each hour
worked which exceeds ten (10) hours shall be in lieu of and not in addition to the
employee's regular straight time hours.

b.  Call-Back - An employee on off-duty status who is called back to
duty shall be credited with the greater of a minimum of three (3) hours regular
straight time pay or overtime, calculated from the time the employee leaves the
employee's home until the employee returns home from work.

c. Court Attendance - An employee who attends court outside of the
employee's scheduled work hours shall be credited with the greater of a minimum of
three (3) hours regular straight time pay or overtime calculated from the time:

(1) the employee leaves the employee's home, attends court and
returns home; or

(2) the employee leaves the employee's work station, immediately
attends court and returns home; or

(3) the employee leaves home while on off-duty status, attends
court and until the start of the employee's regular scheduled work shift; provided that
employees shall be permitted reasonable time to shower and dress for work at the
employee's work station after court duty.

(4) When court attendance commences during the employee's
scheduled work shift and extends beyond the end of such work shift, the employee
shall be compensated in accordance with Section A.1., above. Whenever an
employee attends court in a district other than the district to which the employee is
permanently assigned, the employee shall receive reasonable travel time back to the
employee's work station upon completion of court duties. In the event it is not
necessary for such employee to return to the employee's work station, the employee
shall receive reasonable travel time to return home, if the employee resides in a
district other than the district in which court was held, provided that such time shall
not be greater than reasonable time estimated to go back to the employee's work
station.

25 SHOPO 2011-2017
d. Occurrence of Overtime Work with Respect to Official Leave
with Pay or Compensatory Time - Any official leave with pay or compensatory time
credits which have been actually taken by an employee shall be included in
computing the hours of the employee’s work week.

e. Change of Shift with Less Than Forty-Eight (48) Hours Notice -
Whenever an employee is required, with less than forty-eight (48) hours advance
notice to report for work on a shift other than the shift for which the employee was.
officially scheduled, the employee shall be credited for overtime work for each hour
of work performed on the first day of such new shift. Such overtime credits shall not
be in addition to any other overtime credits to which the employee may be entitled.

f. | Change of Day Off with Less Than Forty-Eight (48) Hours Notice
- Whenever the scheduled workday of an employee is changed with less than forty-
eight (48) hours advance notice, the employee shall be credited with overtime for
each hour of work performed on the first workday following the change. Such
overtime credits shall not be in addition to any other overtime credits to which the
employee may be entitled.

g. Scheduled Overtime During Off-Duty Hours - An employee who
works scheduled overtime during off-duty hours (i.e., meetings, training, physical
examinations, installation and removal of equipment, firearms qualification) shall be
credited with the greater of a minimum three (3) hours straight time pay, or overtime
for actual hours worked, calculated from the time the employee reports to work until
the time the employee leaves work. For the purposes of this section, travel time to
and from work shall not be compensable.

COMMENTARY
This section shall not apply to pre- and post-shift overtime as defined in Article 46,
Meals.

 

h. Seventh Day Provision - Whenever an employee on a 40-hour
work week schedule performs overtime work on all consecutive days off and renders
at least five (5) hours service on at least one of the employee's consecutive days off
and full-time service on all consecutive work days immediately preceding such days
off, the employee shall be entitled to overtime for each hour of work performed on
the work day following the last day off worked and each succeeding day worked
unless granted a period of rest of twenty-four (24) non-work hours. In the event
court attendance on matters connected with the employee's official duties requires
air travel to another island, the five (5) hour minimum requirement on at least one of
the consecutive days off shall be increased to a minimum of seven (7) hours.

For purposes of the Seventh Day Provision, court attendance (including
reasonable travel time) for job related purposes on scheduled work days and days
off shall be considered as time worked or service. Also, paid or unpaid leaves,
compensatory time off, suspensions, unauthorized absences, and other types of
leaves and absences shall not be considered as time worked or service.
Furthermore, consecutive days off may involve one (1), two (2) or three (3) days, and
consecutive work days may involve four (4), five (5) or six (6) days in a scheduled
work week.

i. Stand-By Time Pay - For each calendar day or portion thereof of
stand-by duty, the employee shall be paid an additional amount equal to twenty-five
percent (25%) of the employee's daily pay rate. An employee shall be deemed to be
on stand-by when the employee is assigned by the head of the department or other
superior to hold the employee's self available for a specific period by leaving word as
to where the employee may be reached for the purpose of responding to calls for
immediate service or for court appearance during the employee's off duty hours.
Whenever it is necessary for an employee on stand-by to render service in response
to a call to work, the employee shall be entitled to further compensation as provided

SHOPO 2011-2017 26
in Article 15 A.2.b., Call-Back. When an employee responds to a call to work, the
employee shall be furnished or compensated for meals as provided for in Article 46,
Meals.
COMMENTARY

All of the following conditions are required for stand-by pay:
1. Employee is assigned by superior officer or prosecuting attorney to hold the
employee's self available for a specific period of time.
2. Employee must respond and come in when called.
3. Employee is subject to discipline/transfer if the employee fails to report when
called in.

j. Lack of Rest - Whenever an employee is required to perform
overtime work between two consecutive scheduled workdays that are actually
worked and does not receive at least a total of eight (8) hours of rest from the end of
the first scheduled workday to the start of the second scheduled workday, the
employee shall be entitled to overtime on the second scheduled workday which shall
be equal to the difference between the eight (8) hours and the number of actual
hours of rest received. For the purposes of this section, Article 46, Meals, is not
applicable.

k. Consultative Calls - An employee who is not on stand-by status
shall be paid a minimum of one (1) hour straight time pay for one (1) or more
consultative calls within the same one-hour period, calculated from the onset of the
first call and ending one hour later. For the purposes of this section, a consultative
call shall mean an exchange of technical and/or procedural information to resolve a
problem requiring immediate attention. The payment for consultative calls shall be in
lieu of any other compensation, including overtime and call-back.

B. Compensation for Overtime Work

1. Basic Compensation Formula - The basic compensation for an
employee who receives cash payment for overtime work shall include all differentials
an employee is receiving when performing overtime work, except for hazard pay
differentials. To convert an employee's basic compensation to an hourly rate, the
following formula shall be used: (monthly salary plus the amount of monthly
differentials) multiplied by 12 months then divided by 2080 hours; plus any hourly
differentials the employee is earning.

2. Cash Payment Formula - Cash payment for overtime work shall be
calculated as follows: (basic rate of pay plus differentials as determined in B.1.)
multiplied by the number of hours worked or fraction thereof computed to the nearest
fifteen (15) minutes multiplied again by one and one-half.

(E.g. ($15.00 + 31) x 1-1/2 x 8 = $183.72)

3. Cash Payments for Overtime / Budgeted - Cash payments for overtime
work shall be made to the extent that funds are budgeted and available for such
purpose. If funds are not available, employees shall be credited with compensatory
time.

4. Cash Payments for Compensatory Time Upon Termination - At the
time of termination or resignation from service, an employee shall be paid in cash for
all compensatory time credit earned but not yet taken as compensatory time off
based upon the employee's rate of pay at the time of the termination or resignation.

5. Conversion to Compensatory Time / Formula - The number of actual
hours of overtime worked shall be converted to compensatory time credit at the rate
of one and one-half (1-1/2) hours of compensatory time credit for each hour of
overtime work, except as provided in Section A.2.b., Call-Back.

C. Compensatory Time Off

1. Accumulation of Compensatory Time - An employee may accumulate a

maximum of one hundred (100) hours of compensatory time credit. The Employer

27 SHOPO 2011-2017
may unilaterally schedule such hours in excess of one hundred (100) hours off or
shall pay the employee in cash.

. Use of Compensatory Time - An employee who has accrued
compensatory time off and who has requested the use of such compensatory time
shall be permitted by the Employer to use such time within a reasonable period after
making the request if the use of the compensatory time does not unduly disrupt the
operations of the Employer. The Employer shall make a "sincere effort" to allow the
use of compensatory time when requested.

3. Compensatory Time Considered Leave with Pay - An employee on
compensatory time off shall be deemed to be on official leave with pay status.

4. Conversion to Sick Leave - An employee who notifies the employee's
Department head promptly or substantiates to the satisfaction of the employee's
Department head that the employee was sick on a scheduled day of compensatory
time off shall be charged only for sick leave.

D. Assignment of Overtime Work and Stand-By Duty

1. Equitable and Fair Assignment - The Employer shall endeavor to assign
overtime work, and stand-by duty, in a fair and equitable manner to employees.
When assigning overtime, consideration shall be given to employees of the same
rank within the same work unit. Employees assigned to perform such overtime or
stand-by duty may request to be relieved from performing overtime work or stand-by
duty for justifiable reasons and the Employer shall accommodate such request
provided that a qualified replacement is available.

COMMENTARY
The Employer retains the right to make temporary assignments.

ARTICLE 16. ORIENTATION

A. Union Orientation - The Employer shall make available a period of one (1)
hour to the Union in each recruit class with an end toward education of each
employee of the rights and benefits under the collective bargaining agreement, as
well as other Union benefits, and the responsibilities of the employee and the
organization of the Union with an end toward having an employee who would
become a better Union member and a better employee.

B. Union's Health Benefit / Insurance Programs - The Employer shall make
available a period of one (1) hour on the first day of orientation to Union personnel so
that they may provide each recruit class with information concerning the Union's
health benefits program and insurance plans.

ARTICLE 17. UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT

A. Uniform and Equipment Committee - There shall be established a Uniform
and Equipment Committee in each County. Said Committee shall be charged with
the responsibility for evaluating proposed changes in appearance standards, dress,
the standards and specifications of uniforms, motor vehicles, and personal police
equipment and for making recommendations which shall be given directly to the
Chief of Police of the respective county for consideration and action. The Committee
will be informed of the Police Chief's decision.

1. Composition of Committee - Said Committee shall have four (4)
members. The Employer shall select two members and the Union shall select two
members. The Union shall provide the names of its members to the Employer and
likewise, the Employer shall provide the names of its members to the Union.

2. Meetings - The Committee shall meet at least once a month at a date
and time mutually agreeable; provided, however, that said monthly meetings may be
waived by mutual agreement. Members of the Uniform and Equipment Committee
shall be allowed sufficient time off to attend all meetings of the Uniform and

SHOPO 2011-2017 28
Equipment Committee. The Employer may, only if operationally necessary, refuse to
adjust work schedules to accommodate members of the Committee. The Employer
shall not pay any overtime premiums or any other penalties as a result of work
schedule changes made in accordance with this section.

3. Recommendations - Except in an emergency, the Employer agrees that
changes in appearance standards, dress and the standards and specifications of
uniforms, motor vehicles and personal police equipment shall not be made prior to
receipt of recommendation of said Committee.

B. Employer Rights - Uniforms - The Employer shall have the right to determine
the overall appearance and color of uniforms with the following exceptions:

1. Safety and Comfort - Provided that nothing detrimental to the safety and
comfort of the employees shall be prescribed;

2. Neckties - Neckties shall not be required;

3. Police Hats - Police hats are considered part of the official uniform and
must be worn when directing traffic and for ceremonial, foot patrol and security
details, drills, inspections and off-duty assignments. The wearing of the hat is
optional in all other situations except that each employee shall have their hat readily
available while on duty.

C. Issued Equipment / Uniform Replacement - The Employer shall furnish, at
no expense to employees police equipment, which may or may not include cars, and
personal safety equipment which it requires employees to use in connection with
their official duties. Existing uniform allowance policy of the respective jurisdictions
shall be maintained for the duration of this Agreement except that employees
qualified to receive a uniform replacement shall be entitled to a replacement
allowance based on a reimbursement of seventy-five percent (75%) of the actual
item cost of a purchased replacement uniform.

D. Uniform Maintenance Allowance - Effective July 1, 2013, all employees who
have been issued and are required to maintain uniforms shall receive a Uniform
Maintenance Allowance of $300.00 per fiscal year. Fifty percent (50%) of such
allowance shall be paid on or about July 1st (e.g. $150.00) and January 1st (e.g.
$150.00) of each fiscal year. If the employment of the employee commences after
July 1st or January 1st of the fiscal year, the sum shall be paid prorated from the
date hired. The allowance paid shall cease during periods of suspension of five (5)
or more days and the Employer may recover any overpayment on a prorated basis
retroactive to the first day of suspension. If the employment of an employee is
severed prior to the end of the fiscal year, the Employer shall be entitled to recover
on a prorated basis.

E—. Firearm Maintenance Allowance - Effective July 1, 2013, the Employer shall
provide to employees authorized to carry a firearm as a condition of employment on
a 24-hour basis a sum of $500.00 per fiscal year for the proper care and
maintenance of weapons and accessory personal safety equipment related to their
employment issued by the Employer, and for the purchase, care and maintenance of
supplemental weapons, including ammunition approved by the Employer. Fifty
percent (50%) of such allowance shall be paid on or about July 1st (e.g. $250.00)
and January 1st (e.g. $250.00) of each fiscal year. If the employment of the
employee commences after July 1st or January ‘1st of the fiscal year, the sum shall
be paid prorated from the date hired. The allowance paid shall cease during periods
of suspension of five (5) or more days and the Employer may recover any
overpayment on a prorated basis retroactive to the first day of suspension. If the
employment of an employee is severed prior to the end of the fiscal year, the
Employer shall be entitled to recover on a prorated basis.

29 SHOPO 2011-2017
F. Supply Room - The supply room shall remain open during regular business
(7:45 a.m. - 4:30 p.m.) Monday through Friday except holidays and inventory days,
or as may otherwise be agreed upon.
G. Damaged, Worn, Lost or Stolen Equipment - Except in cases of gross
negligence on the part of employees, furnished equipment to include county-owned
vehicles which are damaged or which are worn out through normal wear and tear
shall be repaired or replaced by the Employer at no cost to the employee. In cases
of gross negligence, employees shall replace lost, stolen or damaged equipment at
their own expense.
H. Reimbursement for Clothing, Shoes, Eyeglasses & Watches - Provided no
gross negligence is involved, the Employer shall either reimburse the employee for
the reasonable value or pay for the repair costs of uniforms or personal clothing,
shoes, prescription eyeglasses, or watches which are damaged in the performance
of their official duties and responsibilities.

1. Employer's Liability Limit - The Employer's liability shall be limited to:

a. Prescription eyeglasses - $150.00 for prescription eyeglasses;

b. Watches - $100.00 for watches;

c. Shoes and Personal Clothing - $100.00 for shoes and personal
clothing. It is further provided that the Employer's liability with respect to shoes shall
not include damages resulting from normal wear and tear.

2. Payment - Payment shall be made to the employee within twenty (20)
working days from submission of such claims.
COMMENTARY
The Parties agree to meet and consult on the Uniform Policy to insure consistency
among the jurisdictions to the extent possible.

  

 

ARTICLE 18. SUBSIDIZED AUTOMOBILES

A. Providing of Automobile Allowances - Automobile allowances shall be
provided to police officers who are required by the Employer to purchase and
regularly use their private automobiles for official duty.

B. Determination - The Employer shall determine who shall be required to
provide an automobile for official duty.

C. Vehicle Specifications - The Employer shall determine the specifications of
such vehicles.

D. Replacement Vehicle - The police officer is responsible for providing an
acceptable replacement vehicle whenever the employee's automobile is being
repaired as the result of off duty damages. In the event damages should be incurred
while on duty where no gross negligence is involved on the part of the employees,
the Employer shall provide a replacement vehicle for official use at no cost to the
employee or reassign the employee to non-motorized duty.

E. On Duty Damages - Employees whose subsidized automobiles necessitate
repairs as a result of on duty damages shall suffer no loss of car allowance for a
period not to exceed six (6) months.

F. Allowance During Leaves of Absence - Automobile allowance shall be
continued during any authorized leaves of absence with pay, including industrial
injury leaves, not exceeding a continuous period of six (6) months.

G. Required Equipment - Equipment required by the Employer for a subsidized
vehicle shall be furnished and installed at the expense of the Employer.

H. Insurance - The Employer shall continue the present practice of providing
public liability and property damage insurance to include no-fault insurance for each
subsidized vehicle. Comprehensive and collision insurance for a subsidized vehicle
shall be the responsibility of the employee. Cost of repairs for damages to a
subsidized vehicle shall be reimbursed under circumstances which indicate that the

 

SHOPO 2011-2017 30
damage occurred “on duty” or incurred while performing an official police function,
and (1) was the malicious or negligent act of a third party, or (2) was not the result of
gross negligence on the part of the officer. Reimbursement shall be made to the
extent not compensated for by the deductible provision of the insurance policy, but
not in excess of $100 for comprehensive insurance and/or $250 for collision
insurance. A final written statement of cost and list of damages shall be presented to
the Employer upon request for payment.

L Notification - Whenever an employee is required to purchase, lease or
otherwise obtain the use of an approved vehicle as a condition of continued
employment or promotion, the employee shall be notified in advance and shall be
given a reasonable time to effect the purchase, lease or use of such vehicle.

J. Changes to Subsidized and/or Fleet Vehicle Programs - The Employer
agrees that changes to the present policies regarding automobiles for police use will
not be made without prior consultation with the Union.

K. Installation and Removal of Required Equipment - Whenever equipment
required by the Employer is to be installed in subsidized vehicles, the following shall
apply:

1. The Employer shall install and remove such equipment.

2. The Employer shall be responsible for repair of any damages caused by
installation or removal of such equipment. Such responsibility shall be limited to
damages caused only by authorized installation or removal.

3. The employee shall be responsible for the proper use and security of all
required equipment. The Employer shall not be responsible for replacement or
repair of required equipment which is stolen, lost, or damaged as a result of gross
negligence on the part of the employee.

L. Automobile Allowance Schedule - The monthly allowance paid by the
Employer for subsidized vehicles shall be paid in accordance with the following
schedules:

 

CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU

Group |
$600.00 - Effective July 1, 2011

Central and Regional Patrol Bureaus -
(MPO, Sergeant, Lieutenant, Patrol Detectives)
Special Services Division (SSD)
Traffic Division (all)
Warrant Officers

Group Il
$562.00 - Effective July 1, 2011

Central Receiving Division
Communications Division
Community Affairs Division
Criminal Intelligence Unit
Criminal Investigation Division
Human Resources Division
Information Technology Division
Major Events Division
Narcotics / Vice Division
Peer Support Unit
Records and Identification Division
Training Division

31 SHOPO 2011-2017
COUNTY OF HAWAII

Group |
$600.00 - Effective July 1, 2011

Patrol (Sergeants, PO)
Traffic Enforcement Units
Uniformed Lieutenants

Group Il
$562.00 - Effective July 1, 2011

Administrative Bureau

Criminal Intelligence / Office of Professional Standards Unit
Criminal Investigation Section

Juvenile Aid Section

Vice Section

M. County of Maui / County of Kauai

1. Private Automobiles Used for Official Duty - If any police officer is
required by the County of Maui or the County of Kauai to purchase and regularly use
the employee's private automobile for official duty, an automobile allowance shall be
provided in accordance with the categories that have been agreed upon for the

 

ions - Whenever an employee who has been required to regularly
provide an automobile for official duty as provided in paragraph 1 above and should
the respective Employer subsequently terminate such policy:

a. Any subsidized vehicle in use on the effective date of the termination
of the above policy and which is in satisfactory operating condition as determined by
the respective Employer, shall be retained as a subsidized vehicle until said vehicle
has aged six (6) years from the date the automobile was first sold.

b. If the employee, with the approval of Employer, elects to waive the
six (6) year period, the Employer shall provide a vehicle to the employee and
discontinue the automobile as provided in paragraph 1, herein.

N. Condition of Vehicle / Employee Responsibility - If the subsidized
automobile is not in satisfactory condition, as determined by the Employer, the
employee shall return it to satisfactory condition at the employee's cost within a
reasonable time but not to exceed 30 days from the date of notice. If not so
returned, the automobile allowance shall be terminated.

O. Gasoline Issued / Rate for On-Duty Miles - Gasoline for all units is to be
issued at the rate of 10 official duty miles per gallon. Mileage overages may be
carried forward but must be cleared within the next calendar month. The present
practice of distribution of oil shall be continued.

P. Time Limit on Use of Sub: ed Vehicles - The Employers agree that any
employee who is required to provide a subsidized automobile shall be permitted to
use such automobile up to eight (8) years from the date the automobile was first
sold, provided such automobile meets the approved standards of the applicable
Department. Notwithstanding the above, the subsidized automobile which has been
used for eight (8) years may be permitted to be used for an additional two (2) year
period upon appropriate application, each of both years, with the Police Department,
provided such automobile meets the approved standards. Any decision by the
Department of each one (1) year extension shall not be subject to the grievance
procedure.

 

   

 

SHOPO 2011-2017 32
Q. Window Tint - Subsidized vehicles may have tinted windows provided that the
window tint meets all applicable Federal and State standards regarding window tint.
In the event of a disagreement as to whether a subsidized automobile’s tinted
window or windows meet Federal and/or State standards, the Employer's
representative and the employee shall have the tint tested at an authorized State
safety inspection station. The results of the test shall be binding on the parties.
When the tint does not meet Federal and/or State standards, the employee shall pay
the cost of the test. When the tint meets the standards, the Employer representative
shall pay the State safety inspection station the cost at the time of the test. Any
violation or disagreement by employees of this section shall not be subject to the
grievance procedure.

ARTICLE 19. PARKING
The Employer agrees to meet and confer with the Union in seeking means to
alleviate the severe problems caused by the lack of parking spaces for employees.

ARTICLE 20. TRANSFERS

A. Placement of Employees - The placement of employees within each Police
Department shall be the responsibility of the respective Police Chiefs.

B. Seniority / Hardship - In transferring or reassigning employees, the Police
Department will insofar as practicable consider grade seniority when making such
transfer or reassignment. In addition, due consideration shall be given for cases
involving personal hardship.

C. Requests for Transfer - Employees may submit written requests for transfer to
another district, division or unit and shall receive written acknowledgment of such
request from the Department. Such requests shall be given full consideration by the
Department.
D. Disciplinary Transfers - Whenever an employee is transferred or reassigned
for disciplinary reasons, the employee shall be given written notification of and the
reasons for such action.

E. _ Intergovernmental Transfers - Intergovernmental transfers of employees may
be permitted when made in conformance with civil service laws and rules.

F. No Requirement to Live in District - No employee shall be required to live in
the district where the employee is assigned the employee's tour of duty. The only
exception will be employees required to work on the islands of Lanai, Molokai, or in
the district of Hana.

G. Notice of Denial - If the transfer is denied, the employee shall be notified of the
denial.

H. Written Transfer List - The Employer shall maintain a dated written transfer
list. Upon the request of a Union Representative, the employee shall be given
access to the transfer list.

L Length of Time Requests are Valid - Transfer requests shall be valid for one
year from the date of filing.

 

 

ARTICLE 21. PROBATIONARY PERIOD

A. Initial Probationary Period / New Employees - All new employees shall serve
an initial probationary period of one (1) year, during which time they shall not be
entitled to any seniority or tenure rights, but during this period, they shall be subject
to the terms and conditions of this Agreement. If an initial probationary employee
takes an approved leave of absence, the employee may, upon recommendation of
the appointing authority, be granted credit for the period of leave towards the
probationary period; otherwise, the employee shall be required to serve an additional
number of days equivalent to the period of leave to complete the employee's initial

33 SHOPO 2011-2017
probationary period. The initial probationary period may be extended by the
Employer for a period not to exceed six (6) months in situations where the Employer
has not had sufficient time to adequately evaluate the employee's performance as a
police officer. Upon satisfactory completion of the initial probationary period such
employees shall be known as regular employees and shall be credited with seniority
and tenure from the date of hire which shall be considered a part of employees’
seniority rights as set forth in Article 23. A new employee whose probationary
appointment is terminated shall not be entitled to use the grievance or appeal
procedure.

B. Promotional Probations - New probationary periods shall be for six (6)
months and may be extended for an additional period not to exceed six (6) months.
An employee whose promotion is terminated or whose new probationary period is
extended during the employee's probationary period shall be informed in writing of
the specific reasons therefor prior to or upon the effective date of said action.

1. Purpose of Promotional Probationary Process - The Employer and the
Union agree that the new promotional probationary period is an extension of the
examination process and will be used to evaluate the employee's overall job
performance in the new position.

2. Rights of Promotional Probationary Employees - An employee whose
promotional probationary appointment is terminated shall be entitled to appeal
through the grievance procedure, if prejudice was a controlling factor in the
termination of the employee's promotion.

SAFETY AND HEALTH

A. Composition of Committee / Meetings - There shall be established in each
jurisdiction a Safety and Health Committee comprised of two (2) member
representatives of the Union and two (2) member representatives of the Employer.
The Union shall provide the names of its members to the Employer and likewise, the
Employer shall provide the names of its members to the Union. The Committee shall
meet at least once each month at a date and time mutually agreeable; provided
however, that said monthly meetings may be waived by mutual agreement.

B. Functions - The function of the Committee shall be to advise the Police Chief
concerning matters of occupational safety and health within the Police Department.
The responsibilities of the Committee shall include reviewing existing safety
equipment, supplies and procedures; reviewing accidents for the purpose of
recommending corrective or preventive safety measures; and suggesting changes to
Police Department safety and health rules and practices. Recommendations of the
Committee shall be given directly to the Chief of Police of the respective county for
consideration and action. The Committee will be informed of the Police Chief's
decision. The Committee shall meet at a time mutually agreeable to representatives
of the Employer and the Union. Members of the Safety and Health Committee shall
be allowed sufficient time off to attend all meetings of the Safety and Health
Committee. The Employer may, only if operationally necessary, refuse to adjust
work schedules to accommodate members of the Committee. The Employer shall
not pay any overtime premiums or any other penalties as a result of work schedule
changes made in accordance with this section.

C. Compliance with Laws - The parties agree to comply with applicable Federal,
State and local safety laws and ordinances.

D. Unsafe Equipment / Third Party Determination - No employee shall be
required to operate or handle any Employer-supplied machine, equipment or motor
vehicle which is deemed unsafe. If an employee alleges that a machine, equipment
or motor vehicle is unsafe and the employee's supervisor disagrees with said
allegation, the employee or the employee's representative and the Employer or

  

SHOPO 2011-2017 34
Employer's representative shall mutually agree upon the appointment of a third party
qualified to evaluate the safety of said machine, equipment or motor vehicle to
determine the safety of same. The decision of the third party shall be final and
binding upon the parties.

ARTICLE 23. SENIORITY

A. Master Seniority List - There shall be established by the Employer of each
county a master seniority list which shall be maintained on a yearly basis. The list
shall be posted each year from January 1 until January 31, in each Department and
each station, in a conspicuous place, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to the
Union. Objections to the seniority lists shall be reported to the respective Employer
on or before February 15 of each year, or said seniority lists shall stand as posted.

B. Contents of Master Seniority List - The master lists shall contain each
employee's name, departmental seniority, present grade, and grade seniority. For
purposes of this Agreement, departmental seniority shall be determined as of the
date of last continuous hire within the county, as a police officer/police cadet, subject
to (1) through (10) below.

C. Determination of Seniority / Limitations - For purposes of the Agreement,
grade seniority shall be determined as of the effective date of appointment to the
employee's present grade, subject to (1) through (10) below:

1. Authorized Leaves - Employees who have been granted authorized
leaves of absences and who then return to active duty within the police department
shall be credited the time of such leave of absence towards all seniority rights.

2. Resignation / Termination - An employee who resigns or whose
employment is otherwise terminated and who thereafter is re-employed shall lose all
seniority rights accrued to the date of termination of the prior employment.

3. Suspension / Unauthorized Leave - Periods of suspension and
unauthorized leaves of absence shall not be credited toward seniority rights.

4. Temporary Assignment - Temporary assignment to higher rank shall not
be a basis of the accumulation of any grade seniority at the higher rank.

5. Same Date of Employment - Employees with the same date of
employment shall have departmental seniority determined by their rank on the
eligible list from which appointed.

6. Same Date of Promotion - Employees with the same date of promotion
shall have their grade seniority determined by their departmental seniority.

7. Demotion - In cases of a demotion, voluntary or otherwise, the demoted
employee shall enter the lower grade with credit for any prior grade seniority which
the employee previously earned within said grade.

8. Promotion - In all cases of a promotion, the employee shall enter the
higher grade with credit for any grade seniority previously earned within said grade.

9. Unsuccessful Completion of Promotional Probationary Period - For
employees who did not successfully complete their promotional probationary
periods, Section C.8. shall not apply.

10. PO-9 - For officers permanently assigned in the PO-9 salary range,
seniority will be determined by departmental seniority. However, for officers
temporarily assigned in the PO-9 salary range, seniority will be determined by grade
seniority.

ARTICLE 24. VACATION LEAVE
A. Vacation Leave Earned

1. An employee shall earn fourteen (14) hours of vacation leave for each
month of service. For the purpose of this Article, a workday is defined as an eight-
hour (8) workday.

35 SHOPO 2011-2017
2. An employee who renders less than a full month of service shall earn
vacation leave for the month as follows:

Straight Time Hours Earned Work
of Work Per Month Hours of Leave
For 0 to 31 0
For 32 to 55 4
For 56 to 79 6
For 80 to 103 8
For 104 to 127 10
For 128 to 151 12
For 152 or more 14

B. Exceptions to Earning Vacation Leave

1. An employee shall earn vacation leave while on leave with pay, including
paid holidays, unless specifically prohibited by the Agreement.

2. An employee shall not earn vacation leave while on:

a. Vacation leave or sick leave when the employment terminates or is
to be terminated at the end of the leave.

b. Leave without pay, except when the employee is on leave for
disability and is being paid workers’ compensation.

c. Suspension.

d. Unauthorized leave.

C. Accumulation of Vacation Leave

1. An employee may accumulate up to one hundred sixty-eight (168) hours
of vacation leave per calendar year until the employee accumulates the first three
hundred thirty-six (336) hours. Subsequently, an employee may accumulate not
more than one hundred twenty (120) hours of vacation leave per calendar year, even
if the total accumulated days fall below three hundred thirty-six (336) hours.
Vacation leave in excess of one hundred twenty (120) hours per year may be
accumulated for good cause when a request for the accumulation is approved by the
Police Chief, provided the request shall be accompanied by a stipulation that the
employee shall take the excess vacation leave at a specified time. If the employee
fails to take the excess vacation leave at the time stipulated, the employee shall
forfeit the excess vacation leave unless for good reason an extension of time is
granted by the Police Chief.

2. An employee may accumulate vacation leave for the succeeding year or
years provided that the total accumulation shall not exceed seven hundred twenty
(720) hours at the end of the calendar year. If vacation leave accumulated at the
end of the calendar year exceeds seven hundred twenty (720) hours, the vacation
leave in excess of seven hundred twenty (720) hours shall be forfeited, except:

a. When the vacation leave commences on or before the last working
day of the calendar year and includes the accumulated vacation leave in excess of
seven hundred twenty (720) hours.

b. When an employee becomes sick prior to the approved vacation
leave that would have commenced on or before the last working day of the calendar
year and the sickness extends into the next calendar year. The excess vacation
leave shall be taken immediately after the conclusion of the sick leave.

c. When an employee terminates on or before the last working day of
the calendar year, notwithstanding the fact that the recording of current accrued
vacation for the year on the last day may result in an accumulation of more than
seven hundred twenty (720) hours.

d. When an employee's accumulated vacation leave exceeds seven
hundred twenty (720) hours, the employee may be paid for the excess vacation
leave in lieu of taking vacation leave, if upon investigation by the respective county

SHOPO 2011-2017 36
director of finance it is found that the excess vacation leave resulted from the
employee's inability to be allowed vacation time off because of orders by the Police
Chief.

D. Application for Vacation Leave

The employee desiring to take vacation leave shall be responsible for
submitting an application, on a form prescribed by the respective county director of
finance, in advance of the beginning date of the vacation to enable the Employer to
make necessary arrangements for any readjustment of work. The advance notice
period to submit an application for vacation leave may be prescribed by
departmental regulations or policies. The advanced notice may be waived for
emergency situations.

E. Ad ering Vacation Leave

Vacation leave shall be administered on a calendar year basis and recorded at
the end of each calendar year. For the purpose of this Article, the vacation year shall
commence January 1 and terminate December 31 of the calendar year.

F. Selection and Scheduling of Vacation Leave

1. In the selection of vacation dates, preference shall be given within each
operating unit by respective grade on the basis of departmental seniority.

2. The Department shall schedule vacations of personnel belonging to
different bargaining units on an impartial basis consistent with operational needs.

3. The Employer agrees to meet and confer with the Union to formulate
guidelines in scheduling vacations of police officers and Department employees of
other bargaining units.

4. — In the event an employee moves from one operating unit to another, after
the employee's vacation has been scheduled but before the effective date of said
scheduled vacation, the Employer shall reschedule the vacation date of the
employee so that it is consistent with the vacation schedule of that operating unit.

G. Granting of Vacation Leave

1. Vacation leave that is requested in advance and submitted on a proper
application by the employee, may be granted and taken at such times as designated
by the Police Chief, provided that such leave shall be taken as close to the
requested period of time as conditions in the Department will permit, so as to prevent
any forfeiture of vacation leave.

2. When vacation leave is granted, it may include, at the request of the
employee, all vacation leave accrued up to the end of the employee's last full month
of service immediately preceding the commencement of the vacation, provided that
no employee shall be granted or permitted to take vacation in any calendar year in
excess of seven hundred twenty (720) hours.

3. Vacation leave of less than one (1) hour shall not be granted.

4. Vacation leave shall be charged only for those hours of work for which the
employee is or would normally be scheduled to work.

5. When payment in lieu of vacation leave is granted or when the
employee’s employment will not continue at the expiration of the vacation leave, the
payment shall include a prorated amount for any fraction of a work day of vacation
leave to which the employee is entitled.

H. Recall from Vacation Leave

In the event an employee is called back to duty prior to the expiration of any
granted vacation, the employee shall be paid for all work performed at the rate of
one and one-half (1-1/2) times the employee's regular rate of pay during such
periods of scheduled vacation the employee's services are required and shall be
granted the employee's unused vacation days, or portions thereof, at a time mutually
agreed upon.

 

37 SHOPO 2011-2017
ARTICLE 25. LEAVES OF ABSENCE WITH PAY
A. Leave for Death in the Family

1. When death occurs to a member of an employee's immediate family, the
employee shall be entitled to three (3) days leave with pay.

a. For the purpose of this section, immediate family is defined as:
parents, brothers, sisters, spouses, natural or legally adopted children, step-parents,
parents-in-law, grandparents and grandchildren, or any individual who becomes a
member of an immediate family through the Hawaiian “Hanai” custom. Provided,
however, an individual affected by the “Hanai” relationship shall be entitled to utilize
funeral leave only for those members of the employee's immediate family resulting
from the “Hanai” relationship. If the death or funeral occurs outside the State of
Hawaii, the employee shall be granted, upon request, a reasonable number of
additional days of accumulated vacation leave, compensatory time off, or leave
without pay for travel to attend the funeral; or participate in the funeral arrangements
for a funeral in the State of Hawaii.

b. Death in family leave shall be granted on the days or shift
designated by the employee provided it is taken within a reasonable period of time
after such a death.

B. Personal Leave - An employee shall, whenever operationally possible, be
permitted five (5) days personal leave with pay per year which shall be charged
against the employee's vacation credits. Additional personal leave with pay may be
granted upon request based on justifiable need whenever operationally possible and
shall also be charged against the employee's vacation credits.

C. Military Leave with Pay

1. Employees whose appointment is for six (6) months or more shall, while
on active duty or during periods of camps of instruction or field maneuvers as
members of the Hawaii national guard, air national guard, naval militia, organized
reserves, including the officer's reserve corps and the enlisted reserve corps, under
call of the President of the United States or the governor of the State, be placed on
leave with pay status for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) working days in any
calendar year, except as provided in subparagraph C.2.

2. ‘If an employee is called to active duty or required to report to camp
training or field maneuvers by official military orders a second time within a calendar
year, the employee may elect to use up to fifteen (15) working days of the
succeeding calendar year; provided that the employee's entitlement to the working
days advanced shall be cancelled from the succeeding calendar year, and the
employee shall so agree in writing. Advanced military leave shall not exceed fifteen
(15) working days and advancement of military leave for two (2) consecutive
calendar years is not allowed.

3. | The employee who is advanced leave shall be required to reimburse the
Employer an amount of pay equivalent to the days advanced in the event the
employee leaves government employment or separates from the military prior to
completion of a year's service in the succeeding year from which leave was
advanced, except in the case of death of the employee.

D. Sick Leave

1. Sickness

a. A physical or mental disability not willfully or intentionally provoked
by the employee, preventing the performance of regular or usual work, including
disabilities caused or contributed to by pregnancy, miscarriage, abortion, childbirth
and recovery therefrom.

b. Sick leave shall be allowed for medical, dental, optical and
optometric appointments which the employee cannot schedule for non-work hours.

SHOPO 2011-2017 38
2. Sick Leave Earned
a. An employee shall earn fourteen (14) hours of sick leave for each
full month of service. For the purpose of this Article, a workday is defined as an
eight-hour (8) workday.
b. An employee who renders less than a full month of service shall
earn sick leave for the month as follows:

Straight Time Hours Earned Work
of Work Per Month Hours of Leave
For 0 to 31 0
For 32 to 55 4
For 56 to 79 6
For 80 to 103 8
For 104 to 127 10
For 128 to 151 12
For 152 or more 14

3. Exceptions to Earning Sick Leave

a. An employee shall earn sick leave while on leave with pay, including
paid holidays, unless specifically prohibited by the Agreement.

b. An employee shall not earn sick leave while on:

1) Vacation leave or sick leave when the employment terminates
or is to be terminated at the end of the leave.
2) Leave without pay, except when the employee is on leave for
disability and is being paid workers’ compensation.
3) — Suspension.
4) Unauthorized leave.
4. Accumulation of Sick Leave
Sick leave may be accumulated without limitation.
5. Application for Sick Leave

Application for sick leave shall be filed on a form prescribed by the
Employer or designee within five (5) working days after return to duty, provided that
in the event such employee dies before that time or before return to duty, the
employee's executor or administrator or the Police Chief, if deemed proper, may file
such application within six (6) months after the employee's death.

6. Granting of Sick Leave

a. Sick leave shall not be granted unless it is proven to the satisfaction
of the Employer that the employee’s absence from work was necessary because of
sickness, or because of medical, dental, optical and optometric examination
appointments which the employee could not schedule for non-work time.

b. The employee shall submit a licensed physician's certificate for
absences of five (5) or more consecutive working days to substantiate the fact that
the period of absence was due entirely to sickness and that the employee is
physically and/or mentally able to resume the duties of the position. The Police Chief
may require the employee to be examined by a physician of said Police Chief's
choice provided the Department assumes the cost of the physician’s services.

c. Sick leave of less than one (1) hour shall not be charged to sick
leave.

d. An employee shall be charged for sickness for only those hours for
which the employee was or would have been scheduled to work. Sickness on
holidays shall not be charged against the employee's sick leave allowance.

7. Sick Leave During Vacation

An employee who is sick one (1) or more consecutive working days while
on vacation leave and who submits a licensed physician's certificate or other
satisfactory proof of sickness, as deemed necessary by the Employer, shall be

39 SHOPO 2011-2017
charged sick leave in lieu of vacation leave. Application for sick leave in lieu of
vacation leave shall be made within five (5) working days upon the employee's return
to work.
8. Physical Exami
Physical examinations required by the Employer shall not be charged
against an employee's sick leave.
9. Forfeiture / Non Forfeiture of Sick Leave
An employee who terminates employment shall forfeit accumulated sick
leave to the date of the termination, except as otherwise provided by law. An
employee shall not forfeit accumulated sick leave when the employee is granted a
leave of absence without pay, including military leave, or is rehired within seven (7)
calendar days by the Employer.
10. Investigation of Sick Leave
The Employer may investigate any absence with pay due to sickness and
take disciplinary action when a false claim is determined to have been made by the
employee. The Employer may require an employee to be examined by a designated
physician to determine whether or not the employee's absence was due to sickness.
If the Employer requires the employee to be examined by a physician selected by
the Employer for the purpose of verifying the sickness, the Employer shall assume
the cost of the physician's services. If the employee requests and the Employer
grants the employee's request to be examined by a private physician of the
employee's choice, the employee shall be responsible for the cost of the physician’s
services. In the event the employee is examined by a private physician, the
employee shall request that the physician furnish a report of the findings to the

 

Employer.
E. Family Leave
1. ions

 
 

a. Child” means an individual who is a biological, adopted, or foster
son or daughter, a stepchild, or a legal ward of an employee.

b. “Parent” means a biological, foster, or adoptive parent, a parent-in-
law, a stepparent, a legal guardian, a grandparent, or a grandparent-in-law.

c. “Serious health condition” means a physical or mental condition that
warrants the participation of the employee to provide care during the period of
treatment or supervision by a health care provider, and

1) Involves inpatient care in a hospital, hospice, or residential
health care facility; or
2) Requires continuing treatment or continuing supervision by a
health care provider.
2. Family Leave Requirement

a. A regular employee shall be entitled to use up to twenty (20) days,
but not to exceed one hundred sixty (160) hours of accrued sick leave in a calendar
year upon the birth of a child of the employee or the adoption of a child, or to care for
the employee's child, spouse or reciprocal beneficiary, or parent with a serious health
condition.

b. An Employer may require that a claim for family leave be supported
by written certification.

COMMENTARY
Family leave shall be in accordance with applicable state and federal family leave
laws.
F. Other Leaves of Absence With Pay
Witness or Juror - Whenever an officer is summoned as a juror or witness in
any judicial proceeding, the officer shall be entitled to leave of absence without loss
of pay or benefits, for the period required for such service. This section shall not

SHOPO 2011-2017 40
apply to officers who are summoned to a proceeding involving or arising from the
officer's official duty where that officer is entitled to overtime compensation as
provided for by Article 15.

ARTICLE 26. ENCOURAGING ADVANCED EDUCATION

A. Policy - The Employer agrees to a policy of encouraging employees to seek
college, graduate, legal or professional education, and specialized training. To
enable employees to attend such Employer approved education and training, the
Employer will whenever operationally practicable make the necessary adjustments to
employee's work schedules.

B. Granting Leave - The Employer may grant vacation leave or leave without pay
to permit employees to attend seminars or workshops to further their education and
training in police work.

C. Notice of Training - The Employer shall post notices of training and
development programs to be made available to employees. Posting of such notices
shall be made within a reasonable period prior to the filing deadline for application
when practicable. A copy of each notice shall be provided the Union. Such notices
shall include necessary information for filing of applications for such programs. The
Employer shall endeavor to select employees for specialized training and
development programs based on operational needs and in a fair and equitable
manner.

D. Mileage Compensation - Whenever an employee who is not receiving
automobile allowance is required to attend recall classes or other training and
development classes in a district other than the district to which the employee is
permanently assigned, the employee shall at the option of the Employer, either be
provided transportation to and from the employee's permanent district station to the
training site or be compensated at the rate prescribed by the U.S. Internal Revenue
Service for actual miles traveled to and from the employee's permanent station to the
training site in the employee's private vehicle. Any employee who resides in or is
permanently assigned to the district where the training is to be held shall not be
covered by this provision.
E. Specialized Ti ing / Union Recommendations - In the selection of
employees for specialized training, the Union may recommend names. Employees
not selected from such list for such training may request and shall receive within a
reasonable time an explanation for their not being selected.

 

 

ARTICLE 27. HOURS OF WORK

A. Normal Work Week - The normal work week for each unit member shall be not
more than forty (40) hours.

B. Normal Work Day - Such work week shall consist of five (5) eight (8) hour
work days or any other arrangement agreeable to the Union and the Employer and
not detrimental to the efficient rendering of police service.

C. Meal Period - Each employee shall be permitted a meal period during each
work day for a period of forty-five (45) minutes.

D. Watch Rotation - Unless mutually agreeable, no employee, other than recruits
in training, shall be required to stay on any watch for more than two (2) consecutive
watch periods without being rotated in the usual manner.

E. Modification to Normal Work Week - An Agreement may be entered into
between the Union and the Employer to modify the limitation of an 8-hour day and a
40-hour week for an employee or a group of employees of a work unit.

F. Day Off Rotation - All employees who do not have regular weekends off shall
have their days-off rotated in a forward manner at least once a month or in any other
manner agreed upon by the Union and the Employer.

41 SHOPO 2011-2017
ARTICLE 28. PERSONNEL INFORMATION

A. Examination of Personnel File - An employee, at the employee's request, and
by appointment shall be permitted to examine all of the employee's personnel files.
An employee shall be given a copy of any material in the employee's personnel file if
it is to be used in connection with a grievance or a personnel hearing.

B. Derogatory Material - No material, derogatory to an employee covered
hereunder shall be placed in the employee's personnel file unless a copy of same is
provided the employee. The employee shall be permitted to submit a written
statement as to any disagreement with the facts related to such material which shall
also be included in the employee's personnel file.

1. Relevance - Without exception, derogatory material which is not relevant
to the employee's employment shall not be retained in the employee's personnel file.

Removal of Derogatory Materi: An employee may request that any
derogatory material which has become insignificant with age be reviewed and
destroyed after two (2) years.

3. Review of Materials - The employee’s Department head will determine
whether the material is (a) relevant or (b) insignificant because of age and will decide
whether the material will be retained or removed from the employee's personnel file,
but the employee’s employment history record shall not be altered. If the employee
disagrees with the employee's Department head, the employee may request that the
Personnel Director render a decision on the matter. If the Personnel Director's
decision is not satisfactory to the employee, the Union may then proceed to Step IV
of the Grievance Procedure, Article 32.

4. Destruction of Derogatory Material After Four Years - Any derogatory
materials more than four (4) years old shall be destroyed provided that a summary
notation shall be retained as part of the record.

C. Confidentiality of Records - Employees' home addresses and phone
numbers shall be kept confidential and shall not be released to any person other
than officials of the Department, other authorized agencies, or upon subpoena from
a competent court of law, or upon written authorization of said employees.

D. Information Provided to the Union

1. Personnel Transactions - At the employee's request, the Employer shall
make available to the Union all personnel information needed to chart accurately an
individual employee's personnel transactions.

2. List of New Employees - The Employer shall furnish to the Union each
month the names of all employees hired during the prior month.

 

ARTICLE 29. MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES

A. Maintenance - The Employer shall maintain vehicles, work areas, locker
rooms, and other facilities in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition.

B. Lockers - The Employer shall provide a locker for each uniformed employee
and each employee in other field units to be situated at the police station from which
the employee is assigned. The locker shall be full length and of sufficient size so
that uniforms and other equipment may be adequately secured.

C. Adequate Toilet Fa s - Adequate toilet facilities including toilets and wash
basins shall be provided for employees at the police station. In the renovation of
existing or construction of new police stations the Employer shall provide adequate
toilet facilities including showers, toilets, and wash basins.

 

 

SHOPO 2011-2017 42
ARTICLE 30. SALARIES

The salary schedule in effect on June 30, 2011, shall be designated as Exhibit
A and shall remain in effect through June 30, 2013, and there shall be no step
movement for the period July 1, 2011 to June 30, 2013.

A. Subject to the approval of the respective legislative bodies and effective
July 1, 2013:

1. The salary schedule designated as Exhibit A shall be amended to reflect
one and seventy-five hundredths percent (1.75%) salary adjustment and such
schedule shall be redesignated as Exhibit B.

2. Employees on the salary schedule designated as Exhibit A as of June 30,
2013 shall be placed on the corresponding pay range and step of Exhibit B.

3. Employees shall move or remain on Exhibit B or Exhibit C as applicable,
as follows:

a. Catch-up step movements: All employees who are on a step or
receiving a basic rate of pay lower than warranted by their cumulative years of
service as provided in Paragraph K. Step Movements of Article 54, Compensation
Adjustments, shall move to the next higher step in their salary range on the
employee's police service anniversary date.

b. Service step movements: All employees who complete the
cumulative years of service required for the next higher step in the pay range as
provided in the pertinent compensation adjustment provisions shall move to such
step on the employee's police service anniversary date provided that employees did
not receive a step movement in accordance with A.3.a above.

c. All other employees who are on or beyond their appropriate step
based on their cumulative years of service shall remain at their respective step or
rate.

d. Employees shall receive no more than one step movement under
A.3.a or A.3.b above from July 1, 2013 to June 30, 2014.

B. Subject to the approval of the respective legislative bodies and effective
January 1, 2014:

1. The salary schedule designated as Exhibit B shall be amended to reflect a
one and seventy-five hundredths percent (1.75%) salary adjustment and such
schedule shall be redesignated as Exhibit C.

2. Employees on the salary schedule designated as Exhibit B as of
December 31, 2013 shall be placed on the corresponding pay range and step of
Exhibit C.

C. Subject to the approval of the respective legislative bodies and effective
July 1, 2014:

1. The salary schedule designated as Exhibit C shall be amended to reflect
a one and seventy-five hundredths percent (1.75%) salary adjustment and such
schedule shall be redesignated as Exhibit D.

2. Employees on the salary schedule designated as Exhibit C as of June 30,
2014 shall be placed on the corresponding pay range and step of Exhibit D.

3. Employees shall move or remain on Exhibit D or Exhibit E as applicable,
as follows:

a. Catch-up step movements: All employees who are on a step or
receiving a basic rate of pay lower than warranted by their cumulative years of
service as provided in the pertinent compensation adjustment provisions shall move
to the next higher step in their salary range on the employee's police service
anniversary date.

b. Service step movements: All employees who complete the
cumulative years of service required for the next higher step in the pay range as
provided in the pertinent compensation adjustment provisions shall move to such

43 SHOPO 2011-2017
step on the employee's police service anniversary date provided that employees did
not receive a step movement in accordance with C.3.a above.

c. All other employees who are on or beyond their appropriate step
based on their cumulative years of service shall remain at their respective step or
rate.

d. Employees shall receive no more than one step movement under
C.3.a or C.3.b above from July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2015.

D. Subject to the approval of the respective legislative bodies and effective
January 1, 2015:

1. The salary schedule designated as Exhibit D shall be amended to reflect
a one and seventy-five hundredths percent (1.75%) salary adjustment and such
schedule shall be redesignated as Exhibit E.

2. Employees on the salary schedule designated as Exhibit D as of
December 31, 2014 shall be placed on the corresponding pay range and step of
Exhibit E.

E. Subject to the approval of the respective legislative bodies and effective
July 1, 2015:

1. The salary schedule designated as Exhibit E shall be amended to reflect a
two percent (2.00%) salary adjustment and such schedule shall be redesignated as
Exhibit F.

2. Employees on the salary schedule designated as Exhibit E as of June 30,
2015 shall be placed on the corresponding pay range and step of Exhibit F.

3. | Employees shall move or remain on Exhibit F or Exhibit G as applicable,
as follows:

a. Catch-up step movements: All employees who are on a step or
receiving a basic rate of pay lower than warranted by their cumulative years of
service as provided in the pertinent compensation adjustment provisions shall move
to the next higher step in their salary range on the employee's police service
anniversary date.

b. Service step movements: All employees who complete the
cumulative years of service required for the next higher step in the pay range as
provided in the pertinent compensation adjustment provisions shall move to such
step on the employee's police service anniversary date provided that employees did
not receive a step movement in accordance with E.3.a above.

c. All other employees who are on or beyond their appropriate step
based on their cumulative years of service shall remain at their respective step or
rate.

d. Employees shall receive no more than one step movement under
E.3.a or E.3.b above from July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2016.

F. Subject to the approval of the respective legislative bodies and effective
January 1, 2016:

1. The salary schedule designated as Exhibit F shall be amended to reflect a
two percent (2.00%) salary adjustment and such schedule shall be redesignated as
Exhibit G.

2. Employees on the salary schedule designated as Exhibit F as of
December 31, 2015 shall be placed on the corresponding pay range and step of
Exhibit G.

G. Subject to the approval of the respective legislative bodies and effective
July 1, 2016:

1. The salary schedule designated as Exhibit G shall be amended to reflect
a two and a half percent (2.50%) salary adjustment and such schedule shall be
redesignated as Exhibit H.

SHOPO 2011-2017 44
2. Employees on the salary schedule designated as Exhibit G as of June 30,
2016 shall be placed on the corresponding pay range and step of Exhibit H.

3. Employees shall move or remain on Exhibit H or Exhibit | as applicable,
as follows:

a. Catch-up step movements: All employees who are on a step or
receiving a basic rate of pay lower than warranted by their cumulative years of
service as provided in the pertinent compensation adjustment provisions shall move
to the next higher step in their salary range on the employee's police service
anniversary date.

b. Service step movements: All employees who complete the
cumulative years of service required for the next higher step in the pay range as
provided in the pertinent compensation adjustment provisions shall move to such
step on the employee's police service anniversary date provided that employees did
not receive a step movement in accordance with G.3.a above.

c. All other employees who are on or beyond their appropriate step
based on their cumulative years of service shall remain at their respective step or
rate.

d. Employees shall receive no more than one step movement under
G3.a or G.3.b above from July 1, 2016 to June 30, 2017.

H. Subject to the approval of the respective legislative bodies and effective
January 1, 2017:

1. The salary schedule designated as Exhibit H shall be amended to reflect
a three and three tenths percent (3.30%) salary adjustment and such schedule shall
be redesignated as Exhibit |.

2. Employees on the salary schedule designated as Exhibit H as of
December 31, 2016 shall be placed on the corresponding pay range and step of
Exhibit |.
|. The term "service" as it is used in this article relating to step movements shall
be defined as provided in Article 54, Compensation Adjustments.

ARTICLE 31. PAY DIFFERENTIAL
A. Night Differential

1. Scheduled Work Hours - Whenever an employee's scheduled straight
time hours fall between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the employee shall be
paid, in addition to the employee's basic compensation, the amount of fifty-five cents
($.55) per hour for each hour of actual work performed during such 6:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m. hours; provided, however, if one-half (1/2) or more of the employee's scheduled
straight-time hours fall between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the employee shall be paid,
in addition to the employee's basic compensation, the amount of fifty-five cents
($.55) per hour for each straight-time hour actually worked.

2. Overtime Hours - Whenever an employee's overtime hours fall between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the employee shall be paid the night differential
for each hour of actual overtime work performed during such 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
hours; provided, however, if an employee is required to work an established shift on
an overtime basis and one-half (1/2) or more of the overtime shift hours fall between
6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the employee shall be paid the differential for all hours of
such shift worked on an overtime basis. It is further provided that the employee's
basic compensation plus the night differential earned will be used in determining the
cash payment for overtime work pursuant to the provision on Overtime contained in
this Agreement.

3. Portion of an Hour - For the purpose of granting night differential for a
portion of an hour, the employee will be paid twenty-eight cents ($.28) for one-half

45 SHOPO 2011-2017
(1/2) hour or less of work and fifty-five cents ($.55) for more than one-half (1/2) hour
of work.
B. Hazardous Pay

1. Positions Granted Hazardous Pay - Upon recommendation of the police
chief, the personnel director, in consultation with the Union, may grant differentials in
pay for employees exposed temporarily to unusually hazardous working conditions;
provided that the hazard has not already been recognized as a factor in assigning
classes to salary ranges. Such pay differentials may not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the minimum rate of the salary range and shall terminate six (6) months at a
time. The following positions and the amount of hazardous pay shall be granted as
follows:

a. 20% for instructors and trainees engaged in police pursuit and
defensive driving course;

b. 25% for two-wheel solo motorcycle operators;

c. 20% for three-wheel motorcycle operators;

d. 25% for aerial observers;

e. 25% for scuba divers and other underwater divers or personnel
required to perform equivalent functions on a regular or occasional basis;

f. 25% for hostage negotiators;

g- 20% for operators of All Terrain Vehicles; and

h. 25% for K-9 Decoys during canine bite training.

2. Basic Unit of Payment - The basic unit for computing such payments

shall be the hour, provided that:

a. A fraction of an hour shall be considered an hour;

b. A full day’s pay at hazard rates shall be allowed for four (4) or more
hours of hazard work per day; and

c. This pay is in addition to any other rate that may apply to the job.

3. Differential Not Contained in Contract - Recommendations for hazard
pay differentials not contained herein shall be submitted on such forms and such
manner as the Employer may require.

4. Grievance Procedure - Any disagreement on the denial of hazardous

pay or the amount of differential shall be subject to Article 32, Grievance Procedure,
starting at Step III, the Employer level.
C. Standard of Conduct Differential - Police officers are subject to departmental
standards of conduct whether on or off duty, 24 hours per day and shall be paid a
monthly Standard of Conduct differential (SOCD) due to these unique working
conditions. The amount of the SOCD shall be based on the salary range at which
employees receive their compensation as follows:

1. For eligible employees who are paid at PO 8 salary range and below:

Effective Per Hour
July 1,2013 $2.00
July 11,2014 $2.60
July 1,2015 $3.60
July 1,2016 $3.80
2. For eligible employees who are paid at PO 9 salary range and above:
Effective Per Hour
July 1,2013 $2.20
July 11,2014 $2.80
July 1,2015 $3.80
July 1,2016 $4.00

SHOPO 2011-2017 46
3. To facilitate the processing and payment of the SOCD the hourly rates are
converted to monthly rates, to be paid semi-monthly with employee salaries,
according to the following conversion formula: SOCD hourly rate multiplied by
2080 hours (52 weeks x 40 hours) and divided by 12 months equals the monthly
rate.

4. The hourly differentials shall be paid for each hour an employee is in paid
status (excluding overtime hours), to a maximum of 2080 hours per year.

The SOCD shall be in addition to the employee's regular salary and paid in the
same manner as the employee's regular salary. SOCD pay shall be treated in the
same manner as salary in computing adjustments involving less than a full month's
pay, but shall not be used for purposes of computing all types of premium pay and
differentials nor shall it be affected by such premiums and differentials. The
differential shall cease during periods of suspension of five (5) or more days on a
pro-rated basis. The differential shall not be payable should the Standards of
Conduct be modified to exclude off-duty conduct. In the event that the Standards of
Conduct are modified to exclude off-duty conduct, then the SOCD shall revert back
to a uniform maintenance allowance and a firearms maintenance allowance. The
amount of each allowance shall be subject to the negotiations of the parties.

D. Other Differentials - The following differentials shall be paid to the respective
assignments listed below:

1. Bomb Technicians - 10% of employee’s monthly base pay for bomb
technicians (E.0.D.);

2. Explosive Canine Handlers - 5% of employee’s monthly base pay for
explosive canine handlers assigned to seek out explosives; and

3. Canine Handlers - $132 per month for canine handlers (in addition to any
amount paid as explosive canine handlers); provided that the employee shall be
entitled to reasonable reimbursements for medical and health costs necessary for
the animal in accordance with prior arrangement with the Employer or, at the option
of the Employer, such medical and health services shall be provided by the
Employer.

ARTICLE 32. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

A. Statement of Intent - It is the sincere desire of both parties that employee
grievances be settled as fairly and as quickly as possible. Employee grievances
which arise out of the alleged violations, misinterpretation or misapplication of this
Agreement shall be resolved in accordance with provisions set forth herein.

B. Definitions:

41. vance" shall mean a complaint filed by a bargaining unit employee
or by the Union individually or on an employee's behalf, alleging a violation,
misinterpretation or misapplication of a provision of this Agreement occurring after
the effective date of this Agreement.

2. "Adverse Action Resulting from a il Service Employee’s Failure to
Meet Performance Requirements" shall mean: discharge or involuntary separation
from government service; involuntary demotion; involuntary transfer; or reduction in
pay resulting from the reassignment of another pay range or category, due to a
substandard performance evaluation. The following actions resulting from a civil
service employee's failure to meet performance requirements of the employee's
position shall not be subject to the grievance procedure: a notice to improve
performance or notice of substandard performance; a performance improvement
period; or a return to the employee's former position or comparable position as
required by law because of failure to successfully complete a new probationary
period.

 

 

 

47 SHOPO 2011-2017
3. “Arbitrator" shall mean a neutral third party selected by the Union and
Employer to resolve a grievance or adverse action resulting from the employee's
failure to meet performance requirements. In matters involving failure to meet
performance requirements, the arbitrator shall be known as a “performance judge”
and shall be required to follow the requirements set forth in law under Section 76-41,
Hawaii Revised Statutes.

4. "Civil Service Employee" means an employee appointed to a civil
service position who has successfully completed the initial probationary period
required as part of the examination process to determine the employee's fitness and
ability for the position.

C. Processing of Grievance without the Union - An individual employee may
process the employee's grievance and have the grievance heard without intervention
by the Union up to and including Step IIl as described herein. The Union shall be
informed of the time and place of any formal grievance meeting in order that the
Union may be present.

D. Filing / Corresponding Step - Grievances, including class grievances, may, at
the option of the employee or the Union, be filed at the step corresponding to the
level at which the discipline was imposed or administrative action or decision
rendered and which has the authority to resolve such grievances as determined by
mutual agreement; provided however, that grievances involving a dismissal of an
employee for misconduct or an adverse action resulting from the employee's failure
to meet performance requirements shall be heard at Step Il. Any step may be
by-passed by mutual consent of the parties.

E. Step Not Applicable / Informal Settlement - Whenever a step of the
grievance procedure is not applicable to a jurisdiction, the grievance shall be
presented at the next step. A grievance shall, whenever possible, be discussed and
settled informally between the grievant and the employee's immediate supervisor.
The grievant may be assisted at the grievant's request by a Union steward or Union
representative.

F. Time Limits

41. iling of Grievance - There shall be no obligation by the Employer to
consider any grievance not filed within the specified time limit stated in each step
unless extended by mutual consent.

2. Relevant Information - The Employer shall, upon request of the Union,
make available to the requesting party any and all information and materials relevant
to the grievance. Said information and materials shall be presented within ten (10)
working days after receipt of the request, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon.

3. Extension - Notwithstanding any provision herein, the limitation on time
set forth in Step | through Step Ill, inclusive, shall be extended for periods of ten (10)
days in the interest of the employee or Employer upon presentation of a reasonable
explanation for said delay.

4. Miscellaneous - Unless specifically provided otherwise, all references
herein to prescribed periods of ten (10) days or less shall be construed as working
days. All communications shall be deemed to have been performed at the time
certified if mailed or time of receipt if personally delivered. Notwithstanding the
above, the Employer and Union or employee individually, where unassisted by the
Union, may mutually agree to waive any procedural or timeliness requirements set
forth herein.

G. Designated Employer Representative - If a representative is designated by
the Employer, the name of such person shall be provided to the grieving party.

H. All Issues Shall be Raised at the Initial Step - No grievance, allegation, or
charges by the Employer or Union other than those presented in the initial step shall
be considered at any subsequent step.

  
   

SHOPO 2011-2017 48
|. Step | (Appropriate Administrative Level)

1. Formal Grievance - If the grievance is not satisfactorily settled on an
informal basis, the grieving party and/or the Union representative may institute a
formal grievance by setting forth in writing on a form provided by the Employer, the
nature of the complaint, the specific term or provision of the Agreement allegedly
violated, misinterpreted, or misapplied and the remedy sought.

2. Submittal of Grievance - The grievance shall be presented to the
appropriate administrative level as determined in this Article. The grievance shall be
in writing and served within twenty (20) calendar days after the occurrence of the
alleged violation, or notice received of the administrative action or decision or if it
concerns an alleged continuing violation, then it must be filed within twenty (20)
calendar days after the alleged violation, misinterpretation or misapplication or
administrative action first became known or should have become known to the
grieving party.

3. Opportunity to Meet / Settle Grievance - After the filing of the grievance,
the grieving party and/or the Union representative shall be offered an opportunity to
meet with the administrator as determined above in an attempt to settle the
grievance.

4. Decision - The decision of the administrator shall be in writing and be
transmitted to the grieving party and/or the Union representative within ten (10) days
after the meeting above-referenced, unless extended by mutual consent.

J. Step Il (Chief of Police / Chief's Representative)

1. Appeal - If the grievance is not satisfactorily settled at Step |, the grieving
party and/or the Union representative may file a letter of appeal with the department
or agency head or the department's or agency head's representative within ten (10)
days after the receipt of the decision of Step |.

2. Opportunity to Meet / Settle Grievance - After the filing of the appeal,
the grieving party and/or the Union representative shall be offered an opportunity to
meet with the department or agency head or the department's or agency head's
representative in an attempt to settle the grievance.

3. Decision - The decision of the department or agency head or the
department's or agency head's representative shall be in writing and shall be
transmitted to the grieving party and/or the Union representative within ten (10) days
after the meeting above-referenced unless extended by mutual consent.

K. Step Ill (Employer / Employer Representative)

1. Appeal - If the matter is not satisfactorily settled at Step II, the grieving
party and/or the Union representative may file a letter of appeal with the Employer or
the Employer's representative within ten (10) days after the receipt of the decision in
Step Il.

2. Opportunity to Meet / Settle Grievance - After the filing of the appeal,
the grieving party and/or the Union representative shall be offered an opportunity to
meet with the Employer or the Employer's representative in an attempt to settle the
grievance.

3. Decision - The decision of the Employer or the Employer's representative
shall be in writing and shall be transmitted to the grieving party and/or the Union
representative within ten (10) days after the meeting above-referenced unless
extended by mutual consent.

If the grievance is not satisfactorily settled at Step Ill, the Union may exercise
its right to arbitrate the grievance.

L. Step IV (Arbitration)

1. Notification of Intent to Arbitrate - If the matter is not satisfactorily
settled at Step Ill, and the Union desires to proceed with arbitration, it shall within
thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the decision rendered at Step III, serve written

49 SHOPO 2011-2017
notice on the Employer or the Employer's representative of its desire to arbitrate the
grievance.

2. Grievance Must Involve an Alleged Violation, Misinterpretation or
Misappli ion of a Specific Provision of the Agreement - Except as may
otherwise be provided herein, no grievance may be arbitrated unless it involves an
alleged violation, misinterpretation or misapplication of a specific term or provision of
the Agreement.

3. Grievances Arising Between Termination of Agreement and Effective
Date of New Agreement - Any grievance (except those relating to discipline,
discharge, demotion, or transfer) occurring during the period between the termination
date of this Agreement and the effective date of a new Agreement shall not be
arbitrable except by mutual agreement.

4. Consolidation of Grievances - If an employee has more than one (1)
grievance pending at Step IV of the grievance procedure, some or all of the
grievances may be consolidated for hearing upon mutual agreement of the parties.

5. Selection of an Arbitrator - Selection of an Arbitrator shall be made
within twenty (20) calendar days after the notice of intent to arbitrate is filed:

a. First, from a list of five (5) names mutually agreed to by both parties,
or by mutual agreement to a name suggested by either the Employer or the Union
following the notice of intent to arbitrate, or

b. If a selection is not made under 5.a. above, the parties shall select
from a list of five (5) names submitted by Hawaii Labor Relations Board.

The selection of the specific person to serve as Arbitrator from the foregoing
lists shall be as follows:

(1) The Union and the Employer shall by lot determine who shall
have the first choice in deleting a name from the five (5) member panel.

(2) Subsequent deletions shall be made by striking names from
the list on an alternating basis and the remaining name shall be designated the
Arbitrator for the grievance being considered.

c. The arbitration shall commence within a reasonable period of time
after selection of the arbitrator. If the arbitration has not commenced within one
hundred twenty (120) calendar days after the selection of the arbitrator, the parties
may mutually agree to an extension for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30)
calendar days.

6. Dispute Over Arbitrability - If the Employer disputes the arbitrability of
any grievance under the terms of this Agreement, the Arbitrator shall first determine
whether the Arbitrator has jurisdiction to act; and if the Arbitrator finds that the
Arbitrator has no such jurisdiction, the grievance shall be referred back to the parties
without decision or recommendation.

7. Pre-hearing - A pre-hearing conference may be conducted by the
Arbitrator at a mutually agreeable time. The pre-hearing conference would be held
for the purpose of:

a. Determining the issues for arbitration remaining after the grievance
steps above are exhausted.

b. — Stipulating to evidence to be jointly submitted.

c. — Informing the parties of witnesses to be called.

d. Agreeing to other procedures and arrangements for the hearing on
the grievance.

Notwithstanding the above, neither party shall be foreclosed from submitting
additional exhibits or calling additional witnesses.

8. Discovery - The parties may obtain evidence and testimony by any
method which the Arbitrator has within the Arbitrator's powers to permit.

   

  

SHOPO 2011-2017 50
9. Arbitration Award

a. Decision - The Arbitrator shall render the Arbitrator's award in
writing, no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearings or
if oral hearings are waived, then thirty (30) calendar days from the date statements
and proofs were submitted to the Arbitrator, subject to extension thereof by mutual
agreement of the parties.

b. Final and Binding - The award of the Arbitrator shall be accepted
as final and binding. There shall be no appeal from the Arbitrator’s decision by either
party, if such decision is within the scope of the Arbitrator's authority as described
below:

(1) Limitations on Arbitrator's Powers - The Arbitrator shall not
have the power to add to, subtract from, disregard, alter, or modify any of the terms
of this Agreement.

(2) Arbitrator's Authority - The Arbitrator’s authority shall be to
decide whether the Employer has violated, misinterpreted or misapplied any of the
terms of this Agreement and in the case of any action which the Arbitrator finds
unfair, unjust, improper or excessive on the part of the Employer, such action may be
set aside, reduced or otherwise changed by the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator may, in the
Arbitrator's discretion, award back pay to recompense in whole or in part, the
employee for any salary or financial benefits lost, and return to the employee such
other rights, benefits, and privileges or portions thereof as may have been lost or
suffered.

10. Arbitrator's Fees and Costs - The fees of the Arbitrator, the cost of
transcription and other necessary general costs shall be shared equally by the
Employer and the Union. Each party will pay the cost of presenting its own case and
the cost of any transcript that it requests.

M. Step IV (Arbitration of an Adverse Action Resulting from an Employee’s
Failure to Meet Performance Requirements)

1. Notification of Intent to Arbitrate - If the matter is not satisfactorily
settled at Step Ill and the Union desires to proceed with arbitration, it shall within
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of the decision rendered at Step III, serve written
notice on the Employer or the Employer's representative of its desire to arbitrate.

2. Performance Requirements or Disciplinary Reasons Dispute - When
the dispute concerns an adverse action resulting from an employee's failure to meet
performance requirements of the employee's position, a Performance Judge shall
make the final and binding decision in lieu of an Arbitrator. If the Union alleges that
the adverse action was not due to a failure to meet performance requirements but for
disciplinary reasons without just cause, the Performance Judge shall first proceed
with making a determination on the merits of the Employer's action as provided in “5”
below, and if adverse action taken was based on failing to meet performance based
requirements, the Performance Judge shall issue a final and binding decision. If the
Performance Judge determines that the adverse action was not based on
performance requirements, the Performance Judge shall then determine, based on
appropriate standards of review, whether the disciplinary action was with or without
just cause and render a final and binding decision.

3. Performance Judge - The Performance Judge shall be a neutral third
party selected from a list of nine (9) persons whom the Employer and the Union have
mutually agreed are eligible to serve as a Performance Judge for the duration of the
Unit 12 Agreement. The Employer and the Union may modify the Performance
Judge list at any time by mutual agreement, the Performance Judge list shall be
established as follows:

a. The Employer and the Union shall each submit the names of ten
(10) persons eligible to serve as Performance Judges.

 

51 SHOPO 2011-2017
b. The Employer and the Union, by lot, shall determine who shall have
first choice in deleting a name from the list of twenty (20) persons.

c. Subsequent deletions shall be made by striking names from the list
of twenty (20) persons on an alternating basis until nine (9) names remain. The
remaining nine (9) names shall be designated as the Performance Judge list.

4. — Selection of the Performance Judge

a. The Employer and the Union shall select a Performance Judge
within twenty (20) calendar days after the notice of arbitration is filed in one of the
following ways:

(1) By mutual agreement from the list of Performance Judges; or

(2) In the event that the Employer and the Union fail to select a
Performance Judge by mutual consent, the Employer and the Union, by lot, shall
determine who shall have the first choice in deleting a name from the list of
Performance Judges, any subsequent deletions shall be made by striking names
from the list on an alternating basis, with the remaining name designated the
Performance Judge.

(3) The arbitration hearing shall commence no later than one
hundred twenty (120) calendar days after selection of the Performance Judge.

5. Standards Used by the Performance Judge

a. The Performance Judge shall use the following conditions as tests in
determining whether the Employer's action, based on failure by the employee to
meet performance requirements of the employee's position, was with or without
merit:

(1) The employee was made aware of the employee's current job
description and job-related performance requirements;

(2) Evaluation process and its consequences were discussed with
the employee;

(3) Evaluation procedures were observed, including providing the
employee the opportunity to meet, discuss and rebut the performance evaluation and
apprising the employee of the consequences of failure to meet performance
requirements;

(4) The evaluation was fair and objective;

(5) The employee was provided performance feedback during the
evaluation period and, as appropriate, the employee was offered in-service remedial
training in order for the employee to improve and meet performance requirements;

(6) The evaluation was applied without discrimination; and

(7) Prior to the end of the evaluation period that the employee is
being considered for discharge due to failure to meet performance requirements, the
Employer considered the feasibility of transferring or demoting the employee to
another position for which the employee qualifies.

6. Performance Judge’s Authority - The Performance Judge’s authority
shall be final and binding provided the award is within the scope of the Performance
Judge's authority as described below:

a. The Performance Judge shall be limited to deciding whether the
Employer has violated, misinterpreted, or misapplied section 32.M.5. of the Unit 12
Agreement when the adverse action is based upon performance.

b. Wherein the Performance Judge determines that the action was not
based upon performance requirements, the Performance Judge shall be limited to
deciding whether the Employer has violated, misinterpreted, or misapplied any of the
sections of the Unit 12 Agreement.

c. The Performance Judge shall not have the power to add to, subtract
from, disregard, alter, or modify any sections of the Unit 12 Agreement.

SHOPO 2011-2017 52
d. The Performance Judge shall not consider any allegation that was
not alleged at the step that the grievance was formally filed.

e. The Performance Judge shall not award in whole or in part, any
financial benefits lost as a result of an adverse action as defined in Article 32.B.2.

7. Decision - The Performance Judge shall render a decision no later than
thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing or if oral hearings are
waived, then thirty (30) calendar days from the date statements and proofs were
submitted to the Performance Judge. There shall be no appeal from the
Performance Judge's decision by either party, if such decision is within the scope of
the Performance Judge's authority.

8. Performance Judge’s Fees and Costs - The fees of the Performance
Judge, the cost of transcription and other necessary general costs shall be shared
equally by the Employer and the Union or grieving party. Each party will pay the cost
of presenting its own case and the cost of any transcript that it requests.

COMMENTARY
Provision on performance judge and adverse action resulting from an employee's
failure to meet performance requirements is pursuant to Act 253, Sessions Law of
Hawaii (SLH) 2000.

ARTICLE 33. MATERNITY

A. Disabilities caused or contributed to by pregnancy, miscarriage, abortion,
childbirth and recovery therefrom shall be, for all job related purposes, temporary
disabilities and shall be treated in conformity with guidelines established by the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission pursuant to law.

ARTICLE 34. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
A. Cadets - In filling entry level police officer positions, the Employer shall give
first preference to qualified police cadets before hiring through open competitive
recruitment.
B. Workers’ Compensation - The Employer agrees that employees will be
entitled to workers’ compensation coverage while performing special duty as
assigned by the Chief or the Chief's representative and for participating in physical
fitness or athletic programs authorized by the Chief of Police.
C. Survivor’s Rights - The Employer agrees that the payment of wages of any
deceased employee shall be made in the usual manner when due, and shall not be
withheld from the family or the estate of the employee for any reason whatsoever,
except where required by law.
D. Physical Examinations - The Employer shall provide each employee a
physical examination at least once every 24 months by a physician or other qualified
health care professional selected by the Employer at no cost to the employee. The
Employer's physician or other qualified health care professional may, however,
require more frequent physical examinations or portions of the physical examination
to be conducted if the physician or other qualified health care professional
determines that there is a medical necessity. The nature and extent of such physical
examination shall be determined by the Employer in consultation with the Union.
The Employer shall make a "sincere effort" to schedule physical examinations during
the employee's working hours or the employee shall be paid overtime in accordance
with Article 15, Overtime.

COMMENTARY
A "qualified health care professional" shall meet the following requirements: (1) a
combination of education and experience substantially equivalent to graduation from
an accredited college or university; (2) graduation from a school or training program
approved by the Hawaii Board of Medical Examiners for licensure as a Physician

53 SHOPO 2011-2017
Assistant, or possession of a master's degree in clinical nursing or nursing science
recognized by the Hawaii Board of Medical Examiners for licensure as an Advanced
Practice Registered Nurse (APRN) in the practice specialty area of Nurse
Practitioner or Clinical Nurse Specialist; (3) possession of an active State of Hawaii
Physician Assistant License or possession of an active State of Hawaii Advanced
Practice Registered Nurse (APRN) License in the practice specialty area of Nurse
Practitioner or Clinical Nurse Specialist; and (4) a minimum three (3) years of work
experience which involved the performance of direct medical examinations and
assessments of individual health conditions.

E. K-9 Program - In jurisdictions having an approved canine program, the
following shall apply:

1. | The Employer shall provide adequate and safe portable kennel facilities at
the employee's home.

2. The Employer shall hold the employee harmless for any liability incurred
as the direct and immediate consequence of actions of the canine. The Employer
shall not assume liability where the employee's use or misuse of the canine is
predominantly for the employee's benefit or purpose.

3. | Adequate food and medical services for the canine shall be provided by
the Employer.

F. Strike Post - No strike post shall be staffed in excess of four (4) hours by an
individual employee during a tour of duty except for emergencies.

G._ Traffic / Security / Stationary Post - No traffic, security, or stationary post
shall be staffed in excess of four (4) consecutive hours by an employee during a tour
of duty without a meal period, except for operational emergencies and/or
catastrophic events.

H. Union Recommendations - The Union may submit its recommendations to
the Employer on any matter affecting employer-employee relations. In addition,
except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, all matters affecting employee
relations shall be subject to consultation and the Employer shall make every
reasonable effort to consult with the Union prior to effecting changes in any major
policy affecting employee relations.

|. Accidental Injury Benefits - Whenever any employee covered by this
Agreement receives personal injury arising out of and in the performance of their
duty and without negligence on their part, they shall be placed on accidental injury
leave unless suspended or dismissed for cause, and continued on the payroll in their
respective department at their full regular monthly salary during the first four months
of their disability and thereafter during the period of their total disability from work at
sixty percent of their regular monthly salary, as though they did not sustain an
industrial injury. Employees shall be entitled to all rights and remedies allowed under
Chapter 386, Hawaii Revised Statutes, provided that any salary paid under this
section shall be applied on account of any compensation allowed them under
Chapter 386 or any benefits awarded them under Part Ill of Chapter 88, HRS.

J. | Reassignment - Upon written request, the employee who is reassigned shall
be provided a written explanation of the operational need or other reasons for the
reassignment.

ARTICLE 35. PRIOR RIGHTS

A. Rights, Benefits and Perquisites - Nothing in this Agreement shall be
construed as abridging, amending or waiving any rights, benefits or perquisites
presently covered by statutes, rules or regulations of each jurisdiction that the
employees have enjoyed heretofore except as specifically superseded by the terms
of this Agreement.

SHOPO 2011-2017 54
B. Modifications - It is agreed, however, that the aforementioned perquisites are
subject to modifications or termination by the Employer, as conditions warrant, after
prior consultation with the Union. When the Employer takes such action and the
employee or the Union believes that the reason or reasons for the change is or are
unjust the employee or the Union shall have the right to process such grievance
through the Grievance Procedure set forth in Article 32, herein.

ARTICLE 36. DURATION OF AGREEMENT
A. Except as otherwise contained herein, the Agreement shall be effective July 1,
2011, and shall remain in full force and effect to and including June 30, 2017. It shall
be renewed thereafter with respect to the subject matter covered, in accordance with
statutes, unless either party gives written notice to the other party of its desire to
amend, modify or terminate the Agreement and such written notice is given between
June 1, 2016 and October 1, 2016, inclusive. When any such notice is given,
negotiations for a new agreement shall commence as soon as practicable thereafter.
B. This Agreement may be reopened by either party by giving written notice to the
other party, including the specific written proposals of the notifying party, during the
month of October 2013. It is provided that the reopener is limited to three (3)
non-cost articles, unless modified by mutual consent.

In the event the parties reach agreement on any reopened article, such
amended article shall be effective no earlier than July 1, 2014, and shall remain in
effect to and including June 30, 2017.

ARTICLE 37. LAYOFFS AND RE-EMPLOYMENT

A. Layoffs - When there is an impending layoff within a jurisdiction with respect to
any regular employee in the bargaining unit, the Employer shall inform and consult
with the Union as soon as possible.

1. Processing of Layoffs - Layoffs shall be confined to the jurisdiction
involved and shall be processed in the following order:

a. Non-regular employees with the least amount of service.
b. Regular employees with the least amount of departmental seniority.

2. Notification of Layoff - Notification in writing of layoff shall be given to
the Union at least 30 working days in advance of the effective date of such layoff.
The Employer will provide the Union the names of employees to be laid off.

3. Recall List - With respect to any employee who is laid off, such employee

shall be placed on the appropriate recall list, and shall be recalled on the basis of
departmental seniority as provided in this Agreement. Eligibility shall be for a period
of three (3) years.
B. Re-employment - Regular employees may be considered for re-employment in
civil service positions of the same or related class in a lower pay range by placing
their names on appropriate eligible lists for a period not exceeding three years from
the effective date of resignation in good standing. Employees who are re-employed
shall serve an initial probationary period of one (1) year, except that employees who
are re-employed within three months from the effective date of resignation shall not
be required to serve any probationary period. Employees re-employed within such
three month period shall:

1. be placed in appropriate positions as though they did not resign;

2. have the resignation period be considered as a leave of absence without
pay which is not creditable as service for pay or other purposes; and

3. be compensated as though they had remained in their positions
continuously; provided that if they are re-employed in a class with a lower pay range,
their pay shall be adjusted as though a voluntary demotion had occurred.

55 SHOPO 2011-2017
ARTICLE 38. NO STRIKE; NO LOCKOUT

A. Prohibited Action - The Union agrees that during the life of this Agreement,
neither the Union, its agents, nor its members will authorize, aid or assist, instigate,
or engage in any work stoppage, slow-down, sick out, picketing, refusal to work or
strike against the Employer.

B. Assisting Other Labor Organizations Prohibited - The Union agrees that
during the life of the Agreement the Union, its agents and members will not support,
aid, or assist any other labor organization, or any of its members acting individually,
in a labor dispute by any effort relative to any work stoppage, slowdown, sick out,
picketing, refusal to work or strike.

C. Refusal to Cross Picket Lines - Refusal to cross any picket line in the
performance of duty shall be a violation of this Agreement and may be considered a
basis for disciplinary action

D. Notification of Pro! d Action - Upon any notification confirmed in writing
by the Employer to the Union that certain of its members are engaged in an action
prohibited by this Article 38, entitled No Strike; No Lockout, the Union shall
immediately order, in writing, such members to return to work immediately, provide
the Employer with a copy of such an order, and a responsible official of the Union
shall publicly order them to return to work. Such orders shall be given immediately
by the Union and shall be based on the representations, in writing, of the Employer
regarding the aforesaid prohibited activity. In the event that a wildcat strike occurs,
the Union agrees to take all reasonable and affirmative action to secure the
members' return to work as promptly as possible. Failure of the Union to issue such
orders and/or take such action shall be considered in determining whether or not the
Union was instrumental, directly or indirectly, in the prohibited activity. After the
Union disavows the prohibited activity, if the prohibited activity continues, the
Employer may impose penalties or sanctions against the participants as prescribed
by law or departmental regulations.

E. No Lockout - The Employer agrees that there shall be no lockout during the
term of this Agreement.

F. Violations - The parties agree that neither party shall be bound by the
provisions of Article 32 of this Agreement entitled Grievance Procedure in the event
of any violation by either party of this Article 38 entitled No Strike; No Lockout.
In the event of such violation the aggrieved party may immediately pursue such
remedies as are prescribed.

  

ARTICLE 39. HOLIDAYS

A. Established Holidays - The following days of each year are established as

holidays:
1. New Year's Day

Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Day

3. Presidents' Day

4. — Prince Jonah Kuhio Kalanianaole Day

5. Good Friday

6. Memorial Day

7. King Kamehameha | Day

8. Independence Day

9. Statehood Day

10. Labor Day

11. Veterans’ Day

12. Thanksgiving Day

13. Christmas Day

SHOPO 2011-2017 56
14. Elections - All election days, except primary and special election days, in
the county wherein the election is held.
15. By Proclamation - Any day designated by proclamation by the President
of the United States or by the Governor as a holiday.
B. Observance of Holidays
1. Employees whose workdays fall on Monday through Friday during the
workweek in which a holiday occurs shall observe such holiday as provided below:
Day Holiday Falls = Day Holiday Observed

Saturday Friday preceding holiday
Sunday Monday following holiday
Workday Workday

2. Employees whose workdays fall on other than Monday through Friday
during the workweek in which a holiday occurs shall observe such holiday as
provided below:

Day Holiday Falls = Day Holiday Observed
Day off First workday after the day off
Workday Workday

3. Notwithstanding the foregoing, employees who are in a rotational days off
system shall observe holidays in accordance with B-2 above.

C. Forced-Off Policy - Should a holiday fall on a regular scheduled workday of a
patrol officer or an officer assigned to receiving desk duties, said officer shall not be
forced twice consecutively to take the holiday off.

ARTICLE 40. SUPPLEMENTAL WEAPONS

A. Firearms Qualification - The Employer shall provide a firearm qualification
program for each employee at least once each calendar year as follows: in the use
of standard firearms (sidearms and shotguns), as to each employee; as to such
other or supplemental firearms as may have been approved and authorized by
Employer, then as to the individual officer to whom approval and authority was
granted. Insofar as practicable, all employees so tested shall be qualified, or tested
and trained until qualified. Standards for qualification shall be as deemed appropriate
by the Employer. Ammunition shall be provided for all such firearm qualification with
the exception of such authorized supplemental firearms as the officer voluntarily
chooses to carry without being required to do so by Employer.

B. Supplemental Weapons - In addition to the foregoing, authorized employees
shall be allowed to carry such authorized supplemental firearms as may be
appropriately secured by the officer.

C. Mileage Compensation - Whenever an employee who is not receiving
automobile allowance is required to report for annual firearms qualification in a
district other than the district to which the employee is permanently assigned, the
employee shall at the option of the Employer, once annually, either be provided
transportation to and from the employee's permanent district station to the training
site or be compensated at the rate prescribed by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service
for actual miles traveled to and from the employee's permanent station to the training
site in the employee's private vehicle. Any employee who resides in or is
permanently assigned to the district where the training is to be held shall not be
covered by this provision.

 

ARTICLE 41. DUTIES

A. Employee Assignments - Employees shall be assigned duties and
responsibilities reasonably related to law enforcement services. Such duties shall
consist of prevention and control of crimes; enforcement of public laws and
ordinances; necessary auxiliary, administrative and official service functions of the

57 SHOPO 2011-2017
Police Departments; and other emergency duties prescribed by public policy.

B. Other Duties - All other assignments of duties and responsibilities shall be
consistent with the mission of the county, public policy, rules and regulations,
services required under public health, safety or emergency conditions.

ARTICLE 42. TRADING TIME
A. Past practice regarding trading time shall be permitted as presently allowed
and administered in respective jurisdictions.

ARTICLE 43. PRE-RETIREMENT PLANNING

A. The Employer shall provide a regularly scheduled pre-retirement advisory
program covering benefits and rights of retired employees. Those employees who
are contemplating retirement may attend this program.

ARTICLE 44. DEATH OR INJURY TO EMPLOYEES

A. Employer to Notify Union - Following the death or serious injury of an
employee, a Union representative shall be promptly notified, to the extent Employer
knows of such death or serious injury.

B. Burial - In the event of an employee's death, the employee’s next-of-kin may
request that the deceased be buried with honor, to include the employee's uniform
and badge. An officer shall have the right to refuse to wear a badge formally issued
to an officer now deceased.

ARTICLE 45. OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT

A. Approval Required - Upon the approval of the Employer, an employee may
engage in outside employment provided it is not inconsistent or incompatible with, or
does not interfere with, the proper discharge of the employee's duties and
responsibilities as a police officer.

1. Appeal Procedure - Any disagreement on the application of this Article
shall not be subject to the provisions of Article 32, Grievance Procedure. Instead,
resolution of said disagreement shall be through appeal to the appropriate agent or
agency in the respective jurisdictions as follows: the Ethics Commission in the City
and County of Honolulu; the Ethics Commission in the County of Hawaii; the Mayor
in the County of Maui; and the Police Commission in the County of Kauai. The
decision of the respective agent or agencies shall be final and binding on the parties.
B. Types of Employment Permitted - Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
following outside employment shall be permitted under the conditions prescribed:

1. Selling - Employees may engage in outside employment involving sales
or selling under conditions and limitations prescribed by the Employer.

2. Security - Employees may engage in outside employment involving
security work for private establishments under conditions and limitations prescribed
by the Employer.

C. Conditions / Limitations to Outside Employment - Though not all inclusive,
the following conditions shall be applicable to all outside employment.

1. Police Functions / Process - The employee shall not wear official
police uniform, conduct police investigations or avail the employee's self of official
police equipment, records, documents, files or police services, or involve service of
civil process.

2. Collections - The employee shall not collect bills or accounts or use the
employee's police power for private purpose or a civil nature.

3. Liquor Establishment Jobs - The outside employment shall not involve
the sale, mixing, or serving of intoxicating liquors in open containers, or work as a
door-man or bouncer.

 

SHOPO 2011-2017 58
4. Liquor Business - The outside employment shall not involve the
operation of a tavern, bar or other establishment where the business involves the
sale, manufacture or distribution for the sale of intoxicating liquors.

5. Taxicab / Towing Business - The outside employment shall not involve
the operation, control or ownership of any taxicab or towing vehicle.

D. Liability of Employer - The Employer shall not be held liable for any of the
employee's activities directly related to the employee's outside employment.

ARTICLE 46. MEALS

A. Meal Payment Schedule - When meals are required to be furnished under this
section and if such meals are not furnished the following meal payment schedule will
apply:

$10.00 for meal one (1),

$8.00 for meal two (2), and

$6.00 for meal three (3).

Payment for meals shall be within thirty (30) days from submittal of the

BENS

claim.

B. Less than 24 Hours Notice to Work Overtime - When employees are
required with less than twenty-four (24) hours prior notice to work overtime, the
Employer shall furnish them with meals, or if such meals are not furnished, the
Employer shall pay them according to the meal payment schedule.

1. Post-Shift Overtime - For the purpose of this section, the term "post-
shift" is defined as that period of time immediately following the end of the
employee's work shift. When employees are required to perform overtime work after
their normal workday, they shall be furnished or compensated for a meal after the
first two (2) hours of overtime performed and after intervals of five (5) hours following
the first overtime meal. To establish the sequence of meal entitlements, the first
overtime meal shall be meal one (1).

2. Pre-Shift Overtime - For the purpose of this section, the term "pre-shift"
is defined as that period of time immediately preceding the start of the employee's
work shift. When employees are required to perform two or more hours of pre-shift
overtime work, they shall be furnished or compensated for a meal after the first two
(2) hours of overtime and at intervals of five (5) hours of overtime work thereafter. In
addition, the employee shall be furnished or compensated for the regular meal
during the employee's normal work shift. To establish the sequence of meal
entitlements, the first overtime meal shall be meal two (2).

C. Twenty Four (24) Hours or More Prior Notice - When employees are
required with twenty-four (24) hours or more prior notice to work overtime, the
Employer shall furnish or compensate for meals (at the above rates) upon
completion of ten (10) hours of such work and at intervals of five (5) hours of
overtime work performed following the first overtime meal.

D. Scheduled Day Off - When employees are required to work overtime on a
scheduled day-off, they shall be furnished or compensated for a meal upon
completion of two (2) hours of overtime work and at intervals of five (5) hours of
continuous overtime work performed following the first overtime meal. To establish
the sequence of meal entitlements, the first overtime meal shall be meal one (1). For
the purpose of this section, overtime work shall be other than “post-shift or pre-shift”
overtime.

COMMENTARY

When an officer is subpoenaed to attend morning court on the officer's
scheduled day-off, the officer is entitled to meal #1, in accordance with section A
above. If the officer receives a separate subpoena for afternoon court on the same
scheduled day-off, the officer would also be entitled to meal #1, in accordance with

59 SHOPO 2011-2017
section A above.

For the purposes of this section, a scheduled day-off does not include vacation,

compensatory time-off, holidays, administrative days-off, sick leave, or any other
type of leave with or without pay. However, an officer is entitled to the meal for a
scheduled day-off even if the officer is on suspension.
E. Special Assignment - Whenever for the convenience of the Employer, the
employee is on a special assignment making it impracticable to leave the premises
or location for the employee's meal period, the Employer shall provide meal one (1);
otherwise shall compensate the employee in cash.

ARTICLE 47. PROMOTIONS
A. Posting Requirements - For the information of all employees, the Employer
shall post in a conspicuous place in each police station, its existing promotional
policies and procedures, civil service rules and regulations governing promotions
and current examination announcements which are applicable to unit employees.
B. Fair Standards of Merit and Ability - Promotions shall be based upon fair
standards of merit and ability, consistent with applicable civil service statutes, rules
and regulations and procedures.
C. Non-Selection - An employee who is certified from an eligible list for promotion
but not selected shall upon written request submitted within twenty (20) calendar
days of non-selection, be entitled to an individual conference with the appointing
authority or designated representative to discuss the reasons for the employee's
non-selection and the employee's promotion potential.

COMMENTARY
The Employer agrees it shall meet and consult with the Union prior to the final
formulation and implementation of any changes to procedures governing promotions.

ARTICLE 48. POLICE OFFICER'S PROTECTION —- CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS AND INTERROGATIONS

A. Employee Who May be a Suspect - An employee who may be a suspect in a
criminal investigation shall be so informed prior to being requested to attend, submit
to, or participate in any criminal investigation or interrogation.

B. Constitutional Rights - If the employee about to be interrogated is under
arrest, or is suspected of committing a crime, the employee shall be completely
informed of all the employee's Constitutional Rights prior to the commencement of
any criminal interrogation. The employee shall not be disciplined, dismissed, nor
discriminated against solely because the employee exercised said Constitutional
Rights during a criminal investigation.

ARTICLE 49. HAWAIl EMPLOYER-UNION HEALTH BENEFITS TRUST FUND
Subject to the applicable provisions of Chapters 87A and 89, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, the Employer shall pay monthly contributions to the Hawaii Employer-Union
Health Benefits Trust Fund (‘Trust Fund” or EUTF) as follows:
A. “Health Benefit Plan” shall mean the medical PPO, HMO, prescription drug,
dental, vision and dual coverage medical plans.
B. Effective July 1, 2013
Effective July 1, 2013 for plan year 2013-2014, the Employer shall pay monthly
contributions which include the cost of the Trust Fund administrative fees to the Trust
Fund, not to exceed the monthly contribution amounts as specified below:

1. For each Employee-Beneficiary with no dependent-beneficiaries enrolled
in the following Trust Fund health benefit plans:

SHOPO 2011-2017 60
BENEFIT PLAN TOTAL MONTHLY CONTRIBUTION

 

a. Medical (PPO or HMO) (drug & chiro) $173.70
b. Dental $18.36
c. Vision $3.62
d. Dual coverage (medical, drug, chiro)
(1) HMSA $108.64
(2) Royal State $26.54
e. Stand-alone Drug Plan $31.16

The Employer shall pay the same monthly contribution for each Employee-
Beneficiary enrolled in a self-only medical plan (PPO or HMO), regardless of which
plan is chosen.

2. For each Employee-Beneficiary with one dependent-beneficiary enrolled
in the following Trust Fund health benefit plans:

 

BENEFIT PLAN TOTAL MONTHLY CONTRIBUTION
a. Medical (PPO or HMO) (drug & chiro) $433.40
b. Dental $36.72
c. Vision $6.68
d. Dual coverage (medical, drug, chiro)

(1) HMSA $272.16

(2) Royal State $65.28
e. Stand-alone Drug Plan $77.88

The Employer shall pay the same monthly contribution for each Employee-
Beneficiary enrolled in a two-party medical plan (PPO or HMO), regardless of which
plan is chosen.

3. For each Employee-Beneficiary with two or more dependent-beneficiaries
enrolled in the following Trust Fund health benefit plans:

 

BENEFIT PLAN TOTAL MONTHLY CONTRIBUTION
a. Medical (PPO or HMO) (drug & chiro) $561.86
b. Dental $60.36
c. Vision $8.76
d. Dual coverage (medical, drug, chiro)

(1) HMSA $357.64

(2) Royal State $73.76
e. Stand-alone Drug Plan $101.00

The Employer shall pay the same monthly contribution for each Employee-
Beneficiary enrolled in a family medical plan (PPO or HMO), regardless of which
plan is chosen.

4. For each Employee-Beneficiary enrolled in the Trust Fund group life
insurance plan, the Employer shall pay $4.16 per month which reflects one hundred
percent (100%) of the monthly premium and administrative fees.

C. Effective July 1, 2014

Effective July 1, 2014 for plan year 2014-2015, with the exception of items 1a., 2a.,
3a., and 4, which shall be the dollar amounts noted, the Employer shall pay a
specific dollar amount equivalent to sixty percent (60%) of the final premium rates for
Bargaining Unit 12 established by the Trust Fund Board for the respective health
benefit plan, plus sixty percent (60%) of all administrative fees:

1. | The amounts paid by the Employer shall be based on the plan year 2014-
2015 final monthly premium rates established by the Trust Fund for each Employee-
Beneficiary with no dependent-beneficiaries enrolled in the following Trust Fund
health benefit plans:

a. Medical (PPO or HMO) (drug & chiro) $183.70
b. Dental
c. Vision

61 SHOPO 2011-2017
d. Dual coverage (medical, drug, chiro)
(1) HMSA
(2) Royal State

e. Stand-alone Drug Plan

The Employer shall pay the same monthly contribution for each Employee-
Beneficiary enrolled in a self only medical plan (PPO or HMO), regardless of which
plan is chosen.

2. The amounts paid by the Employer shall be based on the plan year 2014-
2015 final monthly premium rates established by the Trust Fund for each Employee-
Beneficiary with one dependent-beneficiary enrolled in the following Trust Fund
health benefit plans:

a. Medical (PPO or HMO) (drug & chiro) $453.40
b. Dental
c. Vision
d. Dual coverage (medical, drug, chiro)
(1) HMSA

(2) Royal State
e. Stand-alone Drug Plan

The Employer shall pay the same monthly contribution for each Employee-
Beneficiary enrolled in a two-party medical plan (PPO or HMO), regardless of which
plan is chosen.

3. | The amounts paid by the Employer shall be based on the plan year 2014-
2015 final monthly premium rates established by the Trust Fund for each Employee-
Beneficiary with two or more dependent-beneficiaries enrolled in the following Trust
Fund health benefit plans:

a. Medical (PPO or HMO) (drug & chiro) $591.86
b. Dental
c. Vision
d. Dual coverage (medical, drug, chiro)
(1) HMSA

(2) Royal State
e. Stand-alone Drug Plan

The Employer shall pay the same monthly contribution for each Employee-
Beneficiary enrolled in a family medical plan (PPO or HMO), regardless of which
plan is chosen.

4. For each Employee-Beneficiary enrolled in the Trust Fund group life
insurance plan, the Employer shall pay no more than $4.12 per month which reflects
one hundred percent (100%) of the monthly premium. The Employer shall also pay
one hundred percent (100%) of all administrative fees.

D. No later than three (3) weeks after the Trust Fund Board formally establishes
and adopts the final premium rates for Fiscal Years 2014-2015, 2015-2016, and
2016-2017, the Office of Collective Bargaining shall distribute the final calculation of
the Employers’ monthly contribution amounts for each health benefit plan.

E. Should the Trust Fund Board eliminate any significant portion (e.g. the
elimination of prescription drug benefits in the medical plan) or part of a Trust Fund
health benefit plan or adopt a new plan, this section shall be reopened for the
purpose of renegotiating the Employers’ monthly contribution amounts.

F. Rounding Employer's Monthly Contribution. Whenever the Employer's monthly
contribution (premium plus administrative fee) to the Trust Fund is less than one
hundred percent (100%) of the monthly premium amount, such monthly contribution
shall be rounded to the nearest cent as provided below:

1. When rounding to the nearest cent results in an even amount, such even
amount shall be the Employer's monthly contribution. For example:

SHOPO 2011-2017 62
(a) $11.397 = $11.40 = $11.40 (Employer's monthly contribution)
(b) $11.382 = $11.38 = $11.38 (Employer's monthly contribution)

2. When rounding to the nearest cent results in an odd amount, round to the
lower even cent, and such even amount shall be the Employer's monthly
contribution. For example:

(a) $11.392 = $11.39 = $11.38 (Employer's monthly contribution)
(b) $11.386 = $11.3! 11.38 (Employer's monthly contribution)

Employer contributions effective July 1, 2013 reflect the rounding described in
item F.

Employer contributions effective July 1, 2014, July 1, 2015 and July 1, 2016
shall be rounded as described in item F after administrative fees have been
determined by the Trust Fund Board.

G. This section may be reopened by either party to determine the Employer
contributions for the plan years 2015-2016 and 2016-2017 by giving written notice to
the other party of its intent to reopen this section by January 31, 2015.

In the event the parties reach agreement on this reopened article, such
amended article shall be effective no earlier than July 1, 2015, and shall remain in
effect to and including June 30, 2017.

H. If an agreement covering period(s) beginning July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2017 is
not executed by June 30, 2015, Employer contributions to the Trust Fund shall be
the same monthly contribution amounts paid in plan year 2014-2015 for the health
benefit plan approved by the Trust Fund including monthly administrative fees.

L If an agreement covering periods beginning July 1, 2017 is not executed by
June 30, 2017, Employer contributions to the Trust Fund shall be the same monthly
contribution amounts paid in plan year 2016-2017 for the health benefit plan
approved by the Trust Fund including monthly administrative fees.

  

ARTICLE 50. SAVINGS CLAUSE

A. If any provision of this Agreement, or the application of such provision should
be rendered or declared invalid by any decree of a court of competent jurisdiction or
by reason of any existing or subsequently enacted legislation, the remaining parts or
portions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect.

ARTICLE 51. TEMPORARY AND SPECIAL ASSIGNMENTS
A. Temporary Assignments

1. Definition - For the purpose of the Agreement, temporary assignment
means the assignment by competent authority and the assumption, without formal
change in position assignment, of substantially all of the significant duties and
responsibilities of another position.

2. Limitations - A vacant position shall not be filled by a temporary
assignment more than 120 working days in a 12-month period, provided that any
exception beyond such 120 working day limitation may be made by mutual
agreement between the applicable Employer and the Union.

B. Special Assignments

1. Definition - A"special assignment" is defined as a provisional assignment
by competent authority for an employee to fulfill an operational need. The special
assignment may be located within the element or in another element other than
where the employee is officially assigned. A special assignment differs from a
temporary assignment in that the duties required of an employee on special
assignment are within the employee's official position classification and the
assignment does not require additional compensation.

2. Limitations - The Chief of Police shall determine the duration of special
assignments and may extend or terminate a special assignment at any time.

 

63 SHOPO 2011-2017
ARTICLE 52. TRAVEL ALLOWANCE

A. Applicable Rules, Ordinances, and Policies - Except as modified by this
Article, the rules, regulations, ordinances, or policies relating to travel shall remain
applicable for the duration of this Agreement.

B. Travel Occurring on Same Island - When employees are required to work in
locations which make it impracticable and undesirable to return home at the end of a
workday, one of the following shall apply:

1. Maui and Hawaii County - If employees are required to travel on official
business between Kona-Hilo, Kohala-Hilo, Ka‘u-Hilo and Hana-Wailuku and must
remain overnight, the employees shall be paid a travel allowance pursuant to
Paragraph D.

2. Mountainous / Remote Areas - If commercial lodging is not available,
such as in mountainous or other remote areas, the Employer shall provide cabins or
tentage and needed camping supplies and equipment. At the employee's option, the
Employer shall also provide adequate stores of food or pay each employee $20 per
day in lieu thereof.

C. Off-Island Travel to Mountainous or Other Remote Areas

1. Responsibility of Employer - Whenever employees are required to
travel on official business to mountainous or other remote areas where no
commercial lodging is available, the Employer shall provide cabins, tentage, or shall
arrange for lodging within available facilities, and shall provide adequate stores of
food or pay each employee $20 per day in lieu thereof.

2. Mutual Agreement - Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, a
mutual agreement may be arranged among employees with the Employer to provide
per diem expenses in lieu of this paragraph.

D. Intrastate Travel

1. Daily Per Diem; Overnight Travel - When an employee is required to
travel overnight on official business to another island the employee shall be provided
with a per diem of $90.00 per 24 hour day.

2. Per Diem / Fraction of a Day - In the case of official overnight travel time
involving a fraction of a day, the allowable claim shall be in terms of quarter-day
periods, with the quarter-day periods measured from midnight. In computing the
amount of per diem, the official time shall begin one (1) hour before the scheduled
flight departure time and shall end upon the employee's return to the employee's
home airport.

3. One-Day Trips - When an employee is required to travel on a one-day
trip (leaving and returning on the same day) on official business to another island,
the employee shall not be provided per diem. An employee shall, however, be
entitled to receive a meal allowance of twenty dollars ($20.00).

4. Authorized Leave - When an authorized leave is added before or after
the official travel, the per diem amount shall be the same as that which would have
been allowed if the authorized leave had not been taken.

E. Out of State Travel

1. Daily Per Diem - When employees are required to travel on official
business to areas outside the State of Hawaii, they shall be provided a per diem of
$145.00 per 24-hour day.

2. Per Diem / Fraction of a Day - In the case of official travel time involving
a fraction of a day, the allowable claim shall be in terms of quarter-day periods, with
the quarter-day periods measured from midnight. In computing the amount of per
diem, the official travel time shall begin no later than 24 hours prior to the time the
employee is to be at work at the out-of-state destination.

The employee should be scheduled to arrive at the out-of-state destination
(applicable airport) at least 10 hours before reporting for duty. The official travel time

 

 

SHOPO 2011-2017 64
shall end upon the employee's return to the employee’s home airport. All
calculations will be based on Hawaiian Standard Time.

3. Authorized Leave - When an authorized leave is added before or after
the official travel, the per diem amount shall be the same as that which would have
been allowed if the authorized leave had not been taken.

F. Reimbursement for Per Diem Related Expenses Exceeding the Per Diem
Rate - Included in the per diem rate designated in Paragraphs D. and E. shall be a
daily allowance for commercial lodging. For intra-state travel, this allowance shall be
$50 per 24-hour day. For out-of-state travel, this allowance shall be $85 per 24-hour
day. Whenever an employee's commercial lodging cost exceeds the applicable
allowance, the employee shall be entitled to an additional amount added to the
employee's per diem. This amount shall equal to the difference of the actual daily
cost of commercial lodging and, the applicable allowance provided herein multiplied
by the number of days spent on commercial lodging.

G. Furnished Lodging - When lodging is furnished at no cost to the employee,
the Employer shall continue its present practices in adjusting the per diem amounts.
H. Furnished Meals - When meals are provided by the Employer at no cost to the
employees, the Employer shall adjust the per diem by the amounts as follows:

a. — Eight dollars ($8.00) for meal one (1).

b. Three dollars and twenty-five cents ($3.25) for meal two (2).

c. Three dollars ($3.00) for meal three (3).

However, the per diem allowance shall not be adjusted when meals are included in
conference programs.

1. Advanced Per Diems - Whenever possible, an employee shall receive
advanced per diem for official travel. The Employer shall reimburse employees who
request reimbursement for excess lodging expenses as soon as possible.

J. Higher Travel Allowance - Any jurisdiction which is providing a higher travel
allowance than that provided above shall continue to do so for the duration of the
Agreement. In addition, present practices and policies on allowance for travel using
Federal, private or other subsidized funding shall continue for the duration of the
Agreement.

ARTICLE 53. ENTIRETY CLAUSE

A. The Employer and the Union agree that the terms and provisions herein
contained constitute the entire agreement between the parties and supersede all
previous communications, representations or agreements, either verbal or written,
between the parties hereto with respect to the subject matter herein. The Employer
and the Union agree that all negotiable items have been discussed during the
negotiations leading to the Agreement and, therefore, agree that negotiations will not
be reopened on any item, whether contained herein or not, during the life of this
Agreement except by written mutual consent.

ARTICLE 54. COMPENSATION ADJUSTMENTS

A. General Provisions - The provisions of this Article shall not be applicable
where an employee moves from one governmental jurisdiction to another, except as
specifically provided herein.

1. Basic Rate of Pay - For purposes of this Article, "basic rate of pay”
means the rate of pay assigned to the salary range and step an employee is
receiving as compensation. For an employee whose rate of pay is not equal to a
step in the salary range, “basic rate of pay" shall mean the actual rate of
compensation the employee is receiving as remuneration for services performed in a
particular position, not including any differentials.

65 SHOPO 2011-2017
2. Service - For purposes of this Article, "service" shall mean employment
service for the Employer jurisdictions in an existing or former class or position which
is or has been included or excluded from the bargaining unit for which the Union is
certified as the exclusive bargaining representative under the provisions of Chapter
89, Hawaii Revised Statutes, including such service prior to the Union's certification
as exclusive bargaining representative and any non-regular employment service;
provided there is no break in government service and further provided that, effective
July 1, 1989, any move by an employee from one Employer to another Employer
through any procedure other than an intergovernmental movement shall be
considered as a break in service.

3. | Order for Making Pay Adjustments - When the effective dates of more
than one personnel action coincide, pay adjustments shall be made in the following
order:

a. Negotiated wage increase, including step movements;
b. | Changeover to a new pay schedule;

c. Repricing;

d. Promotion;

e.  Reallocation;

f.

Other personnel actions.

4. Leaves of Absence Without Pay - A leave of absence without pay shall
end upon the day before the first working day an employee properly reports for duty,
and an employee shall be entitled to receive compensation as of the first working
day the employee properly reports for duty. Each calendar day from the beginning to
the end of an employee's leave of absence without pay shall be charged as leave
without pay provided that an employee who is granted a leave of absence without
pay and who returns to duty after being absent from work for only one working day or
less, shall be charged for one day of leave of absence without pay or less, as
applicable, even though one or more scheduled or normal non-working days or a
holiday may have preceded the employee's return to duty.

5. Pay Adjustments / Less Than a Normal Month - Pay adjustments for
employees who work less than a normal month shall be computed pursuant to the
following formula: Employee's monthly basic rate of pay plus Temporary Differential
(TD) or Temporary Step Differential (TSD) as applicable multiplied by (number of
days worked divided by number of working days in a month, including holidays).

6. Personal Injury - An employee who suffers a disabling personal injury
arising out of and in the course of employment, except for an injury caused by the
employee's negligence, willful intention to injure the employee or others, or by the
employee's intoxication or because of the influence of a non-prescribed controlled
substance, shall be credited for a full day's work on the day of the injury regardless
of the time the employee is injured.

7. Overpayment - An employee who initially was properly compensated

following a promotion, the adoption of a new pay schedule, a temporary assignment,
pricing or repricing, or any other personnel action affecting pay, shall not be required
to make reimbursement when it is found subsequently that an overpayment in salary
occurred due to the retroactive feature of a position classification action. However,
the proper pay adjustment shall be made as of the first pay period following the date
of notice of action by the director.
B. Compensation Adjustment Upon Promotion - As used in this paragraph,
“promotion” means the movement of a regular employee from the position in which
the employee last held a permanent appointment to a vacant civil service position
assigned to a class with a higher pay range in the salary schedule.

SHOPO 2011-2017 66
1. Compensation - A regular employee who is promoted shall be
compensated at the step in the higher salary range which corresponds to the
employee's cumulative years of service in paragraph K.2, provided that:

a. If the employee's step in the lower pay range is lower than
warranted by the employee's cumulative years of service, the employee shall be
compensated at the step in the higher pay range which corresponds to the
employee's step in the lower pay range.

b. If the employee's step or basic rate of pay in the lower pay range is
higher than warranted by the employee's cumulative years of service, the employee
shall be compensated at the step in the higher pay range which corresponds to the
employee's cumulative years of service. In the event, the employee's basic rate of
pay is greater than such step in the higher pay range, the employee shall be entitled
to a temporary step differential.

c. If the employee's basic rate of pay falls between two steps in the
lower pay range, the employee shall be compensated at the step in the higher pay
range which corresponds to the step in the lower pay range whose rate is
immediately above the employee's basic rate of pay.

If there is no step in the higher pay range which rate exceeds the
employee's basic rate of pay, the employee shall be compensated at the maximum
step in the higher pay range, or at the employee's basic rate of pay, whichever is
greater.

2. Promotion Within 12 Months of Demotion - The compensation of an
employee who is promoted within twelve months from the effective date of a
demotion, other than a disciplinary or involuntary demotion, shall be adjusted from
the rate the employee would have received had the demotion not occurred.

Return to Permanent Appointment Following Limited Term
Promotion - A regular employee who returns to the position which the employee last
held a permanent appointment after a limited term promotion shall be compensated
as though the employee had remained in the former position continuously.

C. Compensation Adjustment Upon Demotion

1. De ions - The following definitions shall be applicable to this
paragraph:

a. "Demotion" means the movement of a regular employee from the
position in which the employee last held a permanent appointment to a vacant civil
service position assigned to a class with a lower pay range in the salary schedule.

"Demotion due to a reorganization" means a demotion of an
employee as a result of a reorganization action.

c. "Demotion to avoid layoff" means a demotion accepted by an
employee to avoid being laid off.

d. isciplinary demotion" means a demotion action taken by the
appointing authority for disciplinary reasons.

e. "Involuntary demotion" means a demotion action taken by the
appointing authority due to the employee's inability to perform the duties and
responsibilities of the employee's position, or due to the employee's failure to meet
qualification requirements for the position.

f.  "Non-service connected disability demotion" means the movement
of an employee to a vacant civil service position assigned to a class with a lower pay
range in the salary schedule, due to a disability sustained by the employee other
than while performing the duties and responsibilities of the employee's position.

g. "Service connected disability demotion" means the movement of a
regular employee or an employee serving an initial probationary period to a vacant
civil service position assigned to a class with a lower pay range in the salary
schedule, due to a disability sustained by the employee while performing the duties

 

  

67 SHOPO 2011-2017
and responsibilities of the employee's position.
h. "Voluntary demotion" means a demotion requested by an employee
and granted by the appointing authority.
2. Disciplinary or Involuntary Demotion
a. A regular employee who is involuntarily demoted or who is demoted
for disciplinary reasons shall be compensated at the step in the lower salary range
which corresponds to the employee's cumulative years of service, provided that if the
employee's step in the higher pay range is lower than warranted by the employee's
cumulative years of service, the employee shall be compensated at the step in the
lower pay range which corresponds to the employee's step in the higher pay range.
b. Upon release from a disciplinary demotion given on a temporary
basis, a regular employee shall be compensated as though the employee had
remained in the former position continuously.
3. | Demotion to Avoid Layoff; Demotion Due to Reorganization; Service
Connected Disability Demotion - An employee who accepts a demotion to avoid a
layoff; or who demoted due to a reorganization; or who receives a service connected
disability demotion, shall be compensated at the step in the lower pay range which
corresponds to the employee's cumulative years of service and shall be entitled to a
temporary step differential as provided in paragraph J; provided that: if the
employee's basic rate of pay falls above the maximum step in the lower pay range,
the employee shall be additionally entitled to a temporary differential. The temporary
differential and temporary step differential shall be computed as follows: The amount
of the TD shall be the difference between the employee's existing basic rate of pay
and the rate of the maximum step of the lower pay range. The amount of the TSD
shall be the difference between the rate of the maximum step of the lower pay range
and the rate of the step in the lower pay range which corresponds to the employee's
cumulative years of service.
4. Non-Service Connected Disability Demotion - An employee who
receives a non-service connected disability demotion shall be compensated as
provided below:
a. Aregular employee who has fifteen or more years of service shall be
compensated at the step in the lower pay range which corresponds to the
employee's cumulative years of service and shall be entitled to a temporary step
differential as provided in the paragraph J; provided that: if the employee's basic
rate of pay falls above the maximum step in the lower pay range, the employee shall
be additionally entitled to a temporary differential. The temporary differential and
temporary step differential shall be computed as in subparagraph 3 above.
b. Aregular employee with at least five years but less than fifteen years
of service shall be compensated at the step in the lower pay range which
corresponds to the employee's cumulative years of service and shall be entitled to a
temporary step differential as provided in paragraph J; provided that if the
employee's basic rate of pay falls above the maximum step in the lower pay range,
the employee shall be additionally entitled to a temporary differential for a period
beyond the effective date of the demotion as follows:
Years Months of
of Compensation

Service Retention

12

14

16

18

20

22

 

Seamrnaa

SHOPO 2011-2017 68
1 24

12 26
13, 28
14 30

If both temporary differential and temporary step differential are applied,
they shall be computed as in subparagraph 3 above.

c. The basic rate of pay of a regular employee with less than five years
of service, or a regular employee whose retention period as prescribed in
subparagraph 4.b, has expired, shall be adjusted in the manner of adjustments for
service connected disability demotion, provided the employee shall not be entitled to
a temporary differential.

5. Voluntary Demotion

a. A regular employee who accepts a voluntary demotion shall be
compensated at the step in the lower pay range which corresponds to the
employee's step in the higher pay range, provided that if the employee's basic rate of
pay falls above the maximum step in the higher pay range, the employee shall be
compensated at the maximum step in the lower pay range.

b. Upon return to the position in which an employee last held a
permanent appointment, a regular employee who is demoted on a temporary or
provisional appointment basis shall be compensated as though the employee had
remained in the former position continuously.

D. Compensation Adjustment Upon Transfer - "Transfer" means the movement
of a regular employee from the position in which the employee last held a permanent
appointment to a vacant civil service position which is in the same class or in a
different class assigned to the same pay range in the salary schedule. A regular
employee who is transferred shall continue at the same basic rate of pay.

E. Compensation Adjustment Upon Reallocation

1. Definitions - The following definitions shall be applicable to this
paragraph:

a. "Reallocation Downward" means the reallocation of a position to a
class assigned to a lower pay range in the salary schedule.

b. "Reallocation Upward" means the reallocation of a position to a
class assigned to a higher pay range in the salary schedule.

2. Compensation: Reallocation Upwards - Compensation following
reallocation upwards shall be adjusted in the manner as adjustments for promotion.

3. Compensation: Reallocation Downwards - Compensation adjustment
for a reallocation downwards shall be in the manner prescribed in paragraph C.3.
However, when downward reallocations are due to disciplinary, involuntary, or
voluntary reasons, the employee's basic rate of pay shall be adjusted in the manner
as adjustments for disciplinary, involuntary, or voluntary demotions, as applicable.

4. Compensation: Class / Same Pay Range - Compensation following
reallocation of a position in a class to the same pay range shall be adjusted in the
manner of adjustments for transfer.

F. Compensation Adjustment Upon Repricing

1. Class in a Higher Pay Range - The basic rate of pay of an employee
whose position is in a class which is repriced to a higher pay range shall be adjusted
in the manner as adjustments for promotion.

2. Class in a Lower Pay Range - The basic rate of pay of an employee
whose position is in a class which is repriced to a lower pay range shall be adjusted
in the manner as adjustments are prescribed in paragraph C.3.

G. Compensation of New Employees Entering the Bargaining Unit -
Notwithstanding any paragraph in this Article, new employees entering the
bargaining unit shall be compensated in accordance with applicable civil service

 

69 SHOPO 2011-2017
rules or law, provided that any employee whose salary exceeds the employee's
appropriate step based on the employee's cumulative years of service shall be place
at the appropriate step and shall be entitled to a temporary step differential.
H. Compensation for Temporary Assignment Performed

1. Compensation - Compensation for temporary assignment shall be as
follows:

a. Except as provided in subparagraph 3, the basic rate of pay of an
employee who performs temporary assignment involving a position assigned to a
class in a higher pay range in the salary schedule shall be adjusted in the manner as
adjustments for promotion except that any temporary differential which the employee
was receiving shall not be added to the basic rate of pay but shall be retained by the
employee while performing the temporary assignment. Any employee who performs
temporary assignment involving a position for which an adjusted entry rate has been
prescribed by the Employer, and whose rate of pay, when adjusted hereunder is
below the adjusted entry rate, shall be entitled to an additional amount of
compensation which shall be the difference between the employee's adjusted rate of
pay and the adjusted entry rate prescribed by the Employer. This difference, to be
referred to as a temporary assignment differential (TAD), shall not be considered as
part of the employee's basic base pay. The TAD shall end upon completion of the
temporary assignment.

b. An employee who performs a temporary assignment involving a
position assigned to the same or lower pay range in the salary schedule shall
continue to be compensated at the employee's basic rate of pay prior to the
temporary assignment. It is provided that any employee who performs temporary
assignment involving a position for which an adjusted entry rate has been prescribed
by the Employer, and whose basic rate of pay is below the adjusted entry rate, shall
be entitled to an additional amount of compensation which shall be the difference
between the employee's basic rate of pay and the adjusted entry rate prescribed by
the Employer. The difference, to be referred to as a temporary assignment
differential (TAD), shall not be considered as part of the employee's base pay. The
TAD shall end upon completion of the temporary assignment.

c. Whenever a temporary assignment involves the assumption of the
duties and responsibilities of a position in the Excluded Managerial Compensation
Plan (EMCP), such assignment shall be compensated as though the temporary
assignment had occurred within the same salary schedule. (To determine the
adjustment, use the following equivalency table: EM 01 equates to SR 24, EM 02
equates to SR 25, EM 03 equates to SR 26, etc.)

2. Exceptions - The following employees shall not be entitled to temporary
assignment compensation:

a. An employee who is performing duties in accordance with the terms
of a formal training agreement entered into with the employee's department and
approved by the director.

b. An employee who is performing a normal relief assignment which is
recognized in the employee's position classification and pricing.
|. Temporary Differential Pay

1. Calculation of Temporary Differential Pay - An employee shall be
eligible for temporary differential pay as may be provided in this Article. The amount
of TD pay shall be the difference between the employee's basic rate of pay prior to
the particular action taken and the employee's new basic rate of pay.

2. Temporary Differential Not Considered as Part of Base Pay - The TD
pay shall not be considered part of an employee's basic rate of pay.

3. | Reductions Following Promotion, Upward Reallocation or Repricing
Upwards - The TD pay shall be reduced by an amount equal to any adjustment in

SHOPO 2011-2017 70
the employee's basic rate of pay due to promotion, upward reallocation, or repricing
upward actions. When the adjustment due to these actions is greater than or equal
to the TD pay, the TD pay shall be terminated.

4. Continuation of Temporary Differential Following Demotion, Transfer
or Reallocation to a Class in the Same or Lower Pay Range - When an employee
with TD pay is demoted or transferred, or whose position is reallocated to a class in
the same or lower pay range, the TD shall be continued in the new pay range.

J. Temporary Step Differential

1. Calculation of Temporary Step Differential Pay - An employee shall be
eligible for temporary step differential pay (TSD) as may be provided in this Article.
The amount of the TSD pay shall be the difference between the employee's basic
rate of pay prior to the particular action taken and the employee's new basic rate of
pay.

2. Temporary Step Differential Not Considered as Part of Base Pay -
The TSD shall not be considered part of an employee's basic rate of pay.

3. Reductions in Temporary Step Differential Following Step Movement,
Promotion, Upward Reallocation or Repricing Upwards - The TSD pay shall be
reduced by an amount equal to any adjustment in the employee's basic rate of pay
due to step movement, promotion, upward reallocation or repricing upward actions.
When the adjustment due to these actions is greater than or equal to the TSD pay,
the TSD pay shall be terminated.

4. Continuation of Temporary Step Differential Following Demotion,
Transfer or Reallocation to a Class in the Same or Lower Pay Range - When an
employee with TSD pay is demoted or transferred, or whose position is reallocated to
a class in the same or lower pay range, the TSD shall be continued in the new pay
range.

K. Step Movements

1. Definitions - The following definitions shall be applicable to this
paragraph:

a. "Step movement" means an increase from an employee's basic rate
of pay to the next higher step within the pay range which may be granted as
provided in Article 30, Salaries.

b. "Police service anniversary date" means the date the employee is
granted a step movement, which may be the anniversary of the date the employee
was initially appointed or moved into a full-time position as a uniformed member of
the Police Departments of the Employer jurisdictions.

2. — Eligibility for Step Movement - Any employee at a step or rate below the
maximum step of the pay range shall be eligible for and shall receive a step
movement on the employee's police service anniversary date, provided the
employee has completed the cumulative years of service corresponding to the next
higher step as specified in the following:

Cumulative

 

 

Step Years of Service
A ~

B 4-6

Cc 7-9

D 10-12

U1 13-15

L2 16-18

L3 19-21

L4 22 - 24

LS 25 or more

71 SHOPO 2011-2017
3.  Creditable Service for Step Movements
a. Service throughout a work year shall be creditable for a step

movement provided that:

1) absences without pay, except as provided in subparagraph 3.b.
below; or

2) absences due to suspensions shall be considered time not
creditable and shall be made up by rendering a period of service equal to the time
not creditable.

b. A period of authorized leave without pay for the following purposes

shall be construed as creditable service:

1) to pursue a course of instruction, relating to the employee's
work,

2) to engage in research, relating to the employee's work,

3) to render services at the State legislature,

4) to serve on loan by contract to another government,

5) to be on sabbatical leave,

6) tobe onmilitary service,

7) to recuperate from an injury for which workers’ compensation
weekly payments are made, or

8) to work in an exempt position.

4. Recognition of Experienced Journey Level Officer - In recognition of

the journey level police officer with thirteen or more years of experience, effective
July 1, 1990, there shall be a two step interval between steps D and L1 of the PO 7
salary range.
L. Compensation Adjustments Following an Intergovernmental Movement
Made Pursuant To Law - When an intergovernmental movement has been made
pursuant to law, the compensation of the regular employee involved shall be
adjusted as follows:

1. Class in a Higher Pay Range - If the result of the intergovernmental
movement is that the employee moves to a position assigned to a class with a higher
pay range in the salary schedule than the previous pay range, the employee's
compensation shall be adjusted in the manner as adjustments for promotion.

2. Class in the Same Pay Range - If the result of the intergovernmental
movement is that the employee moves to a position assigned to a class with the
same pay range in the salary schedule as the previous pay range, the employee's
compensation shall be adjusted in the manner of adjustments for transfer.

3. Class in a Lower Pay Range - If the result of the intergovernmental

movement is that the employee moves to a position assigned to a class with a lower
pay range in the salary schedule than the previous pay range, the employee's
compensation shall be adjusted in the manner as adjustments for voluntary
demotion.
M. Other Compensation Adjustments - Compensation adjustments not
expressly provided for by this Article but necessitated by authorized personnel
movements or situations shall be made by the director of personnel services, director
of civil service, or the administrative director of the courts, as applicable; provided
that consultation shall take place with the Union prior to effecting any adjustments
under this paragraph.

ARTICLE 55. OTHER LEAVES OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY
A. Approval and Reasons for Leaves of Absence Without Pay.
1. Regular Employee - The Police Chief may grant at the employee's
request a leave of absence without pay to a regular employee for the purpose of:
a. pursuing a course of instruction which is related to the police work;

SHOPO 2011-2017 72
b. — engaging in research related to police work;

c. improving the employee's ability and increasing the employee's
fitness for police work;

d. extended vacation for travel, rest or recreation;

e. delaying a planned layoff when the position which the employee
occupies has been abolished;

f. loan of employee to another government as authorized by law;

g. entering temporary service in a program related to the U.S.
Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 upon the request of the Director of Hawaii Office
of Economic Opportunity.

2. Non-Regular and Regular Employees - The Police Chief may grant at
the employee’s request of either regular or non-regular employees leaves of
absence without pay for the reason of:

a. _ illness or injury - provided, for leaves without pay for five (5) days or
more, an employee shall submit a licensed physician's certificate to substantiate the
fact that the period of leave without pay was due entirely to illness or injury and that
the employee is physically and/or mentally able to resume the duties of the
employee's position; and that the requirement for a licensed physician's certificate
shall also be applicable where the leave without pay for illness or injury and any sick
leave credits used total five (5) days or more;
death in the family;
industrial injury;
seeking political office except as provided by law;
personal business of an emergency nature;
employment at the State Legislature as authorized by law;
child care, including adoption of a child;
the good of the service;

i. care for an immediate family member (as defined in Article 25,
Leaves of Absence with Pay) who is ill or injured, which includes care for parents,
spouses, children, and/or any other immediate family member who are unable to
perform one or more Activities of Daily Living (ADL), which includes but is not limited
to:

“FempaoT

(1) Mobility: Walking or wheeling any distance on a level surface;
(2) Transferring: Moving between the bed and chair or the bed
and a wheelchair;
(3) Dressing: Putting on and taking off all necessary items of
clothing;
(4) Toileting: Getting to and from the toilet, getting on and off the
toilet, and assorted personal hygiene;
(5) Eating: All major tasks of getting food into the body;
(6) Bathing: Getting into or out of a tub or shower and/or
otherwise washing the parts of the body;
(7) Continence: Controlling one’s bladder and bowel functions.
B. Duration of Leaves of Absence Without Pay - Leaves of absence without
pay granted shall be for no more than twelve (12) months, except as provided in 1, 2,
3, 4, and 5 below.
1. Aregular employee on leave of absence:
a. to pursue a course of instruction;
b. to engage in research; or
c. otherwise to improve the employee’s ability and to increase the
employee's fitness for public employment; may for good cause shown to the Police
Chief be granted an additional period of leave not to exceed 12 months, provided the
conditions of the original leave shall be complied with.

73 SHOPO 2011-2017
2. Military Leave - A leave of absence granted an employee to enter the
U.S. military services shall be for the minimum period of military service as provided
by law.

3. Industrial Injury - A leave of absence granted an employee due to
industrial injury may be extended by the Police Chief for such additional period of
time that the employee is receiving total temporary Workers' Compensation weekly
benefit payments, or upon granting of the final disposition of the Compensation
award, or up to one year while the employee's application for retirement is pending
action. “Pending action” shall only mean the initial determination action by the State
Retirement System and shall not include any appeals filed there from.

4. Employment Loan - A leave of absence granted an employee on an
employment loan program shall be for a period not to exceed two years.

5. Good of the Service - A leave of absence granted an employee for the
good of the service shall be for no more than three (3) months. No extension shall
be allowed.

C. Rights of Leave of Absence Without Pay.

1. Conditions - The following rights of an employee upon return from an
approved leave shall be conditioned upon showing to the satisfaction of the Police
Chief that the employee has fulfilled the purpose of the employee's leave.

2. Reinstatement - Regular Employee - A regular employee, upon
expiration of the employee's leave shall be reinstated to the employee's former
position; provided, that if such position has been abolished during the period of such
leave, the provisions of Article 37, Layoffs and Re-employment, shall be applicable.

3. Reinstatement - Non-Regular Employee - A non-regular employee,
upon expiration of the employee's leave shall have reinstatement rights to the
employee's former position, provided that the status and function of the position
remained the same in the employee’s absence. In the event that the employee
cannot be reinstated, the employee shall be terminated.

4. Failure to Return to Duty - Failure of an employee to return to duty at
the expiration of the employee's leave shall be deemed a resignation provided that if
satisfactory reasons are furnished to the Police Chief within fifteen (15) days after
such expiration for the employee's failure to report to duty, the employee shall be
entitled to such rights as the employee had at the expiration of the employee's leave.
In the event the Police Chief does not accept the reasons, the issue of the
reasonableness of the reasons shall be subject to Article 32, Grievance Procedure.

5. Promotional Exams - A regular employee on an approved leave of
absence shall be eligible during the period of such leave for promotional
examinations and status on promotional eligible lists under the same conditions as
though in active service.

6. Termination upon Acceptance of Other Employment - An employee
who accepts employment, either in another position under civil service or in conflict
with the purpose of the employee's leave during a leave of absence, shall be
deemed to have terminated the employee’s employment in the position from which
the leave was granted, effective as of the date of the appointment to the new
position.

D. Military Leave for Active Duty with the Armed Forces of the United States.

1. Military leave shall be in accordance with applicable federal laws.

2. Any person who has filled or may fill a position vacant as a result of an
employee having entered active military duty or who has filled or may fill a position
affected by such a vacancy shall be subject to removal from the position upon the
return of the employee from military leave.

3. Article 37, Layoffs and Re-employment, shall be applicable to any regular
employee who is removed or displaced by the restoration of an employee upon

SHOPO 2011-2017 74
expiration of the military leave.

4. Each employee who is to fill a position vacated by an employee on
military leave should be informed on the condition of the employee's employment
and of the provisions of this section.

—. Unauthorized Absences from Work.

1. An absence from work which does not meet the requirements for an
authorized leave, with or without pay, shall be charged as unauthorized absence
from work.

2. A day of unauthorized absence from work shall not be considered as a
day of service.

F. Leave Pending Investigation.

1. An employee may be placed on leave of absence without pay pending
investigation, by authority of the Chief of Police, when the employee's presence at
work is determined to be detrimental to the conduct of the investigation and/or to the
operations of the Department.

a. Notice of the action must be given to the employee in writing,
including the reasons for the actions and the instructions for the response.

b. An employee who is placed on leave without pay shall be given an
opportunity to respond in writing, or in person, to the Chief of Police or designee, as
to reasons the employee should not be placed on leave without pay pending
investigation.

2. Aleave of absence without pay pending investigation may be for a period
of up to thirty (30) calendar days, provided that for good cause and with the approval
of the Chief of Police, the leave of absence without pay, may be extended for a
period of not more than an additional thirty (30) calendar days. At no time shall
leave without pay pending investigation be allowed to exceed more than sixty (60)
calendar days in any calendar year.

3. An employee who has been placed on a leave of absence without pay
shall be reinstated without loss of pay and rights and benefits will be restored as
though the employee had not been on leave if the employee is cleared during the
investigation or the charge is dropped or not substantiated.

4. Should the employee be subsequently suspended as a result of the
aforementioned investigation, the employee shall be allowed to apply those days of
leave without pay as credit toward the suspension days and be credited back the
excess days.

5. In the event the employee is discharged, the employee shall not be
granted any back pay or restored with any rights and benefits for the leave of
absence without pay pending investigation.

6. An employee who is subsequently placed on leave with pay pending

investigation shall not earn vacation or sick leave if the employee is
terminated/dismissed, or the employee resigns/retires prior to the
termination/dismissal action.
G. Leaves Involving Holidays - In granting leaves without pay, the Police Chief
may grant leaves back-to-back; provided, for purposes of holiday pay, an employee
shall have worked (or been on paid status) either the workday immediately preceding
the holiday or the workday immediately following the holiday.

ARTICLE 56. HOUSING
A. Maui - The Employer and the Union agree to recognize the Memorandum of
Understanding covering housing and other related matters in the Districts of Molokai
and Lanai which may include the District of Hana.

Modifications to said Memorandum of Understanding shall be made through
mutual agreement between the County of Maui and the Union.

75 SHOPO 2011-2017
B. Hawaii - The Employer agrees to meet and confer with the Union in seeking
means to alleviate problems regarding housing and/or extensive travel for
employees who are assigned to districts located long-distance from their primary
residences, as a result of transfers or promotions.

ARTICLE 57. DRUG TESTING

A. Serious Adverse Effects of Drug Use - The Employer and Union recognize
that drug use can have serious adverse effects upon a police officer's health, safety,
and job performance and the health and safety of co-workers and the general public.
The Employer and Union agree that the use of illegal drugs, on or off duty, by police
officers impairs the efficiency of police departments and law enforcement agencies,
undermines public confidence in them, and makes it more difficult for other police
officers to perform their jobs effectively.

B. Purpose of Drug Testing - The Employer and Union have designed a Drug
Testing program to:

1. Identification / Referral- Assist the Employer in identifying police
officers who have a problem with drug use by referring such police officers for
treatment in counseling and/or rehabilitation programs which deal with these
problems;

2. Promote Voluntary Admission - Encourage police officers who have a
problem with drug use to voluntarily admit to such use and to overcome any drug
related problems;

3. Deterrence / Prevent Adverse Effects - Deter and discourage the illegal
use of drugs by police officers and prevent non-drug using officers from being
adversely affected by those who have a drug problem; so that together the Employer
and Union can maintain a safe working environment for the protection of all police
officers, and assure the members of the public who use or avail themselves of police
facilities or services that public interests of health, safety, and welfare are maintained
in a Drug-Free Department.

C. Drug Testing Program - The Employer and Union support a Drug-Free
Workplace in all of the respective County Police Departments throughout the State of
Hawaii and acknowledge and agree that:

1. Prohibition - The illegal or unauthorized use of drugs by police officers,
whether on duty or off duty, is expressly prohibited.

2. Application - All police officers shall be subject to a drug test at least
once during a fiscal year or a two fiscal year period depending on each jurisdiction's
prescribed testing period.

3. Types of Testing - There shall be three types of drug testing:

a. Required Testing - Required drug tests and the frequency of such
tests for any police officer shall be determined by the Employer based upon a
number of factors, including but not limited to, the police officer's assigned duties;
the police officer's prior refusal to submit to a drug test; the police officer's prior
confirmed positive drug test result; or the police officer's status as a probationary
police officer. Police officers assigned to identified divisions/units shall be subject to
required testing. These divisions/units include, but shall not be limited to: Internal
Affairs, Specialized Services, Narcotics/Vice, Intelligence, Crime Reduction Units and
Personnel.

b. Random Testing - All police officers shall be subject to random drug
tests. Each jurisdiction shall develop and maintain their own random number process
selected from a table of random numbers established according to standard
mathematical procedures. The random process shall be available for screening by
the Union upon request. The random frequency shall be reasonable to avoid
violations of constitutional protections. The Union shall be consulted prior to the

SHOPO 2011-2017 76
implementation of any change to the random groups.

c. Mandatory Testing - In addition to random testing, all police officers
not subject to required testing shall be subject to mandatory testing to ensure that all
officers are tested at least once every fiscal year or every two fiscal years. Officers
shall be subject to mandatory testing once per prescribed time period.

COMMENTARY
The requirement to undergo a mandatory drug test by a police officer is not
precluded by a previous random drug test.

4. Amount of Testing - Each type of drug testing (required, random, and
mandatory) is separate and distinct, and the application of one type of testing to an
individual police officer shall not preclude the application of another type or the same
type of testing to the same officer. However, in no event shall a police officer be
tested more than four (4) times per fiscal year under the random and/or
mandatory testing. Further, after testing a police officer, the Employer is not required
to test the entire Department before testing the individual again.

D. Jurisdictional Procedures - Each jurisdiction shall develop its own
procedures for implementing required, random and mandatory testing programs.

E. Training - In order to maintain the integrity of the drug testing program the
Employer will provide training for supervisory personnel and Union monitoring
personnel on the policies and procedures of the drug testing program.

F. Conditions - The following conditions shall apply to the drug-screening tests
as administered by the Employer:

1. Threshold Levels - The initial drug urinalysis test shall consist of an
immunoassay test which meets the requirements of the Food and Drug
Administration for commercial distribution. The current threshold levels set in the
Administrative Rules of the State of Hawaii Department of Health for screening tests
of urine specimens for the following drugs shall be accepted as positive findings for
the initial drug test:

Initial Test Level

(ng/ml)
a. Marijuana metabolites 50
b. Cocaine metabolites 300
c. Phencyclidine 25
d. Opiate metabolites 2,000
e. Benzodiazepine 300
f. | Amphetamines 1,000
g. Barbiturates 300
h. ~~ Methaqualone 300
i. Proproxyphene 300
j. Methadone 300
k. — 6-Acetylmorphine 10

The cut off levels for screening test and for confirmatory testing of urine
specimens shall be as specified in Chapter 113 of the current Administrative Rules of
the State of Hawaii Department of Health. The Union shall be notified prior to the
implementation of any change.

These threshold levels are subject to change by the Employer as advances in
technology or other considerations permit identification and quantification of these
drugs at lower concentrations. The Union shall be consulted with sufficient evidence
that such advanced technology is acceptable to the scientific community prior to the
implementation of any change.

Some specimens may be subjected to initial testing by methods other than
immunoassays, where the latter are unavailable for the detection of specific drugs of
special concern. These methods are thin layer, high pressure liquid, and/or gas

77 ‘SHOPO 2011-2017
chromatography. The Union shall be consulted prior to the implementation of any
change.

2. Notification - Notification of a drug test will be announced during the
officer's tour of duty. Police officers shall have the specified time to report and shall
be told where the secured site is located. Notification of the drug test shall be given
to a Union representative. Each jurisdiction shall develop its own notification plan in
consultation with the Union. Union representative(s) may observe the on-site testing
process, however testing shall not be delayed to wait for the representative(s).

3. | Specimen Collection Procedures

a. Each testing site shall possess all necessary personnel, materials,
equipment facilities, and supervision to provide for the collection, security, temporary
storage, and transportation of specimens to an approved laboratory facility. Chain-of-
custody forms shall be properly executed by authorized collection site personnel
upon receipt of specimens. No unauthorized personnel shall be permitted in any
part of the collection site where specimens are collected or stored.

b. At the testing site, each testee outside of the direct observation of
the collection site personnel, shall submit one (1) specimen which shall be split into
two samples: Sample A and Sample B. After the specimen is split, the specimen
cups shall be sealed and secured in the presence of the testee and the testee shall
initial the testee's specimen cups. Sample A and Sample B shall both be turned over
to laboratory personnel of the certified screening laboratory. Appropriate chain of
custody processing shall continue after the collection process is completed and the
specimens are transported to the laboratory.

c. Chain of custody forms shall be used throughout the entire testing
process. All equipment used, discarded, or returned as well as discrepancies in
control numbers shall be accounted for.

4. Specimen Testing Procedures - All Sample A specimens identified as
positive on the initial test shall be confirmed using gas chromatography mass
spectrometry (GC/MS) techniques on the same sample. Sample A specimens shall
be confirmed with additional samples from the same testing group in a ratio of five
(5) negative samples for each positive. In the event there are less than five (5)
negative samples in a testing group, Sample A specimens shall be confirmed with
the total number of negative samples in the testing group. Proper chain of custody
controls shall be enforced during confirmation testing.

All Sample B specimens shall be stored in a secured frozen storage for a
minimum period of one (1) year from the date of testing unless requested by a third
party to retain the specimen for an additional period of time. Specimen B shall be
used to defend against legal challenges. If at the end of the one (1) year there are
no legal challenges or retention requests, all Sample B specimens shall be
discarded/destroyed by the laboratory.

5. Laboratory Procedures - No Police Department laboratory shall be used
in the drug testing process. All laboratories must operate consistently within
applicable State licensing requirements and be accredited by the Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), College of American
Pathologists (CAP), or comparable accreditation agencies. All laboratories shall be
required to periodically participate in a proficiency rating program. The laboratories
are expected to maintain appropriate internal quality control procedures.

G. First Confirmed Positive Test Result

1. Notification - On a first confirmed positive drug test result, a regular
police officer shall be notified by a licensed Medical Review Officer (MRO) of the
state. The MRO shall have discussions with the regular police officer to make final
determinations of the drug test results. Upon the MRO’s determination of a confirmed
positive test result, a regular police officer shall be notified by the appropriate

  

SHOPO 2011-2017 78
commander and shall have the employee's gun and badge removed. After said
notification, the police officer shall be assigned to a position where a gun and badge
are not essential pending completion of the investigation. Employer's investigation
shall be done expeditiously.

2. Disciplinary Action - On a first confirmed positive drug test result, a
regular police officer shall be subject to disciplinary action, including termination,
which shall be held in abeyance and not imposed if the police officer, after
evaluation, participates in and satisfactorily completes an Employer-approved
treatment program whose cost shall be at the expense and responsibility of the
police officer. On a first confirmed positive drug test result, an initial probationary
police officer is subject to termination.

3. Leave Status - Any officer with a first confirmed positive test result shall
not be allowed limited or modified duty while undergoing treatment. Such employee
shall be placed on leave status until obtaining a negative drug urinalysis test and
clearance by the Employer's physician to return to full duty. Upon return to full duty,
the officer shall be placed in a required test group for a period of one year.

H. Second Confirmed Positive Drug Test Result - On a second confirmed
positive drug test result, a regular police officer is subject to termination. Police
officers shall be given the option to resign prior to any termination action.

|. Voluntary Admission - Whenever a regular police officer voluntarily admits to
having a problem with drug use, participation in an Employer-approved treatment
program shall be mandatory. Should the officer subsequently test positive after
admitting to having a drug problem, such positive result shall be considered a first
confirmed positive drug test result.

1. Conditions

a. The officer must satisfactorily complete such treatment program
within 18 weeks from the date the officer first enters the treatment program. During
this 18-week period, an officer who has voluntarily admitted to having a drug problem
and who is in compliance with treatment requirements may be given a modified or
limited-duty position where gun and badge are not essential, provided that available
work exists, the officer obtains a negative drug urinalysis test, and is cleared for
limited duty by the treatment facility and/or Employer's physician.

b. Any officer who fails to complete the treatment program within the
18-week period due to non-compliance with treatment requirements shall be placed
on leave status and shall no longer be eligible for a limited-duty assignment. Such
employee shall not be returned to full duty until the employee obtains a negative
drug urinalysis test and is cleared by the Employer's physician. Any positive test
result after the 18-week period shall be considered a first confirmed positive result.

c. The modified duty may exceed 18 weeks from the date the officer
first enters the treatment program only if the employee is fully compliant with all
treatment requirements and is unable to complete the treatment program due to
circumstances beyond the employee's control. The employee on modified duty may
be subject to regular and frequent drug tests for the duration of such modified duty.
The officer shall not be returned to full duty until the officer obtains a negative drug
urinalysis test and is cleared by the Employer's physician. Upon return to full duty,
the police officer shall be placed in a required test group for a period of one (1) year.

2. Limitations

a. The provisions under this section shall be afforded a regular officer
only once during the officer's career.

b. Whenever a regular police officer admits to having a drug problem
after being notified of a scheduled drug test, such admission shall be considered a
positive drug test result.

79 SHOPO 2011-2017
J. Confidentiality

1. Test Results - Confirmed positive test results shall be handled in a
confidential manner. No words on the written notifications shall reflect anything about
failing a drug urinalysis or “positive for marijuana/cocaine/drugs.” Only violations of
cited rules, regulations or orders shall be in print. The notices shall be hand-carried
through the chain-of-command and given to the police officer or mailed by registered
mail.

2. Limitations on Disclosure - Any information concerning a drug test shall
be strictly confidential. Such information shall not be released to anyone without the
informed written consent of the individual tested and shall not be released or made
public upon subpoena or any other method of discovery, except that information
related to a positive test result of an individual shall be disclosed to the individual, the
Employer or the decision maker in a lawsuit, grievance, or other proceeding initiated
by or on behalf of the individual tested and arising from positive confirmatory test
result. The Employer shall make every reasonable effort to notify the employee or a
Union Representative of the receipt of a subpoena for information concerning an
individual's substance abuse test results under this Article.

K. Failure / Refusal to Submit to Drug Testing - Any failure or refusal by a
police officer to submit to drug testing or non-compliance with any of the drug testing
procedures may subject the police officer to disciplinary action, including termination
and the police officer may be placed on leave pending investigation in accordance
with the Civil Service Rules of the respective county.
L. Employer's Rights - Nothing herein shall be construed to be a waiver of the
Employer's rights as set forth in Chapter 89-9, HRS.
M. Disputes - In the event a dispute over any provision of this Article should occur
between one or more Employer jurisdictions and the Union, such dispute shall be
subject to the grievance procedure. Such dispute shall not affect the implementation
of this Article by the other jurisdictions not involved in the grievance filed by the
Union.
N. Savings Clause - If any provision of this Article, or the application of such
provision should be amended, rendered or declared invalid by any decree of a court
of competent jurisdiction or by reason of any existing or subsequently enacted
legislation or Administrative Rules, the remaining parts or portions of this Article shall
remain in full force and effect.
O. Constitutional Challenges - The Employer agrees that it shall be responsible
for defending all statutory and constitutional challenges to the enforceability of this
Article. The Employer shall defend the Union from any claim or action arising out of
the Employer's administration or implementation of this Article. Subject to the
express approval of the appropriate legislative body, the Employer shall pay all
damages awarded against the Union because of such claim or action.
COMMENTARY
The parties acknowledge that the illegal use of steroids is strictly prohibited and
agree to continue to study the feasibility of drug testing for steroids.

SHOPO 2011-2017 80
IN WITNESS WHEREOF,
the parties hereto, through their authorized representatives, have executed
this Agreement as of the 3 day of July, 2013.

EMPLOYER

Isl
NEIL ABERCROMBIE
Governor, State of Hawaii

isi
NEIL DIETZ
Chief Negotiator, Ofice of Collective Barg, State of Hawaii

isi
KIRK CALDWELL
Mayor, Cty & County of Honolulu

Isl
CAROLEE C. KUBO

Director, Dept. of Human Resources, City & County of Honolulu

isi
WILLIAM P. KENOT
Mayor, County of Hawaii

Isl
SHARON TORIANO.

UNION
2014 State Negotiating Committee

Js/
TENARI R. MA'AFALA
President; Committee Co-Chair

Js/
MALCOLM F. LUTU
Vice President

ish
MICHAEL CUSUMANO
Secretary

Js/
JAMES M. SMITH
Treasurer; Committee Co-Chair

isl
DON FAUMUINA
Director at Large

Js/
JOHN C.K. HAINA

 

Director, Dept. of Human Resources, County of Hawai Director at Large
si Isl

ALAN M, ARAKAWA ERIKINUMA

Mayor, County of Maui Director at Large

isi
TANCE. HIROMOTO
Director, Dept. of Personnel Services, County of Maui

isi
BERNARD P. CARVALHO, JR
Mayor, County of Kauai

Js
THOMAS T. TAKATSUKI
‘Acting Director, Dept. of Personnel Services, County of Kauai

81

isl
STANLEY W. AQUINO
Honolulu Chapter Chair

isl
DARREN HORIO
Hawaii Chapter Chair

isl
BARRY AOKI
Maui Chapter Chair

Isl
JESSE GUIRAO
Kauai Chapter Chair

Js/
RUSSELL AKANA
Executive Director

SHOPO 2011-2017
EXHIBITS

SALARY SCHEDULES

Exhibit Effective Date
July 1, 2011
July 1, 2013
January 1, 2014
July 1, 2014
January 1, 2015
July 1, 2015
January 1, 2016
July 1, 2016
January 1, 2017

©O9NOOAKR WN =
-roat7rmoonp

Description Page

 

Schedule as of June 30, 2011
1.75% ATB
1.75% ATB
1.75% ATB....
1.75% ATB....
2.00% ATB
2.00% ATB
2.50% ATB
3.30% ATB.....

 

BU-12's salary schedule consists of levels PO 1 through PO 20.
To save space, only those levels with BU-12 employees are shown.

SHOPO 2011-2017

82
EXHIBIT A
Salary Schedule

83 SHOPO 2011-2017
EXHIBIT B
Salary Schedule

SHOPO 2011-2017 84
EXHIBIT C
Salary Schedule

85 SHOPO 2011-2017
EXHIBIT D
Salary Schedule

SHOPO 2011-2017 86
EXHIBIT E
Salary Schedule

87 SHOPO 2011-2017
EXHIBIT F
Salary Schedule

SHOPO 2011-2017 88
EXHIBIT G
Salary Schedule

89 SHOPO 2011-2017
EXHIBIT H
Salary Schedule

SHOPO 2011-2017 90
EXHIBIT I
Salary Schedule

1 SHOPO 2011-2017
AGREEMENTS

MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT (MOA),
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (MOU),
AND
SUPPLEMENTAL AGREEMENT (SUP)

Pursuant to Chapter 89, Hawaii Revised Statutes, agreements may be entered into
from time to time between SHOPO and one or more Employer jurisdictions to
amend, replace, interpret, or make an exception to contract provisions or cover
matters not in the contract. These are called Memorandums of Agreement (MOA),
Memorandums of Understanding (MOU), and Supplemental Agreements (SUP). An
example would be an agreement to modify the normal 5 day, 8 hour work schedule
to a 5 day, 9 hour schedule.

Below is a listing of agreements in effect. Statewide agreements are applicable to all
counties. _ Contact the respective Union chapter representatives for further
information.

STATEWIDE AGREEMENTS
Agreement # Regarding

S-2014-01 Art.3 Dues, G. Religious Exemption from Fees
S-2014-02 Art. 15 Overtime, Section A.2.g. Seventh Day Provision
S-2014-03 Art. 57 Drug Testing, Voluntary Admission

S-2014-04 Art.57 Drug Testing, Zero Tolerance

S-2014-05 Art. 31 Pay Differential and 57. Drug Testing

HONOLULU AGREEMENTS

0-2014-01  Art.47 Promotion to Corporal Position

0-2014-02 Art. 19 Parking at the Main Station, Subsidized & Non-Sub. Vehicles

0-2014-03 Art. 31 Hazardous Pay for Clandestine Laboratory Response Team

0-2014-04 NIA HIDTA-Funded Canine Unit Program, Narcotics/Vice Division

0-2014-05 Art.23 Seniority, Employees with Same Employment Date

0-2014-06 Art. 37 Reemployment within 3 months of Resignation

0-2014-07 Art. 18 Subsidized Vehicles, Extending Use for 3 Additional Years

0-2014-08 Art. 18 Subsidized Vehicles, Gas Issued at 12 Duty Miles per Gallon

0-2014-09 N/A _ Internal Affairs Renamed to the Professional Standards Office

0-2014-10 Art.20 Transfers, Length of Time Requests are Valid

0-2014-11 Art. 32 Expedited Arbitration, Grievance

0-2014-12 Art. 27 5/8 and 5/9 Work Schedules, Extension until Final Decision Made or
Changes Negotiated

0-2014-13 N/A Contract Hires

SHOPO 2011-2017 92
H-2013-01
H-2013-02
H-2013-03
H-2013-04
H-2013-05

K-2013-01

M-2013-01
M-2014-01
M-2014-02
M-2014-03
M-2014-04
M-2014-05
M-2014-06
M-2014-07
M-2014-08

Art. 31
Art. 32
Art. 21

Art. 20

Art. 18

Art. 49
Art. 29
NIA

Art. 17
Art. 27
Art. 27
Art. 56
Art. 31
Art. 34

HAWAII AGREEMENTS

Hazardous Pay for the Special Response Team

Expedited Arbitration, Grievance

18 Month Initial Probationary Period for New Employees

Deferral of Vacation Leave Payouts for Employees Planning to Retire
Transfers, Length of Time Requests are Valid

KAUAI AGREEMENTS

Subsidized Automobiles, Implementation

MAUI AGREEMENTS

EUTF Employer Contribution Amounts

Lockers, Lanai Station

Deferral of Vacation Leave Payout for Employees Planning to Retire
100% Uniform Replacement Allowance

4-2 Work Schedule for Wailuku, Lahaina, Kihei

4-2 Work Schedule for Lanai, Hana, Molokai

Housing Maui County

Hazardous Pay for Special Response Team

Hazardous Pay for Clandestine Laboratory Response Team

93 SHOPO 2011-2017
NOTES

SHOPO 2011-2017 94
NOTES

95 SHOPO 2011-2017
 

SHOPO 2011-2017 96
