 

 

3)
Cv. Souenaiie
$ 5 ~~

BG

INCORPORATE

Memorandum of Understanding
between the

City of Burbank
and the

Burbank Police Officers’
Association

 

 

 

June 2009 through July 2015

 

 

 

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE |
RIGHTS AND PLEDGES

SECTION TITLE PAGE
A. RECOGNITION... ssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssess 1
B. MUTUAL PLEDGE OF ACCORD ...cccssscsssscssssssseeeesseseeseeeeeeeeseseeseseeeseeee 1
CG. — NON-DISCRIMINATION ..cccccssssssscccccsssceseeeesseeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeeseeeeeeseeeeeseete 1
DD. CITY RIGHTS oassssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssensnnnnnnnnnnnnneenneeeencctntntntteeetctee 1
E. — ASSOCIATION RIGHTS sssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssessseseeceeeeneneneetceenectetece 2
F.— DUES DEDUCTION aesssssssssssssssssssssssssssessssssnesenneeeeneeeceeccenenteneneneetes 3
G. MODIFICATION CLAUSE...ccccsssssssssssssssseseeeeeseseeeeeeeesseeseseeeeeseseeseeeseseste 4
H. — SAVINGS CLAUSE .oeessssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssesenssenenseeeceeeenenenenteeeeeeeetees 4
L. TERM OF AGREEMENT onassssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssceeeeeeceeseeceeeeeeeeees 4
ARTICLE II

mm OO DB P

zo

PAY FOR TIME WORKED

HOURS OF WORK ........ccccccsesesssssesssseseeeeessssesssseseseeesssesesenseneneeseseneneees 5
ATTENDANCE ........cccsesecssssssseseseeeessssssesseneneeseesesesenseneneseseseseseeneneneeesee 10
SALARY PLAN......c.cccccsesessssssssseseseeeessssesesseneneeeessisesseeeneneeeseseteneenenenes 10
RETIREMENT.........cccccccccssssesesescscssssesesesesenecsescsssenecsesesesensesesesssensesesees 13
SALARY ADJUSTMENTS. ........:ccccesesssssssssseseseeeessssesseseseeeeeseseseseeeenenes 15
OVERTIME PAY .......ccccecsssssseseseseesssssssseseneeesesesesssseneneeseseseseeneneneseses 17
DIFFERENTIAL PAY .........cccccccccsseseseseseseteneeseseseeneesesesssensesesessenseseeees 19
WORKING OUT OF CLASS ......cccscssecscsseseseeeensesesesseneeeensesesesseneneeeeeses 22
POLICE OFFICER SPECIALTY ASSIGNMENTS ..........c:ccceeseeseseeeeee 23
9 9 9 >

m

vO 2 E85 F

2

PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT PLAN/OVERTIME..........0cscse 26

FLEXIBLE DEPLOYMENT OF PERSONNELL...........:ccscseesesesssseteees 26

ARTICLE Ill
PAY FOR TIME NOT WORKED

HOLIDAYS. .......csesecesssssseseseseseessssesscseseseeseesaseseseeseneeseiseseseseeneneesesesesente 27
SICK LEAVE .....cscscscscssesesessssesesseseseeeesssssssseeneneeseisisessseeneneeesisesenecnenenea 28
RETURN TO WORK .........cccsecssssssseseseseeeesessseesseseeeeessesesesseneneeesesateneeee 30
VACATION.....cccscssssesesesesssssseseseeeesessssesssseneneeesesisesssseneeeeseseseseeneneeeeeses 31
JURY SERVICE ......csccececsssssssesesesesssssesesseseseeseeseseseseeneeeeeseseseseeneneeeeesets 32
MATERNITY LEAVE. ..........ccccccccescsssseseseseseneneceesessseneneesessseeeeeseassenaeees 32
LEAVE — DEATH IN FAMILY..........0.cscccccccsseseecscseeneneeeeseseeneneesesssenaeees 33
INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT LEAVE.........c.ccscssssssesesessessisesssseneneeeesetenenes 34
MILITARY LEAVE OF ABSENCE ..........c:c:ccccesesesssssesseseseneeeeseseteeeenenee 34
EMERGENCY LEAVE ........csecssssssssseseseseesessesesseseeeeressisesesseneneeesesaseneets 34
GOOD FRIDAY .......cscsccsesesscssesseseseseeeesssseseseeneneeeessisessseeneneeesiseseseenenenes 35
REST PERIODS ........cscscsceesessssssssseseseeeesesseseseeseneesessesesesseneneeeseseseneees 35

TIME OFF FOR MUNICIPAL, COUNTY AND STATE ELECTIONS....35

TIME OFF FOR CIVIL SERVICE BOARD MEETINGS... 35
LEAVE POLICIES ........ccccecssssssssesesesessessssssseseneeeessssesseeeeeneeeseseseseeeenenea 35
UNPAID FAMILY LEAVE .........cccccsccesessteeeeseseseneneesesesseneeeesesseneeseaeee 36

SPECIAL RESPONSE TEAM ON-DUTY WORKOUT AGREEMENT .36
mm OO DB P

zo

9 9 9 >

m

ARTICLE IV

SUPPLEMENTAL WAGE PAYMENTS

125 FLEXIBLE BENEFITS...........c.cccsccsesesssssscseseseseeessesesssseneneeseesesenenes 38
DENTAL INSURANCE .........cececssssssseseseseesesssssseeseneeeeesesesesesseneneeeeeses 39
VISION INSURANCE .........cccccsccesesessssssseseseseeeessesesesseeeneeeeeseseseseenenenes 39
DISABILITY INSURANCE.........c.cccccccsesesssssssseseseesensesetesseneneeeeeseseneete 39
SAFETY EQUIPMENT .........c:cccsccesesesssssssssseseseeeessesesseseseneeeseseseseceenened 40
UNIFORMS .......cccccesssssseseseseeeeecssssecseseseeseesssesesseeeneeneiseseseseeneneesesasesenes 41
POST TRAUMA COUNSELING .......:ccccecssssssesesesesserssesesseseneeeeseseneeee 41
ANNUAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION .......cccccssseseseseeeesessesesseseneeeeneee 41
RETIREE MEDICAL...........ccccscssssssseseseeesessssssseseseeessesesesseneneeesesesenents 41
AFTER HOURS EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM ......... 42
MEDICARE .........cccccscssesesesssseeessseseseeeessssessseeneneesessesesseeeneneeeseseseseenenened 42
CAR ALLOWANCE/DISCONTINUED............csecessssssseseseeeeesseteneenenenee 42
WELFARE BENEFIT PLAN ..........ccccscsescsesesstseeceesessseneneeseseseneneeseeeseees 43
ARTICLE V
MISCELLANEOUS
PROBATIONARY PERIOD. ........c:ccccscsesessssssssseseseesessesesssseneneeeseseseneeee 44

EMPLOYEE RELATIONS...

 

LAYOFF, DISPLACEMENT AND RECALL. .........::ccsccccseseeessseeeeeeeneeee 45

NEPOTISM POLICY .

 

WELLNESS PROGRAM/ ANNUAL OBSTACLE COURSE..........00 52
9 9 9 >

m

9 Oo @ >

m

ARTICLE VI

DISCIPLINARY ACTION
STATEMENT/LIMITATIONG........0ccsecsessssseseseseeeesssesseseseneeeseseseneenenene 54
REASONS FOR SUSPENSION, DEMOTION, OR DISMISSAL.......... 54
ORAL OR WRITTEN REPRIMAND PROCEDURES/APPEALS ......... 56
MINOR DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES/APPEALG..........c:cesessssseesereees 56
MAJOR DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES/APPEALG ..........cecessesseserenes 58
MEDIATION ........cccscscscesesessssseessseseeeeeesssseseseeneneeesssesesseeeneneeesiseseneeeenenee 61
EMERGENCY DISCIPLINARY SITUATIONG.........::cccscseeseeeesseeeeeee 61

ARTICLE VII
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
STATEMENT/LIMITATIONG........cscsessessssssseseseeessssesseseneeeeeseseseteeeenenee 62
DEFINITIONS 1... .ccscscsssssseseseesessssecssseseeseesssesesseseneeeesseseseseeneneesesesenenes 62
PROCEDURE ........cccccscssseseseessssssseseseseeseesssesesseseneeneesesesesseneneeesesaseneets 64
MEDIATION ........cccscscscesesessssseessseseeeeeesssseseseeneneeesssesesseeeneneeesiseseneeeenenee 64
ARBITRATION ........csccesssssssssseseseeeessssssssseneneessesesesesseneeeisesesesseeeneneeesess 66
ARTICLE |
RIGHTS AND PLEDGES

RECOGNITION

Burbank Police Officers' Association (Association) is the recognized employee
organization for all personnel ("employees") employed by the City of Burbank
("City") in the classifications of Police Officer, Police Detective, Police
Sergeant and Police Lieutenant.

MUTUAL PLEDGE OF ACCORD

Inherent in the relationship between the City and its employees is the
obligation of the City to deal justly and fairly with its employees and of the
employees to cooperate with their fellow employees and the City in the
performance of its public service obligation. In the interest of promoting and
ensuring harmonious relations between the City and its employees, authorized
representatives of the City and the Association have met and conferred in
good faith, exchanging various proposals concerning wages and other terms
and conditions of employment for the employee.

The authorized representatives of the City and the Association have reached
an Understanding and Agreement as to changes in wages and certain other
benefits for the affected employees which shall be submitted to the City
Council of the City for approval and implementation of its terms and conditions
by appropriate ordinance, resolution, or other lawful action.

NON-DISCRIMINATION

The provisions of this Agreement shall be applied equally to all employees
without unlawful discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race, color,
ancestry, religious creed, disability, national origin, political affiliation or gender
identity. Any violation of this provision by the City or Association shall be
subject to immediate correction. (Affirmative Action Plan)

CITY RIGHTS

D.1. General
Responsibility for management of the City and direction of its work
force is vested in City officials and department heads whose powers
and duties are specified by law. The rights of the City include but are
not limited to the exclusive right to: (1) determine the mission of its
constituent departments, commissions and boards; (2) set standards of
service; (3) determine the procedures and standards of selection for
employment and promotion; (4) direct its employees; (5) take
disciplinary action; (6) relieve its employees from duty because of lack
of work or for other legitimate reasons; (7) maintain the efficiency of
governmental operations; (8) determine the methods, means and
personnel by which government operations are to be conducted; (9)
determine the allocation and content of job classifications; (10) take all
D.2.

necessary actions to carry out its mission in emergencies; and (11)
exercise complete control and discretion over its organization and
technology of performing its work.

Reserved Rights
The City shall have all other rights and prerogatives subject only to
express restrictions on such rights as are provided in this Agreement.

E. ASSOCIATION RIGHTS

E.1.

E.2.

E.3.

Association Access

Reasonable access to employee work locations shall be granted to
Officers of the Association and its authorized representatives for the
purpose of processing grievances or contacting members of the
Association concerning business within the scope of representation.
Such officers or representatives shall not enter any work location
without the consent of the City or its authorized representative. Access
shall be restricted so as not to interfere with the normal operations of
the department or with established safety or security requirements. (AP
ll-15) The City acknowledges that an employee is entitled to review the
contents of their "official" file located in the Management Services
Department at reasonable intervals. An employee may request a
representative to assist him or her in reviewing said folder. A
representative of the Management Services Department will remain
present during the employee's review of the file. In addition, an
employee is entitled to review the contents of the employee's
"Departmental" personnel files by arranging an appointment with a
representative of the Police Department.

Association Time

An aggregate of five hundred and twenty (520) hours per fiscal year

shall be available for use by Board members subject to the following

conditions:

E.2.a. The hours shall be utilized to attend meetings or conventions
held by labor or police-oriented organizations and/or
seminars or classes on labor or police-related subjects.
Local Association meetings shall be included as a part of the
utilized hours.

E.2.b. Use of any part of the five hundred and twenty (520) hours
will be cleared through the office of the Police Chief with
manpower availability being the only additional criteria
utilized.) The association will be prepared at all times to
account for the use of this time.

Pay for Association Business
Employees shall be granted time off without loss of pay to attend
meetings of the Civil Service Board which are scheduled during the
employees' regular working hours, if the employee is (1) president of an
employee organization or the president's designee, if the president
cannot attend; (2) present on official business before the Board
including an appeal by the employee or representation of an employee
by another for the purpose of appeal; or (3) present because, in the
opinion of the Police Chief, the interests of the City are served by
having the employee present. Employees shall request permission
from the Police Chief to attend at least twenty four (24) hours prior to
the meeting. Unless otherwise authorized, employees must return to
work as soon as the business for which they are attending is
completed. (AP II-5)

In addition, affected employees who are elected members of the Board
of Directors of the BPOA, and who are on duty, shall be released from
normal work duties to attend monthly Board of Director meetings.
Release from normal duties will be cleared through the office of the
Police Chief with manpower availability and on-going criminal case
involvement being the only criteria utilized.

E.4. Bulletin Boards

Adequate space shall be made available to the BPOA on City bulletin
boards throughout the City. The following types of notices, provided
they are not of a political matter, commercial advertising or of a
derogatory nature to the City, may be posted after they are signed and
dated by an officer or representative of the Association: (1) notices of
recreation or social affairs of the Association; (2) notices of Association
election and appointments; and (3) notices of business meetings of the
Association. Notices of any other type not listed above shall first be
submitted to the City Manager's office 24 hours prior to posting. (AP II-
9)

DUES DEDUCTION

The City shall deduct and remit monthly to the Association dues required of
such employees as certified by a duly authorized representative of the
Association, provided such deduction is authorized in writing by the individual
employee. Such deduction shall continue unless written notice of cancellation
is given to the City.

The City shall have no liability to collect Association dues for any month in
which the employee, in his/her last full pay period, receives, after legal
deductions, pay less than the amount of such dues. In addition, the
Association shall indemnify and save or hold the City harmless from any
liability resulting from any and all claims, demands, suits or other action arising
from compliance with this section of the Article.
MODIFICATION CLAUSE

Any agreement, alteration, understanding, variation, waiver, or modification of
any of the terms or provisions contained herein shall not in any manner be
binding upon the parties hereto unless made and executed in writing by all
parties hereto, and if required, approved and implemented by the City Council.

SAVINGS CLAUSE

If any term or provision of this MOU is found to be in conflict with any City,
State, or Federal law, the parties agree to meet promptly, and as often as
necessary, to expeditiously renegotiate this term or provision. All other terms
and provisions of this MOU shall remain in full force and effect during the
period of such negotiations and thereafter until their normal expiration date.
The parties understand that many of the Employees covered by this
Memorandum of Understanding may also be covered by the Fair Labor
Standards Act of 1938, as amended, 29 U.S.C. Section 201 et seq. (FLSA).
To the extent that any provision herein conflicts with the FLSA, employees
covered by the FLSA shall receive benefits required thereunder and any
additional benefits set forth herein if compatible with FLSA.

TERM OF AGREEMENT
This Agreement is effective July 1, 2009. The term of this Agreement shall
continue in effect until the 30th day of June 2015.
ARTICLE Il
PAY FOR TIME WORKED

HOURS OF WORK

A.1.

A.2.

A.3.

Definition - Work Day/Week

Normally, a work day shall constitute eight (8) hours of work. The work
week shall consist of five (5) consecutive work days followed by (2)
consecutive days off.

9/80 Work Schedule

The City has established a nine day-eighty hour work schedule
acceptable to the Association and to the Police Chief. This schedule
shall feature three consecutive days off.

3/12 Work Schedule

Patrol and the motor squad shall work a 3/12 work schedule.
A.3.a. PATROL

It is the intent of the parties to:

A.3.a.(1) Assure the schedule will not be designed for the purpose of
reducing any existing level of benefit BPOA currently has.

A.3.a.(2) With command approval officers will be allowed to adjust
their work schedules to work into court time.

A.3.a.(3) Seniority Benefit

Effective February 5, 2012, no employee assigned to patrol,
hired after November 24, 2004 will have the ability to pick
their three shifts all at once as is the current practice upon
entering the Top 15. Rather, they will select patrol shifts
using the “2-1 method” as all other patrol officers select their
shifts. Employees hired on or before November 24, 2004 will
be known as being "grandfathered into the Top 15."

There are three patrol deployments per year. Generally,
January-April, May-August and September-December. The
“2-1 method” refers to the number of shifts chosen within
three deployments selected on a yearly basis.

Officers, in order of seniority, will select a shift (day shift,
night shift, beginning of week or end of the week) in two of
the three deployment periods. The selection of shifts will
move to the next senior officer who selects in the same
fashion. The process will continue until all officers have
selected a shift in two of the three deployments. Then the
selection will return to the most senior officer, who will select
A.3.a.(4)

A.3.a.(5)

a shift in the deployment the officer didn’t select earlier in the
process. The next senior officer will select in the same
fashion and so on, until all shifts are selected.

By definition, as the process moves forward, fewer and fewer
choices are available and less senior officer's default to less
desirable shifts and/or deployment periods.

Maintain the 3/12 schedule for patrol during the contract
period with the following criteria (and base levels) to be
utilized for evaluation of the schedule's effectiveness:

 

OVERTIME HOURS BASE LEVEL (uly-Dec 1994)
Total Overtime Hours 11,728.00

Continuation of Shift 1,139.3

Minimum Staffing Level 882.6

Court Appearances 1,541.8

Court Stand-By 4,976.3

SICK USAGE BASE LEVEL uly 92 - Jan 93)
Total Sick Hours 6,020.7

FIELD ACTIVITY BASE LEVEL (July 92- June 93)
Total Arrests 6,246.0

Total Cites 1,044.0

RESPONSE TIME * BASE LEVEL (an - Dec 94)
Emergency 3 minutes, 24 seconds
Non-Emergency 18 minutes, 24 seconds

* All response times based on weighted averages.

Return to the 9/80 schedule, upon agreement of the BPOA
and the Police Chief, if patrol cannot maintain the
established criteria set forth in Article Il. A.3.a.(5). Return to
the 9/80 schedule due to patrol being unable to maintain the
established criteria will not result in any additional
compensation paid by the City to any affected employee or
the BPOA.

A.3.b. MOTOR SQUAD

A.3.b.(1)

Lieutenants, Detectives, or non-Motor Squad Police Officers
in the Traffic Bureau will remain on the 4/10 work schedule
as set forth in Article Il. A. 4.
A.3.b.(2) The Departments ability to make a temporary, non-

A.3.b.(3)

A.3.b.(4)

A.3.b.(5)

A.3.b.(6)

disciplinary change in a limited-duty Officer’s assignment or
work schedule (shift, hours and/or days off) to maximize their
contribution toward the Department’s needs shall not be
affected by this 3/12 schedule.

The high degree of scheduling flexibility which has been the
prerogative of the Traffic Bureau Commander based on the
needs of the Department will remain unchanged.

Payback days for each month ill be scheduled by the
Bureau Commander by the 15" of the previous month,
Unless scheduled otherwise, payback days will be the ane
Wednesday of the month for those working Thursday,
Friday, and Saturday. It will be the Thursday immediately
following the and Wednesday for those working Monday,
Tuesday, and Wednesday. Paybacks may be scheduled on
a Sunday when Motor School training needs require the
complete Unit training together, such as riot procedures or
formation riding.

Monthly Motor School of eight hours or less will be
scheduled by the Bureau Commander, and will include
maintenance/cleaning of the motorcycles and all possible in-
service training. Usually Motor Schools will be split and held
for half of the Motor Squad during each of the two monthly
payback days. Normal field strength should not be affected
by Motor School, and Motor Officers not assigned to Motor
School on a given day shall not go to the school site.

Motor Squad Work Schedule
Officers assigned to Motor Squad or officers who were on an

employment list for the Motor Squad assignment on
February 5, 2012, will be grandfathered into the 3/12
schedule, but all other newly assigned employees will work a
4/10 schedule. Officers assigned to Motor Squad will be able
to take their motorcycles home unless the Police Chief
determines that for just cause the officer should not take the
motorcycle home. Such reasons shall be put in writing.
Employees assigned to the Motor Squad may volunteer to
work a 4/10 schedule but will also retain the right to return to
the 3/12 schedule.

In the event that the City transfers or reduces the number of
officers assigned to the Motor Squad and, as a result,
officers grandfathered into the 3/12 work schedule are
transferred out of the Motor Squad, the officer grandfathered
into the 3/12 work schedule will have the right to be
transferred back to the Motor Squad, if and when a vacancy
exists in the position from which the officer transferred and
can remain on a 3/12 schedule.

If a Motor Squad employee voluntarily accepts an
assignment outside the Traffic Bureau, that employee shall
not have the right to return to the Motor Squad on a 3/12
work schedule.

Discontinue the 5/8 “School Schedule.”

Maintain the 3/12 schedule for the motor squad with the
following understanding:

A.3.b.(7).i.

The Motor Squad safety and riding skill levels must remain
excellent, as determined by the Division Captain with
significant input from the Bureau Lieutenant, Sergeants, and
Motor Squad Field Training Officer. Failure to comply, as
determined by the Division Captain, SHALL cancel the 3/12
Work Schedule for the Motor Squad.

A.3.b.(7).ii.

Staffing levels on each day shall be sufficient to handle the
traffic needs of the City. If not, and if a reasonable schedule
modification of the 3/12 Work Schedule cannot be identified,
the 3/12 Work Schedule MAY be cancelled. Staffing
inequities could result from changing demands for service in
the City, or from a reduction in the number of officers
assigned full-time to the Motor Squad.

A.3.b.(7).iii.

The Motor Squad average monthly sick usage per assigned
officer shall remain generally equivalent to, or less than, that
of Patrol Officers or the 3/12 Work Schedule MAY be
cancelled.

A.3.b.(7).iv.
For those who have been grandfathered into the 3/12
schedule, the following sections shall apply: The Motor
Squad handles many traffic enforcement and other special
details, and primarily focuses on traffic enforcement during
A.4.

all free time. Officers traditionally have written 100 or more
citations for hazardous violations a month, in addition to
making arrests and writing citations for equipment and
parking violations. They also take traffic accident reports,
assist Patrol on priority calls, and handle other details that
detract from enforcement time. If in the opinion of the
Division Captain, the 3/12 Work Schedule has a negative
impact on the Motor Squad’s primary function of traffic
enforcement, the 3/12 Work Schedule MAY be cancelled.

A.3.b.(7).v.

It is the intent that the 3/12 Work Schedule will provide
benefits to the affected employees and to the Department,
without risking the safety of the employees. No non-safety
condition imposed by this schedule is intended to force the
cancellation of the 3/12 Work Schedule if the Division
Captain feels that its benefits to the Department outweigh its
disadvantages.

A.3.b.(8) Scenarios in which the Department can cancel the 3/12
Motor Officer Work Schedule are listed in Article II.A.3.b.(8).
If the 3/12 schedule is cancelled, the work schedule would
revert to a 4/10,as listed in Article Il. A. 4. The 4/10
schedule would require some of the Motor Officers to have
split days off. Return to the 4/10 schedule due to any of the
scenarios listed in Article II.A.3.b.(8) will not result in any
additional compensation paid by the City to any affected
employee or the BPOA.

4/10 Work Schedule

The City and the Association Have implemented a 4/10 work schedule

for Air, Canine, and Investigation assignments not on the 3/12 plan

based on criteria established for each of the assignments for the

duration of this agreement. It is the intent of the parties to:

A.4.a. Establish the criteria for evaluating the effectiveness of the
4/10 work schedule by mutual agreement of the parties.

A.4.b. Evaluate the assignments on the 4/10 schedule as separate
entities. In the event one entity on the 4/10 schedule does
not meet the criteria set forth, its removal from the 4/10
schedule shall not affect the other entities on the schedule.

A.4.c. Return to the 9/80 schedule, upon agreement of the BPOA
and the Police Chief, any entity that cannot maintain the
established 4/10 criteria.
Cc.

A.5. Lieutenants Schedule
The City shall assign Lieutenants to a 4/10 or 3/12 schedule based on
available staffing, and on the needs of the organization. Lieutenants
may flex their hours to address the personnel and operational needs of
their watch, with the concurrence of their commanding officer.

The parties agree to meet in October of 2012 and yearly through the
life of this agreement, to meet and discuss/consult on the impacts this
schedule change for lieutenants from a 3/12 to a 4/10 and the actual
ability lieutenants are being given to flex their hours. These
consultations will include the City Manager and Management Services
Director.

ATTENDANCE

Employees shall be in attendance at their work during the regular hours of
work and shall not absent themselves during working hours for any reason
without the prior approval of the immediate supervisor except in the case of
emergencies.

SALARY RANGE

“C.1. Establishment of Nine-Step Range
Effective July 1, 1986, salary ranges for employees in the classifications of

Police Officer, Police Detective, Police Sergeant and Police Lieutenant shall

be converted from the five step salary range to a nine step salary range.
Effective February 5, 2012 the salary range will be expanded to include an

additional 10% at the bottom of the salary range. This will create 13 steps
within the range. This will only be applicable for employees hired after

January 1, 2012. (See Exhibit A).

There shall be a difference of two and one-half (2 2) percent between steps.

C.2. Movement Within the Range
Affected employees below the top step of the salary range shall be
considered for salary adjustment on an annual basis and may receive an

adjustment of up to three (3) steps within a year. The Police Chief shall have

the authority to grant step increases. Adjustments for affected employees in
the classification of Police Officer shall be made effective on the anniversary
of the employee’s date of hire, except for the initial step increase which shall
be made at six months of service if the employee's job performance at the
six month period is satisfactory. Adjustments for affected employees in the
classifications of Police Detective, Police Sergeant, and Police Lieutenant
shall be made effective on the anniversary date of the employee's promotion.
The Police Chief shall have the authority to grant salary adjustments more
than once annually only to the extent that an employee not exceeds an
increase of three steps within a one year period. Salary increases within the
salary range shall be based upon satisfactory job performance. The

10
C.3.

C.4.

C.5.

C.6.

C.7.

standard adjustment for satisfactory job performance shall be two steps. In
no instance will a step increase be granted unless an employee has
demonstrated satisfactory performance in at least one of the employee's last
two evaluations.

Evaluations

All sworn personnel (“officers”) will receive performance evaluations on the
anniversary of their hire date or of the promotional date, once per year. The
performance evaluation shall be conducted on forms agreed upon between
representatives of the City of Burbank and the Burbank Police Officers’
Association. An officer's supervisor shall evaluate the officer, subject to
review and concurrence by the Police Chief. Salary increases shall only be
given based upon a performance evaluation.

Denial of Step Increase
An employee who receives two consecutive overall unacceptable

performance evaluation ratings shall not be advanced to the next salary step.
The Police Chief may reduce the monthly salary of an employee by up to two
steps in any twelve (12) month period on the basis of two consecutive overall
unacceptable performance evaluation ratings. An employee who has hada
step increase denied or salary reduced shall be reconsidered for a future
step increase no sooner than six (6) months following the denial/reduction.
Any increase shall be based upon satisfactory job performance.

Appeal

An employee who has had a step increase denied, may within ten calendar
days of notification of the denial, request an informal hearing before the
Police Chief and present evidence as to why the step increase should not be
denied. The decision of the Police Chief shall be final. An employee whose
salary is reduced shall have the right of appeal as outlined in Burbank
Municipal Code Sections 2-515 and 2-516. (BMC 2-515 & 2-516)

Eligibility After Denial

Failure to receive a salary increase as herein provided shall not preclude any
employee from thereafter receiving such increase. After failing to receive a
step number salary increase as herein provided, any employee so affected
shall receive such increase after he/she has been classified in his/her current
step number for an additional six (6) months, providing it coincides with a
satisfactory performance evaluation. In the event there is not a satisfactory
performance evaluation, the employee shall be eligible for such increase
yearly thereafter, subject however, to satisfactory performance evaluations.

Acceleration

An employee's step advancement may be accelerated subject to the

following conditions:

C.7.a. The Police Chief in his written request for acceleration, certifies
that the employee has performed his/her work in an outstanding,

11
C.8.

C.7.b.

C.7.c.

C.7.d.

C.7.e.

meritorious manner, giving the reasons therefore, or certifies that
the employee has regular full-time responsibilities of supervision
whose rate of pay is equal to or less than one or more of his/her
subordinates and that in making the request he/she has already
exhausted the assignment resources which would have placed a
senior supervisor over a senior subordinate; provided that for
supervisory responsibilities, the acceleration will not result in a rate
of pay which shall exceed the rate of pay of the next highest paid
subordinate, other than those subordinates who are being paid at
a "Y" rate in accordance with BMC 2-707, are on temporary
service, or are being paid a salary differential to which the
supervisor is not entitled. Requests for acceleration on the basis
of supervisory/subordinate relationship shall be submitted to the
City Manager through the Management Services Director and the
Police Chief shall use such references as the class specifications
and the most recent organization chart approved by the City
Manager, or in cases where these are not conclusive, he/she shall
include a written statement setting forth the duties and the place of
the position in the department organization. The anniversary date
of the supervisor whose salary is accelerated as herein provided
shall not be changed by such acceleration. (BMC 2-705)

NOTE: "Y" rate is used to distinguish rates of pay established for
an employee whenever the salary of the position that employee
holds is lowered. This rating insures that such change does not
affect any individual and the employee will continue to receive
his/her current salary. This "Y" designation is removed whenever
the rate of pay for the position is increased to an amount which
equals or exceeds the employee's current salary.

At least six (6) months have elapsed after the employee's
appointment to the classification. (BMC 2-705)

Not more than two (2) salary steps are recommended. (BMC 2-
705)

The employee has had no previous step advancement
acceleration during his/her employment in the particular
classification. (BMC 2-705)

The employee's seniority held in the step from which advanced is
carried forward. (BMC 2-705)

Step Advancement in Salary Upon Promotion

For the purposes of step advancements only, when an employee is
advanced from one title to another, the employee is to be advanced to the
next higher base salary plus two steps. (BMC 2-704)

12
D.

If there is a pay decrease associated with a promotion in rank, as calculated
under C.8. above, the employee will receive the next highest step increase in
the new rank upon promotion (this does not include assignment changes
within the same rank).

C.9. Step Advancement on Promotion from Recruit to Officer
When a recruit is advanced to Police Officer, the effective date of his or her
salary increase shall be the day of the recruit’s graduation from the
Academy.

 

RETIREMENT
D.1. PERS
D.1.a. The retirement program established by the California Legislature

in 1968 for members of the California Highway Patrol is adopted
for all affected employees. Affected employees agree to
exchange for this retirement plan, one half pay for accumulated
sick leave on retirement or death. Sick leave earned prior to July
1, 1974, will be available for sick leave use only and will not have
monetary value at the time of retirement or death.

D.1.b. Effective December 16, 2000, or as soon thereafter as PERS and
Burbank Municipal Code requirements can be satisfied, the
retirement benefit shall include Section 21363.1 (3% @ 55)
formula. Effective June 30, 2001 the retirement benefit shall
include Section 21363.2 (3% @ 50) formula. Effective July 1,
2004, the City will pay all costs associated with the BPOA PERS
3% @ 50 retirement benefit. This will include the normal
employee contribution rate of 9% and the City’s (employer)
contribution rate. All salary increases and educational incentive
increases previously deferred in order to establish a “rate
stabilization fund” for the 3% @ 50 retirement benefit will become
the sole property of the City and the BPOA will have no claims to
these monies.

D.1.c. | One-Year Final Compensation
For employees hired on or before February 5, 2012, the retirement
allowance of a Public Employees Retirement System (“PERS”)
member shall be based on the 12 highest paid consecutive
months under the plan. (Government Code Section 20042).

Three Year Final Compensation

For employees hired after February 5, 2012 (or as soon thereafter
as practicable), the retirement allowance of a Public Employees
Retirement System (“PERS”) member shall be based on the 36
highest paid consecutive months under the plan. (Government

13
Code Section 20037).

Contributions toward PERS Retirement

Effective February 5, 2012 or as soon as practicable, the City shall
cease picking up two percent (2.0%) of the employee’s nine
percent (9%) share of contributions to the Public Employees’
Retirement System (PERS). Each employee shall be responsible
for paying that two (2.0%) of the full employee share of PERS
contributions, with state and federal income tax on the PERS
member contribution deferred to the extent permitted by Internal
Revenue Code, 26 USC Section 4.14(h)(2).

The City shall continue to pay seven percent (7.0%) of the
employee’s nine percent (9.0%) share, and the City shall make the
employer contribution to PERS for each employee. The City shall
pay for any increase in the employer rate and shall retain any
savings from a decrease in the employer rate and for contribution
credits (rebates) from PERS. During the life of this Agreement,
earnings may accrue to the City by reason of a reduction of the
City’s contribution to PERS.

Effective June 23, 2013, the City shall cease picking up 5.5% of
the employee’s nine percent (9%) share of contributions to the
Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS). Each employee
shall be responsible for paying that 5.5% of the full employee
share of PERS contributions, with state and federal income tax on
the PERS member contribution deferred to the extent permitted by
Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC Section 4.14(h)(2).

The City shall continue to pay the 3.5% of the employee’s nine
percent (9.0%) share, and the City shall make the employer
contribution to PERS for each employee. The City shall pay for
any increase in the employer rate and shall retain any savings
from a decrease in the employer rate and for contribution credits
(rebates) from PERS. During the life of this Agreement, earnings
may accrue to the City by reason of a reduction of the City’s
contribution to PERS.

Effective June 22, 2014, the City shall cease picking up nine (9%)
of the employee’s nine percent (9%) share of contributions to the
Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS). Each employee
shall be responsible for paying the full employee share of PERS
contributions, with state and federal income tax on the PERS
member contribution deferred to the extent permitted by Internal
Revenue Code, 26 USC Section 4.14(h)(2).

The City shall pay for any increase in the employer rate and shall

14
D.2.

E.1.

retain any savings from a decrease in the employer rate and for
contribution credits (rebates) from PERS. During the life of this
Agreement, earnings may accrue to the City by reason of a
reduction of the City’s contribution to PERS.

D.1.e. In implementing the provisions of this section, each affected
employee shall be obligated to contribute any increase in
employee contributions that should hereafter result from any state
or federal enactment or action which increases the total employee
contribution rate above its current level of nine percent (9%).

D.1. Amounts contributed by the City pursuant to this section shall be
credited to the affected employee's PERS account as if made
solely by the employee.

Survivors Benefit

Effective January 1, 2001, or as soon thereafter as PERS requirements can
be satisfied, the retirement benefits shall include Level IV of 1959 Survivor
Benefits under Section 21574 of the California Government Code and Post-
Retirement Survivor Allowance to Continue After Remarriage under Section
21635.5 of the California Government Code.

SALARY
Pursuant to this agreement, officers, detectives, sergeants, and lieutenants
shall be made the salary provided for in Exhibit A.

Adjustments
The salary levels for all positions will be increased effective June 24, 2012 by
1.5%.

The salary levels for all positions will be increased effective June 23, 2013 by
2.0%.

The salary levels for all positions will be increased effective June 22, 2014 by
3.0%.

The parties agree that there will be a payroll test run before final salaries are

established.

E.1.a. The City and BPOA agree that a survey will be conducted for
consideration in the 2015-2016 negotiations in order to assess
whether the salaries of BROA members are competitive with the
following agencies and in accordance with the following
methodology. The parties understand that this survey is for
informational purposes only and any implementation, in full or in
part, will be subject to further negotiations.

E.1.a.(1) The Cities to be surveyed are as follows:

15
E.1.a.(2

E.1.a.(3)

Anaheim Long Beach

Garden Grove Pasadena

Glendale Santa Ana

Huntington Beach Santa Monica

Inglewood Torrance

The following compensation and benefit elements will
be surveyed to establish the percent that BPOA
positions are above or below survey:

Salary

*Longevity

Uniform Contribution

Advanced Post
*Education Incentive

PERS Employee Contribution paid by City
*Medical/Dental Contribution made by City
*Deferred Compensation made by City

The PERS element will be calculated by multiplying the
Cities’ percentage that they contribute towards the
employee’s PERS rate times the subtotal of PERSable
elements for that City in the survey. The City considers
3% @ 50 retirement benefit to be an industry standard
and the cities PERS employer rate will not be
considered in the survey. For the items above having
an asterisk, the survey will compare the City of
Burbank’s employee population to the compensation
provided by the cities surveyed to determine what the
BPOA employee would receive if that employee was
subject to the provisions of the compensation and
benefits provided by the surveyed cities. This data is
then averaged to determine the compensation for that
element. If a city on the survey has an element but
provides no compensation, this element will be
calculated in the survey. In conducting the survey, if a
city does not provide an element this element will be
excluded from the calculation.

 

The survey will contain a column that indicates the
amount of out-of-pocket medical/dental costs that
BPOA employees would be liable for if the BPOA
employees were subject to the medical/dental
provisions of the cities surveyed. This data will be for
informational purposes only.

16
E.1.b. A salary survey shall be conducted of personnel employed at the
top step exclusive of bonuses or incentives of the Police Officer,
Police Sergeant and Lieutenant classifications. For purposes of
this language the top step of Glendale shall be their merit step.

E.1.c. An average of the total top step salaries for Police Officer,
Sergeant and Lieutenant of the 10 (ten) survey cities will be
derived. For survey and computation purposes, the City's top step
shall in actuality equate to the ninth step.

E.1.d. The average shall then be expressed as the City's top step salary
total for Police Officer, Police Sergeant, and Police Lieutenant,
respectively.

E.1.e. The survey range for the classification of Police Detective shall be
midway between Police Officer and Police Sergeant.

E.1.f. The calculation for the July 1 survey settlement will be made on
September 1 regardless of the status of settlements in survey
agencies by that date.

E.1.g. In the event that a city or cities in the group surveyed significantly
changes its allocation of salary and benefits, the parties to this
agreement agree to meet and confer on the effect to be given
these changes in the salary and benefits survey.

F. OVERTIME PAY
F.1. Policy

F.2.

The Personnel Policy of the City of Burbank discourages overtime work.
Overtime will not be permitted except in cases of emergency (as defined by
the Police Chief) or when the public health, safety or welfare requires it. The
Police Chief or his designee is responsible for giving prior approval of any
overtime to be worked except in case of emergency, and shall make every
effort to reschedule work to avoid overtime. Overtime usage will be reviewed
by the City Manager or his or her designated representative to determine
whether the authorized overtime was due to an emergency or that public
health, safety or welfare required it. (AP I-12)

Definition of Overtime Work

Overtime work is work performed by an employee of the City in excess of the

employee's regularly scheduled hours or on a holiday, or at times other than

those normally required for their employment. In-service training shall not

constitute overtime work to the extent that time spent in such training does

not exceed the hours of work stipulations of the Fair Labor Standards Act.

Code 7 time shall not constitute overtime.

F.2.a. Compensation for travel and/or training time on a regularly
scheduled work day shall be paid at the overtime rate should the

17
F.3.

F.4.

F.5.

F.6.

travel and/or training time exceed the regularly scheduled work
hours of the affected employee.

F.2.b. Compensation for travel and/or training time on a scheduled day
off shall not constitute overtime work to the extent that time spent
in such training does not exceed the hours of work stipulations of
the Fair Labor Standards Act.

The Department may elect to change an employee's regularly
scheduled work hours to a 5/40 schedule in order to
accommodate extended training. In this case, the employee
would work an eight (8) hour day as regular work hours excluding
lunch periods.

Dispute as to Normal Hours of Employment

Any dispute or question of fact as to what time or times are normally required
for the employment of any employee shall be decided by the City Manager
and his/her decision shall exhaust administrative remedies.

Rate

Affected employees shall be paid overtime at 12 times the hourly rate for the
step in which they are employed, except employees who receive differential
pay shall be paid 1‘ times the hourly rate they are paid under Section G.
(BMC 2-711).

Overtime Pay-Emergency Call In

Except as provided for in Article Il, Section K providing for flex time
assignment, When an employee is called back to work after returning home,
or is called to work on a day when he/she would normally be off duty, or is
called to work on a shift to which he/she is not assigned, he/she shall be paid
a minimum of four (4) hours of pay at the overtime rate even though he/she
works less than four (4) hours. The employee's pay shall commence when
he/she reports to the work location or goes into service in the City. Should
an employee so called to work be recalled after having been released from
work he/she will again be paid a minimum of four (4) hours of pay at the
overtime rate provided he/she worked at least four (4) hours during the
previous call to overtime duty, or two (2) hours had elapsed since the
previous call to duty.

Overtime Pay - On Call For Court

Affected employees shall receive two (2) hours of straight time for the period
from 8 a.m. to 12 noon, and two (2) hours of straight time for the period from
1 p.m. to 5 p.m. when the affected employee is placed on an "on-call" status
for court on either a workday or day off, except for those employees actually
working during the time the on-call subpoena is in effect.

F.6.a. Subpoenas
Affected employees (Officers) who are on court “On-Call” or “Must

18
F.7.

Appear” status for a City Attorney or District Attorney Subpoena
and are not called off of the subpoena by 5 p.m. the prior day shall
receive two (2) hours of straight time provided the employee
(Officer) is not working a regularly scheduled, or an overtime
assignment.

If an employee (Officer) is called off of a subpoena the same day,
more than two hours prior to the court appearance time the
employee (Officer) is entitled to two (2) hours of straight time. If
the employee (Officer) is called off of a subpoena two hours or
less before the court appearance time the employee (Officer) is
entitled to two (2) hours of overtime at time and one half.

F.6.b. Trailing Felony Case Subpoenas
The trial date will be clearly indicated on subpoenas for "trailing

felony cases" and will be served in the normal fashion as an on-
call subpoena. Officers will receive on-call pay from the new trial
date until the case is adjudicated or continued to a date beyond
the original ten (10) court day trailing period. Officers will be taken
off no "on-call status" when there is a case disposition or re-
calendar for a future date with a new subpoena. Officers will not
be responsible for any on-call status until they have actually been
served.

Time Off With Pay In Lieu Of Overtime

The Police Chief may, whenever he considers that the best interests of the
City will be served, order that an employee may take time off work with pay in
lieu of overtime pay. Time off with pay shall be given for a period equal to
the appropriate overtime rate. Accrued in-lieu time shall be used by the
employee within 30 days after it is earned, unless extended by the Police
Chief. The Police Chief shall not permit any employee to accumulate in lieu
time in excess of 200 hours beyond the end of a calendar year without the
approval of the City Manager. Overtime earned working on jobs for which
the City is reimbursed ("billable hours") are not eligible to be paid in time off
in lieu of overtime payment. (AP II-12)

DIFFERENTIAL PAY
G.1. Definition

G.2.

G.3.

"Differential pay" shall mean the addition to the base salary of a City officer
or employee determined by reference to assignment or certification. (BMC 2-
710)

Entitlement Amount

Affected employees shall receive differential pay in such amount and under
such terms and conditions as specified by this MOU. (BMC 2-710)

Special Assignment

19
G4.

G5.

G6.

G7

Effective June 30, 2007, the differential pay for affected employees on
special assignment was modified as follows:

Pilot-in-Command (PIC) 8.2% of top step Officer per month
PIC with a commercial rating 11.3% of top step Officer per month
Helicopter Observer 2.3% of top step Officer per month
Motor Officer 7.9% of top step Officer per month
School Resource Officer 3.1% of top step Officer per month

Field Training Officer

(Patrol/Motor/Aero-Bureau/K-9) 6.8% of top step Officer per month
Field Training Officer 3.4% of top step Officer per month
(not assigned a Trainee)

Special assignment pay is effective on the 1°‘ day of such assignment.
(Side letter 5/24/07)

Assignment Surveys

The City agrees to survey the following assignment differentials for

consideration in the 2009-2010 negotiations in order to assess whether the

assignment differentials for BPOA members are competitive with the

agencies listed in E.1.a.1. of this Article and in accordance with the following

methodology. The parties understand that this survey is for informational

purposes only and any implementation, in full or in part, will be subject to

further negotiations.

G.4.a.The assignment differentials to be surveyed are as follows:
Helicopter Pilot, Observer, Motor Officer, and Field Training Officer,
K-9, School Reserve Officer, Bi-lingual Bonus Pay, and Shooting Pay

G.4.b.This data is then averaged to determine the compensation for that
element. If a city on the survey has an element but provides no
compensation, this element will be calculated in the survey. When
conducting the survey, if a city does not provide an element this
element will be excluded from the calculation.

Detective
Unit employees assigned to a Detective position shall receive salary
advancements in accordance with Article II C.8.

K-9 Duty

Unit employees who are assigned to K-9 duty receive additional
compensation in the amount of twelve (12) hours of pay per month at time
and one-half (1%). K-9 duty compensation is granted in recognition of the
duties and responsibilities of the K-9 assignment including any time spent by
the employee on or off duty in the care and maintenance of the assigned
animal.

Shooting Pay
All affected employees shall shoot at least once each month. Employees

may shoot as many times as desired, but no more than twice per month

20
while on-duty and at City expense. Annual shooting pay will be computed by
multiplying $30.00 by the number of months the officer qualifies on the
combat shoots, usually twelve.

G.8. Bilingual Bonus
Pursuant to the discretion of the Police Chief, a bonus of $100 per month will
be paid to qualified employees desiring to translate/speak a second
language. Payment of the bonus will be subject to the following criteria:

G.8.a.

Individuals desiring to receive the bonus must have their
proficiency in the second language evaluated in a method to be
mutually agreed upon between the City and BPOA.
Employees in uniform patrol may be required to select their shifts
in such a manner to allow utilization of their expertise on all shifts.
Such shift selection shall be made on the basis of seniority.

There will be no cap on the number of personnel that are eligible
for the bilingual bonus.

G.9 _-P.O.S.T. Pay

G.9.a.

G.9.b.

Effective July 1, 2005, Intermediate P.O.S.T. pay shall be paid at
5% of the top step (step 9) of Police Officer. Advanced P.O.S.T.
pay shall be paid at 9% of the top step of Police Officer pay.
Supervisory P.O.S.T. pay shall be paid at 9% of the top step
Sergeant pay. Management P.O.S.T. pay shall be paid at 15% of
the top step of Police Lieutenant. Such pay shall commence on
the pay period following the employee meeting the eligibility
requirements for the P.O.S.T. certificate. The minimum specified
standards shall be at least those prescribed by P.O.S.T. as of the
date the employee completes the P.O.S.T. application form, which
will be held by the department until all submission documents are
obtained.

The City will pay any Lieutenant who does not possess a
Management P.O.S.T. Certificate $285 a month. These payments
will be made monthly until the attainment of a Management
P.O.S.T. Certificate. The payments will be paid cumulatively with
the Advanced or Supervisory P.O.S.T. Certificate.

G.10. Education Differential

G.10.a.

Effective February 5, 2012, Officers, Detectives, Sergeants and
Lieutenants possessing post-secondary degrees issued from an
educational institution that is accredited by an agency recognized
by the U.S. Department of Education shall be paid the following:

21
G.11

Associate’s degree - $175
Bachelor's degree - $275
Master's degree - $450

. Standby Pay

G.11.a. Employees required to be on standby and carry a paging device due
to assignment shall be paid one (1) hour at the straight time rate per day on
days which they are on-duty and two (2) hours at the straight time rate per
day on days which they are off-duty. The City will have at least two (2)
Detectives in addition to one (1) Traffic Investigator, on standby at all times.

G.11.b. In the Investigation Division one (1) supervisor will be assigned as
standby. The standby supervisor will be rotated weekly among the two (2)
Lieutenants and six (6) Sergeants in the Investigation Division. Employees
do not have the option of opting out, but may trade.

H. WORKING OUT OF CLASS
H.1. Policy

It is the Policy of the City to pay employees for working out of class because
of a temporary position vacancy. When a position becomes vacant, the
Police Chief will first determine whether the position must be filled, whether
the more responsible functions of the position can be assumed by the next
higher level, or whether the balance of duties may be dispersed to a number
of other positions. If it is not possible to accommodate the work load using
the aforementioned, the Police Chief may recommend that an employee be
assigned to work out of classification. (AP II-13)

H.2. Out of Class Pay

H.3.

H.2.a. All affected employees when assigned to work out of classification in
accordance with the policy outlined in H.1. of this Article shall be paid out of
class pay beginning the 16th day of working out of class, when temporary
assignment is in excess of 15 days. (AP Il- 13)

H.2.b. Except for employees working out of class (WOC) as a Police
Captain, all WOC assignments will be compensated in accordance with
Article II.C.8. of this Memorandum of Understanding.

H.2.c. When WOC as a Police Captain, all affected employees will receive
the bottom of the Police Captain range or 7.5% above their base range,
whichever is higher. If this results in a salary beyond the top of the range,
the employee will receive a flat 5% above their base range. Existing
differentials/fringes and any new differentials/fringes, if applicable, are added
on top of the new base salary. The Police Chief has the option of providing
up to a 10% base salary adjustment for working out of class as a Police
Captain.

Duration of Provisional Appointment
22
Upon the completion of the provisional appointment, employees shall be
returned to their previous classifications, unless promoted in accordance with
Civil Service Rules. Effective January 1, 2000, if a provisional appointment
results in a probationary/permanent appointment (without a return to the
employee’s previous classification) the employees’ probationary period and
salary raise date shall be calculated from the first day of the provisional
appointment, not to exceed 12 months of provisional time. This does not
affect the employee’s seniority date for any other seniority based purpose.

POLICE OFFICER SPECIALTY ASSIGNMENTS

 

11.

12.

DUI Unit
As currently administered.

Gang Unit
As currently administered.

Mall Unit
As currently administered.

Special Enforcement Detail
As currently administered.

School Resource Officer
As currently administered.

Field Training Officer

Assignment shall be for the duration of a valid FTO list. Extensions may be
granted by the Police Chief should an FTO receive overall "Outstanding"
evaluations. FTO's who do not obtain the level of an overall "Outstanding"
evaluation shall be required to re-test for the assignment when a list expires.

For the Patrol Bureau, the Police Chief or designee shall establish and
maintain a list of qualified candidates for Field Training Officer and appoint
FTO’s on an as needed basis. The duration of appointment to FTO will be
for a minimum of six months and shall not exceed two years, unless
completion of formal training with a probationary officer, or completion of a
Department training project is in the best interest of the Department. Itis the
intent of the Department to maintain a full time cadre of four Field Training
Officers at full FTO pay, whether or not they are assigned a trainee. The
Department may appoint as many as four additional FTO’s with full FTO pay
based on the needs of the Department. When any of the additional FTO’s
are not assigned a trainee they will receive 3.4% or one half the FTO
differential pay. FTO’s not assigned a trainee may be required to work with
the Patrol Division Captain or the Training Unit to enhance the Department's
training program. If a vacancy occurs within the full-time cadre of four FTO’s
the Chief or his designee shall appoint a replacement FTO from within the
part time cadre, if possible. The following positions unaffected by this

23
1.10.

114

1.12

language include: COPS Bureau training officer and Traffic Bureau training
officer.

Vice/Narcotics

Five (5) year maximum assignment excluding time assigned to special
projects or task forces outside the Department (includes Civil Service
Detective Classification). Special Task Force assignments shall be for a
maximum of three (3) years. Extensions may be made for operational
concerns.

Detective

The City shall select and assign officers to Detective. Assignments shall be
for an indefinite period based on performance. All members of the
bargaining unit with a minimum of three (3) years service with the Burbank
Police Department, and currently in the Police Officer (830.1 PC)
classification shall be eligible to participate in the selection for the Detective
assignment. Although the Civil Service Rules may be utilized as a guideline
for testing, there will be no requirement for the Department to adhere to the
Civil Service Rules in filling this assignment. The Department will issue rules
for the testing process for creating the assignment list in advance, which
shall provide for a fair and competitive testing process. The process will
include, but is not limited to a written test and an oral interview panel.

The parties agree to meet in October of 2012 and yearly through the life of
this agreement, to meet and discuss/consult on the impacts of the Detective
selection process. These consultations will include the City Manager and
Management Services Director.

Helicopter
Assignment shall be for an indefinite period based on performance and
safety factors.

K-9

Assignment shall be for an indefinite period based on performance and
safety factors. Response time may be used as a factor during the selection
process, but may not be used as a sole criteria for selection, nor as ameans
to disqualify applicants from the testing process.

Motors
Assignment shall be for an indefinite period based upon performance and
safety factors.

Performance Criteria

1.12.a. | To maintain any specialty assignment listed, officers shall maintain
a "Satisfactory" performance rating in all critical performance
"factors" listed in the Police Officer - Progress Review evaluation
form adopted by the Department. Additionally, officers assigned

24
1.13.

1.14.

1.15.

1.16.

to Field Training Officer, Detective (Non-Civil Service), K-9, Motor,
and Helicopter positions will be required to maintain an "Above
Standard" performance rating in those factors identified as
"critical" performance areas designated on the Police Officer -
Progress Review Specialty Assignments Addendum.

1.12.b. | Should the performance of an Officer assigned to any Specialty
Assignment listed fall below the minimum performance levels for
that position, a Performance Improvement Plan shall be initiated
before an Officer may be removed from an assignment. The
development of a Performance Improvement Plan shall provide for
sufficient time (minimum six (6) months) for the Officer to improve
performance to minimum standards designated for the position.
An exception to the Performance Improvement Plan requirement
prior to removal from a position is when an Officer's performance
is judged to be Unacceptable". An "Unacceptable" performance
rating in any critical factor may be utilized by management to
immediately evaluate an Officer's continued assignment to the
positions noted.

Safety Factors

The Helicopter, K-9, and Motor positions involve technical skills not required
of other Specialty positions. Should these skills which are inherent to the
safe operation or control of equipment deteriorate, and future training would
not raise these skills to a satisfactory level, an Officer may be removed from
these designated positions.

Training Periods

Ratings below minimum performance levels for Specialty Assignments at the
termination of training periods (six (6) months) may be utilized by
management to evaluate an Officer's continued assignment to any Specialty
Assignment.

Appeals
The Burbank Police Officer's Association does not waive any member's right
to appeal ratings which are perceived by the employee to be biased.

Rotation

Officers assigned to Specialty Assignment positions which automatically
rotate after a specified period of time (i.e. DUI, Gang Unit, SED, SRO, Mall
Unit, Vice/Narcotics Detail), or Officers removed from Specialty Assignments
for cause, may test for other rotating Specialty Assignments. However, they
will not be eligible for appointment until one (1) year (365 days) from the date
they left their previous rotating Specialty Assignment. An exception to this
limitation will take place when there are no other applicants on a selection list
who are available for an opening in any designated rotating Specialty
Assignment. Officers being assigned from rotating Specialty Assignments to

25
J.

K.

available positions in Field Training Officer (FTO), Detective, K-9, Motor, or
Helicopter assignments are not affected by the one (1) year limitation.

PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT PLAN/OVERTIME

 

Officers shall receive notice prior to placement on a Performance
Improvement Plan either by entries on their comment card, or through their
evaluation. An officer who is placed on a Performance Improvement Plan
may become ineligible to work optional overtime for the duration of the
Performance Improvement Plan. A lieutenant or above shall notify the officer
in writing, at least thirty days prior to placement on the PIP if ineligibility to
work optional overtime will become a condition of the plan. This provision
will provide the employee adequate opportunity to improve his or her
performance before imposition of the PIP, in an effort to avoid
implementation of the PIP.

FLEXIBLE DEPLOYMENT OF PERSONNEL

At the discretion of the Police Chief or designee and based on the safety of
the community, efficient operations, or the operational or training needs of
the Department, the Department may decide to flexibly deploy officers.
During a flexible deployment, the Department may require an officer to begin
or end his/her work shift up to three (3) hours before or after their normally
scheduled starting time or ending time without additional compensation. If
the total time an officer works exceeds those regularly scheduled, the officer
will be compensated at the overtime rate for that additional time.

 

 

The safety of the community, efficient operations, or the operational or
training needs of the Department may include, but are not limited to, a short-
term, pre-planned event requiring additional law enforcement resources, a
spontaneous community event requiring law enforcement
presence/intervention, or an immediate law enforcement response to a
critical public safety need. For short-term, pre-planned events officers shall
receive a minimum of seven days’ advance notice prior to flexible
deployment. It is not the intent of the Department to routinely change working
hours or to avoid considering other options including the use of overtime or
redeployment of other personnel within the Department.

Those employees affected by a change in start time will generally be notified
at least 24 hours in advance. If notification is made less than 12 hours in
advance of their normally scheduled start time the employee will be
compensated one and one half times in salary for the hours flexed.

The parties agree to meet in October of 2012 and yearly through the life of
this agreement, to meet and discuss/consult the impacts of the Department's
ability to flexibly deploy personnel as discussed above. These consultations
will include the City Manager and Management Services Director.

26
A.

ARTICLE Ill
PAY FOR TIME NOT WORKED

HOLIDAYS

A.1.

A.2

Entitlement
Holidays shall be:
A.1.a. Regular days off provided in Article Il, G.2.

A.1.b. Legal holidays as follows:
January 1st, known as "New Year's Day"
Third Monday in January, known as "Martin Luther King Day"
February 12th, known as "Lincoln Day"
Third Monday in February, known as "Washington's Day"
Last Monday in May, known as "Memorial Day"
July 4th, known as "Independence Day"
First Monday in September, known as "Labor Day"
September 9th, known as "Admission Day"
November 11th, known as "Veterans Day"
Fourth Thursday in November, known as "Thanksgiving Day"
Friday after the fourth Thursday, known as the "Day after
Thanksgiving"
December 25th, known as "Christmas Day" ( XIV)

Definition of “Holiday”

Unit members working a 3/12 schedule, will work as scheduled, without any
additional compensation, regardless of Holidays, legal or designated. For all
other unit members a “Holiday” is observed on the weekday designated by
the City.

A.2.a. Holiday In Lieu Pay

Effective February 5, 2012, in lieu of bargaining unit members
(employees) observing holidays, the City shall pay unit members
in lieu compensation for holidays without regard for when holidays
occur or whether the unit member actually works on a holiday.
The City shall pay Holiday In Lieu, holiday compensation at the
rate of 4.154 hours per pay period. This Holiday In Lieu, holiday
pay meets the definition of special compensation defined in Cal.
Code Regs, Title 2, Section 571, and shall be incorporated into the
unit members compensation reported to PERS for retirement
purposes. In the event that PERS modifies its regulations, the
parties agree to meet and negotiate changes to this language.
Holiday In Lieu pay shall not be included in the regular rate of pay
for calculating the overtime rate of pay. (Note: 4.154 hours per
pay period is based on 12 holidays at 9 hours per holiday.)

A.2.b. Uniform Patrol Assignment
Unit members assigned to uniform patrol shall not earn any

27
additional holiday pay above and beyond the Holiday In Lieu Pay
described above. If an officer is on a scheduled day off, the officer
will take the scheduled day off. If the officer is scheduled to work,
the officer will report to work as scheduled.

A.2.c. Non-Uniform Patrol Assignment
Will not be scheduled to work any of the 12 BPOA recognized

holidays. At the Police Chief's discretion, the City may create on-
call teams of non-uniform unit members (Detectives, Support
Services, SRO's, Gangs, COPS, Etc) who may be called in to
work on a holiday. In the event the Police Chief exercises such
discretion, the number of sworn personnel will be divided into four
teams chosen by department seniority, evenly distributed with
officers, detectives and supervisors. Each team will choose their
assigned days prior to each June 1 (for July 1) and will be
assigned three of the 12 holidays to be "on-call" from 7am to 5pm.
The four teams will split Thanksgiving, the day after Thanksgiving,
Christmas Day and New Year's Day so each team will be assigned
to only one of these holidays in a given fiscal year.

A.2.d. Call In Pay For Three Holidays Per Year
In the event the Police Chief or designee calls in a unit member to
work on up to three of the holidays listed in section A.1.b. per
year, the unit member will work up to 9 hours without additional
compensation. In the event the Police Chief or designee requires
a unit member to perform more than 9 hours of work on one of the
three holidays listed in section A.1.b., the City shall pay the unit
member at the overtime rate of pay for all hours worked in excess
of 9 hours per holiday. /f a unit member is called in to work on a
day other than one of their three designated holidays, then they
will be compensated at their overtime rate, for each hour worked.

A.2.e. Limitations On Holiday Call-Ins
The Police Chief or designee shall not call-in unit members for
planned police or City activities, routine investigations or follow-up,
the back-filing of officers, training, or other day-to-day activities.

B. SICK LEAVE
B.1. Use
Sick leave shall not be considered as a right which an employee may use at
his/her discretion. Sick leave is intended to provide protection against loss of
earnings due to illness or injury, illness in the immediate family or for pre-
approved medical or dental appointments. Sick leave may be granted by the
Police Chief if an employee is disabled from a job incurred injury after
exhausting his/her industrial accident leave. (AP II-19)

28
B.2.

B.3.

B.4.

B.5.

B.6.

Notice

B.2.a. An employee taking sick leave because of personal illness or
injury or illness in the immediate family, shall notify the Police
Chief or his designated representative no later than one (1) hour
prior to the beginning of his/her scheduled shift or watch. (AP II-19
& GO 140)

B.2.b. An employee taking sick leave for a medical appointment shall
notify his/her supervisor not later than the work day prior to that
appointment. (AP II-19)

Sick Leave Investigation

If an employee's sick leave usage shows an array of frequency, pattern or

timing, e.g., "Friday-Monday, " that the Police Chief finds inconsistent to

expected usage, he shall have an interview with the employee and his/her

supervisor to determine if the actual circumstances justify further action.

Further actions are:

B.3.a. Counsel the employee as to the purpose of sick leave, or to
recommend or direct the employee to visit his/her personal
physician, as appropriate.

B.3.b. The use of the Certificate of Absence or Medical Release Form as
delineated in the Return-to-Work Table.

B.3.c. Request a special medical evaluation. (See AP II-17)

B.3.d. Direct personal visits by the employee's supervisor on subsequent
absences.

B.3.e. Other procedures the Police Chief considers appropriate. (AP II-
19)

Sick Leave Revoked

The City Manager shall revoke sick leave, if it is determined that the
employee is not, in fact, sick or incapacitated from performing his/her duty, or
if he/she has engaged in private or other public work while on such sick
leave, or if it is determined that the employee is not in compliance with the
provisions of Section B.1 and B.2. of this Article.

Sick Leave Without Pay

Sick leave without pay may be granted by the Police Chief after accumulated
sick leave is exhausted. Application must include a physician's statement in
writing showing the need and the duration. (AP II-19) The City's contribution
toward an employee's flex plan and life insurance benefits shall continue at
the normal rate for up to three months. (AP I-39)

Sick Leave Accrual

29
B.7.

B.6.a. An employee shall be entitled to one day of sick leave for each
calendar month during which he/she is employed by the City with
pay.

B.6.b. Employees absent without pay in excess of 40 hours in any one
pay period shall not receive sick leave accrual for that same
month.

B.6.c. In computing compensation payable for sick leave, the
compensation paid shall be the amount the employee would earn
during the sick leave period if working at his/her current rate of pay
and work schedule without the inclusion of overtime earnings.

Compensation for Accrued Sick Leave

If an employee with unused sick leave credit dies; retires under the City's
retirement system; resigns when eligible for such retirement; resigns to enter
a City elective office without a break in continuity of City service and serves
in such office employment until retired under the City's retirement system; or
is laid off because of the abolishment of his/her position or employment or
because of absence of funds; he/she or his/her estate shall be entitled to
receive 60% of the value of his/her accrued sick leave computed from his/her
last base salary as an employee, except that, sick leave earned prior to July
1, 1974 will be available for sick leave use only and will not have monetary
value at the time of retirement or death. When deducting sick leave used by
an employee, that sick leave earned after June 30, 1974, will be deducted
before deducting sick leave earned prior to July 1, 1974. Payment shall be
made as soon as practicable following the occurrence of any of the foregoing
events. This “cash out” shall be directed to the employees VEBA account.

RETURN TO WORK

C.1.

C.2.

C.3.

Medical Certificate

When an employee is absent more than three (3) consecutive work days on
sick leave, the Police Chief will require him/her to file a physician's or
practitioner's certificate or a personal affidavit stating the cause of such
absence.

Medical Authorization for Return-To-Work

Submittal of a physician-signed copy of the City's Medical Authorization for
Return-to-Work form is mandatory for sick leave taken due to back injury or
heart trouble. If the employee is not under the care of a personal physician,
then the City's authorized physician will sign the Return-to-Work form after
examining the employee. (AP II-50 & AP II-51))

Medical Release Form

The City's Medical Release procedure encompasses the release of the
employee to work only after examination by the City's Medical Consultant or
examiner and will be required only in those cases involving back injury or
heart or suspected heart conditions. (AP II-50 & AP II-51))

30
D.

VACATION

D.1.

D.2.

D.3.

Accrual
All full-time affected employees shall accrue vacation as follows:
D.1.a. Two (2) calendar weeks or 80 hours per year;

 

D.1.b. Upon the completion of five (5) years of continuous service, an
additional calendar week shall be added to the allowance currently
available and the annual allowance thereafter shall be three (3)
calendar weeks or 120 hours per year;

D.1.c. Upon completion of fifteen (15) years of continuous service, an
additional calendar week shall be added to the allowance currently
available and the annual allowance thereafter shall be four (4)
calendar weeks or 160 hours per year;

D.1.d. Vacation accrued in any current year may be taken in the year in
which it is accrued with the consent of the Police Chief subject to
such procedures and limitations as may be specified by the City
Manager.

D.1.e. Employees absent without pay in excess of 40 hours in any one
pay period shall not receive vacation accrual for that same pay
period.

Vacations - Termination of Employment

Upon resignation, death, or other termination of employment, all vacation
accrued to the employee shall be granted and a cash settlement will be
made.

Vacation Use

All vacations will be chosen within bureaus on the basis of rank and seniority.
Seniority is defined as "date of appointment to rank." (GO 202) The
Department is responsible for scheduling the vacations of City personnel so
that the vacation absenteeism does not interfere with productivity. (AP II-16)
Employees may utilize their accrued vacation time in minimum increments of
one hour subject to prior approval of the Police Chief. Vacations shall be
taken during the calendar year following their accrual except that the Police
Chief may authorize such accrued vacation or any portion thereof to be
carried over into the succeeding calendar year. Employees shall accrue no
more than two (2) years of vacation on the books. They may request an
additional forty (40) hours with the approval of the Police Chief. Further
vacation carry-over shall require the approval of the City Manager or his/her
designee. Accrued vacation that will be lost unless carried over shall, in the
City Manager's discretion, be compensated in cash.

31
F.

JURY SERVICE

E.1.

E.2.

E.3.

E.4.

Jury Summons

Employees receiving a "Jury Summons" shall notify their supervisors within
one (1) working day, by presenting a copy of this document. Since the
receipt of this notice indicates that no exemption or personal excuse has
been granted, the employee will report to jury service as directed by the
court. If the employee is unable to notify his/her supervisor of his/her jury
summons, he/she should report to the Court as instructed and notify his/her
supervisor at the earliest possible time. (AP II-20)

Reporting For Jury Service

Upon reporting for actual jury service, the employee shall notify the Jury
supervisor that he/she is a City employee receiving paid jury leave, and file
his/her Certificate of Jury Service (which he/she obtains from his/her
department) with him/her. Upon completion of jury service, the employee
shall obtain this form, completed by the Court, and present it to his/her
Department. (AP II-20)

Compensation for Jury Duty
All employees will receive pay during time actually lost from work due to jury

duty. Employees will be excused from night shift assignments if they are
scheduled for jury duty on the following day, or the current day. The term
regular pay means full pay for regularly scheduled work, which the employee
would have received had he/she not been called to jury service, including
shift premium or schedule differentials that would have resulted from
regularly scheduled work. All time spent on jury leave must be accounted
for. If an employee is excused from jury service on a normal workday,
he/she is expected to report for work. Employees must account to their
Departments for any time off for illness or other reasons, while on jury duty.
Upon completion of jury service, the employee shall submit to the City
Treasurer's Office the warrant for jury fees and mileage. The City
Treasurer's Office shall cash the warrant and return to the employee that
portion of the warrant covering mileage, and jury fees representing jury
service performed by the City employee on his/her regular day off. (AP II-20)

Return from Jury Duty
Upon returning from jury service, the employee shall submit the completed
"Certification of Jury Service" to his/her Department, which will account for all
regularly assigned workdays during which the employee was on jury duty.
Regularly assigned workdays on which the employee did not report for work
or for jury duty may not be paid unless covered by sick leave, vacation time,
or accumulated overtime, as they would for a normal absence. (AP II-20)

 

MATERNITY LEAVE

F.1.

Notification
When an employee is unable to continue work due to pregnancy, she should

32
F.2.

F.3.

F.4.

notify her supervisor and bring in a medical certificate. At that time, the
employee shall be placed on family medical leave (FMLA) in accordance with
Administrative Procedure II-31. The employee will use any sick leave or
vacation time she may have accrued up to that point, or be placed on aleave
without pay status. Flex benefits will be continued up to three months of
absence, while in a leave without pay status. After three months of leave
without pay, the employee shall make her premium payments to the Benefit’s
Office for any insurance she wishes to continue. (AP II-23)

Extension of Leave

After FMLA time is exhausted, the employee shall be entitled to an additional
sixteen (16) weeks of California Family Rights Act (CFRA) leave. As such, a
total leave of seven (7) months shall be allowed for maternity leave. If the
employee cannot return to work by that time, then the City may terminate her
services. However, additional time beyond the seven (7) months may be
requested by the Police Chief, with advice and counsel from the treating
physician, and may be granted at the sole discretion of the City Manager.
(AP II-23)

Return to Work

Upon return from maternity leave, "Medical Authorization for Return to Work"
should be completed by her physician and given to the supervisor. The
employee will have the option to return to her former position which she
vacated prior to maternity leave. She will retain her seniority, salary and
benefits due. (AP II-23)

Termination & Reinstatement

When an employee terminates, but is reinstated within one (1) year of date
of confinement, such reinstatement shall be within the same salary step and
without any loss in vacation time or other fringe benefits related to tenure.
(AP I-23)

LEAVE - DEATH IN FAMILY

Gl.

G.2.

Policy

An employee shall be entitled to absent himself/herself from work in the
event of the death of a member of his/her immediate family. The City
Manager may, in his discretion, authorize pay for all or any portion not to
exceed thirty (30) hours of such leave, provided a written request for such
pay is filed.

Definition - Member of Family

For purpose of this rule the term "member of the immediate family" is limited

to:

G.2.a. any relative by blood or marriage who is a member of the
employee's household, and

G.2.b. parents, step-parents, spouse, children, step-children, brother,

33
sister, grandparents, grandchildren, great grandparents, great
grandchildren, son/daughter-in-law, father/mother-in-law,
sister/brother in-law, grandparent in-laws, registered domestic
partner, or responsible guardian or person who has acted in that
capacity, regardless of place of residence.

INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT LEAVE

If an employee is compelled to be absent from duty on account of any injury or
disease which comes under the State of California Workers’ Compensation
Insurance and Safety Act, he/she shall receive compensation from the City for each
such accident as follows:

H.1. Compensation
The City will pay full salary for up to one (1) year cumulative for each injury.

After the one year period, temporary disability benefits are paid at the current
statutory rate based upon 2/3 of the employee's wages.

H.2. Leave Supplement
The employee shall not be entitled to avail himself/herself of any sick leave

or vacation benefits while he/she is receiving temporary disability indemnity
under the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Insurance and Safety
Act, except that in the discretion of the City Manager he/she may be
permitted to take as much of his/her accumulated sick leave or his/her
accumulated vacation as, when added to his/her temporary disability
indemnity, will result in the payment to him/her of not more than 100 percent
of his/her normal gross salary.

MILITARY LEAVE OF ABSENCE

An employee may be absent on paid military leave for 160 hours pursuant to
Sections 395 through 395.8 of the Military and Veterans Code of California. An
employee may be absent on unpaid military leave beyond 160 hours pursuant to
said Code. The employee shall furnish to the Department satisfactory proof of
his/her orders to report for duty and of his/her actual service pursuant to such
orders. He/she shall be returned to City service thereafter as provided in said Code.

EMERGENCY LEAVE

An employee may be excused from work without loss of pay for emergencies or
special circumstances not covered by this section. Such leave of absence may be
granted by the Police Chief, not to exceed one (1) day. For longer periods of time,
approval of the City Manager is required. Any emergency leaves of absence in
excess of fifteen (15) days shall be brought to the attention of the Civil Service
Board.

Emergency leave may be granted to employees in instances where actual or
potential damage to an employee's personal residential property or personal
belongings due to natural or civil disasters requires the employee's presence to
protect, salvage or restore his/her property to a safe condition; death in the

34
immediate family requires more than the three (3) days of death leave (not to
exceed two (2) days of emergency leave); an employee is subpoenaed to appear in
court as a witness; other emergencies or special circumstances not covered by Civil
Service Rule XV requires an employee's absence from work. (AP II-21)

GOOD FRIDAY

Any employee who desires leave from work to attend religious services on Good
Friday may be excused by the Police Chief, or the City Manager, for not to exceed
three (3) hours. This absence shall be leave without pay unless the employee
chooses to use accrued vacation or in-lieu time. Unless the services of employees
are required by public necessity or convenience, they shall be allowed to absent
themselves as herein provided.

REST PERIODS
Employees will be provided two rest periods, consisting of fifteen minutes each, one
during each half of a regular eight hour shift. Rest periods taken in the field should
conform to this policy. No rest period will be permitted within the first or last hour of
the shift unless approved by the immediate supervisor. (AP Il-1 mod.)The rest
periods for the 3/12 schedule will be mutually agreed to by the Police Chief, and the
BPOA. They shall not be less than the current level.

TIME OFF FOR MUNICIPAL, COUNTY AND STATE ELECTIONS
Time off will be provided employees who, as registered voters, do not have time to
vote before reporting for work or after finishing work. The employee shall notify the
Police Chief two (2) days prior to the election of his/her need and reason for the
time off. The employee may take as much time off as needed, whether it be at the
beginning or the end of the day, yet will only be compensated for a maximum of two
(2) hours of regular working time. (AP II-6)

TIME OFF FOR CIVIL SERVICE BOARD MEETINGS
Employees shall be granted time off without loss of pay to attend meetings of the
Civil Service Board which are scheduled during the employee's regular working
hours, in accordance with Article 1, E.3.

 

Employees may attend Civil Service meetings by notifying the Police Chief at least
twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting. Unless otherwise authorized, the
employee must return to work as soon as the business for which he/she is attending
the meeting is complete. (AP II-5)

 

LEAVE POLICIES

0.1. Return at Expiration of Leave
Upon the expiration of any leave, other than a military leave, the employee
shall be returned to the same class of position or to any position to which
he/she had been eligible to transfer at the time his/her leave of absence was
granted.

0.2 Return From Temporary Assignment
35
Upon the termination of a temporary assignment, a permanent employee
shall be returned to his/her permanent position.

0.3. Refusal of Leaves of Absence
0.3.a. No leave of absence shall be granted, and if granted it shall be
revoked, where the Civil Service Board determines, after
investigation instituted upon its own motion or upon complaint of
any resident of the City, that the request for such leave of absence
was for any of the following purposes:
0.3.4.1. Of accepting private employment,

0.3.4.2. Of enabling employment of a temporary
employee to the same position,

0.3.4.3. Because of political pressure or other
improper influence, or,

0.3.4.4. For a purpose contrary to the good of the
service.

0.3.b. The order revoking such leave of absence shall specify the
effective date thereof and the employee shall be informed of the
contents forthwith. The Police Chief may grant a leave of absence
without pay for a maximum of five (5) continuous days. An
employee desiring a leave of absence without pay for three (3)
continuous days or more shall file a written request thereof on
forms provided by the Management Services Department. The
request shall state the title of his/her position and the name of the
employing department, the beginning and ending dates of the
desired leave of absence, and a full statement of the reasons
supporting the request. The Police Chief's approval of a leave of
absence without pay for a continuous period up to a maximum of
sixteen (16) hours may be reported by noting on the time report.

UNPAID FAMILY LEAVE

Unpaid "family leave" is available to employees pursuant to the terms of AP II-31 on
Family Leave. Employees may be entitled up to 12 weeks leave in a 12 month
period for the birth, adoption or placement of a new child, or for a serious illness of
the employee or a family member. Employees who may need to take advantage of
this right should contact Employee Relations as soon as possible.

SPECIAL RESPONSE TEAM ON-DUTY WORKOUT AGREEMENT

The following agreed upon criteria was established regarding the implementation of
a procedure to allow SRT Tactical Team Members to workout on duty.

Q.1. | The workouts will begin on May 10, 2001.

 

Q.2. Only SRT Tactical Team members who complete the SRT Obstacle Course
36
Q3.

Q4.

Q5.

Q6.

Q7.

Q8.

twice yearly qualify to participate.

SRT members will be given up to three hours a week of on-duty time to
workout. Every attempt shall be made to fulfill this agreement, however,
both sides agree that in certain emergency circumstances (e.g. major
criminal investigations and/or major field emergencies, etc.) it may become
necessary to cancel the workout and deploy the personnel to the field.

The member shall begin their shift on time at roll call. The member may be
in workout clothing if the member begins their shift with the workout period.

The workout period may be at the beginning or end of the shift period. It
may consist of three one-hour periods, two-1'% hour periods, etc., based
upon an agreement between the individual and the Command Group.

At the end of the workout period, the individual shall be dressed and
prepared for deployment in the field. The member does not receive one
hour to workout and one hour to prepare for their shift.

Code 7, or seven for ten, shall not be used in conjunction with the workout
time. Each SRT member shall keep the desk advised of their whereabouts
during the workout period. When the member leaves the station for a run,
the member shall carry a pager in compliance with the BPOA MOU.

The workout time shall be documented on the Officer’s Daily Log.

37
ARTICLE IV
SUPPLEMENTAL WAGE PAYMENTS

A. 125 FLEXIBLE BENEFITS
A.1. Monthly Contribution to Plan

A.1.a.

A.1.b.

Effective July 1, 1997, the City will increase the §125 flex plan
contribution by $4.00, from $560.08 to $564.08 per month toward
each eligible member of the unit hired prior to January 1, 2008. In
exchange for this $ 4.00 increase all affected employees will
purchase and carry reliable pager or cellular phone while on duty
or on call status. If assigned a city cellular phone and the
employee does not have a pager, the employee shall maintain a
separate personal cellular phone number. Pager or cellular
numbers will be provided to the Department or Watch
Commanders upon request. Any change in pager or cellular
phone numbers will be reported immediately to the Watch
Commander. All references to survey in this MOU are suspended
for the duration of this agreement.

Employees hired on or after January 1, 2008 will receive a §125
flex plan contribution of $350 per month. All such affected
employees will purchase and carry reliable pager or cellular phone
while on duty or on call status. If assigned a city cellular phone
and the employee does not have a pager, the employee shall
maintain a separate personal cellular phone number. Pager or
cellular numbers will be provided to the Department or Watch
Commander upon request. Any change in pager or cellular
numbers will be reported immediately to the Watch Commander.

In addition to the §125 flex plan contribution as provided for in
Section A.1.a. above, the City will make contributions as shown
below towards the cost of medical premiums for eligible
employees. These contributions, in combination with the §125
contributions above, will be equal to 90% of the Family PORAC
premium. However, the following contribution will be for medical
premium cost only.

** FORMULA **

90% of Family PORAC premium - (minus) monthly §125 flex plan
contribution as stated in Section A.1.a. above = Supplement Amount

 

Following are charts that illustrate the implementation of this formula for the
time frames indicated.

Year 1- Effective December 1, 2007 for January 1, 2008 Premium

 

 

 

 

 

Type of Plan Hired Prior to 1-1-08 Hired 1-1-08 or After
Employee Only Up to $404.32 Up to $618.40
2 Party Up to $404.32 Up to $618.40
3 Party Up to $404.32 Up to $618.40

 

 

 

38

 
Year 2- Effective December 1, 2008 for January 1, 2009 Premium

 

 

 

 

 

Type of Plan Hired Prior to 1-1-08 Hired 1-1-08 or After
Employee Only Up to $471.82 Up to $685.90
2 Party Up to $471.82 Up to $685.90
3 Party Up to $471.82 Up to $685.90

 

 

 

 

A.1.c. The City will resurvey the medical insurance of the comparable
cities and re-compute the flex benefit amount to an amount equal
to the average of the maximum flex benefit contributions of the
survey cities. All references to survey in this MOU are suspended
for the duration of this agreement.

A.2. — Eligibility for 125 Flex Plan Benefits
All employees must enroll in one of the PERS Health Program plans, unless
they submit to the City both: 1) proof of health coverage, and 2) sign a health
insurance waiver. Employees who fail to complete both requirements shall
not be allowed to utilize their 125 flex plan contributions for any other eligible
plans. Employees who meet both requirements shall be allowed to utilize
their flex plan contributions for any of the eligible plans.

A.3. 125 Flex Benefit Contribution Reduction
The Burbank Police Officers' Association agrees to annually reduce the
City's 125 flex benefit contribution in order to cover the cost of the following:

One and one-half percent (1.5%) of the affected employee’s salary to be
placed in a Voluntary Employees Benefits Association (VEBA) in the name of
the affected employee.

DENTAL INSURANCE

Effective July 1, 2007 dental insurance, with comparable benefits to the Blue Cross
- 2007 Blue 100 Dental Plan, will be provided for all employees. Any changes in the
dental plan will be by mutual agreement between the BPOA and the City.

VISION INSURANCE

Effective as soon as practicable after adoption, the City will provide VSP vision
coverage (or a comparable plan) for full-time employees. Coverage is for the
employee only; additional coverage for dependents may be purchased on a
voluntary basis.

DISABILITY INSURANCE

The Association agrees to provide disability insurance coverage for allemployees.
The City agrees to pay to BPOA nineteen dollars and fifty cents ($19.50) per month
for each employee to be used for disability insurance. The City will pay all allowable
increases to the BROALTD premium rates as long as they do not exceed the City’s
LTD premium rates. The first annual payment will be due by August 1, 1995.
Subsequent payments will be paid by August 1st of each fiscal year of this
agreement. These August 1st payments will be payment for the previous fiscal
year.

39
E.

SAFETY EQUIPMENT

E.1.

E.2.

E.3.

E.4.

E.5.

New Employees
New employees shall be provided with the following equipment at City
expense:

Service weapon
Holster

Belt and ammunition
Magazine holders
Handcuffs and case
Baton

Flashlight

Ballistic Vest

Baton Holder

O.C. and Holder

Motor Duty
Affected employees assigned to motor duty shall be provided with the

following equipment at City expense:
Motor boots

Motor breeches

Plastic safety helmet

Leather gloves

Helicopter Duty
Affected employees assigned to helicopter duty shall be provided with the

following equipment at City expense:
Flight boots

Nomex fireproof coveralls or flight suit
Nomex flight jacket

Plastic aviation-type safety helmet
Nomex flight gloves

Special Issue Equipment
The difference in cost between special issue equipment and normal issue
equipment required by the City, such as shoes, shall be borne by the City.

Equipment Repair/Replacement

The City shall provide for the repair and/or replacement of the above
equipment for all affected employees regardless of hire date when the
equipment becomes unserviceable (lost, damaged, or worn out) during the
course of normal duty. Expenses for the repair or replacement of the above
equipment due to non-job-related causes shall be borne by the employee.
The decision to repair or replace equipment shall be made by the Police
Chief or his designee. Written authorization of the Police Chief or his
designee must be obtained by the employee in advance before repair or
replacement will be approved by the City.

40
F.

UNIFORMS

E.1.

F.2.

F.3.

F.4

Allowance

The City provides a Uniform Allowance in the amount of one thousand
dollars ($ 1000.00) per year for each affected employee. The allowance is
paid twice yearly (reported to PERS on a bi-weekly basis) in increments of
five hundred dollars ($ 500.00), except in cases of newly hired lateral officers
or recruit graduates or in case of emergency and with advance approval of
the Police Chief or his designee. Uniform allowance for the first year will be
advanced to all new lateral officers and recruit graduates. After the first year,
lateral officers and recruit graduates will be paid uniform allowance twice
yearly in accordance with Department policy. Employees absent from duty
for a period of six (6) months or more shall receive clothing allowance only
upon submittal of acceptable receipts.

Class B Uniforms
All BPOA employees will purchase a Class B uniform no later than sixty (60)
days after the Uniform Committee finalizes the new uniform specifications.

Damage to Uniforms

The City may provide monetary reimbursement to affected employees whose
uniforms are damaged as a result of on-duty incidents. Affected employees
shall submit appropriate reports to their immediate supervisor. The decision
to provide reimbursement shall be made by the Police Chief or his designee.
Expenses for replacement of uniforms due to non-job related causes shall be
borne by the employee. (GO 605)

Mandatory Uniform Day
The Chief will designate certain days as “Uniform Days.” On those days all

BPOA personnel shall wear their uniforms as designated by the chief as a
show of Department unity.

POST TRAUMA COUNSELING

Affected employees involved in a traumatic incident shall participate in a minimum
of one (1) post-trauma counseling session. The determination of the necessity of
this counseling shall be made by the Police Chief and Risk Management and their
determination shall be final.

ANNUAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Members of the Police bargaining unit shall be required to provide at their own
expense an annual physical examination at least as good as that provided by the
City under Class | and II physical examination at Urgent Care or its equivalent. (

RETIREE MEDICAL

4
The City shall pay BPOA forty-five thousand dollars ($45,000) per fiscal year of this
MOU for the benefit of retirees to be used for medical expenses or premiums.
These payments are to be paid by August 1. These August 1st payments will be
payment for the previous fiscal year.

Effective February 5, 2012, the City will contribute $27 per month per active
employee to the individual employee’s VEBA account. The City will continue with
the $45,000 retiree medical contribution (pursuant to Article IV Section H) for
distribution amongst retirees who retired prior to 1999. Those retirees will continue
receiving the current monthly amount and such amount (effective January 1, 2012)
shall remain unchanged. The City’s $45,000 contribution will diminish as individual
retirees cease to draw funds. At that same time, the VEBA contribution to individual
employee accounts will begin to increase. The amount of the increase will be
established at the beginning of each fiscal year based on the amount the existing
retiree medical pool (the original $45,000 Agreement) diminishes the previous fiscal
year. After all former bargaining unit members have left the retiree medical pool, the
City shall no longer make that contribution to BPOA, as all dollars will have been
diverted to the individual employee VEBA retiree medical accounts on a pro rata
basis.

AFTER HOURS EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM

Effective February 5, 2012, all affected employees shall be entitled to annual after
hours education reimbursement to a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5000.00)
at the rate of 75% of eligible fees. Eligible fees include tuition, tests (including
instructional computer software or audio tapes required for class participation) and
certain materials and fees for courses which are directly related to the employee’s
present position or promotion within the City. Costs for retained supplies such as
paper, pens, pencils, and related supplies are not eligible for reimbursement.
Educational expenses not reimbursed in the year in which they were incurred may
be applied for in the following year. In no event will the amount reimbursed to the
entire bargaining unit exceed $50,000 in any fiscal year. Such reimbursement shall
be made in accordance with Administrative Procedure II-3.

MEDICARE

Affected employees hired April 1, 1986 and after must be covered under Medicare.
Affected employees will have a deduction from their paycheck to cover the cost of
Medicare. The deduction will be based on their gross salary. The deduction and
salary requirements are determined by federal regulations. In the event that any or
all of the provisions of Medicare are no longer applicable to local government due to
legislation or judicial action(s), the benefit set forth in this section shall be declared
null and void, and the City's requirement to provide this benefit shall cease. (Federal
regulation)

CAR ALLOWANCE

The Lieutenants agree that they will use their personal cars on City business. Since
the Lieutenants are not being compensated for the use of their own cars on the job,
the City shall assume responsibility for "insurance coverage" during the periods of

42
work in which the Lieutenants are engaged in City business using their own
automobiles. In certain assignments, the Police Chief may determine that the use
of a City car is occasionally required for specific duties (such as surveillance or
pursuit).

WELFARE BENEFIT PLAN

A Welfare Benefit Plan for all BPOA employees has been established in

accordance with Section 501(c) (9) (Voluntary Employees Beneficiary

Association) of the Internal Revenue Code. The benefits to be provided by the

PLAN shall include but are not limited to payment of/or reimbursement for costs

associated with the following Post-retirement benefits: medical benefits as provided

in Section 213 (d) of the Internal Revenue Code, and Life Benefits.

M.1. AllBPOA employees shall participate in the PLAN. Contribution to the PLAN
shall be one and one-half percent (142%) of the current salary step for each
member. Members shall have the equivalent dollar value deducted from the
Flexible Benefit amount established in Article IV.A. The contribution shall be
credited to each individual’s PLAN account as delineated in the VEBA Trust
Agreement. The balance of the Flexible Benefit amount shall be available
for other authorized benefits as provided in this MOU.

M.2. The City may make additional contributions to an individual member’s PLAN
account from the following sources:

M.2.a. Annual conversion of a maximum of 30 hours or the lesser
number of hours unused at the end of each calendar year at one
half (%) cash value in compliance with current sick leave
conversion rules.

M.2.b. 60% of the total value of unused accrued sick leave computed
from the employee’s last base salary upon retirement from the
City’s retirement system, resignation when eligible for such
retirement, resignation to enter a City elective office without a
break in continuity of City service and serves in such office
employment until retired under the City’s retirement system, or
upon lay off because of the abolishment of position or employment
because of absence of funds. Sick leave earned prior to July 1,
1974, will be available for sick leave use only and will not have
monetary value at the time of retirement or death.

M.2.c. Effective February 5, 2012, the City will contribute $27 per month
per active employee to the individual employee’s VEBA account.
Future additional amounts will be placed in active employees
accounts pursuant to Section | of this article.

43
ARTICLE V
MISCELLANEOUS

PROBATIONARY PERIOD

A.1.

A.2.

A.3.

A.4.

A.5.

A.

Duration of Probationary Period

All original appointments of affected employees to positions in the Civil
Service System shall be for a normal probationary period of twelve (12)
months. All promotional appointments of affected employees to positions in
the Civil Service System shall be for a normal probationary period of six (6)
months. (BMC 2-512)

Evaluation of Probationary Employees
Evaluation of probationary employees should be completed at least by the

end of the second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh months. (AP I-35)

Extension of Probation

The probationary period shall be regarded as part of the testing process and
shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the
most effective adjustment of a new employee to his or her new position, and
for rejecting any probationary employee whose performance does not meet
the required standards of work. The Police Chief may recommend and, the
City Manager may extend an employee's normal probationary period by a
maximum of six (6) months in two (2) month increments.

Termination of Probationary Appointment

Probationary employees do not have property or vested rights to their
position with the City. A probationary employee may be discharged or
rejected at any time during the probationary period by the appointing power
without cause and without right of appeal, unless discharge was for
misconduct. In cases involving misconduct, the affected employee is entitled
to a hearing to protect his/her liberty interests. Notification of rejection in
writing shall be served on the probationer and a copy shall be filed with the
Management Services Director. (BMC 2-512 & Public Safety Officers
Procedure Bill of Rights)

Rejection and Reinstatement to Former Position

An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which
he or she has been promoted, shall be reinstated to the position from which
he or she was promoted, unless charges are filed and he/she is discharged
as provided in this Article and the Civil Service Rules. (BMC 2-512)

 

Displacement by Reinstatement of Another to His/Her Former Position

Any employee, though he or she may have attained permanent status and
who is displaced as a result of another employee's being returned to his or
her former position under paragraph A.5 above or under this subsection,
shall likewise be reinstated to his/her former position. If an employee so
affected has permanent status but no former position he or she shall be

44

 
A.7.

placed on the appropriate layoff list. Any employee who has permanent or
probationary status and who is displaced or placed on layoff in accordance
with this subsection, without fault or delinquency on his/her part, shall be
reinstated to the position from which he/she was displaced if within three (3)
years a vacancy should occur within that classification. (BMC 2-512).

One (1) Hour Response Time

The City and the Association agree that a one (1) hour response time is a
reasonable requirement. The parties agree that employees hired after July
1, 1992, may be required to reside at a location from which they can report to
work within one (1) hour. This requirement will not be imposed until six (6)
months after the affected employees have completed their initial
probationary period.

EMPLOYEE RELATIONS

B.1.

Investigation of Complaints

The Department will receive, consider, and act on all complaints made by
employees or members of the public against affected employees or practices
in accordance with Government Code Section 3300 ET. All complaints
setting out a "grievance" shall be processed in accordance with Article VII of
this Memorandum or Understanding.

LAYOFF, DISPLACEMENT AND RECALL

C.1.

C.2.

Purpose
The purpose of this section is to provide a fair and equitable basis for the

reduction of personnel when this becomes necessary in the department or in
the total work force. In such circumstances, the City will make every effort to
assist those employees who may be subject to layoff due to lack of work or
similarly compelling reason. Assistance will be made available through
utilizing existing vacancies to the fullest extent possible to relocate affected
employees. In addition, contacts will be made with other employers to refer
those employees who are unable to be placed in other City vacancies.

Seniority
C.2.a. Seniority is defined as the status attained by the length of service
in employment for the City of Burbank.

C.2.b. Seniority shall accrue based on the most recent date of Civil
Service employment. When an employee voluntarily terminates
for a stated reason, except layoff, seniority shall cease and not be
reinstated in the event of reemployment. Seniority shall be
reinstated in the case of layoffs where the employee is recalled
within three (3) years of date of layoff. Such seniority shall include
credits for prior time worked only and will not include any time
while on layoff.

C.2.¢. Seniority shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions

45
C.3.

Layoff
C.3.a.

C.3.b.

C.3.c.

C.3.d.

C.3.e.

C.3.F.

as set forth in this Article.

Layoff of employees shall be determined by length of Civil Service
with the City using the present date of hire except as otherwise
provided in this section.

Except as outlined below in sub-section C.4.d., layoffs should be
effected within the department; general displacement of
employees across departmental lines shall not be permitted.

An employee with unique skills or body of knowledge for the
performance of his or her duties, as determined by the Police
Chief with the concurrence of the City Manager, may be retained
out of his or her seniority with the City as long as such employee
has a minimum of two (2) years total employment. There shall be
a limit of ten (10) employees, Citywide, who may be designated
under this paragraph during any given layoff. Standards for
defining retention of such employees shall be limited to:
C.3.¢.(1) Special schooling provided or required by
the City for an employee following his or
her initial employment to fill a unique
position or meet a specific program need
where the schooling lasts for six (6)
months or longer.

C.3.c.(2) Special experience provided or required
by the City for a unique position or special
program need where the experience
requires at least one (1) year of training
on the job.

C.3.c.(3) Possession of a unique craft, artistic
endeavor or professional level skill not
available in other City employees.

An employee who has been previously appointed to provisional
status in a higher classification at time of layoff considerations
shall revert back to his or her permanent classification for
purposes of determining his or her layoff.

An employee in a probationary status as a result of a promotion
within the Civil Service System cannot displace a permanent
employee in the same classification at time of layoff.

An employee may voluntarily request layoff in lieu of reassignment
should his or her seniority be sufficient to be retained on the

46
C.3.g.

payroll.

An employee on layoff shall be recalled to his or her previous
classification based on the minimum qualification requirements,
which existed at the time of his or her layoff.

C.4. Displacement

C.4.a.

C.4.b.

C.4.c.

C.4.d.

C.4.e.

Except as stated in sub-section C.4.d., an employee whose
position has been eliminated shall be permitted to transfer to a
lower rank within the department. Date of appointment to
permanent rank in their present classification shall govern who
remains or who is displaced to the next lower rank. A higher
ranking officer may only displace a lower ranking officer where the
former employee has an earlier date of rank at the lower rank than
the latter employee. On taking a lower classification, the
employee shall be paid at the highest rate of the lower
classification which is not greater than the rate earned prior to the
displacement.

In such instances as outlined in sub-section C.4.a. immediately
preceding, employees must meet the minimum qualifications of
the newly assigned position.

Additionally, an employee must be medically fit to perform the
duties of the newly assigned position.

An employee displaced from a job because the position has been

deleted or replaced by a higher classified employee with more

seniority, shall be eligible to transfer to the same or lower title in

another department, where the employee last served prior to his

or her current assignment, if:

C.4.d.(1) he or she served in that title and in that department
where a vacancy or employee with lesser seniority
exists, and

C.4.d.(2) the department manager of the department to which the
transfer is to be made approves such transfer if said
department is any of the following: City Council, City
Manager, City Attorney, or Management Services
Department.

An employee who is reduced in classification shall be returned to
his or her previous higher classification and department when a
vacancy occurs within a three (3) year period of the reduction.
Such return will not require qualifying through testing or placement
on an employment list. Where the return involves returning to
probationary status within six (6) months following demotion, the

47
C.5.

C.4.F.

C.4.g.

C.4.h.

C.4.i.

C.4j.

time spent in probationary status before the demotion occurred
shall be applied toward permanent status.

An employee in a provisional status in a higher classification shall
be returned to his or her permanent classification prior to layoff in
order to determine his or her availability for displacement or
reassignment.

Where three (3) or more employees exist in a classification within
a department, the department shall not be required to lose more
than fifty (50) percent of its employees in any given classification
through displacement by higher classified, longer seniority
employees.

An employee with greater seniority than other employees in the
same classification and department may request voluntary transfer
or demotion to another position under the provisions of Civil
Service Rule IX, § 1.B.

An employee designated by the City as a manager may or may
not be reduced to a lower classification which would result in the
employee having to work for another employee whom he or she
formerly supervised when in a management position. ( XIll)

As used in this section, “higher classification" or similar phrases
are synonymous and interchangeable.

Procedure

C.5.a.

C.5.c.

C.5.d.

C.5.e.

Departments anticipating a possible reduction in staff shall notify
the City Manager and the Management Services Director as soon
as possible in order for appropriate action to be taken. C.5.b.

An immediate determination should be
made as to which positions will be involved and the number of
employees to be affected.

The Management Services Director shall determine what openings
exist in the same and other departments so that affected
employees may be considered for transfer prior to layoff.

Employees to be affected by a layoff will be given written notice
thirty (30) calendar days in advance.

Efforts will begin immediately to relocate affected employees into
comparable positions of responsibility and pay or lower rated
positions where practicable as outlined in Section C.4. First
priority for filling open positions will be given to affected employees
as opposed to other employees or job applicants under

48
C.6.

Recall

 

consideration.

The Management Services Director, upon approval by the City Manager, will
establish and make available to affected employees a Recall List showing all
employees on demotion or layoff status along with the date of appointment.
In utilizing the list, the following shall apply:

C.6.a.

C.6.b.

C.6.c.

C.6.d.

C.6.e.

C.6.F.

Persons on the Recall List shall have absolute rights over regular
employment, transfer or reinstatement lists.

Names shall be listed in the inverse order of their layoff or
demotion according to seniority. An employee shall be recalled to
his or her last classification or lower classified position in any
department of the City should he or she be the most senior on the
recall list or lists for the positions available. Should a lower
classified position first become available and no recall list exists
for such position, then the most senior employee on the recall list
for the next higher classified position shall be recalled in
accordance with sub-section C.6.c. of this Article.

Employees on the Recall List will hold reinstatement rights for a
period of three (3) years from date of layoff and be considered for
openings as they arise if they are determined to be medically fit.

Upon reinstatement, the employee will receive his or her old salary
step or, if in a lower classification, the step nearest to, but not
exceeding the old classification. In addition, if recalled within three
(3) years of layoff, previous seniority will be reinstated less any
time spent on layoff.

If an employee is recalled from layoff and had been (1) serving in
a probationary status and (2) never in a permanent status in the
Civil Service system, then his or her past seniority shall not be
reinstated for purposes of satisfying the probationary period
unless recalled to the former position within six (6) months
following the layoff.

An employee on layoff status shall be responsible for keeping the
City's Management Services Department aware of the most
current address and telephone number for purposes of contact at
time of recall. Absences from the home for over two (2) weeks
should also be reported if the employee on layoff desires to
safeguard against being passed over should notice of recall be
given. On notifying employees of recall, the City of Burbank shall
send notice by certified mail and the employee shall have fourteen
(14) calendar days to respond from receipt of such notice. Where
the employee fails to respond, the City shall contact the next most

49
C.7.

senior employee on the Recall List, and the same procedures
shall apply. Failure of an employee to respond to notices sent as a
result of three (3) opportunities during the permitted recall period
shall cause removal of his or her name from the said list. In
addition, employees must be available to return to work within two
(2) weeks of receiving the above stated notification.

Benefit Considerations

C.7.a.

C.7.b.

C.7.c.

C.7.d.

For layoffs under thirty (30) days, all benefits will be retained
except for pro rata reduction in the retirement plan and reduction
of seniority for days on layoff.

For layoffs of thirty (30) days up to three (3) years, there is no
accrual of seniority, vacation, sick leave or other benefits for the
period of the layoff. Sick leave and vacation benefits not
previously paid the employee at the time of layoff shall be paid at
the end of the first month of layoff unless at the time of layoff, an
employee elects to leave all sick leave and vacation credits on
account and have such credits reinstated upon recall. If the
employee elects to leave all sick leave and vacation credits on
accounts, such employee, or his or her heirs, representatives or
assigns, may, at any time within three (3) years after the effective
date of such employee's layoff, demand payment for such benefits
in such sum or sums as would otherwise have been payable at
time of layoff, without interest. The City shall have up to thirty (30)
days to make such payment after time of demand. Failure to
demand such payment during such three (3) year period and one
(1) year thereafter shall constitute a waiver thereof. Payments of
the cash value of accrued sick leave and vacation credits shall
terminate all further obligations by the City to reinstate such past
credits should the employee be returned to work.

 

For layoffs of three (3) years or more, recall privileges cease at
three (3) years.

Any employee recalled following a layoff shall be entitled to
receive at least the same level of benefits which he or she was
receiving at the time the layoff occurred, provided, however, any
reduction or increase in benefits for all employees in the recalled
employee's represented group during the layoff period shall apply
to the recalled employee.

NEPOTISM POLICY

Statement

The City of Burbank, for business reasons of supervision, safety, security, or morale
may refuse to place a new hire or promotional candidate under the direct

D.1.

50
supervision of a relative.

D.2.

D.3.

D.1.a.

The City may refuse to place a new hire or promotional candidate
in the same department, division or facility if the situation may
result in potential conflicts of interest or other hazards greater for

relatives than for other persons.

If co-employees marry or fellow employees become relatives by
marriage as a result of the marriage of others, either inside or
outside the organization, the City shall make reasonable efforts to
assign job duties so as to minimize problems of supervision,

safety, security, or morale.

Definitions

D.2.a.

D.2.b.

Relatives

For the purpose of this policy, the term “relative” includes wife,
husband, son, daughter, mother, father, brother, half-brother,
brother-in-law, sister, half-sister, sister-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt, uncle
niece, nephew, grandchild, stepparent, stepchild, or any other
relative living in the same household.

Direct Supervisor
This is the person that assigns, prioritizes and evaluates the
employee’s work.

Procedures
In order to carry out this policy, the following procedures are established:

D.3.a.

D.3.b.

D.3.c.

Management Services Department will ascertain if new hires
or promotional candidates are related to current employees in
the City.

Failure to disclose such relationship will result in
disqualification from consideration for employment or
promotion.

Management Services Department will notify the appointing

department of such relationships and ask the department

manager to:

D.3.c.(1) Make a determination that no supervision, safety,
security or morale issues will arise out of the hiring.

D.3.c.(2) Identify and agree to workable accommodations to
allow the hire, while avoiding or mitigating the
potential negative impacts on supervision, safety,
security, or morale.

D.3.c.(3) Management Services Department, with the

51
D.4.

E.1.

E.2.

E.3.

oversight of the City Attorney’s Office, will review the
response of the department manager and make a
recommendation to the City Manager.

D.3.c.(4) In the event the department and Management Services
Department disagree, the City Manager’s Office will
make the final decision.

Promotional Candidate Appeal Process
D.4.a. If a promotional candidate is rejected on the basis of this policy, they
shall have the right to appeal the decision through an Administrative
Appeal Procedure. The Administrative Appeal Procedure is as follows:
D.4.a.(1)The candidate, upon notification of rejection, may, within
three (3) working days, file a written appeal of the decision
with the Management Services Director. The written
submission must include the specific basis for the appeal
under the policy.

D.4.a.(2)The Management Services Director will review the matter and
respond to the appellant within five (5) working days of receipt
of the appeal.

D.4.a.(3)If the Management Services Director denies the appeal, the
candidate may, within three (3) working days, appeal the
decision to the City Manager or his/her designee.

D.4.a.(4)The City Manager or his/her designee will review the matter
and respond to the appellant within five (5) working days. The
decision of the City Manager or his/her designee is final.

WELLNESS PROGRAM AND ANNUAL OR OBSTACLE COURSE
COMPLETION

Annual Fitness for Duty (Physical Agilit

As acondition of employment, unit members (employees) hired after January 1,
2001, shall complete the most current new hire obstacle course once a year prior
to June of each year. A unit member (employee) who takes and successfully
completes the SRT obstacle course during the year will not need to take the
regular annual obstacle course for that year.

Hold Obstacle Course In Abeyance
In exchange for BPOA’s agreement to the Wellness Program described in this

section E, the City agrees to temporarily suspend administration of the current
obstacle course and hold it in abeyance effective January 1, 2012.

Notice And Opportunity To Bargain Impacts Of Reinstating A Fitness For Duty Or
An Obstacle Course

52
E.4.

The City reserves the right to make the decision to revise and reinstate a
practical physical fitness for duty test or an obstacle course during the term of this
Agreement. Before the City implements its decision to reinstate practical physical
fitness for duty test or an obstacle course, however, the City shall give the BPOA
notice and opportunity to negotiate in accordance with law. If an obstacle course
is reinstated, the Wellness Program shall cease to be mandatory for any unit
members.

Wellness program
Bargaining unit members (employees) hired after January 1, 2001 shall

participate in the Wellness Program. (While the details of the program still need
to be addressed as we are uncertain if Santa Ana College can take on our Police
Officers into the program due to funding problems, the City envisions a program
very similar to what the City’s Fire Fighters participate in.)

53
ARTICLE VI
DISCIPLINARY ACTION

STATEMENT/LIMITATIONS

Employees of the City with permanent civil service status shall be assured of fair
and consistent treatment and no arbitrary actions will be taken for disciplinary time
off or termination of any employee without just cause and due process.

Any person holding a position or employment in the Civil Service System shall be
subject to suspension without pay by the appointing power, but such suspensions
shall not exceed a total of ninety (90) days in any fiscal year; provided, however,
any person suspended without pay shall have the right of appeal in the manner
provided by this Article. (BMC 2-514)

Neither the provisions of this section nor this Article shall apply to reductions in pay
which are part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages as an economy
measure or as part of a general curtailment program. (BMC 2-515)

REASONS FOR SUSPENSION, DEMOTION, OR DISMISSAL
Suspension, demotion, or dismissal of an employee may be accomplished for any
one or more of the following reasons:

B.1. Violation of any official regulation or order or failure to obey any
proper direction made and given by a superior, or failure to comply
with any condition of employment or to maintain any necessary
qualification in the course of municipal employment;

B.2. Neglect of duty;

B.3. Unjustified failure or refusal to properly perform the duties
assigned;

B.4. Carelessness in the discharge of assigned duties;

B.5. Conduct of a disgraceful or scandalous nature;

B.6. Malfeasance in office or employment;

B.7. Conviction or forfeiture of bail for any job-related misdemeanor

involving moral turpitude, or any felony;

B.8. Having one's privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the public
highway in the State of California suspended or revoked by the
Department of Motor Vehicles where a driver's license is required
for the performance of one's job;

B.9. One (1) or more days unauthorized absence;

54
B.10.

B.11.

B.12.

B.13.
B.14.

B.15.

B.16.
B.17.

B.18.

B.19.

B.20.

B.21.

B.22.

B.23.

B.24.

B.25.

B.26.

Repeated tardiness;

Inability to establish and maintain proper working relationships
with fellow officers or employees;

Reporting for duty, or being on duty, under the influence of
alcohol, drugs or any combination thereof; or rendering oneself
unfit to perform fully one's duties for reasons attributable to, or
produced by, indulgence in alcohol, drugs, or any combination
thereof;

Absence from the job during the working hours without permission;
Unauthorized use of City tools, equipment or property;

Abuse or negligence in the care or operation of City tools,
equipment or property;

Use of sick leave for unauthorized purposes;
Conduct unbecoming a public officer or employee;

Receiving gratuities or any personal favor in exchange for the
performance or for the non-performance of an assigned duty;

Discussion of confidential City business or information with
unauthorized persons;

Willful refusal to respond to an official call in an emergency;

Willfully making any false statements, certificates, or reports or in
any manner committing or attempting fraud;

Violation of administrative rules and regulations;
Illegal possession or use of drugs or narcotics;

Incompetency or inefficiency in the performance of required
duties;

Discrimination against, or harassment of, co-workers or the public
based on race, religion, national origin, sex, age, handicap, or
other unlawful consideration. ( Xl)

Consuming alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs during work hours,
including lunch and rest periods.

55
ORAL OR WRITTEN REPRIMAND PROCEDURES/APPEALS

C.1. Written reprimands shall be preceded by a written or oral notice to the
employee of the time, date and reasons for an informal hearing two (2)
calendar days prior to the hearing. This notice shall include specific
and factual charges as enumerated in § B of this Article.

C.2. All pre-disciplinary meetings relating to oral or written reprimands shall
be held before the division commander (Police Captain or Police
Administrator) who proposed the discipline. Testimony of witnesses
shall not be allowed at pre-disciplinary meetings.

C.3. When the oral or written reprimand is upheld by a division commander,
any person may appeal to the Office of the Chief of Police (Chief or
Deputy Chief). If the Deputy Chief proposes the discipline and
conducts the pre-disciplinary meeting, the appeal shall be to the Chief
of Police. The decision of the Office of the Chief of Police is final and
there shall be no further administrative appeals for an oral or written
reprimand. (Side letter 2/3/07)

C.4. The BPOA and members represented by the BPOA shall have no right
to appeal oral or written reprimands to either arbitration or the Civil
Service Board.

MINOR DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES/APPEALS

D.1. Minor discipline shall be all discipline administered where the
punishment imposed is a suspension from work for not more than
three (3) work periods or equivalent discipline.

D.2. Minor discipline shall be preceded by a written or oral notice to the
employee of the time, date and reasons for an informal hearing
two (2) calendar days prior to the hearing. This notice shall
include specific and factual charges as enumerated in Section B
of this Article.

D.3. All pre-disciplinary meetings shall be held before the division
commander (Police Captain or Police Administrator) who
proposed the discipline. Testimony of witnesses shall not be
allowed at pre-disciplinary meetings for minor disciplines. (Side
letter 2/3/07)

D.4. | The division commander shall document what occurs at the meeting
including the problem, significant facts and the results. A copy will
be given to the affected employee, as well as placed in the
employee's personnel file, except that no employee shall have
any comment adverse to his/her interest entered in his/her
personnel file, or any other file used for any personnel purposes
by his/her employer, without the affected employee having first

56
D.5.

D.6.

D.7

D.8

D.9

D.10

D.11

D.12.

read and signed the instrument containing the adverse comment
indicating he/she is aware of such comment, except that such
entry may be made if after reading such instrument the affected
employee refuses to sign it. Should an employee refuse to sign,
the fact shall be noted on that document, and signed or initialed by
the officer making the notation.

If, during the course of the hearing, it becomes apparent that more
than minor discipline is in order, the division commander shall
terminate the hearing and then proceed in accordance with the
procedure set forth below for major discipline. The employee will
be informed as to why the hearing is being terminated.

The division commander may decide on the facts and render a
decision at the immediate conclusion of the hearing or advise the
employee in writing within four (4) calendar days.

When the minor discipline is upheld by a division commander, any
person may select an arbitrator to hear their appeal pursuant to
the process provided for in Section E.7. of this Article. The
decision of the arbitrator shall be solely advisory in nature and
may be verbal or in writing. The arbitrator in these proceedings
shall have the same authority and jurisdiction as provided in
Section E.10. of this Article.

The appeal hearing and disposition of the appeal shall be
informal, the object being to settle the appeal promptly by the
parties. The parties shall have the right to offer evidence by
witnesses at the hearing subject to the discretion of the arbitrator.

The arbitrator may modify the disciplinary action, but in no event
shall have the authority to increase the disciplinary action imposed
to be greater than a four day suspension.

The arbitrator's decision shall be rendered within five (5) working
days of after the hearing. Provided, however, the parties may
mutually agree to extend the time in which the judgment may be
rendered. The arbitrator's decision shall be forwarded to the City
Manager, who shall review it and make the final decision within
fifteen (15) working days of its receipt.

The arbitrator’s authority shall be limited to deciding the issues
submitted by the parties. The arbitrator shall have no jurisdiction
or authority to add to, delete from, or modify any written
provisions of any Memorandum of Understanding.

All costs for the service of the arbitrator, including but not limited

57
to, per diem expenses, travel and subsistence expenses, a
transcript, and court reporter (if there is one) will be borne
equally by the City and the BPOA.

MAJOR DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES/APPEALS

 

E.1.

E.2..

E.3.

E.4.

E.5.

E.6.

E. 7.

Major discipline shall be all discipline administered where the
punishment imposed may result in suspension without pay of
more than three (3) days or in the dismissal or demotion of the
employee.

Major discipline shall be preceded by a notice served on the
employee ten (10) calendar days prior to a pre-disciplinary
hearing. The notice shall contain the time, date and place of the
hearing and shall also contain a brief statement of all charges
against the employee. An earlier date may be established if the
employee agrees, or with department approval, the date may be
extended by five (5) calendar days.

In major disciplinary matters the statement of charges shall be
specific and factual and enumerate violations of Section B of this
Article.

In major disciplinary matters, the employee’s rights include
presenting testimony and evidence, inspection of City evidence,
and representation by BPOA or an attorney. A full trial type
evidentiary hearing is not required in pre-disciplinary hearings.

The Police Chief, or his designee, shall preside at major
disciplinary hearings. The Police Chief, or his designee, shall
document the significant occurrences at the hearing including
facts, violations, brief summary of key testimony, attendees, etc.
A copy will be placed in the employee’s personnel file and the
employee will be given a copy. The person conducting the
hearing may decide on the facts and render a decision at the
immediate conclusion of the hearing or advise the employee in
writing within four (4) calendar days.

When a major discipline is upheld by the Police Chief or his
designee, the BPOA may file a written request for arbitration to the
Management Services Director within fifteen (15) working days
after the employee receives the final notice. In no event may an
employee appeal a discipline individually.

The BPOA and the Management Services Director shall attempt to
mutually agree upon an arbitrator. If they cannot agree, they shall
strike names from the panel of arbitrators below until one name
remains. [NOTE: The parties reserve the right to incorporate

58
additional, mutually agreed upon, arbitrators to this panel at any
time.] The final arbitrator's name remaining on the list shall
arbitrate the dispute. The order of striking shall be determined by
acoin toss. The arbitrator shall be notified of his or her selection
by a joint letter from the parties requesting that he or she set a
time and place for the hearing, subject to the availability of the City
and Union representatives.
** PANEL OF ARBITRATORS **

Sara Adler Michael Prihar William Dorsey
Norman Brand Joe Gentile Walter Daugherty
Charles Askin Robert Austin Mark Burstein
Buddy Cohn Howard Block Philip Tamoush

Additional Arbitrators TBD

E.8.

E.9.

E.10.

Ten (10) days prior to the hearing by an arbitrator, representatives of
the parties shall meet and prepare a submission statement setting
forth the issues to be submitted to the arbitrator and exchange
evidentiary documents. In the event the parties cannot jointly agree
on a submission statement then at the hearing each party shall
present to the arbitrator its own submission statement in which case
the arbitrator shall determine the issues to be resolved.

If there is a dispute between the parties as to the question of whether
an issue can be arbitrated, that question shall be submitted separately
to the arbitrator for resolution prior to addressing the merits of the
grievance.

The arbitrator shall have all the authority provided in California Code
of Civil Procedure Sections 1282 to 1284.3, except Section 1283.05
shall not apply to any arbitration held pursuant to this Memorandum of
Understanding. The arbitrator shall have jurisdiction over all aspects
of the arbitration including evidentiary rulings and discovery requests.
Any party aggrieved by any evidentiary rulings or discovery orders
may raise those issues as part of any appeal of the arbitrator's final
decision after the arbitration via the administrative writ proceeding
before the Superior Court.

. Discovery shall be conducted between the parties in an informal

way as provided below:

E.11.a.The party seeking information requests must do so in writing to
the other party’s representative designated to handle and
expedite such requests.

E.11.b.A party who receives an information request shall respond
within five (5) working days by supplying the information
requested or requesting additional time to provide the

59
information, the need for more specificity concerning the
request, or its decision not to comply with the request. If a
party refuses any request for information, specific reasons for
the refusal shall be stated.

E.11.c.If a party requires more specifics; the requesting party shall
provide it in writing within three (3) working days. Following the
receipt of the more specified request the receiving party shall:
i) provide the information sought by the requesting party within
five (5) working days, or
ii) inform the requesting party of its decision not to provide the
information sought within five (5) working days.

E.11.d.It is understood that a party is under no obligation to provide
information that may be protected by the Federal or State
Constitution or Federal or State statutes. In the event that
information is sought which might involve the release of
“confidential” information (home address, medical condition,
etc.) a party may offer to provide the information sought in
redacted form.

E.11.e.If the receiving party believes that a request is unduly
burdensome or does not exist in the form sought by the
requesting party it shall inform the requesting party of such
during the initial five (5) day period after receiving the request
for information and discuss the problem with the requesting
party’s designated representative. The requesting party may
agree to accept the information sought in the form in which the
other has it, or press its original claim.

E.11.f.If the parties are unable to agree on what information (if any) is
to be provided and/or in what form within the required period,
the requesting party shall request the assistance of the
arbitrator to obtain the information sought. The arbitrator may
issue a subpoena duces tecum, to compel release of the
information sought. Any party receiving a subpoena duces
tecum issued by the arbitrator shall provide the requesting
party with the information required by subpoena within five (5)
days of the receipt of the subpoena or shall seek court review
within that time. No arbitration shall proceed to hearing until
such time as the receiving party has produced the information
sought by the requesting party or it obtains an order to the
effect that the requesting party is not entitled to the information
it has sought.

E.12. The decision of an arbitrator resulting from any arbitration of
grievances hereunder shall not add to, subtract from, or otherwise

60
E.13.

E.14.

modify the terms and conditions of this Memorandum of
Understanding. The decision of the arbitrator shall be solely advisory
in nature. The arbitrator's written award shall be submitted within
thirty (30) calendar days from the last day of the hearing. The
arbitrator's decision shall be forwarded to the City Manager, who shall
review the award and make the final decision within thirty (30) working
days of its receipt.

Employee called as witnesses during the course of the arbitration
hearing shall be released for that purpose without loss of
compensation or benefits. Witnesses will be subject to subpoena
issued by the arbitrator, at the request of either the BPOA or the City,
and enforceable by the City.

The fee and expenses of the arbitrator and the cost of a written
transcript, including the cost of the court reporter, shall be borne
equally by the parties.

E.15. Any permanent employee in the Civil Service System who has been

F. MEDIATION

demoted, dismissed or reduced in pay, shall be subject to the
disciplinary procedures set forth in this Article and shall not be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Civil Service Board. The procedures in this
Article are exclusive and in no event shall the State Personal
Employee Relations Board (PERB) have any jurisdiction regarding
disciplinary actions by the City. Appeals of final decisions by the City
Manager shall be made pursuant to the Code of Civil Procedure
Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.

Prior to requesting a post disciplinary hearing, BPOA or City may request
that a discipline be submitted to mediation subject to the provisions of
Article Vil Section D. of this MOU.

G. EMERGENCY DISCIPLINARY SITUATIONS

Gl.

G.2.

G.3.

Emergency disciplinary situations exist when the continuation on
the job by the employee shall constitute an immediate adverse
effect on the function of the department.

In such situations the employee may be placed upon suspension
with pay for a period of time no more than ten (10) calendar days
from the employee's receipt of notice of the hearing, unless
otherwise approved by the City Manager.

At the discretion of the Police Chief, the employee may not be
permitted to come to his/her regular place of employment or may
be assigned a task where the department's function is not
jeopardized by his/her presence.

61
ARTICLE VII
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

STATEMENTI/LIMITATIONS

The purpose of the grievance procedure is to establish channels of
communications between employees, supervisors, and management. The
City encourages any employee having a grievance related to working
conditions to informally discuss the matter with his or her immediate
supervisor without undue delay. The informal discussion need not be
reduced to writing and no records need be kept. The purpose of informal
discussion is to settle grievances fairly and as quickly as possible. The
employee may be represented by himself or herself, by the BPOA, or by
counsel.

No grievance shall be considered and/or processed unless it is submitted
within fifteen (15) working days after the employee concerned has become
aware or should have become aware, through the use of reasonable
diligence, of the occurrence of the event giving rise to the alleged grievance.
If a grievance is not presented within the time limits set forth above, it shall
be considered waived. If a grievance is not appealed to the next step within
the specified time limit or any mutually agreed extension thereof, it shall be
considered settled on the basis of the Department’s last answer. If the
Department does not answer a grievance or an appeal thereof within the
specified time limits, the Union and/or the employee may elect to treat the
grievance as denied at that step and immediately appeal to the next step of
the grievance procedure. The time limit(s) in each step may be extended by
mutual written agreement of the City and the Union representative and/or the
employee involved in each step. The term working days as used in this
Article shall mean the days Mondays through Fridays inclusive and excludes
Saturdays, Sundays, holidays and/or other days on which City Hall is closed.

DEFINITIONS

B.1. Grievance - The term "grievance" shall be defined as a "dispute or
difference of opinion raised by an employee, a group of
employees (with respect to a single common issue), or the BPOA
covered by this Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) involving
the meaning, interpretation or application of the provisions of this
MOU." An impasse in meeting and conferring can not be grieved.

B..2. Immediate Supervisor - Immediate supervisor is defined as the
employee's closest superior whose position has been designated
as Supervisory or Management by the City.

PROCEDURE

C.1. Step One
If an employee feels that he/she has a grievance, then he or she

shall, within ten (10) working days of the incident or condition
62
C.2.

C.3.

C.4.

giving rise to the grievance or within ten (10) working days of the
time when he or she should have reasonably been aware of the
grievance, contact his or her immediate supervisor to informally
discuss the matter. The Supervisor should thoroughly discuss the
grievance with the employee, endeavoring to reach a mutual
understanding on the matter. If employee's grievance concerns
the immediate supervisor and cannot be resolved through informal
discussion, the employee may request an informal meeting with
the next level of supervision and his/her immediate supervisor.
The immediate supervisor shall respond verbally within five (5)
working days.

Step Two

If an employee's grievance cannot be satisfactorily resolved
through informal discussion with his/her immediate supervisor, the
employee may submit to the division commander within ten (10)
working days of the informal response a written statement which
shall set forth in detail: the exact incident or condition as to which
the grievance is made and the remedy requested by the
employee. Copies of grievances at this step must be
simultaneously submitted to the Management Services Director.
The division commander shall have five (5) working days to meet
with the employee. The division commander shall inform the
employee and the BPOA in writing of his or her decision within five
(5) working days after the meeting. The division commander shall
include findings relating to the incident or condition as to which the
inquiry is made and the action taken or to be taken or the reasons
for the refusal to act.

Step Three
If the grievance cannot be satisfactorily resolved at the second

step, the employee may submit a written request to the Police
Chief within ten (10) working days of the response from the
division commander. At this level, the employee through the
BPOA may, at time of submittal of the grievance revise the written
grievance to include additional conditions and/or additional
requests, as long as such corrections do not substantially cause
the City to be faced with a new grievance. The Police Chief or his
or her designee will meet with the employee within five (5) working
days of the request. The Police Chief or designee will inform the
employee and the BPOA in writing of his or her decision within five
(5) working days of the meeting.

Waiver of Steps by Mutual Assent

Any of the preceding steps may be waived by mutual assent, in
writing, of the Department, the Management Services Director and
the aggrieved employee or his or her representative.

63
C.5. Step Four
If the grievance cannot be successfully resolved at the third step,

it may be forwarded in writing to the Management Services
Department within fifteen (15) days of the Police Chiefs response
to schedule the matter for mediation or an arbitration hearing.
The grievance provisions and the Civil Service Appeals
procedure are mutually exclusive and no relief shall be available
under the Civil Service Appeals process on matters covered by
this Article with the exception of matters related to discrimination
and sexual harassment.

MEDIATION

D.1.

D.2.

D.3.

D.4.

Initiation of Mediation

Prior to requesting arbitration for a grievance, the BPOA or the City may
request that the grievance be submitted to mediation, pursuant to the
provisions of this section of the MOU. If both the BPOA and the City agree,
the matter may be submitted to mediation.

Appointment of Mediator

The parties shall request a State mediator to resolve the issue. Prior to
accepting an appointment, the prospective mediator shall disclose any
circumstance likely to create a presumption of bias or prevent a prompt
meeting with the parties. The mediator shall fix the date and the time of each
mediation session. The mediation shall be held in the City of Burbank.

Identification of Matters in Dispute
At least ten (10) days prior to the first scheduled mediation session, each

party shall provide the mediator with a brief memorandum setting forth its
position with regard to the issues that need to be resolved. At the discretion
of the mediator, the parties may mutually exchange such memoranda. At the
first session, the parties will be expected to produce all information
reasonably required for the mediator to understand the issues presented.
The mediator may require any party to supplement such information.

Authority of Mediator

The mediator does not have the authority to impose a settlement on the
parties but will attempt to help them reach a satisfactory resolution of their
dispute. The mediator shall, however, interpret and apply the rules of this
Article insofar as they relate to the mediator's duties and responsibilities.
The mediator is authorized to conduct joint and separate meetings with the
parties and to make oral and written recommendations for settlement.
Whenever necessary, the mediator may also obtain expert advice
concerning technical aspects of the dispute, provided that the parties agree
and assume the expenses of obtaining such advice. Arrangements for
obtaining such advice shall be made by the mediator or the parties, as the
mediator shall determine. The mediator is authorized to end the mediation
whenever, in the judgment of the mediator, further efforts at mediation would

64
D.5.

D.6.

D.7.

D.8.

D.9.

not contribute to a resolution of the dispute between the parties.

Confidentiality

Mediation sessions are private. The parties and their representatives may
attend mediation sessions. Other persons may attend only with the
permission of the parties and with the consent of the mediator. The mediator
shall not divulge confidential information disclosed to a mediator by the
parties or by witnesses in the course of the mediation. All records, reports, or
other documents received by a mediator while serving in that capacity shall
be confidential, and shall not be subject to discovery or release, except as
provided for in Section D.6. of this Article. The mediator shall not be
compelled to divulge such records or to testify in regard to the mediation in
any adversary proceeding or judicial forum. Matters discussed in mediation
shall be considered confidential and privileged to the maximum extent of
California law. The parties shall maintain the confidentiality of the mediation
and shall not rely on or introduce as evidence in any arbitral, judicial, or other
proceeding:

D.5.a.Views expressed or suggestions made by another party with respect to

a possible settlement of the dispute;

D.5.b. Admissions made by another party in the course of the mediation
proceedings;

D.5.c. Proposals made or views expressed by the mediator; or

D.5.d. The fact that another party had or had not indicated willingness to
accept a proposal for settlement made by the mediator.

Written Agreement

Awritten agreement reached by the parties in the course of the mediation is
admissible in any subsequent proceeding to enforce its terms. However,
there shall be no stenographic record of the mediation process.

Termination of Mediation
The mediation shall be terminated:
D.7.a. By the execution of a settlement agreement by the parties;

D.7.b. By a written declaration of the mediator to the effect that
further efforts at mediation are no longer worthwhile; or

D.7.c. By a written declaration of a party or parties to the effect that t
the mediation proceedings are terminated.

Exclusion of Liability

The mediator is not a necessary party in judicial proceedings relating to the
mediation. The mediator shall not be liable to any party for any act or
omission in connection with any mediation conducted under these rules.

Expenses
The party producing any witness shall pay that witness' expenses. All other

65
expenses of the mediation (including required traveling and other expenses
of the mediator and the cost of any proofs or expert advice produced at the
direct request of the mediator) shall be borne equally by the parties unless
they agree otherwise.

E. ARBITRATION

E.1.a.

E.1.c.

The BPOA and the Management Services Director shall attempt to mutually
agree upon an arbitrator. If they cannot agree, they shall strike names from
the panel of arbitrators below until one name remains. [NOTE: The parties
reserve the right to incorporate additional, mutually agreed upon, arbitrators
to this panel at any time.] The final arbitrator's name remaining on the list
shall arbitrate the dispute. The order of striking shall be determined by a
coin toss. The arbitrator shall be notified of his or her selection by a joint
letter from the parties requesting that he or she set a time and place for the
hearing, subject to the availability of the City and Union representatives.

** PANEL OF ARBITRATORS **

Sara Adler Michael Prihar William Dorsey
Norman Brand Joe Gentile Walter Daugherty
Charles Askin Robert Austin Mark Burstein
Buddy Cohn Howard Block Philip Tamoush

Additional Arbitrators TBD

. Ten (10) days prior to the hearing by an arbitrator, representatives of the

parties shall meet and prepare a submission statement setting forth the
issues to be submitted to the arbitrator and exchange evidentiary documents.
In the event the parties cannot jointly agree on a submission statement then
at the hearing each party shall present to the arbitrator its own submission
statement in which case the arbitrator shall determine the issues to be
resolved.

If there is a dispute between the parties as to the question of whether an
issue can be arbitrated, that question shall be submitted separately to the
arbitrator for resolution prior to addressing the merits of the grievance.

E.1.d. The arbitrator shall have all the authority provided in California Code of

E.1.e.

Civil Procedure Sections 1282 to 1284.3, except Section 1283.05 shall not
apply to any arbitration held pursuant to this Memorandum of Understanding.
The arbitrator shall have jurisdiction over all aspects of the arbitration
including evidentiary rulings and discovery requests. Any party aggrieved by
any evidentiary rulings or discovery orders may raise those issues as part of
any appeal of the arbitrator’s final decision after the arbitration via the
administrative writ proceeding before the Superior Court.

Discovery shall be conducted between the parties in an informal way as
provided below:

66
E.1.e.(1). The party seeking information requests must do so in writing to the
other party’s representative designated to handle and expedite such
requests.

E.1.e.(2).A party who receives an information request shall respond within
five (5) working days by supplying the information requested or
requesting additional time to provide the information, the need for more
specificity concerning the request, or its decision not to comply with the
request. If a party refuses any request for information, specific
reasons for the refusal shall be stated.

E.1.e.(3).If a party requires more specification, the requesting party shall
provide it in writing within three (3) working days. Following the
receipt of the more specified request the receiving party shall:

i) provide the information sought by the requesting party within
five (5) working days or

ii) inform the requesting party of its decision not to provide the
information sought within five (5) working days.

E.1.e.(4).It is understood that a party is under no obligation to provide
information that may be protected by the Federal or State Constitution
or Federal or State statutes. In the event that information is sought
which might involve the release of “confidential” information (home
address, medical condition, etc.) a party may offer to provide the
information sought in redacted form.

E.1.5.e.(5).If the receiving party believes that a request is unduly
burdensome or does not exist in the form sought by the requesting
party, it shall inform the requesting party of such during the initial five
(5) day period after receiving the request for information and discuss
the problem with the requesting party's designated representative.
The requesting party may agree to accept the information sought in
the form in which the other has it, or press its original claim.

E.1.e.(6).If the parties are unable to agree on what information (if any) is to
be provided and/or in what form within the required period, the
requesting party shall request the assistance of the arbitrator to obtain
the information sought. The arbitrator may issue a subpoena duces
tecum, to compel release of the information sought. Any party
receiving a subpoena duces tecum issued by the arbitrator shall
provide the requesting party with the information required by
subpoena within five (5) days of the the receipt of the subpoena or
shall seek court review within that time. No arbitration shall proceed to
hearing until such time as the receiving party has produced the
information sought by the requesting party or it obtains an order to the
effect that the requesting party is not entitled to the information it has
sought.

67
E.6.

E.7.

E.8.

The decision of an arbitrator resulting from any arbitration of grievances
hereunder shall not add to, subtract from, or otherwise modify the terms and
conditions of this memorandum of understanding. The decision of the
arbitrator shall be solely advisory in nature. The arbitrator's written award
shall be submitted within thirty (30) calendar days from the last day of the
hearing. The arbitrator's decision shall be forwarded to the City Manager,
who shall review the award and make the final decision within thirty (30)
working days of its receipt.

Employee called as witnesses during the course of the arbitration hearing
shall be released for that purpose without loss of compensation or benefits.
Witnesses will be subject to subpoena issued by the arbitrator, at the request
of either the BPOA or the City, and enforceable by the City.

The fee and expenses of the arbitrator and the cost of a written transcript,
including the cost of the court reporter, shall be borne equally by the parties.

68
In witness whereof, the parties hereto have caused their authorized representatives to
execute this Memorandum of Understanding on this date to be effective the fifth day of
February 2012, and as provided herein.

ON BEHALF OF THE ON BEHALF OF THE BURBANK
CITY OF BURBANK: POLICE OFFICE S$’ ASSOCIATION:

  
        

 

ICHAEL S. FLAD . MARK ARMENDARIZ
City Manager Preston fe? ‘ol Representative

Cay
QSGCES
CLAUDIO, LOSACCO
Vice President and-Sergeant Representative

 

  
 
   

 

VIIKE PARRINELLO~
Past President

Z.

 

 

  

 

 

UE
CARRIE MATSON JJ PUGLISI
Deputy Financial Services Director Lieutenant Representative A
LOG
J@AQUIN BUSQUETS RIS RACINA
“Auman Ri SOUsCES Manager Detective Représentative
ERICKA REINKE _— BRENT DYRNES
Administrative Analyst II Detective Representative

Date: March 6. 2012

 
EXHIBIT A

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2012 SALARY LISTING-REFLECTIVE OF 10% REDUCTION TO BOTTOM OF RANGE
JOB NAME STEP 1 STEP 2 STEP 3 STEP 4 STEP 5 STEP 6 STEP 7
BI WEEKLY
POL DETECTIVE $ 2,711.28 $ 2,779.07 $2,848.54 | $2,919.76 | $2,992.75 | $3,067.57 | $3,144.26
POL LIEUTENANT $ 3,557.69 $ 3,646.63 $ 3,737.79 | $3,831.24 | $3,927.02 | $4,025.19 | $4,125.82
POL OFCR $ 2,378.48 $ 2,437.94 $ 2,498.89 | $2,561.37 | $2,625.40 | $2,691.04 | $2,758.31
POL SERGEANT $ 3,044.42 $ 3,120.53 $3,198.54 | $3,278.51 | $3,360.47 | $3,444.48 | $3,530.60

STEP 8 STEP 9 STEP 10 STEP 11 STEP 12 STEP 13 STEP 14

POL DETECTIVE $ 3,222.87 $ 3,303.44 $ 3,386.03 | $3,470.68 | $3,557.44 | $3,646.38 | 0
POL LIEUTENANT $ 4,228.97 $ 4,334.69 $4,443.06 | $4,554.14 | $4,667.99 | $4,784.69 | 0
POL OFCR $ 2,827.27 $ 2,897.95 $2,970.40 | $3,044.66 | $3,120.78 | $3,198.80 | 0
POL SERGEANT $ 3,618.86 $ 3,709.33 $3,802.07 | $3,897.12 | $3,994.55 | $4,094.41 | 0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
INDEX

Absent Without Pay ..
Acceleration .
Accrued In-Lieu Time
Advanced P.O.S.T. Certificate ..
After Hours Education Reimbursement Program.
Annual Obstacle Course Completion ..
Annual Physical Examination.
Annual Shooting Pay.

 
   
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 

  

Appeal...... .11, 25, 52-53
Assignment .. 19-21, 23-25
Association Access weed
Association Rights.. 22-3
Association Time 2

  
 
 
 

Attendance... 10
B

Back Injury ... .. 30

Bilingual Bonus .. 1-22

Board of Director Meetings .
Bulletin Boards

 
 
 
 
  

City Rights
Civil Service Board.

Compensation for Accrued Sick Leave
Conduct Unbecoming a Public Officer ...

 

D
Death in Family ........ccccccccccceecsececsecsceesseceeeesseseeesseseeeessesesessaseseesseseseessasessessaseseeseaeese 33
Demotion
Denial of Step Increase oo... cence eeene neces eeeceneeeseseseneseseeeeeneneseseenenenee 11

 
  
 
 
 

Differential Pay.......
Disability Insurance
Disciplinary Action..
Dismissal.........
Displacement ..
Dues Deduction..
Education Differential
Emergency Call In.....
Emergency Disciplinary Situations
Emergency Leave
Employee Relations
Equipment Repair/Replacement
Evaluation of Probationary Employees
Extension of Probation

 
 

 

 

  

 

Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)..
Family Leave .......cceeees .
Flexible Benefits (125 Plan) 38-39
Flex Benefit Contribution (125 Plan)

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

Flex Benefit Contribution Reduction. 39
G

Grievance Procedure ... ... 62-68
H

Health Insurance 38-39

Heart Trouble .........ccccccccccceceecsececsecseeesseseseesseseeessesesessesessessasesessasesessasesessaseseesaaese 30

Helicopter Duty
Holidays

  
 
 

Industrial Accident Leave
Intermediate P.O.S.T. Certificate ..
In-Service Training

JULY SOPViCE wee eeeeecceceeceeeeeeeseeeceeeeeeeseeaceeesecaesecsesaeseeaesaeeesecaeeseesaeeesaesaeeeseeeaeeeteeeaeeees 32
 

Layoff
Layoff, Displacement and Recal
Leave Policies

 

Major Discipline .
Maternity Leave .
Medical Authorization for we
Medical Certificate... 30-31, 33
Medical or Dental Appointment ........0..:cccccccccseecseceeecseceeeesseseeeesseseseessaceseesseseseesaaeese 28
Medicare ..
Member of Family ..
Military Leave of Absence
Minor Discipline ........
Modification Clause ..
Motor Duty ..........
Mutual Pledge of Accord.

  
  
 
 
   
 
  

 

Nepotism
Nine-Step Salary Plan..
Non-Discrimination....

 

Observer ..

On Call for Court
Out of Class Pay
Overtime

  

17-19, 26

 
 

Pager Pay
Performance Evaluation

 
 
 

 

  
 
  
 
  
 
   
   
  

Personnel Files .........

Political, Religious or Racial Bias..
P.O.S.T. Pay ..
Post Trauma Counseling.
Probation.......0.cc08
Probationary Period ..
Promotion.

Recall .
Recognition ..
Reduction of Personnel
Rejection and Reinstatement to Former Position.
Rest Periods.
Retiree Medical ..

 

 

Safety Equipment
Salary Adjustments
Salary Survey.....
Savings Clause ..
Seniority ...... .5, 22, 31-33, 28-30, 45-46
Shooting Pay... eee eee ce eee eee ceeeseeeneceeeseeeneeeneseseneieneseesneeeneneneeae 20-21
Sick Leave ...... 12, 28-30, 34, 43, 50, 54
Sick Leave Accrual ... .. 30, 50
Sick Leave Investigatio: “

Sick Leave Revoked ...
Sick Leave Without Pay

 
 
 
  
 
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 

Special Response Team On-Duty Workout Agreement
Standby Pay ..e..ecccccccccceceseesseeeseeseeecsecseeecseeeeeecseceeeesaeceeecaeeeeecaeeesesaeeeseesaeeeseesaseeseeeaeeee 22
Step Increase..
Suspension
T
Temporary ASSIQNMENE ........ccececsccee cece eeesseceeeesseceeeessecesessecesesaeseseesaaseseesaaese 22, 35-36

Term Of AQre@Ment .......ccccccecceeccseeseceeecsecseeecseseceesseseseessesesessasesessasesessaseseessaseseesaaeee 4
 

Termination & Reinstatement
Termination of Probationary Appointment .
Time Off for Civil Service Board Meetings
Time Off for Municipal, County and State Elections

 

 

Unacceptable Performance Evaluation
Uniforms ..

 

Vacation

   
 
 
 
  

Wellness
Work Day/Week.
Working on a Holiday
Working Out of Class...
