 

bi
iw

 

 

 

CITY OF
CHULA VISTA

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN
THE CITY OF CHULA VISTA
AND
CHULA VISTA
POLICE OFFICER'S
ASSOCIATION

November 4, 2014— JUNE 30, 2017

 

POA MOU 11/4/14- 6/30/17 Page 1
 

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING CONCERNING WAGES AND OTHER TERMS AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF CHULA VISTA AND THE CHULA
VISTA POLICE OFFICER'S ASSOCIATION FROM OCTOBER 28. 2014 THROUGH JUNE 30,

2017.

SECTION I
ARTICLE 1.01
ARTICLE 1.02
ARTICLE 1.03
ARTICLE 1.04
ARTICLE 1.05
ARTICLE 1.06
ARTICLE 1.07

ARTICLE 1.08
ARTICLE 1.09
ARTICLE 1.10
ARTICLE 1.11

SECTION IT

SUBSECTION A.
ARTICLE 2.01
ARTICLE 2.02
ARTICLE 2.03
ARTICLE 2.04
ARTICLE 2.05
ARTICLE 2.06
ARTICLE 2.07
ARTICLE 2.08
ARTICLE 2.09
ARTICLE 2.10
ARTICLE 2.11
ARTICLE 2.12
ARTICLE 2.13
ARTICLE 2.14
ARTICLE 2.15

SECTION IT

SUBSECTION B
ARTICLE 2.16
ARTICLE 2.17
ARTICLE 2.18
ARTICLE 2.19
ARTICLE 2.20

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ADMINISTRATION ......ccccsssssssssssssessssesessssesesscsesssnesesncsessenesesscseseencnceneoes
PREAMBLE..
RECOGNITIO.
CITY RIGHTS..
POLICE OFFICER ASSOCIATION RIGHT:
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS .......ccccssssssssesesseseeeeseee
LABOR-MANAGEMENT COOPERATION
TERM AND EFFECT OF THIS MEMORANDUM OF
UNDERSTANDING
MOU REVISIONS...
REOPENER
RETENTION OF BENEFIT:
SAVINGS CLAUSE.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

COMPENSATION ..

OVERTIME
COMPENSATORY TIME
CALLBACK PAY.
STANDBY PAY
OUT-OF-CLASS ASSIGNMEN'
FIELD TRAINING OFFICEER P.
SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT PAY.
BILINGUAL PAY ......
SHIFT DIFFERENTIALS
MILEAGE REIMBURSEME
UNIFORMS
PROFESSIONAL ENRICH!
EDUCATION/P.O.S.T. INCENTIVE PAY.
RECRUITMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM/NEW HIRE LATERAL
INCENTIVE PAY....

COMPENSATION ..
BENEFITS..
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
GROUP TERM LIFE INSURANCE
RETIREMENT
DEFERRED COMPENSATION
RETIREE MEDICAL TRUST...

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17

Page 2
 

SECTION III
ARTICLE 3.01
ARTICLE 3.02
ARTICLE 3.03
ARTICLE 3.04
ARTICLE 3.05
ARTICLE 3.06
ARTICLE 3.07
ARTICLE 3.08
ARTICLE 3.09

SECTION IV
ARTICLE 4.01
ARTICLE 4.02
ARTICLE 4.03
ARTICLE 4.04
ARTICLE 4.05
ARTICLE 4.06
ARTICLE 4.07
ARTICLE 4.08
ARTICLE 4.09

 
  
 
 
 
 

FLEXIBLE WORK SCHEDULES
VACATION TIME..
SICK LEAVE
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
HOLIDAYS...
JURY DUTY...
COURT LEAVE ae
LEAVES OF ABSENCE-MILITARY LEAVE ......ccccsscssssssesssseseseeseees 26

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

WORKING CONDITIONS ......ccccsssccsssssessssessssssessscsesseseeesneseessneseeneneees 26
PROHIBITED PRACTIC ae

ADVANCE NOTICE...
DRIVING ELIGIBILITY .
PHYSICAL ABILITY TE
FITNESS FOR DUTY
SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY.
PAYROLL DEDUCTION.
DIRECT DEPOSIT
GRIEVANCE PROCEDUR!

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17

Page 3
 

SECTION I ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE 1.01 PREAMBLE

This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) is entered into by the City of Chula Vista (City) and the
Chula Vista Police Officer’s Association (POA) as a result of meeting and conferring in good faith
concerning the wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment, pursuant to the
Employer-Employee Relations Policy of the City of Chula Vista and the California Government Code
Sections 3500 et. seq., known as the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act.

ARTICLE 1.02 RECOGNITION

The City recognizes the POA as the certified representative for all employees of the Police Department
who are employed in the classifications of, or have the working titles of: Peace Officer, Police Agent,
Police Sergeant, and Police Lieutenant.

ARTICLE 1.03 CITY RIGHTS

Nothing contained herein shall be construed to restrict any legal or inherent exclusive City rights with
respect to matters of legislative or managerial policy.

The exclusive rights of the City shall include, but not be limited to, the right to:

A. Establish, plan for, and direct the work force toward the organizational goals of the
City government.

B. Determine the organization, and the merits, necessity, and level of activity or service
provided to the public.

C. Determine the City budget.

D. Establish, regulate, and administer a merit or civil service system which provides for
all types of personnel transactions, including, but not limited to, determining the
procedures and standards for the hiring, promotion, transfer, assignment, layoff,
retention, and classification of positions in accordance with the City Charter, Civil
Service Rules, and established personnel practices.

 

E. Discipline or discharge employees for proper cause.

F. Determine the methods, means, numbers, and kinds of personnel, and the job or
position content required to accomplish the objectives and goals of the City.

G. Effect a reduction in authorized positions.

H. Take actions necessary to carry out the mission of the City in emergencies and in
other situations of unusual or temporary circumstances.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 4
 

I. Continue to exercise efficient and productive management practices consistent with
Federal and State laws and in compliance with the City Charter and City ordinances.

In exercising these rights the City shall comply with all applicable provisions of this agreement.

The establishment or exercise of City rights shall not be subject to meeting and conferring; provided,
however, the POA shall not be precluded from meeting and conferring with representatives of the City
when the consequences of decisions on matters of the City rights directly affect wages, hours, and other
terms and conditions of employment.

ARTICLE 1.04 POA RIGHTS

L

Il.

iil.

Authorized representatives of the POA shall be allowed reasonable access to unit employees
at their work locations during working hours for the purpose of consulting with employees in the
unit regarding the employer-employee relationship, provided that: (1) the work of the employee
and the service of the public are not unduly impaired, and (2) the authorized representatives shall
have given advance notice to the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative when
contacting unit employees during the duty period of the employees. The Chief of Police or his
or her designee shall determine the appropriate time for such access.

The POA may be granted use of City facilities by the appropriate Appointing Authority for
meetings composed of unit employees, provided such meetings are held outside regularly
scheduled working hours for the group which is meeting, and provided space can be made
available without interfering with the City needs.

A reasonable amount of space shall be provided to the POA on City bulletin boards for
legitimate communications with members. The POA shall be responsible to maintain space
provided in an orderly condition and shall promptly remove outdated materials.

The City shall continue to bill the POA $.10 per member per pay period for the actual costs
incurred for dues deductions on behalf of the POA.

ARTICLE 1.05 EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

L

Il.

Employees may form, join and participate in the activities of employee organizations of their
own choosing for the purpose of representation in matters of employer-employee relations.

City agrees that no officers, agents, representatives, members or anyone connected with either
party will in any manner intimidate, coerce, restrain or interfere with employees to form, join or
assist labor organizations or to refrain from any of these activities, specifically including the
rights of employees to withdraw, revoke or cancel POA membership, or because of the exercise
of any right provided to the employee by this MOU.

ARTICLE 1.06 LABOR-MANAGEMENT COOPERATION

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 5
 

The parties agree that during the term of this MOU, they will continue to support the Pride At Work
Program. In addition they will continue to participate in efforts to contain health care costs. The City
and POA agree that they will continue to have open discussions on matters of concern to the parties
during the term of this MOU.

ARTICLE 1.07 TERM AND EFFECT OF THIS MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

lL [Three Year Term] This Memorandum of Understanding shall remain in full force and effect
from the date of ratification by POA and approval of City Council until June 30, 2017. The
parties will endeavor to submit written proposals to each other by March 1, 2017 and the parties
will endeavor to begin negotiations not later than April 14, 2017.

IL. The provisions of this MOU shall be subject to Federal, State and local law.

Il. | This MOU fully and completely incorporates the understandings of the parties hereto for the
full term of this MOU, constituting the sole and entire understanding between parties. It is
further understood, however, that nothing herein prohibits the parties from changing and
amending the terms of this MOU during the period of its effectiveness by further meet and
confer sessions by mutual agreement. Nothing contained herein shall affect rights and
privileges of parties as established by the laws of the State of California, as contained in the
Government Code of the State of California under those provisions known as the Meyers-
Milias-Brown Act, unless specifically referred to herein.

Iv. [Reopener] If at any time during the term of this MOU, the City Council declares a fiscal
emergency then, in such event, the City may re-negotiate this MOU and meet and confer on
wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment. This section, however, in no
way effects the existing right of the City to lay off employees.

ARTICLE 1.08 MOU REVISIONS

The City and POA agree that during the term of the MOU they will continue to meet and confer on

changes to the format and language of the MOU if necessary. The purpose of the proposed changes is to

reconcile the MOU with the Civil Service Rules, the Employer/Employee Relations Policy, and other

City policies and procedures, and to insure the language of the MOU accurately reflects City practice.

ARTICLE 1.09 REOPENER

See Article 1.07, paragraph IV, [Term and Effect of Memorandum of Understanding].

ARTICLE 1.10 RETENTION OF BENEFITS

The represented employees covered by this MOU shall retain all benefits provided herein for the full
term of this MOU and for any such additional period of time as provided in Article 1.07; provided,

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 6
 

however, benefits, rights, or privileges not specifically covered by this MOU, but subject to the Meyers-
Milias-Brown Act, may be acted upon by the City without mutual consent after meeting and conferring
with the POA.

ARTICLE 1.11 SAVINGS CLAUSE

If any article or section of this MOU is held to be invalid by operation of law or by any court of
competent jurisdiction, or if compliance with, or enforcement of, any article or section is restrained by
such court, the remainder of this MOU shall not be affected by such action. The parties shall, if
possible, meet and confer or meet and consult as the case may be for the purpose of arriving at a
mutually satisfactory replacement for any article or section invalidated by operation of law.

SECTION II COMPENSATION

SUBSECTION A. WAGES

ARTICLE 2.01 WAGES

I.

IL.

Til.

IV.

A. [Salary Adjustments] Salary adjustments shall be made as follows:

1. 3% in the first full pay period of January 2015
2. 3% in the first full pay period of January 2016
3. 3% in the first full pay period of January 2017

B. [Effective Date] The salary adjustments in Paragraph A shall be effective as set forth
therein after ratification by CVPOA and approval by City Council via resolution in open
session of a successor MOU to the MOU which expired June 30, 2014.

C. [Salary Adjustment Not Retroactive] The salary adjustment in Paragraph A shall not
be retroactive.

Merit (Step) Increases will be made according to the formula set forth in the Civil Service
Rules currently in effect.

The classifications shall be subject to a five (5) step salary range. The normal hire rate shall
be Step “A” provided, however, that an exceptionally well-qualified candidate may be hired
beyond Step “A” within the established range based upon the recommendation of the Chief
of Police and approval by the City Manager.

Effective Dates - All other payroll and wage changes, such as regular merit increases, shall
be made effective at the beginning of the regular biweekly payroll period which includes the
employee's actual anniversary date of the employee’s current position.

Rate of Pay Following Promotion - When a represented employee is promoted, the new rate
of pay will be the lowest step in the new salary range which will result in the employee

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 7
 

receiving at least 5% more than the actual base rate in the old classification. The actual rate
will also include Motorcycle, and Dog Handler pay if these differentials will be lost as a
result of the promotion. It will not include Education Incentive or Bilingual pay.

Longevity Pay - Commencing July 1, 2012, Employees shall receive longevity pay in the
form of a 3% increase in their base pay when they have served fifteen (15) or more complete
years of full time service with the Chula Vista Police Department in a classification
represented by CVPOA. The longevity pay shall increase base pay by 3% for eligible
employees, calculated in the same manner as a COLA. For employees with fifteen (15) or
more years of service as of July 1, 2012, the base pay used to calculate the longevity pay
shall be the base pay they are making on that date, and for Employees not eligible for
longevity pay on July 1, 2012, it shall be the base pay on the date they become eligible.

ARTICLE 2.02 OVERTIME

L

Il.

iil.

Subject to the provisions of Paragraphs II through IV below, when an employee is
required or is ordered to:

Work on his or her day off; or

Report back to work after he or she has left the work station; he or she shall be
compensated for a minimum of two (2) hours for any time worked in accordance with
the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and the 7k exemption. For purpose of
calculating the overtime premium, time worked shall include paid time off and eligibility
for overtime shall be based on hours worked during a work period in excess of 80 hours
in a work period for those assigned to a 4/10 schedule and 160 hours in a work period for
those assigned to the 3/12.5 schedule.

"Immediate" callbacks require the employee to return to the station or to proceed to a
crime scene as soon as possible upon notification. "Non-immediate" callbacks require
the employee to return to the station at a time certain, wherein said time is not designated
as being as soon as possible. For immediate callbacks, overtime shall commence at the
time of arrival at the station or at the crime scene, with an additional one-half hour added
for work related activities undertaken between the time of notification and arrival.

Holdovers Beyond Regular Shift - An employee who works beyond his or her regular
scheduled shift by reason of, but not limited to, late calls, arrests, report preparation, etc.
shall receive payment in accordance with Section C. above. In no event will an
employee be paid for less than 15 minutes. Periods of time less than 15 minutes will be
disregarded and may not accumulated.

Court Time — Employees on scheduled time off, who are subpoenaed in the line of duty
or required by the Chief of Police or his or her designee to be present in criminal or
juvenile court, or other judicial proceedings, shall be compensated as provided under
Article 2.02, I, B above for all time actually spent and required to be in court and all

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 8
 

actual travel time required between the court and either the Police Station or the
employee’s home, as the case may be. Employees shall be guaranteed a minimum of
three (3) hours for each separate court appearance, including any travel time. Employees
shall be reimbursed for all actual mileage the employee travels between the court and
either the Police Station or the employee’s home, as the case may be, at the mileage
reimbursement rate as set out in Article 2.11.

Iv. Overtime Premium Pay shall be calculated at the overtime rate required by the Fair
Labor Standards Act.

V. A committee consisting of Police Department management and POA members shall be
formed to study the use of overtime in the department and develop recommendations as
to how overtime can be managed more effectively.

ARTICLE 2.03 COMPENSATORY TIME

An employee eligible to receive overtime pursuant to this section may receive pay or compensatory
time off. Compensatory time shall be calculated at the rate of 1 /% times the extra hours worked.
The accrual of compensatory time-in-lieu-of overtime pay will be at the option of the Chief of Police
and/or supervisor, based on the employee’s request while recognizing the overall staffing
requirement of the department. Compensatory time shall not be accrued to an employee’s credit for
any time in excess of 120 hours. A record of compensatory time earned and utilized shall be
maintained on the biweekly pay records.

If an officer works a hard holiday, he or she will be provided the option of accruing compensatory
time in-lieu of holiday pay.

ARTICLE 2.04 CALLBACK PAY

Whenever an employee is called back to work, after he/she has left his or her work site, and is required
to return to work before the scheduled start of his or her next shift, he or she will receive a fifty dollar
($50) differential, in addition to pay as provided under 2.02 I. B. above.

ARTICLE 2.05 STANDBY PAY

Standby - Employees shall receive $150 compensation for each full bi-weekly period during which
they are assigned standby duties or a prorated amount if the standby period is less than two (2)
weeks. Standby duty is defined as that period of time, in addition to the employee's normal work
week assignment, during which the employee must remain at all times where he or she can be
contacted by telephone or pager, ready for callback to perform essential service within one (1) hour
of notification.

Any callbacks that occur while an employee is on standby duty shall not reduce the amount of standby
pay the employee would have earned had there not been a callback. Any overtime or callback pay shall

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 9
 

thus be in addition to the standby pay. For purposes of calculating hours worked under the FLSA, the
parties agree that standby time shall not be counted as hours worked.

ARTICLE 2.06 OUT-OF-CLASS ASSIGNMENT

L Sworn personnel who are assigned duty as an Acting Agent, Acting Sergeant, or Acting
Lieutenant in the Patrol Division for a period of at least one full regularly scheduled continuous
work shift (excluding shift overlap(s)) shall receive compensation at a rate of five percent (5%)
above his or her base pay. Payment will be retroactive to the time the out-of-classification
assignment commenced and will continue until the out-of-classification assignment ends,
provided the above full-shift minimum is met. Personnel assigned duty as an Acting Agent,
Acting Sergeant or Acting Lieutenant in the Patrol Division during any shift overlap period will
receive out-of-classification compensation for that overlap period provided the above full-shift
minimum is met.

I. Sworn personnel who are assigned duty as an Acting Agent, Acting Sergeant, or Acting
Lieutenant in a division other than Patrol for a period of at least one continuous week (40
consecutive hours) shall receive compensation at a rate of five percent (5%) above his or her
base pay. Payment will be retroactive to the time the out-of-classification assignment
commenced and will continue until the out-of-classification assignment ends, provided the above
full week minimum is met.

Il. The assignment of Acting Agent, Acting Sergeant, or Acting Lieutenant shall be made in writing
and shall indicate the day and time the assignment begins. Out-of-classification assignment pay
shall be calculated to the nearest quarter hour.

ARTICLE 2.07 FIELD TRAINING OFFICER PAY

Peace Officers and Police Agents who are designated Field Training Officers (FTO's) for the purpose of
training Peace Officers will receive $4.00 per hour additional compensation when they are actually
engaged as FTO's. Police Agents shall not be considered FTO’s or receive FTO compensation for time
spent training other Police Agents.

ARTICLE 2.08 SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT PAY
L Motorcycle Pay - Employees who are assigned to Motorcycle Duty will receive two (2)
hours overtime cash compensation per week. The differential pay shall compensate for
general maintenance, including cleaning and washing of the motorcycle and minor

maintenance.

IL. Dog Handlers - Employees who are designated Dog Handlers will receive three and a half
(3 ¥%) hours paid overtime cash compensation per week.

ARTICLE 2.09 BILINGUAL PAY

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 10
 

Those employees who, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police and the approval of the
Director of Human Resources, and who successfully complete a Bilingual Performance Examination
for another language including Sign Language, who are regularly required to use their bilingual
skills in the performance of their duties, will receive $200 per month in addition to their regular pay.
In order to continue receiving bilingual pay, employees must successfully complete a short
validated oral PASS or FAIL examination every three years. The City agrees to have one POA
member as a tester on each 2 member panel for POA exams. Candidates who have failed the
Bilingual Performance Examination may re-test once every six months.

ARTICLE 2.10 SHIFT DIFFERENTIALS

L Effective with the first full pay period after January 1, 2002, each Officer, Agent, Sergeant,
and Lieutenant regularly assigned to work the first watch (graveyard) shift shall receive $80
a pay period. (For example, a person regularly scheduled on first watch who is temporarily
assigned to another watch will receive the pay, but a person who is regularly scheduled on
another watch and temporarily assigned to first watch will not receive the pay)

II. Effective with the first full pay period after January 1, 2003, each Officer, Agent, Sergeant,
and Lieutenant regularly assigned to work the third or fourth watch (swing) shift shall
receive $40 a pay period. For example, a person regularly scheduled on third or fourth
watch who is temporarily assigned to another watch will receive the pay, but a person who is
regularly scheduled on another watch and temporarily assigned to third or fourth watch will
not receive the pay)

 

Ill. Effective with the first full pay period which includes January 1, 2007, each Officer, Agent,
Sergeant, and Lieutenant regularly assigned to work the first watch (graveyard) shift shall
receive an additional $160 per pay period. (For example, a person regularly scheduled on
first watch who is temporarily assigned to another watch will receive the pay but a person
who is regularly scheduled on another watch and temporarily assigned to first watch will not
receive the pay.)

IV. Effective with the first full pay period encompassing January 1, 2007, each Officer, Agent,
Sergeant, and Lieutenant regularly assigned to work the third or fourth watch (swing) shift
shall receive $80 per pay period. For example, a person regularly scheduled on third or
fourth watch who is temporarily assigned to another watch will receive the pay but a person
who is regularly scheduled on another watch and temporarily assigned to third or fourth
watch will not receive the pay.)

ARTICLE 2.11 MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT
Employees shall be subject to the City’s Mileage Reimbursement Program when required to use their

personal vehicle for authorized City business. The reimbursement rate will be tied to the current
maximum IRS rate.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 11
 

If an employee is reporting to court or to training on his or her day off he or she may be reimbursed for
up to a maximum of 50 miles total round trip. Employees will not receive mileage reimbursement for
staff meetings, committee meetings or any other reason to return to work except for scheduled court or
training.

ARTICLE 2.12 UNIFORMS
I. ISSUE AND REPLACEMENT

All regulation police uniforms and equipment (excluding shoes) will be provided at City
expense. If regulation police uniforms or equipment are destroyed or damaged in the
line of duty, they will be repaired or replaced as determined by the Chief of Police or his
or her designee. Uniform cleaning will be the employees' responsibility. When an
employee terminates employment with the Police Department, he or she must return to
the City all regulation police uniforms and equipment provided at City expense;
provided, however, that employees hired prior to July 1, 1984, may keep any equipment
and uniforms they purchased before July 1, 1984.

IL. CLEANING
Employees represented by the POA shall be entitled to a uniform cleaning allowance of
$300 per year. Cleaning allowances shall be payable during the first pay period ending
in December.

ARTICLE 2.13 PROFESSIONAL ENRICHMENT

This Article left blank.

ARTICLE 2.14 EDUCATION/P.O.S.T. INCENTIVE PAY

I. Employees represented by the Association shall be entitled to between $200 and $400 per month
if they meet the educational/P.O.S.T. incentive pay requirements detailed below. The amount of
educational incentive pay will not be cumulative.

= $200 for an Associates Degree

= $300 for a Bachelors Degree or an Advanced/Supervisory POST
= $350 for a Bachelors Degree and an Advanced/Supervisory POST
= $400 for a Masters Degree or higher

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 12
 

ARTICLE 2.15 RECRUITMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM/NEW HIRE LATERAL
INCENTIVE PAY

I. [Recruitment Incentive Program] A POA member may receive a bonus equivalent to 10 hours of
base pay when he or she refers an individual to the department and the individual completes the
academy and probationary process and becomes a permanent employee. The following conditions
will apply to the Recruitment Incentive Program.

1. POA members assigned to the Professional Standards Unit are ineligible to receive the bonus
during their tenure in the Professional Standards Unit and may not utilize the recruitment
incentive program for any applicant contacts they made during their tenure thereafter.

2. POA members assigned on a temporary basis to carry out specialized recruiting activities,
unless it can be verified that the recruitment did not occur during that activity, are also
ineligible.

3. POA members will not qualify for the Recruitment Incentive Bonus if the candidate referred
to the department is related to the POA member by blood or marriage within the third degree.

4. Candidates must complete the full 18-month probationary period plus any probation
extensions that may be requested by the department because of injuries or absences before
bonuses will be distributed.

5. Candidates must declare the name and rank of the POA member who referred them at the
time of application. If the candidate does not provide the referral information with his or her
application the referring POA member will be ineligible to receive the bonus.

6. There will be only one, 10-hour base pay incentive per candidate. POA members may split
the 10 hours if more than one POA member is listed as the referee.

IL. [New Hire Lateral Incentive Pay] New hires who come into the Chula Vista Police Department
from another public law enforcement agency on or after April 10, 2013 with external law
enforcement experience will receive lateral incentive pay of $1000 for each full year of external
experience brought to the City for up to five (5) years of experience or a maximum of $5,000.

The external law enforcement experience shall consist of full time (not reserve) POST certified (not
limited police powers) employment as a police officer, sheriff's deputy, or California Highway
Patrol Officer. Credit will only be given for full years of service. There shall be no credit for partial
years of service and there will be no round up of number of years. Thus, for example, if a lateral has
1 year and 3 months experience, they have one full year of service and shall get $1000. If a lateral
has 1 year and 11 months experience, they have one full year of experience and shall get $1000.

Lateral incentive pay for each full year of qualifying external law enforcement experience will be
paid at the following intervals until the incentive is paid in full:

$1,000--Upon completion of the hiring process

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 13
 

$1,000--At the successful completion of the City probationary period
$1,000--Every year thereafter on the employee’s anniversary date, up to the $5,000 maximum.

In no event will an employee receive more than the maximum of $5,000 lateral incentive pay.

This New Hire Lateral Incentive pay is of limited duration and the City may end this incentive pay,
in its sole and unfettered discretion, at any time and for any reason by providing CVPOA written
notice of its intent to terminate this incentive pay and an effective date of such termination.
SECTION IT COMPENSATION

SUBSECTION B BENEFITS

ARTICLE 2.16 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS

I. Health and Dental Insurance

Effective January 1, 2005, the City will provide the following benefits to each represented

 

 

 

 

 

 

employee:
Health Insurance Dental Insurance
Annual Cost | Kaiser Non-Kaiser Non-Kaiser Pre-Paid Dental
HMO’s PPO Dental PPO
Employee City pays Employee pays | City pays an City pays | City pays an
Only 100% of $50 per Month; | Amount Equal to 100% of Amount Equal to
Premium City Pays the City’s Share of | Premium | the Premium for
Balance of Non-Kaiser HMO the Pre-Paid Plan,
Premium Premium, Employee Employee
Responsible for Responsible for
Balance Balance
Employee City pays Employee pays | City pays an City pays | City pays an
+1 100% of $50 per Month; | Amount Equal to 100% of Amount Equal to
Premium City Pays the City’s Share of | Premium | the Premium for
Balance of Non-Kaiser HMO the Pre-Paid Plan,
Premium Premium, Employee Employee
Responsible for Responsible for
Balance Balance
Employee City pays Employee pays | City pays an City pays | City pays an
+ Family 100% of $50 per Month; | Amount Equal to 100% of Amount Equal to
Premium City Pays the City’s Share of | Premium | the Premium for
Balance of Non-Kaiser HMO the Pre-Paid Plan,
Premium Premium, Employee Employee
Responsible for Responsible for
Balance Balance

 

 

 

 

 

 

Represented employees who are married to another represented employee have the option of

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 14

 
 

being covered as an Employee Only or as a dependent under their spouse’s Employee + One or
Employee + Family coverage level.

A. ENROLLMENT:

1. Health - Each eligible employee will be covered under the City offered health plan of his or her
choice effective from employee’s date of hire in that eligible position. For employees enrolling
in Kaiser, the City will pay the full cost of the premium. For employees enrolling in a non-
Kaiser HMO, the City will pay the cost of the premium less $50 per month. For employees
enrolled in a non-Kaiser PPO, the City will pay an amount equal to the City’s share of the non-
Kaiser HMO premium. Any difference between the City’s share of the health premium and the
full premium cost will be paid by the employee through payroll deductions. Employees who fail
to submit required benefit election forms within 30 days of the date of eligibility or during open
enrollment will automatically be enrolled in the Kaiser-Employee Only plan.

2. Dental - Optional

Represented employees will be eligible to participate in any City sponsored group dental plan
effective the first of the month following the employee’s date of hire. The City will pay an
amount equal to the pre-paid dental plan premium for employees who enroll in a dental plan
within 30 days of their date of eligibility or during open enrollment. Any difference between the
pre-paid dental plan premium and the PPO dental plan premium will be paid by the employee
through payroll deductions.

Employees may only change their health or dental coverage levels at open enrollment or
upon a qualifying event (marriage, divorce, birth, adoption, etc.).

3. Vision — Optional

Represented employees will be eligible to participate in a City sponsored group vision plan.
The premium for this selected plan will be paid by the employee through payroll deduction.

4. Co-Payments

It is the intent of the parties that co-payments be set at levels that will provide the highest long-
term cost stability to both the City and employees.

5. Employee Paid Medical and Dental Premiums Taken as Pre-Tax Payroll Deductions

It is the intent of the parties that participating employees receive the maximum benefit allowable
in accordance with IRS regulations. In those cases where the employee pays a portion of the
cost, premiums will be deducted from the employee’s paycheck on a pre-tax basis as allowed
under Sections 125, 105, and 213 of the Internal Revenue Code. If an employee prefers to have
the deductions taken on a post-tax basis, he or she must present the request for such change in
writing to the Human Resources Department. If the City does not meet IRS requirements, or if
IRS regulations change for any reason, this benefit may be discontinued.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 15
 

Il.

Insurance Coverage While On Leave of Absence Without Pay

Represented employees on leave without pay for any reason may continue, at their own expense,
their group insurance coverage by paying the full cost of their premium plus a 2% administrative
fee. This provision is subject to the Civil Service Rules regarding Leave of Absence.

Upon an employee’s return from leave without pay, the employee’s benefits will be reinstated to
the same benefit level in effect prior to the beginning of the leave without pay status. An
employee who paid for the cost of his or her insurance while on leave of absence and who
returns to work prior to the 15" of the month, will not be required to pay the insurance premium
for that month.

Termination of Benefits Upon Separation of Employment

An employee’s coverage under the City’s group medical, dental, and term life insurance plans is
effective through the last day of the month in which the employee’s separation is effective.

The employee may continue benefit coverage beyond that date, at his or her own expense, in
accordance with Federal COBRA law. The cost of COBRA coverage is the premium cost plus a
2% administrative fee.

Flexible Spending Accounts (FSAs)-Health Care and Dependent Care

Represented employees will be eligible to participate in the two Flexible Spending Account
(FSA) options offered by the City. These accounts are allowed by Sections 125, 105, 129 and
213 of the Internal Revenue Code. Employees may elect to set aside a portion of their salary, on
a pre-tax basis, to fund eligible health care and dependent care expenses. If the City does not
meet IRS regulations, or if the IRS regulations change for any reason, this benefit may be
discontinued.

The maximum amounts an employee may set aside are:

$2,500 for Health Care
$5,000 for Dependent Care

These accounts may only be established during the Benefits Open Enrollment or within 30 days
of a qualifying change in family status as defined by the IRS.

Salary deductions will be taken 24 pay periods per year, bi-weekly except for those months with
three pay periods, where deductions will only be taken two times.

Reimbursements will be made on a schedule to be determined by the City. Requests for
reimbursement must be made on forms provided by the City. Any monies not used by the end of
the plan year will be forfeited. Specific details of the plan are provided in the City’s Summary of
Benefits publication available from Human Resources.

The City reserves the right to contract with a Third Party Administrator for administration of

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 16
 

FSAs. The City will pay the start-up costs associated with third party administration.
Participating employees will pay any required fees (monthly, per employee, or per transaction).

ARTICLE 2.17 GROUP TERM LIFE INSURANCE

The City agrees to pay the premium for $50,000 of group term life insurance for each represented
employee. Represented employees may apply for themselves and their eligible dependents to purchase
from $50,000 to $300,000 of supplemental group term life insurance in $10,000 increments through the
City's group insurance plan with employees paying the additional cost through payroll deductions.

ARTICLE 2.18 RETIREMENT

The City will provide to represented members retirement benefits via contract with the California Public
Employees Retirement System (CalPERS) as set forth in the California Government Code.

1. TIER I. For employees hired on or before the effective date of the January 25, 2011 MOA, the
City will provide the 3% at 50 Retirement Plan for Local Safety Members as provided for under
the California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS). Employees in Tier 1 shall
make contributions, that shall be applied to the City’s (employer share) contribution to CalPERS
under Government Code section 20516 for optional benefits, in the total amount of nine percent
(9%) for Employees in the “Local Police Officers” CalPERS member category. The
aforementioned contributions will be made on a pre-tax basis to the extent permitted by Internal
Revenue Code section 414(h)(2). The City shall report, as presently done, the Employer Paid
Member Contribution (EPMC) to CalPERS as compensation earnable.

The City will provide the following CalPERS contract options:

One-Year Final Compensation
Post-Retirement Survivor Allowance
Credit for Unused Sick Leave

4th Level 1959 Survivor Benefit.
Military Service Credit as Prior Service
Cost of Living Allowance (2%)
Post-Retirement Survivor Allowance Continuance
Pre-Retirement Death Benefit for Spouse
Retired Death Benefit $5,000

Prior Service Credit

Employer Paid Member Contribution

ASO rOmMmMoOe>

2. TIER II. For Employees hired after the effective date of the January 25,2011 MOA and who do
not qualify as “new members” as defined by PEPRA (see Gov’t Code section 7522.04(f)(1)-(3))
and CalPERS, the CalPERS Retirement Plan benefits for Employees in the “Local Police
Officers” CalPERS member category are (1) the 3% @ 55 retirement formula; (2) that the
Employees make 100% of the statutory employee (employee share) contribution to CalPERS,
currently 9%; (3) that there be no final year concession of said payments to compensation for
CalPERS benefit calculation purposes; and (4) the use of an average highest three consecutive

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 17
 

years calculation to determine final compensation. Furthermore, the City will no longer provide
a blended health care rate for Employees hired under the Second Tier CalPERS Retirement Plan.

The City will provide the following CalPERS contract options:

-Zommoow>

Post-Retirement Survivor Allowance

Credit for Unused Sick Leave

4th Level 1959 Survivor Benefit.

Military Service Credit as Prior Service

Cost of Living Allowance (2%)

Post-Retirement Survivor Allowance Continuance
Pre-Retirement Death Benefit for Spouse

Retired Death Benefit $5,000

Prior Service Credit

Tier If]. [PEPRA] For Employees hired on or after January 1, 2013 and determined to be “new
members” as defined by PEPRA (see Gov’t Code section 7522.04(f)(1)-(3) and CalPERS, the
following shall apply: (1) a 2.7% @ 57 retirement formula; (2) no EMPC; (3) the use of an
average highest three consecutive years calculation to determine final compensation; (4)
employees shall pay 50% of normal cost of their pension, as set forth in PEPRA and determined
by CalPERS; (5) pension capped as set forth in PEPRA (Gov’t Code section 7522.10(c)(2)); and
(6) no blended health care rate for Employees under this Tier.

The City will provide the following CalPERS contract options:

-mommoow>

ARTICLE 2.19

Post-Retirement Survivor Allowance

Credit for Unused Sick Leave

4th Level 1959 Survivor Benefit.

Military Service Credit as Prior Service

Cost of Living Allowance (2%)

Post-Retirement Survivor Allowance Continuance
Pre-Retirement Death Benefit for Spouse

Retired Death Benefit $5,000

Prior Service Credit

DEFERRED COMPENSATION

POA members shall be eligible to participate in the City's approved deferred compensation plans offered

by the City.

ARTICLE 2.20

RETIREE MEDICAL TRUST

All employees covered by this Agreement shall participate in a retiree medical expense
reimbursement plan administered by the PORAC Retiree Medical Trust or such other entity that

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17

Page 18
 

later may be selected by the Association. This Plan is designed to permit organizations representing
employees to designate on a pre-tax basis salary and/or leave payouts which occur upon termination
of employment to be used to help pay for health insurance costs when the employee is no longer
working for the City. No City contributions shall be made to this Plan. The trust shall be and
remain separate and apart from any Employer health insurance funding program.

Effective January 1, 2009, employees covered by this Agreement shall contribute to the plan $150
per month, which the employer shall automatically deduct from the salary of each employee and
remit monthly [in one aggregate check], to the Plan’s administrator, accompanied by a list of
contributing employees. The employer shall contribute the monies on a pre-tax basis. These
contributions shall be included as salary for the purpose of calculating retirement benefits. There
shall be no employee election to take the amount in cash.

Upon retirement of an employee covered by this Agreement, the employer shall transfer into the
PORAC Retiree Medical Trust, an amount equal to 100% of the cash value of the employee’s
vacation and floating holiday leave balance for which they would receive payment. The employer
shall contribute the monies on a pre-tax basis. There shall be no employee election to take the
amount in cash,

The Association has the right to alter the amount of salary deduction or the percentage of leave
balance contribution at separation from service during the course of this Agreement, on a uniform
basis, for all employees covered by the Agreement, subject to approval of its members according to
the Association’s internal rules.

The City of Chula Vista hereby acknowledges receipt of the Trust Agreement governing the Trust
and will comply with rules set by the Trust Office in regard to reporting and depositing the required
contributions set forth above.

Exceptions: Employees entitled to full military medical benefits may make a one time election not
to participate in the plan. Employees entitled to this exemption must notify human resources of their
refusal to participate within 60 days of January 1, 2009, or within 60 days of joining the bargaining
unit. The provisions of this agreement do not reply to anyone hired on or before February 1“ 1982.

City Contribution: Commencing March 2009, the City will contribute $100 per member per month
into the Retiree Medical Trust (“RMT”).

SECTION IT HOURS
ARTICLE 3.01 WORK PERIOD
I. The City enacted the 7k exemption in the case of law enforcement as permitted under the
Fair Labor Standards Act. The work period for law enforcement employees will be 80

hours in a 14-day cycle beginning at 00:01 on Friday and ending 14 days later.

Il. Any deviation from the current scheduling practice will be preceded by a meeting of a
committee of the City and POA no more than 6 months and no less than 3 months before

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 19
 

implementation of the new schedule. If a mutual agreement is not reached by the
committee, the Chief of Police shall have final authority.

Tl. The current schedule and 7(k) exemption is that set forth in the August 30, 2012 Side
Letter of Agreement between the City and CVPOA regarding 4/10 and 3/12.5
schedule, which is attached to this MOU as Attachment B.

ARTICLE 3.02 FLEXIBLE WORK SCHEDULES

The City shall have the right to "flex" schedules under any one of the following conditions: 1) on an as-
needed basis for emergency situations, 2) on an as-needed basis for employees working in the following
special assignments: the Gang Suppression Unit, Street Team, Regional Auto Theft Task Force, FBI
Task Force, Narcotics Task Force, Marine Air Group, Special Investigations Unit, Narcotics
Enforcement Team, and Academy Training Officer, 3) for voluntary training assignments, 4) with the
voluntary consent of the employee. Emergency situations shall be defined as natural disasters, declared
civil disasters and riots within the City of Chula Vista, or when response is required under a mutual aid
agreement.

ARTICLE 3.03 VACATION TIME

I. Definition - For the purposes of this section, the definitions found in the Civil Service
Rules shall apply.

Il. Vacation

A. Vacation Accrual - Continuous service: Each employee paid at a biweekly rate who has
had continuous full-time active service shall be entitled to an annual vacation with pay.
This benefit will be calculated on 26 pay periods per fiscal year. The following
provisions shall apply:

1. Employees will accrue 80-hours during the first through fourth years of service
(cumulative to a total leave balance of 160-hours). This benefit will be accumulated
at the rate of 3.07 working hours for each full biweekly pay period of service performed.

2. Employees will accrue and be eligible to receive 120-hours annually (cumulative to a
total leave balance of 240-hours) during the fifth through ninth year of service. The
benefits will be accumulated at the rate of 4.60 working hours for each full biweekly pay
period of service performed.

3. Employees will accrue and be eligible to receive 160-hours annually (cumulative to a
total leave balance of 320-hours) during the tenth through fourteenth years of service.
This benefit will be accumulated at the rate of 6.14 working hours for each full biweekly
pay period of service performed.

 

4. Employees will accrue and be eligible to receive 200-hours annually (cumulative to a
total leave balance of 400-hours) during the fifteenth and succeeding years of service.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 20
 

This benefit will be accumulated at the rate of 7.70 working hours for each full biweekly
pay period of service performed.

5. Vacation sell back - All members of represented classifications earning three weeks or
more vacation annually will have the option of selling forty (40) hours of said vacation
back to the City. The accumulated vacation balance will be reduced accordingly.
Payment of vacation hours will be made the first payday of each month provided that the
Finance Department has received ten working days advance notice of the request prior to
the payday.

6. Payment Upon Separation - At the time an employee is separated from City service,
whether voluntarily or involuntarily, he/she shall be granted all of the unused annual
leave to which he or she is entitled based upon his or her active service in prior years,
and in addition, he or she shall be granted annual leave based upon the length of his or
her active service during the year in which the separation occurs and computed on the
basis set forth in Section (A)(1). Payment shall be made hour for hour with any portion
of an hour being considered a full hour.

7. Vacation Use — Annual leave balances shall be reduced by the actual time not worked to
the nearest quarter hour. Absence may not be charged to vacation not already
accumulated.

ARTICLE 3.04 SICK LEAVE

A. Accumulated paid sick leave credit is to be used for the sole purpose of protecting the
employee's wages in the event an absence is made necessary because of the disability,
injury or illness of the employee or a serious illness or death in his or her immediate
family. For purposes of this article, immediate family is defined as spouse, domestic
partner, child, stepchild, parent, stepparent, sibling, parent-in-law, grandparent, or any
other person living as a member of the employee’s immediate household.

 

  

B. Sick Leave Accrual - Computation of sick leave: sick leave with pay is cumulative at the
rate of 3.69 working hours for each biweekly pay period of service, 96 hours annually,
beginning at the time of full-time probationary employment. A person who has held a
position with temporary or interim status and is appointed to a position with probationary
status, without a break in service, may have such time credited to sick leave upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police and Director of Human Resources, and the
approval of the City Manager.

C. Maximum Sick Leave Accumulation - Unused sick leave may be accumulated in an
unlimited amount.

D. Sick Leave Use - Sick leave balances shall be reduced by the actual time not worked to
the nearest quarter hour. Absence for illness may not be charged to sick leave not
already accumulated.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 21
 

E. Sick Leave Verification - The City may, in its discretion, require a doctor’s certificate
and/or a personal sworn affidavit stating that the employee is unable to perform the
essential functions of their job in order to determine eligibility for sick leave. If an
employee is required to furnish a doctor's certificate for absences of three days or less,
the employee must have been notified of such requirement by the Chief of Police or his
or her designee, with the approval of the City Manager or his or her designee, at least 24
hours before the time the employee notifies the department that he or she will be absent
because of illness or disability.

F. Sick Leave Reimbursement

(1) | Employees who are unit employees on and before June 30, 1979, shall be entitled
to sick leave reimbursement of 20.83% for up to 120 days (maximum 200 hours)
of unused sick leave upon honorable separation. Unit employees covered by this
paragraph (1) are not eligible for benefits under paragraph (2).

(2) | Employees who are not unit employees on June 30, 1979, and who become unit
employees thereafter, shall be entitled to sick leave reimbursement as follows (to
the exclusion, and in lieu of, any benefits under paragraph (1):

a. Employees using thirty two hours (32) or less of sick leave during the
fiscal year shall have the option of converting twenty-five percent (25%)

of their remaining yearly sick leave to pay.

b. Pay shall be computed based on the following schedule and all
computations shall be rounded to the nearest whole hour:

Remaining Yearly

Sick Leave Pay

96 hrs 24 hrs
88 hrs 22 hrs
80 hrs 20 hrs
72 hrs 18 hrs
64 hrs 16 hrs
56 hrs or less 0 hrs

c. If the pay option is selected, the paid sick leave hours shall be

subtracted from the employee's accumulated yearly sick leave
balance. The remaining sick leave hours shall be carried over and
accumulated. (Example: Employee uses 32 hours of sick leave. He
or she then elects to receive pay for 25% of remaining hours, or 16

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 22
 

hours. The 16 hours are subtracted from his or her remaining yearly
sick leave and the other 48 hours are added to the employee's
accumulated sick leave balance.)

Payment will be made during the month of July of each year. Pay
will be computed based on the employee's salary step on June 15, and
will only be calculated for employees who have been on the payroll
for one full year at the time calculations are made.

Permanent employees covered by this paragraph (E)(2) who retire
during the fiscal year will be compensated under this plan based on
their formal retirement date. Prorated payment also will be made to
an employee who terminates during the fiscal year. In the event of
the death of an individual while employed by the City, 50% of the
employee's unused, accumulated sick leave will be paid to the
appropriate beneficiary.

(3) The City is proposing a Sick Leave Abuse Policy. The parties agree to meet
and confer on this item as a separate process.

(4) During the term of the MOU, the parties agree to re-open the discussion of
Article 3.04 Sick Leave, with the City to work with the POA regarding the
use of sick leave upon approval of industrial disability retirement, with
changes implemented only by mutual agreement.

ARTICLE 3.05 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

When an employee with permanent status is compelled to be absent from work because of the
death of an immediate family member as defined in Article 3.04 (a), or any other person living in
the same household as the employee or immediate family member of the employee’s spouse; and
after the employee makes a written request and receives written approval from the Chief of
Police or his or her designee, the employee may be allowed to use his or her accumulated sick
leave, vacation, compensatory time, or floating holiday time for up to five (5) calendar days, plus

three (3) days travel time.

ARTICLE 3.06 HOLIDAYS
I. "Hard Holidays" - During the term of this MOU, the following are the recognized
holidays:
Independence Day July 4
Labor Day First Monday in September
Thanksgiving Fourth Thursday in November
Christmas December 25
New Year's Day January 1

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17

Page 23
 

Martin Luther King, Jr. Third Monday in January
Memorial Day Last Monday in May

IL. Holiday Pay

A. POA Members Who Cannot Observe a Normal Holiday Schedule
1. If an officer does not work a hard holiday, he or she will receive 8 hours pay.

2. If an officer works a hard holiday on an 8-hour shift, he or she will receive 8
hours pay plus time and one-half for each hour worked.

3. If an officer works a hard holiday on a 10-hour shift, he or she will receive 10
hours pay plus time and one-half for each hour worked.

For payment purposes, if a hard holiday falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the day of observance
shall be the actual day of the holiday.

B. POA Members Who Can Observe a Normal Holiday Schedule and Who Work a 5/8
Shift

1. If the hard holiday falls on a scheduled work day, the officer shall be granted
time-off, except as otherwise directed by the Chief of Police and/or
supervisor.

2. If the hard holiday falls on a scheduled day off, the officer shall receive an
extra day off.

3. If an officer works a hard holiday, he or she will receive 8 hours pay plus
time and one-half for each hour worked.

For payment purposes, if a hard holiday falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the day of observance
shall be the day observed by general City employees.

Cc. POA Members Who Can Observe a Normal Holiday Schedule and Who Work a 4/10
Shift

1. If the hard holiday falls on a scheduled work day, the officer shall be granted
time-off except as otherwise directed by the Chief of Police and/or
supervisor. Holiday time-off shall be granted for the full 10 hour shift.

2. If the hard holiday falls on a scheduled day off, the officer shall receive an
extra day off, for the full 10-hour shift.

3. If an officer works a hard holiday, he or she will receive 10 hours pay plus
time and one-half for each hour worked.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 24
 

For payment purposes, if a hard holiday falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the day of observance
shall be the actual day of the holiday.

Til. Floating Holidays

Effective the first pay period in July of each fiscal year of this MOU, employees shall be
credited with 8 hours each for: Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's Birthday, Admission Day,
Columbus Day and Veterans’ Day. Employees may take floating holiday time at their
discretion with the approval of the Chief of Police or his or her designee.

A. Floating Holiday Use - If an employee uses floating holiday time before the holiday
passes and subsequently leaves City service, he or she will be charged for such time.
If an employee does not use his or her floating holiday time before June 30 of a
fiscal year, he or she will lose such time. The smallest unit of time chargeable to
floating holiday time is one half (1/2) hour.

ARTICLE 3.07 JURY DUTY

For officers receiving a notice to serve on a federal jury shall be entitled to pay under the
following conditions:

A.

They must present to their supervisor the jury summons to appear for federal jury duty at
least three weeks prior to their date to report.

. If jury service and travel time from court to work is less than five (5) hours or seven (7)

hours for persons on a 4/10 plan in a work day, the employee is expected to return to
work unless a justification is provided and approved or pre-authorized leave is approved.

Employees who are required to serve jury duty on their scheduled days off will not be
compensated for this time and may keep any fees paid by the court.

. If the employee is not required to report for jury duty on any particular day(s) they are

then expected to be at work as per their normal schedule.

It is the employees’ responsibility to inform his or her supervisor on a daily basis if they
are required to report for jury duty the following day.

Absence due to jury duty will be submitted on the City leave form.

. Employees whose workweek is other than Monday through Friday (8:00 a.m. to 5:00

p.m.) may have their jury duty workday adjustments made by their supervisors.

. Employees who receive compensation for their jury service from the courts will return

those funds to the payroll specialist unless Section D applies.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 25
 

ARTICLE 3.08 COURT LEAVE
Court leave is paid leave granted by the City to enable an employee to fulfill his or her duty as a
citizen to serve as a witness in a court action to which the employee is not a party, before a federal or

superior court located within San Diego County.

Court leave shall be limited to:

A. Required attendance before federal or superior courts located within San Diego
County.
B. Time in attendance at court together with reasonable time between court and work if

attendance is for less than a full day and the employee can reasonably be expected to
return to work.

Cc. Court leave shall not be granted when the employee is paid an expert witness fee.

Dz The employee must submit to the City any payment received for the court
appearance except travel and subsistence pay.

E. Court leave will only be granted to employees who are not litigants in the civil case
nor related to litigants in the civil case or defendants in a criminal case.

F. Employees shall provide their supervisor with a copy of the legal subpoena and
provide other documentary evidence of service.

ARTICLE 3.09 LEAVES OF ABSENCE
MILITARY LEAVE

For purpose of this MOU, the Civil Service Rules for leaves of absence and military leave are
incorporated as reference as though set out in full in this article.

SECTION IV WORKING CONDITIONS

ARTICLE 4.01 PROHIBITED PRACTICES

I. POA pledges it shall not cause, condone or counsel its unit members or any of them to strike,
fail to fully and faithfully perform duties, slow down, disrupt, impede or otherwise impair

the normal functions and procedures of the City except that nothing shall be construed in this
MOU to prevent the POA or its unit members from exercising any legal rights or remedies

 

 

IL. Should any unit employees during the term of this MOU breach the obligations of Paragraph
I, the City Manager or his or her designee shall immediately notify the POA that an alleged
prohibited action is in progress.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 26
 

Ill. POA shall as soon as possible, and in any event, within eight working hours disavow any
strike or other alleged prohibited action, shall advise its members orally and in writing to
immediately return to work and cease the prohibited activity and provide the City Manager
with a copy of its written advisement or, alternatively, accept the responsibility for the strike
or other prohibited activity if it fails to follow one or more of the duties set forth in this
article.

IV. If POA disavows the prohibited activity and takes all positive actions set forth in this MOU
in good faith, the City shall not hold the POA financially or otherwise responsible. The City
may impose such penalties or sanctions as the City may appropriately assess against the
participants.

V. Should the POA during the term of this MOU breach its obligations or any of them under
this Article, it is agreed that the City shall pursue all legal and administrative remedies
available to the City that in its discretion it may elect to pursue.

VI. There shall be no lockout by the City during the term of this MOU.

ARTICLE 4.02 ADVANCE NOTICE

The City shall give reasonable advance written notice to the POA on any proposed change or new
ordinance, resolution, departmental rule or regulation relating to matters within the scope of
representation proposed to be adopted by the City or the Department. The POA shall be given the
opportunity to meet and confer with City or Department representatives prior to adoption of any
proposed changes.

ARTICLE 4.03 DRIVING ELIGIBILITY

Whenever an employee drives a vehicle for City business he or she shall have a valid California
drivers license. In order to ascertain the validity of the employee's license, employees must
present their drivers license to their supervisor upon request. The City reserves the right to
check with the Department of Motor Vehicles at any time to determine if the license is valid. If
an employee's drivers license is revoked, suspended or otherwise made invalid, the employee
must inform his or her supervisor. Failure to notify the supervisor may result in immediate
disciplinary action. An employee who does not possess a valid California driver’s license will
be considered for a non-driving position, if one is available in the employee's classification. The
non-driving assignment will continue for a maximum of six months if there is a reasonable
expectation the employee will have a valid California driver’s license at the expiration of that
time. Extensions to the six-month limit will be considered on a case-by-case basis, however, in
no case shall an employee receive more than one non-driving assignment in any three-year
period. When no non-driving assignment is available, employees must request a leave of
absence without pay for six months or until such time as their license is once again valid,
whichever is shorter.

 

In order to assure that non-driving assignments are provided on a fair and equitable basis, the

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 27
 

following procedures shall be observed:

A. Each department will determine whether it has any non-driving assignments that can
be filled by employees who would otherwise have driving assignments.

B. Non-driving assignments will be given on a first come, first served basis. For
example, if two employees in a department have a non-valid driver’s license and
there is only one non-driving assignment, the first employee who comes forward will
be given the non-driving assignment. The other employee may apply for a leave of
absence as described above.

ARTICLE 4.04 PHYSICAL ABILITY TESTING

A. The City of Chula Vista along with the POA agrees that for the safety of the employee as
well as the public, those employees who are represented by the POA should maintain a
minimum level of physical fitness. The physical fitness of the employee will be assessed in
two manners. The first will be a physical assessment and the second a physical agility test.

B. All represented employees may be required to undergo a physical fitness sment if the

Chief of Police and/or the Human Resource Department determines an

necessary to insure the employee can fully perform his or her duties. The initial as

will generally consist of a physical conditioning assessment.

  
 
 
 

Cc. Physical Agility Test

Employees may be required to take a physical agility test, in accordance with the standards
and tests established as part of the physical agility program unless they request and receive
an exemption from the Chief of Police.

ARTICLE 4.05 FITNESS FOR DUTY

The parties agree that physical and mental fitness of City employees are reasonable requirements to
perform the duties of the job and instill public confidence. Recognizing these important factors, the
parties agree that during the term of this MOU, the City with reasonable cause, may require medical
and psychological assessments of employees provided the City pays and provides time off without
loss of pay for such assessments. All such assessments shall be done by appropriately qualified
health care professionals. It is understood that the assessment regimen performed by said
professionals shall be reasonably related to the requirements and duties of the job.

 
 

Any treatment or remedial action shall be the full responsibility of the employee, except as otherwise
provided by law or as may be provided through the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) for City
employees.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 28
 

ARTICLE 4.06 SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY

Employees represented by POA are subject to the City’s Substance Abuse Policy.

ARTICLE 4.07 PAYROLL DEDUCTION

Upon the receipt of a written request and authorization from an employee for deduction of POA dues
the City shall withhold such dues from the salary of the employee and remit the withholdings to the
POA. The City shall continue to withhold such deductions unless the employee files a statement
with the City withdrawing authorization for the continued withholding of the deductions. The
effective date of withholding to the POA, and the effective date of discontinuance and all procedural
matters shall be determined in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Director of Finance.

ARTICLE 4.08 DIRECT DEPOSIT
Represented employees hired on or after January 1, 2006 will be required to provide written

authorization to the City’s Director of Finance to electronically deposit their paychecks to a financial
institution of their choice.

 

 

ARTICLE 4.09 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
This grievance procedure shall be in effect during the full term of this MOU.
Section 1. PURPOSE. The purposes and objectives of the Grievance Procedure are to:

1 Resolve disputes arising from the interpretation, application or enforcement of
specific terms of this MOU.

2 Encourage the settlement of disagreements informally at the employee-supervisor
level and provide an orderly procedure to handle grievances through the several

supervisory levels where necessary.

3 Resolve grievances as quickly as possible and correct, if possible, the causes of
grievances thereby reducing the number of grievances and future similar disputes.

Section 2. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this grievance procedure the following
definitions shall apply:

1. Manager: The City Manager or his or her authorized representative.

2. Day: A calendar day, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and hard holidays as described
by this MOU.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 29
 

9.

Section 3.

1.

Department head or head of a department: The chief executive officer of a
department.

Director of Human Resources: The Director of Human Resources or his or her
authorized representative.

Employee: Any officer or regular (not temporary) employee of the City, except an
elected official.

Employee representative: An individual who speaks on behalf of the employee.

Grievance: A complaint of an employee or group of employees arising out of the
application or interpretation of a specific clause in this MOU.

Immediate supervisor: The individual who assigns, reviews, or directs the work of
an employee.

Superior: The individual to whom an immediate supervisor reports.
REVIEWABLE AND NON-REVIEWABLE GRIEVANCES.
To be reviewable under this procedure a grievance must:

Concern matters or incidents that have occurred in alleged violation of a specific
clause in this MOU; and

Specify the relief sought, which relief must be within the power of the City to grant
in whole or in part.

A grievance is not reviewable under this procedure if it is a matter which:
Is subject to those reserved City Management Rights as stipulated under Section 4 of
the Employer-Employee Relations Policy for the City of Chula Vista or under
management rights as specified in this MOU
Is reviewable under some other administrative procedure and/or rules of the Civil
Service Commission such as:

qd) Applications for changes in title, job classification or salary

(2) Appeals from a formal disciplinary proceeding

(3) Appeals arising out of Civil Service examinations

(4) Appeals from work performance evaluations

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 30
 

Section 4.

1.

(5) Appeals that have a civil rights remedy or some other remedy
specified by law

c. General complaints not directly related to specific clauses of this MOU

d. Would require the modification of a policy established by the City Council or
by law

e Relates to any City group insurance or retirement program

GENERAL PROVISION OF THE GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.

Grievances may be initiated only by the employee or employees concerned or by the
POA on behalf of itself regarding an otherwise grievable incident. The POA cannot
grieve for itself an incident already grieved by an employee or group of employees.
Conversely, an employee or group of employees cannot grieve an incident already
grieved by the POA.

Procedure for Presentation. In presenting his or her grievance, the employee shall
follow the sequence and the procedure outlined in Section 5.

Prompt Presentation. The employee shall discuss his or her grievance with his or her
immediate supervisor within ten (10) working days after the act or omission of
management causing the grievance, or within ten (10) working days of when the
employee, with the exercise of reasonable diligence, should have discovered the act
or omission being grieved.

Prescribed Form. The written grievance shall be submitted on a form prescribed by
the Director of Human Resources for this purpose.

Statement of Grievance. The grievance shall contain a statement of:

a. The specific situation, act or acts complained of as a violation of the MOU;
b. The inequity or damage suffered by the employee; and

c. The relief sought.

Employee Representative. The employee may choose someone to represent him or
her at any step in the procedure. No person hearing a grievance need recognize more

than one representative for any employee at any one time, unless he or she so desires.

Handled During Working Hours. Whenever possible, grievances will be handled
during the regularly scheduled working hours of the parties involved.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 31
 

10.

11.

12.

Section 5.

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Extension of Time. The time limits within which action must be taken or a decision
made as specified in this procedure may be extended by mutual written consent of
the parties involved. A statement of the duration of such extension of time must be
signed by both parties involved at the step to be extended.

Consolidation of Grievances. If the grievance involves a group of employees or if a
number of employees file separate grievances on the same matter, the grievances
shall, whenever possible, be handled as a single grievance.

Settlement. Any complaint shall be considered settled without prejudice at the
completion of any step if all parties are satisfied or if neither party presents the
matter to a higher authority within the prescribed period of time.

Reprisal. The grievance procedure is intended to assure a grieving employee the
right to present his or her grievance without fear of disciplinary action or reprisal by
his or her supervisor, superior or department head, provided he or she observes the
provisions of this grievance procedure.

Back pay. The resolution of a grievance shall not include provisions for back pay
retroactive further than twenty (20) working days prior to the date the grievance is
filed. However, if with the exercise of reasonable diligence the act or omission being
grieved was not discovered within 10 working days of its occurrence, and the
grievance is subsequently timely filed pursuant to Section IV (3), then the resolution
of the grievance may include provision for back pay for a maximum period of one
year from the date the grievance was filed so long as such back pay awards are
compliant with the law.

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE STEPS. The following procedure shall be followed by
an employee submitting a grievance pursuant to this article:

Discussion with Supervisor.

The employee shall discuss his or her grievance with his or her immediate supervisor
informally. Within three (3) working days, the supervisor shall give his or her
decision to the employee orally.

Written Grievance to Superior.

If the employee and supervisor cannot reach an agreement as to a solution of the
grievance or the employee has not received a decision within the three (3) working
days' time limit, the employee may within seven (7) working days present his or her
grievance in writing to his or her supervisor. The supervisor shall provide written
comments to the grievance and present the grievance and comments to his or her
superior within seven (7) working days. The superior shall hear the grievance and
give his or her written decision to the employee within seven (7) working days after
receiving the grievance.

Grievance to Department Head.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 32
 

Step 4

Section 6.

If the employee and superior cannot reach an agreement as to a solution of the
grievance or the employee has not received a written decision within the seven (7)
working days’ limit, the employee may within seven (7) working days present his or
her written grievance and all written comments and/or decisions in writing to his or
her department head. The department head shall hear the grievance and give his or
her written decision to the employee within seven (7) working days after receiving
the grievance. Representative at Step 4.

Grievance to Director and Manager.

If the grievance is not settled at the department head level, it may be submitted by the
POA Representative within twenty (20) working days to the Director of Human
Resources, who shall investigate and report his or her findings and recommendations
to the City Manager within ten (10) working days. The City Manager shall provide
his or her answer within ten (10) additional working days. The times indicated may
be extended by mutual agreement. Any Employee grievance will be filed by the
POA.

Following the submission of the City Manager's answer, and before going to Section
6, Advisory Arbitration, matters which are unresolved shall be discussed at a meeting
between the parties during which all pertinent facts and information will be reviewed
in an effort to resolve the matter through conciliation.

ADVISORY ARBITRATION.

Any dispute or grievance which has not been resolved by the Grievance Procedure
may be submitted to advisory arbitration by the POA Representative or the City
without the consent of the other party providing it is submitted within ten (10)
working days, following its termination in the Grievance Procedure. The following
Advisory Arbitration procedures shall be followed:

The requesting party will notify the other party in writing of the matter to be
arbitrated and the MOU provision(s) allegedly violated. Within five (5) working
days of the receipt of this notice, the parties may agree upon an arbitrator, or a panel
of three arbitrators trained in conducting grievance hearings.

If agreement on an arbitrator cannot be reached, the State Department of Industrial
Relations shall be requested by either or both parties to provide a list of five
arbitrators. Both the City and the POA shall have the right to strike two names from
the list. The party requesting the arbitration shall strike the first name; the other
party shall then strike one name. The process will be repeated and the remaining
person shall be the arbitrator.

The arbitrator shall hear the case within twenty (20) working days after the arbitrator
has been selected. The arbitrator shall make rules of procedure. The arbitrator shall
make a written report of their findings to the POA and the City within fifteen (15)
working days after the hearing is concluded. The decision of the arbitrator shall be
advisory to the City Manager who shall render a final decision within ten (10)
working days.

 

POA MOU 11/4/14— 6/30/17 Page 33
 

Negotiating Parties

For the City: For the POA: 4
fo

   

Fréd Rowbotham, President
Police Officer’s Association

; lio) 4

 

Date Date

y Bacoy
Negotiator

“- 7-7
Date

Attachments:

A. Hourly Rates
B. August 30, 2012 Side Letter of Agreement

 

POA MOU 11/4/14- 6/30/17 Page 35

 
ATTACHMENT A

EFFECTIVE 12/26/2014

   

CLASSIFICATION SsTErPA STEPB STEPC STEPD STEPE
Peace Officer . $33.30 $34.97 $36.71 $38.55 $40.48
Police Agent $36.67 $38,50 $40.43 $42.45 $44.57
Police Sergeant $42.18 $44,29 $46.51 $48.83 $51.27
Police Lieutenant $50.62 $53,15 $55.81 $58.60 $61.53 .

NOTE: Police Recruits are represented by CVEA.
These base hourly rates ate-an approximation only, Final houtly rates may be
different due to rounding of figures.

 

 
ATTACHMENT B

SIDB LETTER OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF CHULA VISTA,
AND THE CHULA VISTA, POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCATION

August 30, 2012

‘The City of Chula Vista (“City”) and the Chula Vista Police Officers Association
(“POA”) hereby enter into this Side Letter of Agreement and agree to the following

tems:

 

1. [MOU extension] Untess otherwise specifically. indicated in this side letter, all ofthe
existing terms and conditions of the current Memoranduni of Understanding (“MOU”)
and side letters dated 1/1/09, (Retivee Medical Trust participation); 1/26/09, (Wages);
8/26/09, (Compensatory Time); 10/13/09, (Bilingual Exam), and; 1/25/11, (Pension
Contribution and Misc.) will be extended arid remain in fulll force and effect through June
30, 2014. :

2. [4/10 — 3/12.5 Schedule] Effective the first pay-period in January 2013, (01/1/13), a.
hybrid "4/10 —3/12.5” work schedule will be implemented for officers assigned to patrol,
(excluding Traffic, Street Team/GSU, SRO, and Geographic Policing), Officers assigned
to the 4/10 schedule will work Monday through Thursday, while officers assigned to the
3/12.5 schedule will work Friday, Satuxday, and Sunday. .

3. [Work period] The City has enacted the 7k exemption in the case of law enforcement
as permitted by the Fair Labor Standards Act, The wotk period for employees assigned
the 3/12.5 work schedule will be 160 hours in a 28-day cycle heginning at 00:01 on
Friday and ending 28 days later,

4, [10 hour pay-back} Because officers assigned to the 12.5 hour shift work 75 hours
during a two week pay-period, they are required to work an additional 10 hour shift every
28 day cycle. This additional shift will typivally be repaid by attending regularly
scheduled bi-monthly 10 hour training days, and during opposing months, providing
coverage when officers assigned to the 4/10 schedule attend their regularly scheduled
traitiing days, The training date will be determined by the department. .

5, [Overtime] Oveitime for officers working a 12,5-hour shift will be paid in accordance
with section 2.02 ofthe MOU : :

6, [2-year Trial Period] The first two years following implementation of the schedule set
forth In paragraph 2 will be considered a trialperiod. At any time during this 2-year trial
period, the POA and Police Department, at either party’s xequest, shall meet to discuss
changes to and/or issues with the schedule; when necessary, a committee with
xepresentation ftom both parties will be formed to further discuss and resolve these
issues, Ifthe committee does not reach a mutual agrooment, then the ChicfofPolice
shall have final authority. The committee may be composed of the following:

a. Two (2) members choseiv‘by the POA,

 

 
b, Two (2) members chosen by the Police Department,
© One (1) member chosen by the above four mutually. This member shall
participate only in a non-binding advisory role,

7. {Continuation of Schedule after Trial Period] No later than 60 days prior to the
termination of the 2-year trial period, the POA and Police Department, at either party’s
request, shall meet aud confer to discuss continuation of, and/or issues with the schedule
in existence at that time; when necessary, a committee with representation ftom both

~~ parties Will De foRMEM to fhither discuss said continuation and/or resolve these issues.

 

 

For CVPOA; For the City of Chula Vista:

| ~ gpolre ), fh Vinanws &ft0h2
aD Wame Date Name Date

 

 

Name. Date , Name Date

 

 
ATTACHMENT B

SIDB LBTTER OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF .CHULA VISTA.
AND THE CHULA VISTA, POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCATION

August 30, 2012

‘The City of Chula Vista (“Cify”) and the Chula Vista Police Officers Assooiation
(*POA”) hereby enter into this Side Letter of Agreement and agree to the flowing
tems:

   

 

1. [MOU extension] Unless otherwise specifically. indicated in this sido letter, all ofthe
existing terms and conditions of the current Memoranduni of Understanding (MOU”)
and side.letters dated 1/1/09, (Retires Medical Trust participation); 1/26/09, (Wages);
8/26/09, (Compensatory Time); 10/13/09, (Bilingual Exam), and; 1/25/11, (Pension
Contribution and Misc.) will be extended atid remain in full force and effect through June

30, 2014.

2. [4/10 — 3/12.5 Schedule] Béfective the first pay-period in January 2013, (01/11/13), a
hybrid "4/10 —3/12.5” work schedule will be implemented for officers assigned to patrol,
(excluding Traffic, Street Team/GSU, SRO, and Geographic Policing), Officers assigned
to the 4/10 schedule will work Monday through Thursday, while officers assigned to the
3/12.5 schedule will work Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. .

3. [Work period] The City has enacted the 7Ic exemption in the case of law enforcement
as permitted by the Fair Labor Standards Act, The work perlod for employees assigned.
the 3/12.5 work schedule will be 160 hours in. a 28-day cyole beginning at 00:01 on
Friday and ending 28: days later.

4. [10 hour pay-back} Because officers assigned to the 12.5 hour shift worl 75 hous
during atwo week pay-period, they are required to work an. additional 10 hour shift every
28 day cycle. This additional shit will typically bo repaid by attending regularly
scheduled bi-monthly 10 hour training days, and during opposing months, providing
coverage when officers assigned to the 4/10 schedule attend their regularly scheduled.
traiting days, The training date will be determined by the department. .

5, [Overtime] Oveitime for officers working a 12,5-hour shift will be paid in accoxdance
with section 2.02 ofthe MOU : :

6, [2-year Trial Period] The first two years following implementation of the schedule set
forth Jn paragraph 2 will be considered atrial period. At any time during this 2-year trial
period, the POA and Police Department, at either party's request, shall meet to discuss
changes to and/or issties with the schedule; when necessary, a committee with
representation from both parties will be formed to further discuss and resolve these
issues, Ifthe committee does not reach a mutual agreement, then the ChicfofPolice
shall have final authority. The committee may be composed of the following:

a. Two (2) members choseiby the POA.

 

 
b. Two (2) members chosen by the Police Department,
©, One (1) member chosen by the above four mutually. This member shall
participate only in a non-binding advisory role,

7. [Continuation of Schedule after Trial Period] No later than 60 days prior to the
termination of the 2-year trial period, the POA and Police Department, at either party’s
request, shall meet and confer to discuss continuation of, and/or igsues with the schedule
in existence at that time; when necessary, a committee with representation ftom both

‘Parties Will be formed to fhither discuss said continuation and/or resolve these issues.

 

 

For CVPOQA; For the City of Chula Vista:

as of jz — . diners Sf8OA 02,
aa Namie Date Name Date

 

Name. Date , Name Date

 

 
RESOLUTION NO. 2014-204

RESOLUTION OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
CHULA VISTA APPROVING A MEMORANDUM = OF
UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE CITY OF CHULA VISTA
AND THE CHULA’ VISTA POLICE OFFICERS’
ASSOCIATION BARGAINING UNIT ('CVPOA”) RELATED
TO COMPENSATION AND OTHER TERMS AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT: AUTHORIZING THE
CITY MANAGER TO EXECUTE ANY NECESSARY
DOCUMENTS AND/OR MOU AS MAY BE REQUIRED TO
IMPLEMENT THE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

WHEREAS, the Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Chula Vista and the
Chula Vista Police Officers’ Association (CVPOA) expired June 30, 2014; and

WHEREAS, negotiating teams representing CVPOA and the City have worked
collaboratively toward the development of a mutually beneficial MOU that would assist the City
in the recruitment and retention of swom Police Officers where we are experiencing higher than
normal vacancies; and

WHEREAS, the City and CVPOA bargaining unit have met and conferred in good faith,
as required by the Mevers-Milias-Brown Act (Govt. Code Section 3500 et. seq.; “MMBA”): and

WHEREAS, the City and CVPOA have reached an agreement with regards to term and
effect, compensation and other terms and conditions of employment, and consistent with the
MMBA, have set forth those terms in a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), which has been
designated as Exhibit A for identification in this resolution; and

WHEREAS, the proposed salary and benefit enhancements were ratified by a majority of
the CVPOA membership at a general membership meeting on October 1, 2014.

NOW, THEREFORE. BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council of the City of Chula
Vista, that it hereby does (1) approve the MOU between the City of Chula Vista and CVPOA:
(2) authorize the City Manager or his designee(s) to execute said MOU; and (3) authorize the
City Manager or his designee to make such minor modifications to said MOU as may be
approved or recommended by the City Attorney’s Office.
Resolution No. 2014-204

  

Page No. 2

Presented by Approved as to form by
= K. = Glen R. Goggins
Deputy City Manager/Director of Human Cink Attorney
Resources

PASSED, APPROVED, and ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Chula Vista,
California, this 4th day of November 2014 by the following vote:

AYES: Councilmembers: Aguilar, Bensoussan, Ramirez, Salas and Cox
NAYS: Councilmembers: None

ABSENT: Councilmembers: None

 

Cheryl Cox, Mayor
ATTEST:

 

Donna R. Norris, ~ City Clerk

STATE OF CALIFORNIA )

COUNTY OF SAN DIEGO )

CITY OF CHULA VISTA )

I, Donna R. Norris, City Clerk of Chula Vista, California, do hereby certify that the foregoing
Resolution No. 2014-204 was duly passed, approved, and adopted by the City Council at a
regular meeting of the Chula Vista City Council held on the 4th day of November 2014.

Executed this 4th day of November 2014.

Donna R. Norris, CMC, City Clerk
