AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE
CITY OF TOLEDO

AND
TOLEDO POLICE
PATROLMAN'S ASSOCIATION
LOCAL 10
1.U.P.A., A.F.L. — C.L0O.

JANUARY 1, 2015 — DECEMBER 31, 2017
TABLE OF CONTENTS

2129.01 RECOGNITION OF THE TOLEDO POLICE PATROLMAN'S ASSOCIATION, LOCAL 10,
LU.P.A. - A.F.L. - C.LO. ..

 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 

2129.02 CLASSIFICATIONS
2129.03 FIELD TRAINING OFFICER..
2129.031 CORPORAL STIPEND...
2129.04 FEDERALLY FUNDED POSITIONS ...
2129.05 LISTING OF NEW EMPLOYEES..
2129.06 AGENCY SHOP, PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS AND DUES CHECKOFF....
2129.07 CREDIT UNION ....
2129.08 UNITED WAY AND TPPA.....
2129.09 POLICE INSURANCE FUND ..
2129.10 DEFERRED COMPENSATION ..
2129.11 PLEDGE AGAINST DISCRIMINATION AND COERCION ..
2129.12 BULLETIN BOARDS...
2129.13 REPRESENTATIVES
2129.14 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
2129.15 EXPEDITED LABOR ARBITRATION RULES
2129.16 DEFAULT IN ANSWER
2129.17 LEGAL COUNSEL
2129.18 ACCELERATION OR EXTENS
2129.19 EMPLOYEE'S BILL OF RIGHT!
2129.20 DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING...

 

2129.21 FIREARMS REVIEW BOARD...

 

2129.22 RELIEF FROM DUTY....

 

2129.23 SUSPENSION OR DISCIPLINARY ACTION

 

2129.24 REPRIMAND .....

 

2129.25 DISCIPLINARY RECORD RETENTION...

 

2129.26 PERSONAL SERVICE RECORD...

 

2129.27 RESIGNATION

 

2129.28 INTERVIEWS UPON EMPLOYMENT TERMINATION

 

2129.29 SENIORITY...

 

2129.30 BIDDING FOR ASSIGNMEN’

 

2129.31 FILLING VACANT POSITIONS

 

2129.32 CAREER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM

 

2129.33 TRAINING COURSES...

 

2129.34 MILITARY SERVICE...
2129.35 SENIORITY DURING INDUSTRIAL DISABILITY

 

2129.36 LAYOFF PROCEDURE.

 

2129.37 RECALL FROM LAYOFF ....

 

2129.38 ACTING TIME...

 

2129.39 PERSONAL LEAVE OF ABSENCE.

 

2129.40 FRINGE BENEFITS WHILE ON LEAVE OF ABSENCE...

 

2129.41 FAMILY LEAVE...

 

2129.42 DISABILITY ASSIGNMENTS.
2129.43 SICK OR OFF-DUTY INJURY LEAVE
2129.44 OTHER EMPLOYMENT WHILE ON LEAVE...

 

 

 

2129.45 WORK SCHEDULES...

 

2129.46 PERMANENT SHIFTS
2129.47 STARTING TIME...
2129.48 QUITTING TIME......
2129.49 WORKDAY.

 

 

2129.50 WORK IN EXCESS OF REGULAR WORKDAY

  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 

2129.51 COURT APPEARANCE TIME
2129.52 COMPENSATORY TIME ..
2129.53 HOLIDAY PREMIUM.
2129.54 EQUALIZATION OF OVERTIME
2129.55 OVERTIME PROCEDURE FOR POLICE OFFICERS
2129.56 RECALL; SPECIAL EVENT!
2129.57 ACCUMULATION OF SICK DA
2129.58 BONUS DAYS.

 

  

2129.59 SICK PAY USAGE...

 
 

2129.60 REPORTING; PROOF OF ILLNESS
2129.61 SICK PAY EXTENSION...
2129.62 INJURY PAY
2129.63 PARENTAL PAY...

 

 

 

2129.64 REPORT TO PHYSICIAN DESIGNATED BY THE CITY.

 

2129.65 DEATH BENEFIT.

 
 

2129.66 HOSPITALIZATION; PRESCRIPTION DRUG; DENTAL INSURANCE...
2129.67 THE POLICE AND FIREMEN'S DISABILITY AND PENSION FUND...
2129.68 SAFETY EQUIPMENT
2129.69 VACATIONS ...

 

 

 

2129.70 PAID HOLIDAY:

 

2129.71 FUNERAL PAY..
2129.72 JURY DUTY ....
2129.73 UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION ...

 

 

2129.74 COMPENSATED TIME CONSIDERED AS TIME WORKED

 

2129.75 WAGE RATES

 

2129.76 CLOTHING ALLOWANCE...

 

2129.77 OVERNIGHT PAY ...

 

2129.78 TRAVEL ALLOWANCE...

 

2129.79 TERMINATION AND SEVERANCE PAY....

 

2129.80 SHIFT PREMIUM .....

 

2129.81 POLICE SERVICE ALLOWANCE...

 

2129.82 TIME BANK...

 

2129.83 DISASTER TIME BANK.....

 

2129.84 PAYDAY

 

2129.85 SAFETY AND WELFARE.....

 

2129.86 PROVISIONS FOR SAFETY ..

 

2129.87 RULES AND ORDERS

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2129.88 RETRAINING
2129.89 OFFICIAL ISS

  

};UED EQUIPMENT/UNIFORM INSPECTIONS
2129.90 RETIREMENT
2129.91 OUTSIDE EMPLOYME!
2129.92 TRADE DAYS OFF
2129.93 CRITICAL INCIDEN
2129.9 CRITICAL INCIDENT PROTOCOL...

 

2129.95 EDUCATIONAL REIMBURSEMENT .....
2129.96 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT ...
2129.97 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY...

 

 

 

2129.98 CONTINUATION OF SERVICES...

 

2129.99 SAVINGS CLAUSE...

 

2129.100 MID TERM BARGAINING...

 

2129.101 CANINE UNIT.

 

2129.102 MOTORCYCLE UNIT

 

2129.103 LIFE PARTNER...

 

2129.104 DURATION OF AGREEMENT

 

iii
2129.01 Recognition of the Toledo Police Patrolman's Association, Local 10, I.U.P.A. -
A.F.L. - C.LO.

The City agrees to recognize the Toledo Police Patrolman's Association, Local 10,
(hereinafter referred to as the Association), as having jurisdiction over and being the sole and
exclusive bargaining agent for employees of the City working in the classifications that are listed
in Section 2129.02 herein for the purpose of establishing wages, hours of work, other terms and
conditions of employment, and handling of grievances. The City shall not negotiate with, nor
make any collective bargaining agreement or contract with any other employee group or with
any of the employees working in classifications covered by this agreement, individually or
collectively. All agreements entered into between the City and the employees covered by this
agreement shall be through duly authorized representatives of the Association. Any other
agreement shall be of no effect.

2129.02 Classifications

 

The classifications included within this bargaining unit, and their eligibility for
representation and benefits shall be as follows:

(a) Police Officer Trainee: All newly hired trainees shall complete the Ohio State Peace
Officers Training Council Minimum Standard Training Program prior to being assigned to any
regular police duties. At the conclusion of the training period, the Trainee who has successfully
completed the training course shall then be classified as a Police Officer Probationary and will be
assigned regular police duties. When O.P.O.T.A. (Ohio Police Officer Training Academy)
certified employees are hired, they as well shall be considered Trainee Police Officer until their
assignment as a Police Officer Probationary commences. Upon completion of the Police Officer
Trainee Program the employee will receive the first step wage increase. No Trainee shall be
assigned to any regular police duties nor receive any fringe benefits other than Hospitalization
and Death Benefit during the Academy training period.

 

 

Upon the employee having successfully completed the training period in the Police
Academy, he/she shall then be entitled to full fringe benefits. The Association shall represent a
new employee upon satisfactory completion of the Academy. However, the Association shall
not represent the employee in an issue pertaining to the acceptance or rejection of the employee
during the Probationary Period.

All O.P.O.T.A. Certified employees, laterally hired, shall be released from the Academy
for an orientation with the Association. This shall occur two (2) days or more prior to the
completion of the Academy, and shall be accomplished at the Association's facility at a time
agreed upon by the Police Administration and the Toledo Police Patrolman's Association.

(b) Police Officer - Probationary: All appointed employees shall serve a probationary
period of one (1) year of duty in actual police service after successful completion of the Police
Academy, or such longer period as agreed upon by the Director of Police Operations and the
Toledo Police Patrolman's Association to allow for an extended full evaluation of Probationary
Employee. They shall have no seniority during this probationary period, but upon completion of
this year, their seniority date shall be established as the original date of employment.

Absence from work for any reason, except schooling required by law, shall not be
included in calculating an employee's one (1) year probationary period, but in no event shall a
probationary employee become permanent until he has completed one hundred eighty (180)
work days of actual police service.

The City may discharge an employee at any time during the employee's training or
probationary periods and a statement of the reason(s) for such discharge shall be submitted to the
employee. The provisions of this section shall apply only to employees in their initial
probationary period or any mutually agreed upon extension.

(c) Police Officer: Employees upon the completion of the probationary period shall be
classified as police officers and will be known as permanent employees. Their training and
probationary periods shall then be counted for purposes of determining their entitlement to all
fringe benefits, as well as their continuous service date in the event of layoff.

The Association shall be the exclusive bargaining agent to address a new police class.
This is to occur at some time between the 130th and 150th days of their employment while they
are in attendance at the police academy, for the purpose of informing new employees of the
existence of the Association and their functions as representatives of employees.

(d) Sergeant-At-Arms: The position of Sergeant-At-Arms will be selected from the
rank of Police Officers. The Sergeant-At-Arms shall be selected by the City Council and his/her
duties shall be exclusive to the business of the Mayor and City Council. In the event of holidays
not covered within this agreement, said duties shall be defined by the Chief of Police.

2129.03 Field Training Officer

(A) _ Police Officers who are assigned to this program will be called Field Training
Officers (herein referred to as F.T.O.), however, the police officers shall retain the classification
of Police Officer for all provisions of this agreement. All police officers who are selected to
participate within this program will be assigned as an F.T.O. on an individual voluntary basis
only.

(B) _ The entry criteria into the Field Training Program shall be:
1. The applicant must have a minimum of three (3) years of continuous seniority
with the Department at the time of selection. Officers who do not meet this minimum

requirement but have prior police experience or exceptional abilities may be considered.

2. The applicant must have been assigned to Field Operations at any time for at least
six (6) months prior to date of application.
3. Successful applicants must be available for regular patrol beat assignments for
the duration of the process.

4. The applicant must have a commitment to the training and development of new
officers.

5. The applicant must be willing to work overtime to accomplish training and
evaluation duties when necessary.

(C) | Field Training Officers shall be selected by a committee to be composed of five
(5) representatives: two (2) from the current Field Training Officers to be appointed by the
Association; one (1) Field Training Sergeant; the Field Training Commander; and the Personnel
Commander.

The FTO Selection Committee will consider the following criteria:

1. Performance evaluation by current supervisor and Commander.

2. Discipline history as defined in Section 2129.25 and 2129.26 herein.

3. Attendance record.

4. Prior work product review (i.e. Incident reports, OH-1, and supplemental
reports).

5. Prior performance as an FTO (where applicable).

6. Writing sample based upon a defined circumstance.

7. A personal interview before the selection committee to include a problem solving
exercise.

(D) After interviewing all the candidates, the selection committee shall carefully
consider all the factors presented and produce a list of FTO nominees. When everything is equal
between two candidates, the officer most senior shall be the one nominated by the committee.

After the selection, all successful FTO candidates will undergo either basic, or refresher
FTO training. Those successfully completing the training will be certified eligible for actual
FTO service and benefits.

(E) Once an officer is a certified FTO, regardless if he/she is in actual training, he/she
will receive a five (5%) percent adjusted gross wage annually, payable in the 26 regular pay
periods. The adjusted gross wage will not be considered as a new base wage rate. The five (5%)
percent payment is also independent of the consideration provided in Section 2129.32, "Career
Enhancement Program."
(F) The officer will retain FTO certification except where there are general changes
of assignment, the officer chooses to withdraw from the Field Training Program, or where there
is just cause for removal.

(G) Cause for removal shall be directly related to one or more of those criterion used
in the selection proc listed in 2129.03 (B) and (C). Removal of certification may be
authorized only by the Chief of Police (or his designee) upon either the recommendation of the
Selection Committee or as a result of the disciplinary process.

 

(H) Commencing on September 1, 2014, a Patrolman certified as an FTO and has
been placed on Light Duty status fora NON-DUTY illness or injury (Section 2129.42) status
for a period of more than 90 days or has been placed in RESTRICTED DUTY status for a
period of more than 90 days shall relinquish his or her 5% FTO Pay for the duration after 90
days in this duty status. The 5% FTO pay shall be reinstated the first pay period they return to
full duty status in the Field Operations Bureaus.

 

 

 

 

 

(D An FTO Officer submitting a bid/Sgt. report for a TEMPORARY assignment
for a duration of more than 90 days, AND would change his FTO status to unavailable only
while a probationary class is actively working in the FTO Program, shall relinquish his or her
5% FTO pay for the duration of the officer’s TEMPORARY assignment. The 5% FTO pay
shall_be reinstated upon the officer’s return _to Field Operations duty regardless if a
robationary class is active in the FTO program.

 

 

 

 

 

   

J) Patrolmen whose duty assignment is the MOTORCYCLE UNIT and are FTO
certified shall be decertified of their FTO status as of December 20, 2014. The Motorcycle
Unit shall not consist of any FTO certified patrolman after this date. If the Motorcycle Unit is
eliminated from the Toledo Police Department by January 1, 2016, then those Patrolmen in
that Unit who previously had FTO status shall have their FTO status re-instated and remain in
the Field Operations Bureau available for FTO duty.

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Motorcycle Unit Patrolman shall receive forty (40) points as a_ specialty
assignment in the Career Enhancement Program (Section 2129.32) as of January 1, 2015.

 

 

2129.031 Corporal Stipend

Effective July 1, 2016, once Police Officers have achieved ten (10) years of continuous
service with the City of Toledo, they will be designated as Corporals. In addition, Police
Officers achieving ten (10) years service thereafter shall receive the Corporal Stipend upon their
ten- (10) year anniversary date. The stipend shall be paid, as set forth below, every year
thereafter. However, those officers shall retain the classification of Police Officer pursuant to
and for all provisions of this Agreement, including, but not limited to, Articles 2129.01 and
2129.02.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Once_an officer achieves Corporal designation, he/she will receive a_stipend of an
amount equal to three percent (3%) of the annual base_wage, payable in the 26 regular pay
periods. The amount paid will not be considered as a new base wage rate. The three percent

 

 

 
(3%) stipend is also independent of the consideration provided in Section 2129.32, "Career
Enhancement Program."

 

2129.04 Federally Funded Positions

Any Police Officer hired with Federal funds shall have the right to become members of
the Association recognized as the bargaining agent for Police Officers and shall be included in
the bargaining unit.

2129.05 Listing of New Employees

All employees shall be required to provide the Department with their current address and
phone number upon accepting employment and to update this information annually and/or at any
other time in which a change occurs.

The City will furnish the Association with a list of all new employees, their address and
phone number upon completion of their thirtieth (30th) calendar day of employment with the
Department of Police.

Upon the employee's completion of the training period, the City will furnish the
Association with a list of the duty assignments of the new employees.

The City will provide the Association, upon notification, the change in address or phone
number of the new employees in order that the Association will be able to discharge its
responsibilities.

2129.06 Agency Shop, Payroll Deductions and Dues Checkoff

(a) In recognition of the Toledo Police Patrolman's Association's services (herein referred
to as the T.P.P.A.) to the bargaining unit and the Toledo Police Patrolman's Association's role in
helping develop a harmonious and stable labor relationship between the bargaining unit
employees and the City, employees within the bargaining unit will, upon completion of the
academy training period, either become members of the Toledo Police Patrolman's Association
or share in the financial support of the Toledo Police Patrolman's Association by paying to the
Association a service fee as established by law not to exceed the amount of dues or initiation
service fees uniformly required of members of the Association.

 

(b) The Association shall notify non-members of their obligation to pay service fees and
such notification will include the procedures for payroll deductions and direct cash payments.

(c) The City shall pursuant to O.R.C. Chapter 4117 deduct current Association dues,
initiation service fees, initiation fees and equal assessments and service fees from the paychecks
of employees within the bargaining unit as set forth in the recognition clause. Dues shall be
deducted (in half payments) from the first two paychecks of the month for which current dues,
initiation fees, initiation service fees, equal assessments or service fees (each payable in advance)
are due the T.P.P.A.
(d) No other labor organization shall be afforded dues deductions.

(e) The City shall remit to the Financial Secretary of the Association, dues, service fees,
initiation fees, initiation service fees or equal assessments so deducted from the paychecks of the
employees covered herein by check or wire transfer at the union's discretion immediately
following said withholdings. The City shall provide monthly to the T.P.P.A., a list of those
members and non-members on payroll deduction.

(f) Nonpayment of service fees, initiation fees, initiation service fees, dues or other equal
assessments may be pursued by the Union at its option through collection or other remedies
permissible under Ohio law. The City will deduct any arrears in unpaid Association dues,
service fees, initiation service fees, initiation fees and equal assessments owed to the Association,
if and only if, the City has made an error in failing to deduct such dues, fees or equal as sments
during a former payroll period, or if the City receives a court-ordered garnishment of wages for
such fees or other court order requiring the same.

 

(g) Payment of dues or service fees shall not be a condition of continued employment.

(h) The Association shall indemnify and save the City harmless against any liability that
may arise out of, or by reason of, any actions taken by the City for the purpose of complying
with these provisions.

2129.07 Credit Union

The City agrees to deduct, from the paychecks of employees giving written authorization,
bi-weekly or monthly, any monies for any authorized Credit Union and remit same to such
authorized Credit Union by separate check.

2129.08 United Way and TPPA

The City agrees to deduct from the paychecks of employees giving written authorization,
any monies for the TPPA Charities and the United Way Payroll Deduction Program and remit
such withholdings to proper authorities.

2129.09 Police Insurance Fund

The City agrees to continue to make deductions for group insurance to protect
dependents of deceased Police Officers and to remit such withholdings to the Toledo Police
Insurance Fund.

2129.10 Deferred Compensation

The City shall make available during the term of this agreement the opportunity for all
employees to participate through payroll deduction in a Deferred Compensation Plan (Section
401-K Plan or Section 457 Plan) developed and administered by a provider designated by a joint
labor management committee, set up and chaired by the Association.
2129.11 Pledge Against Discrimination and Coercion

The provisions of this Agreement shall be applied to all employees, without
discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race, color, creed, national origin, or political
affiliation. The failure of the City or the Association to apply this agreement without
discrimination, when brought to the attention of either party, shall be subject to the provisions of
the grievance procedure.

All references to employee in this Agreement designates both sexes, and where the male
gender is used, it shall be construed to include male and female.

The City agrees not to interfere with the rights of employees to become members of the
Association, and there shall be no discrimination, interference, restraint, or coercion by the City
or its representatives against any employee activity in an official capacity on behalf of the
Association.

The Association recognizes its responsibility as bargaining agent and agrees to review
and/or present all employee grievances in the bargaining unit without discrimination,
interference, restraint or coercion. The Association agrees not to intimidate or coerce any
employee in an effort to recruit membership.

2129.12 Bulletin Boards
The City agrees to furnish glass enclosed bulletin boards with locks at all separate Police

facilities where requested for the use of the Association to post notices relative to Association
affairs.

 

Articles posted on the Association bulletin boards
by the City.

all not be removed or tampered with

Bulletin board placement shall be mutually agreed upon.
2129.13 Representatives

Effective January 1, 2010, there shall be a total of nine (9) representatives determined by
the association. If the Department designates a third district station, the number of
representatives shall increase to twelve (12) and remain at that level as long as the three district
stations are designated by the Chief.

One of the representatives from the respective District Stations shall be considered the
Senior Steward. Only the Senior Steward or his/her designee shall be released from an on duty
status for the purposes of attendance at the Association Monthly Board of Directors meeting.
The scheduling of this meeting shall be exclusive to the business of the Association.
These representatives shall be authorized to represent the employees in the First Step of
the Grievance Procedure. The employee who has a grievance shall be entitled to only one (1)
representative of his choice in the first step of such procedure. The representative shall be
allowed reasonable time to investigate the grievance with the employee in such a way that will
not unnecessarily interfere with the police operations. The President of the Association and/or
his designees shall continue to represent the Association in subsequent steps of the grievance
procedure.

   

The Association representatives shall make every effort to assist the supervisor in settling
grievances in the First Step of the Grievance Procedure. When the grievance cannot be settled at
the First Step, then the Association representative will refer it to the Association for further
handling in accordance with the grievance procedure provided herein.

If an employee is to be reprimanded by the supervisor, then he shall have the right to be
represented by the Association Steward before the supervisor.

The Association President and/or his designee will be allowed sufficient time to conduct
other necessary Association business.

The Association President shall be scheduled to work on the Administrative Schedule.
The Association President shall report to the Personnel Section by phone on days he is scheduled
to work and shall be considered as full time released. Additionally, a designee of the president
shall be placed on the day schedule and shall report to the Personnel Section and shall be
considered as full time released.

The Association elections shall be conducted in the Safety Building and the City agrees
to permit two (2) police officers as designated by the Association President to provide security
for the period of the election. The Association President agrees to assign off-duty personnel to
provide the security when practical.

The City agrees to afford the Association seventy five (75) additional days of release
time for the purpose of attending conferences, lectures, educational seminars and union related
activities per year.

 

The Association is entitled to have four representatives (excluding the President and the
designee of the President) released for contractual negotiations. The members of the Association
bargaining team shall receive ninety (90) days release time prior to the beginning of bargaining
over the next collective bargaining agreement which release time shall terminate upon
ratification of a new contract or on December 31, 2017, whichever occurs first. Additional time
shall be granted for fact finding and conciliation hearing dates. Any other release time for
preparation of the latter shall be as needed with any dispute over release time being resolved with
an agreed upon third party on an expedited basis.
2129.14 Grievance Procedure

The definition of a grievance shall be any dispute or difference that arises between the
City and the Association as to the interpretation or application of any provisions of this
agreement. Such dispute or difference (hereinafter referred to as "grievance") shall be settled in
accordance with the grievance procedure set forth.

It is the mutual desire of the City and Association to provide for prompt adjustment of
grievances in a fair and reasonable manner, with a minimum amount of interruption of the work
schedules. Every reasonable effort shall be made by both the City and Association to effect the
resolution of grievances at the earliest step possible. In the furtherance of this objective, the
following procedure shall be followed:

(a) FIRST STEP: When an employee has a grievance, the employee shall contact the
Association steward and they shall verbally discuss the matter with his Section Commander or
his designee and attempt to resolve the problem. The grievance must be brought to the attention
of the Section Commander or his designee within ten (10) work days of the employee having,
through the exercise of reasonable diligence, gained knowledge that a grievance exists. If the
grievance cannot be resolved through verbal discussion, then it shall be reduced to writing and
presented to the Bureau Commander or Section Commander by the Association. The specific
contract section(s) at issue must be cited in the grievance. The Bureau Commander or Section
Commander shall indicate, in writing, his response to the grievance by the end of the shift, on the
tenth (10th) work day following the day on which the written grievance was presented.

If the answer of the Bureau Commander or Section Commander is not satisfactory, then
the Association shall have ten (10) work days to appeal the grievance to the Second Step of this
grievance procedure.

"Work days" for purposes of all provisions of this collective bargaining agreement shall
be Monday through Friday, excluding major holidays. Any reference to days herein, unless
specified as calendar days, shall be considered as "work days".

 

(b) SECOND STEP: Grievances not settled in the First Step shall be delivered to the
Chief of the Department of Police. The Chief of the Department of Police and/or his designee
shall attempt to settle or have settled the grievance within ten (10) work days after the
submission to his office. If the answer of the Chief is not satisfactory, then the Association shall
have ten (10) work days to appeal the grievance to the Third Step of this grievance procedure.

(c) THIRD STEP: If the dispute is not settled to the satisfaction of all concerned parties,
then the grievance shall be submitted to the Director of Public Safety and/or her/his designees
who shall jointly attempt to settle the dispute. The Directors shall provide a written answer to the
grievance within ten (10) work days after the matter has been submitted. If the answer of the
Directors is not satisfactory, the Association shall have fifteen (15) work days to appeal the
grievance to the Fourth Step of this grievance procedure.

 
(d) FOURTH STEP: If the decision of the City as given in the Third Step of the
Grievance Procedure is not satisfactory, then the Association shall notify the City in writing
within fifteen (15) work days after the answer of the Director, that the grievance is to be
submitted to arbitration. The parties may mutually agree to a mediator to discuss any grievance.
The mediator may give an advisory opinion as to the merits of the grievances before him/her.
Said opinion shall not be used in any subsequent arbitration; nor shall it prejudice the positions of
either party. The cost of said mediation shall be borne equally by the parties. Within fifteen (15)
work days after notification when a grievance is submitted to arbitration the parties will decide if
the Expedited Advisory Labor Arbitration process is to be used as set forth in this contract, or, if
not, then the following process for binding arbitration is to be followed. At the request of either
party, the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service or the American Arbitration Association
will submit a list of seven (7) names of available arbitrators. In the event that the parties cannot
agree on the medium for presentation of these issues, the Federal Mediation Conciliation Service
shall be used. Upon receipt of the list within fourteen (14) work days, the City and the
Association representative shall alternately strike one (1) name from the list. The side to strike
the first name shall be chosen by lot. The person whose name has been chosen shall become the
arbitrator. The arbitration shall be heard at the arbitrator's earliest available date. The fees and
expenses of the arbitrator shall be paid by the party against whom the arbitrator renders an
adverse decision.

 

 
 

In the event more than one grievance is referred to the same hearing, the costs of the
arbitration shall be divided proportionately, the loser bearing the proportionate share of the costs
for the cases lost. All other expenses for witnesses or otherwise shall be borne by the party
incurring the cost. However, any City employee called as a witness by either side, will continue
to receive his regular rate of pay while attending such a hearing, not to exceed the normal eight
(8) hours.

Arbitration shall be limited to matters concerning the interpretation or application of
provisions as listed herein. However, by mutual agreement of the City and the Association, the
grievance procedure set forth above may be used in other matters.

All written responses at steps 2 and above are to be sent to the Vice-President responsible
for grievances and the President of the Association. All grievances and appeals filed at steps 3
and above are to be sent to the Director of Public Safety, the Director of Human Resources, and
the Chief of Police. Grievances, appeals and responses sent by U.S. mail shall be deemed
received as of the date of posting.

Any grievance that originates from a level above the First Step of the grievance
procedure shall be submitted directly to the step or level from which it originates.

Grievance awards that specify the individual(s) to be paid and the amount shall be issued
by the next full pay period after the award date.
2129.15 Expedited Labor Arbitration Rules

The City and the Association shall jointly establish a list which will be defined as an
Expedited Labor Arbitration Panel. All grievances referred to this Panel will be by mutual
agreement.

The Panel of Labor Arbitrators will be comprised of ten (10) persons and shall be
selected from a panel of twenty-five (25) arbitrators as forwarded by the Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service. The list shall be put in random order as selected by the parties after a coin
toss to determine the first selector. An Arbitrator, upon rendering a decision, shall be placed in
the tenth (10th) position and the person originally listed as second will become the next
Arbitrator so assigned.

The hearing shall be conducted by the Arbitrator in whatever manner will most
expeditiously permit a full presentation of the evidence and arguments of the parties. There shall
be no stenographic record of the proceedings, but the Arbitrator shall make an appropriate record
of the proceedings. Normally, the hearing shall be completed in one (1) day. In unusual
circumstances and for good cause shown, the Arbitrator may extend the hearing beyond one (1)
day, and schedule an additional hearing, within five (5) work days.

There shall be no post hearing briefs.

The arbitration may proceed in the absence of any party who, after due notice, fails to be
present. An award shall not be made solely on the default of a party. The Arbitrator shall
require the attending party to submit supporting evidence.

The Arbitrator shall be the sole judge of the relevancy and materiality of the evidence
offered.

When both sides have completed their presentations, the Arbitrator shall ask whether
either party has any further evidence to offer or witnesses to be heard. Upon receiving negative
replies, the Arbitrator shall declare and note the hearing closed.

The award shall be rendered promptly by the Arbitrator and, unless otherwise agreed by
the parties, not later than five (5) work days from the date of the close of the hearing.

The awards shall be in writing and shall be signed by the Arbitrator. If the Arbitrator
determines that an opinion is necessary, it shall be in summary form.

The expenses of non-City employee witnesses for either side shall be paid by the party
producing such witnesses. City employees called as witnesses shall be paid if called during
normal working hours.

The Arbitrator shall interpret and apply these rules insofar as they relate to the
Arbitrator's powers and duties.
The decision rendered by the Arbitrator shall not be precedent setting, but will be final
and binding on the specific issue involved.

2129.16 Default in Answer

In the event that the City fails to answer a grievance within the time required at any step
of the grievance procedure, or if the Association fails to appeal the answer given to the next step
of the grievance procedure within the time allowed, then the grievance will be considered settled
against the side which has defaulted. However, any of the time limits in the grievance procedure
may be extended by mutual agreement. Grievances settled by default cannot be the basis of
establishing precedent for the settlement of any other grievances.

2129.17 Legal Counsel

(a) The Association's Attorney may be brought in to represent the Association or the
member at any step of the discipline or grievance procedure as defined herein.

(b) At the sole election of the Director of Law and consistent with the applicable Rules
of Professional Responsibility, independent legal counsel may be retained by the City to
represent members of the Association when they are sued for conduct within the scope of their
employment. The Director of Law may engage outside counsel for this purpose without further
Council authorization if the anticipated fees and expenses do not exceed Ten Thousand Dollars
($10,000.00). In the event the anticipated fees and expenses are estimated to exceed that amount,
or if after the initial retention it becomes apparent that the fees and expenses will exceed that
amount, the Director of Law shall seek Council authorization for the expenditure or additional
expenditures. The outside counsel or law firm used for purposes of this provision shall be by
agreement of the Law Director and the T.P.P.A.

2129.18 Acceleration or Extension of Grievances

Upon mutual agreement between the person who should answer the grievance at each
step and the Association, any step or steps in this procedure may be combined, to accelerate the
resolution of the grievance. Each person responsible to answer at each step shall make an
immediate decision as to whether the grievance is to be advanced. Upon mutual agreement, the
time limits set forth herein may be extended providing such extension is agreed to by both sides
in writing.

2129.19 Employee's Bill of Rights

A. An employee has the right to the presence of counsel and/or a representative of his
recognized bargaining unit and the right of cross-examination of all witnesses at disciplinary
hearings requested before the Chief of Police, the Safety Director, Civil Service Commission
and/or before an Arbitrator.

 

B. An employee who is to be questioned as a suspect in any investigation of any
criminal charge against him shall be advised of his Constitutional Rights before any questioning
starts. Internal Affairs questioning of the Officer named in the criminal complaint and any
administrative charges against that Officer, shall be delayed until after the trial stage of the
criminal case provided: (1) the Officer involved declines to participate in the administrative
investigation and (2) the Officer removes himself/herself from duty without pay.

The City recognizes that criminal investigations of a police officer should be and will be
handled in the same manner as a criminal investigation that would involve any citizen.

C. Before an employee may be charged with any violation of the Departmental Rules
and Regulations for a refusal to answer questions or participate in an investigation, he shall be
advised that his refusal to answer questions, or participate in such investigation, may be made the
basis of such a charge.

D. Any interrogation, questioning or interview shall be conducted at a reasonable hour,
preferably while the employee is working. Interrogation sessions shall be for reasonable periods
of time, and time shall be allowed during the questioning for rest periods or for other physical
necessities. The employee has the right to the presence of an Association representative during
these sessions.

 

 

E. The employee shall be informed of the nature of the investigation prior to any
questioning.

F. When a single anonymous complaint is made against an employee and there is no
corroborative evidence of any kind, the employee accused shall not be required to submit to
interrogation or make a report.

G. The Department may divulge the fact that a particular officer is under investigation,
but, may not release any additional information until the investigation is completed and the
employee is either cleared or charged. Prompt notice must be provided to the Association when
upon inquiry the Department divulges the fact that an officer is under investigation.

H. When an employee suspected of a violation is being interrogated in an Internal
Affairs investigation, such interrogation shall be recorded at the request of either party.

I. An employee who has been charged with a violation of any Departmental policies, or
Rules and Regulations, shall upon request be provided the opportunity to inspect and obtain
written statements and any other material as a condition to its use at a hearing on such charge.

Such request must be made forty-eight (48) hours prior to the scheduled hearing time.
However, the forty-eight (48) hour provision may be waived in the event of extenuating
circumstances.

J. No hearing that may result in the dismissal, demotion, suspension or reprimand shall
be held unless the employee is notified of the hearing and the reasons for it at least seven (7)
calendar days prior thereto.
K. Any evidence obtained in the course of an Internal Affairs investigation through the
use of administrative pressures, threats or promises made to the employee shall not be used in
any subsequent criminal court action.

L. In the course of an Internal Affairs investigation, a polygraph examination will be
administered only with the consent of the officer under investigation. If in the course of an
internal investigation, an employee has been given a polygraph examination, such examination
shall not be used in any subsequent criminal court action.

M. When an employee is to be interviewed in an investigation of any other member of
the Police Department, such interview shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure
established herein.

N. Any Officer brought before the Internal Affairs Unit for investigation has the right
upon request to have present an attorney. Any information divulged at said interview shall
remain confidential.

O. If the rights of the employee who is under investigation as provided herein have been
violated, the violation shall be subject to the grievance procedure, but limited to the Third Step of
such procedure.

P. Investigations by Internal Affairs with regard to minor violations shall be completed
within forty-five (45) calendar days after filing of the original Departmental Investigation Form
(D.LF.).

Major complaint investigations, other than criminal complaints involving felony
violations, shall be completed within one hundred (100) calendar days after filing of the original
D.LF. unless upon request to the Safety Director an extension of time for such investigation to be
completed is granted. The Association must be notified of the Safety Director's decision upon
the granting of an extension request.

Criminal complaints involving felony investigations shall be investigated and completed
in accordance with the statute of limitations set out in the Ohio Revised Code.

An additional fifteen (15) calendar days shall be provided beyond the forty-five (45) and
one hundred (100) day limits above in cases where the investigation is not initiated in the Internal
Affairs Section although a D.LF. has been filed.

2129.20 Drug and Alcohol Testing
1. Policy Statement
The Police Department recognizes illegal drug usage and abuse of alcohol as a threat to

the public safety and welfare and to the employees of the Department. Thus, the Police
Department will take the necessary steps, including drug and alcohol testing, to eliminate illegal
drug usage and alcohol abuse. The goal of this policy is prevention and rehabilitation rather than
termination. All officers shall be eligible for random drug testing.

  

2. Definitions

The term "drug" includes cannabis as well as other controlled substances as defined in
the Ohio Revised Code.

The term "illegal drug usage" includes the use of cannabis or any controlled substance
which has not been legally prescribed and/or dispensed, or the abusive use of a legally prescribed
drug.

3. Notice and Education of Employees Regarding Drug and Alcohol Testing

All employees will be informed of the Police Department's drug and_alcohol testing
policy before testing is administered. Employees will be provided with information concerning
the impact of the use of drugs and alcohol on job performance. In addition, the employer will
inform the employees of the manner in which the tests are conducted, the reliability of the tests
performed, under what circumstances employee will be subject to testing, what the tests can
determine, and the consequences of testing positive for illegal drug use or alcohol abuse. All
new employees will be provided with this information when initially hired. No employee shall
be tested until this information has been provided.

4. Basis for Ordering an Employee to be Tested for Drug or Alcohol Abuse. Employees
may be tested for drug or alcohol abuse under any of the following conditions:

a. Where there is reasonable suspicion that the Police Officer to be tested is using or
abusing illegal drugs.

b. Where there is reasonable suspicion that the Police Officer to be tested is using or
abusing alcohol while on duty.

 

c. An off-duty officer who is engaged in misconduct as defined in the Department
Manual who either identified himself as a police officer in an attempt to mitigate the issue of
his/her misconduct or acts under the color of their authority may be subjected to alcohol testing.
For purpose of this paragraph c., a “‘positive test result” is defined as .08 BAC or above. An off-
duty officer who tests positive will be required to attend and complete mandatory treatment
counseling. A positive test result in and of itself is not the basis for an additional disciplinary
action.

 

 

 

 

d. When an employee is required to submit to alcohol/drug testing while off-duty they
shall be compensated per the Work in Excess of Regular Workday section 2129.50.

e. Those officers who are permanently or temporarily assigned to work the following:

Property Room, Bulk Cash Task Force, Drug and Gang Reduction Team, Tactical Operations
Team, Metro Drug Task Force, Bomb Squad, and Canine Unit may be tested once annually for
drugs and/or alcohol.

 

f. Those officers on a promotional eligibility list may be tested prior to promotion.

All orders requiring employees to submit to drug or alcohol testing shall be in writing
setting forth the reasonable suspicion before the test is ordered.

5. Urine Samples

Specimen collection will occur in a medical setting and the procedures should not
demean, embarrass, or cause physical discomfort to the employee.

Each step in the collecting and processing of the urine specimens shall be documented to
establish procedural integrity and the chain of evidence.

For an employee who tests positive, a professional medical interview with the employee
will serve to establish use of drugs currently taken under professional medical supervision.

The employee designated to give a sample must be positively identified prior to any
sample being taken.

Specimen samples shall be sealed, labeled and checked against the identity of the
employee to ensure the results match the testee. Samples shall be stored in a secured and
refrigerated atmosphere until tested or delivered to the testing lab representative.

Upon request, an employee shall be entitled to the presence of a union representative
before testing is administered.

6. Breath Testing

Specimen collection will occur in a medical setting and the procedures should not
demean, embarrass, or cause physical discomfort to the employee.

Each step in the collecting and processing shall be documented to establish procedural
integrity and the chain of evidence.

 

 

 

 

The employee designated to give a sample must be positively identified prior to any
sample being taken.

 

Upon request, an employee shall be entitled to the presence of an union representative
before testing is administered.

 

7. Testing Procedures

16
The laboratory selected by the City to conduct the analysis must be experienced and
capable of quality control, documentation, chain of custody, technical expertise, and
demonstrated proficiency in urinalysis testing.

The testing or processing phase shall consist of a two-step procedure.

(i) Initial screening step, and
(ii) Confirmation step.

The urine sample is first tested using a screening procedure. A specimen testing positive
will undergo an additional confirmatory test. An initial positive report will not be considered
positive, rather it will be classified as confirmation pending.

Where a positive report is received, urine specimens shall be maintained under secured
storage for a period of not less than one (1) year.

Any sample which has been adulterated or is shown to be a substance other than urine
shall be reported as such.

All test results shall be evaluated by a suitably trained physician, or a person with a Ph.D.
in chemistry or a related science, or the equivalent in related education or experience, prior to
being reported.

A positive test for alcohol on-duty will be a .04 BAC and above. Any officer who tests
positive may be subject to discipline and/or mandatory treatment counseling.

 

Any on-duty officer who has under .04 BAC shall not be subject to discipline but will be
required to go home. This officer may utilize any accumulated compensatory or vacation time to
cover their absence. Any on-duty officer who tests at .04 BAC and above while on-duty may be
subject to discipline. An on-duty officer who tests positive will be required to_attend_and

complete mandatory treatment counseling.

 

 

 

 

All unconfirmed positive test records shall be destroyed by the laboratory.

Test results shall be treated with the same confidentiality as other employee medical
records. Test results used as evidence for disciplinary action shall also be entitled to the same
confidentiality.

8. Disciplinary Action
Officers who, as a result of being ordered to be drug or alcohol tested, are found to be
abusing drugs or alcohol may be subject to dismissal. Refusal to submit to a drug or alcohol test,

adulteration of, or switching a urine sample may also be grounds for dismissal.

Voluntary submission to a chemical dependence program can be a basis for consideration
prior to imposition of penalty.
9. Right to Appeal

An officer disciplined as a result of a drug or alcohol test has the right to challenge the
results of such drug or alcohol test through the disciplinary appeal procedures in Section
2129.22.

10. Voluntary Participation in a Dependency Program

An officer may, at any time, voluntarily enter a chemical dependency program. This
may be done through the Employee Assistance Program or by direct contact with the other
providers of such services. Knowledge gained by the employee's voluntary admission or
participation in a chemical dependency treatment program shall not be used as the basis for
discipline. An officer shall be allowed to use sick time or any other accumulated leave to enter
into an in-patient treatment program.

 

Information regarding treatment of employees in chemical dependency programs shall
remain confidential and shall not be released to the public.

Although an officer will not be subject to disciplinary action where the employee
voluntarily submits to treatment as discussed above, the Police Department reserves the right to
insure that the Police Officer is fit for duty. An officer found temporarily unfit for duty because
of drug or alcohol abuse shall be treated as are those similarly situated, i.e., sick leave, temporary
reassignment, if available.

i. Duty Assignment After Treatment

Once an employee successfully completes rehabilitation and is fit for duty, the officer
shall be returned to the regular duty assignment, except that the officer’s return to Property
Management, Bulk Cash Task Force, Drug and Gang Reduction Team, Tactical Operations
Team, Metro Drug Task Force, Bomb Squad, and Canine Unit shall be at the discretion of the
Chief of Police. Officer reassignment during treatment shall be at the discretion of the Chief of
Police based on each individual's circumstances. If follow-up care is prescribed after treatment,
this may be imposed as a condition of continued employment. Once treatment and any follow-
up care is completed, at the end of two years the records of treatment and positive drug test
results shall be retired to a closed medical record. The Chief of Police or his designee shall have
the right to test the employee up to four (4) times in the calendar year following the officer’s
return to work in a full duty status. The police officer shall be given a fresh start with a clean
administrative record. Except that discipline records shall be retained as is provided for in
Section 2129.25.

 

 

 

12. Right of Union Participation

At any time, the Union shall be notified, and will have the right to inspect and observe
any aspect of the drug and alcohol -testing program with the exception of individual test results.
The Union may inspect individual test results if the release of this information is authorized by
the employee involved.

 

 
13. Union Held Harmless

This drug and alcohol -testing program is initiated solely at the behest of the employer.
The Police Department shall be solely liable for any legal obligations and costs arising out of
employees' claims based on constitutional rights regarding the application of this Section of the
collective bargaining agreement relating to drug and alcohol testing. The Union shall be held
harmless for the violation of any employee's constitutional rights.

The employer is not responsible for any legal obligations and costs for claims based on
the Union's duty of fair representation.

2129.21 Firearms Review Board

When an employee is summoned to appear before the Firearms Review Board, the Police
Officer may have a representative of the recognized bargaining unit appear and speak on his
behalf.

2129.22 Relief from Duty

No employee shall be relieved from duty without first being afforded the right to a
hearing as provided in Section 2129.23, except where it is necessary to immediately relieve the
employee from duty for the safety and welfare of the community, or to preserve the good order
and discipline of the Department.

When such a situation occurs, the employee shall be advised of his/her status within
seven (7) calendar days.

The Department shall notify the officer and the Association within the seven (7) calendar
day period of the specific charges or reasons that have resulted in the officer's removal from duty
without pay. The Association shall have the right to dispute the legitimacy of any charge used
by the Department to support the removal from duty of any officer. An officer relieved from
duty shall be reimbursed with full back pay in the event the officer is found innocent in the
administrative process of the charges which resulted in the officer's relief from duty, except to
the extent of any suspension imposed for other charges of which the employee is found guilty in
the administrative process.

2129.23 Suspension or Disciplinary Action

When departmental charges are to be filed against an employee, the Chief of Police or his
designee shall have the charges against the employee reduced to writing with two (2) copies of
the charges to be served on the employee. The employee may request a hearing with the Chief
of Police to be conducted by the Chief or his designee not sooner than seven (7) work days and
not more than fourteen (14) work days after the written charges have been served upon the
employee.
Requests for hearings shall be made in writing within five (5) work days after the charges
have been served on the employee. If a hearing is not requested, the Chief/designee shall render
his decision without a hearing within said fourteen (14) work day period.

If the Chief or his designee recommends the suspension of an employee, then he shall
forthwith, in writing, certify to the Director of Public Safety the fact of such suspension. Within
five (5) days from the receipt of such certification the Director of Within five (5) days from the
receipt of such certification the Director of Public Safety shall proceed to inquire into the cause
of the suspension as provided in Section 143 of the Charter of the City of Toledo. The Director
of Public Safety at his discretion may conduct a hearing on the suspension as provided in the
Charter and the employee shall have the right to be represented at such hearing.

The Director of Public Safety shall render judgment in the matter and take action as he
deems suitable and as is provided for in the Charter.

The decision of the Safety Director with regard to the suspension or dismissal of an
employee may, at the request of the employee, be appealed to the Civil Service Commission as
provided in Section 144 of the Charter or, at the discretion of the Association, be submitted to
final and binding arbitration.

  

2129.24 Reprimand

When it becomes necessary for a supervisor to reprimand an employee, it shall be done
with discretion in a manner as not to cause public embarrassment to the employee. In the event
that a verbal or written reprimand is issued that is to be made a part of the official personnel
record of an employee, the only appeal that will be provided is an "appeal review" whereby the
Association, on behalf of the member, sets forth in writing to the Chief of Police why the
reprimand should not have been issued. The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall then review
the facts giving cause for the issuance of the reprimand and shall make a final determination.

In the event that a supervisor finds it necessary to reprimand an employee, the employee
shall be made aware that a record of such reprimand is being maintained in the supervisor's files
or records. The supervisor shall provide the employee with a copy of the supervisor's notations.
The employee shall acknowledge receipt of same by signing and dating the original copy of the
record.

2129.25 Disciplinary Record Retention

The City shall only retain disciplinary records (including but not limited to records
contained in the personnel service file and investigative files) for the time periods set forth in the
following schedule:

Period Records

5 years All records relating to cases of suspensions of 30 days or more

20
4 years All other disciplinary records

The above period shall commence upon issuance of the reprimand, Safety Director's
decision, or the Chief's decision when it is accepted. In investigations resulting in a finding of
exonerated, non-sustained, or unfounded, the period shall commence upon such finding.

Commencing January 1, 1994 and thereafter all disciplinary records maintained by the
City that exceed the above retention schedule shall be destroyed. The City may maintain a
statistical record showing numbers, types, and levels of discipline and a statistical profile of
officers' disciplined, but shall not maintain any records identifying individual officers beyond the
specified periods.

The union agrees to make available and provide copies to the city, any and all
disciplinary records that they have in their possession to determine relevancy in any appeal
hearing. The question of as to admissibility of said documents will remain with the
administrative hearing officer and/or arbitrator.

2129.26 Personal Service Record
All Police Officers shall be permitted to review their Personal Service Records and shall
receive a copy of all additions thereto. The Personal Service Record of a Police Officer shall be

cleared of any offenses in accordance with the following schedule:

(A) All reprimands shall be removed from the Personal Service Record after two (2)
years from the date of the reprimand.

(B) All suspensions of less than thirty (30) days shall be removed from the personal
service record after three (3) years from the date of the suspension.

(C) Any suspension of thirty (30) days or more, shall be removed from the Personal
Service Record after five (5) years from the date of the suspension.

(D) Suspensions, as set forth in (B) and (C) above, may be removed after two (2) years
from the date of the suspension at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

It shall be the responsibility of the Police Officer to request that the Chief of Police
consider the expungement of those documents as defined within this section.

(E) In reference to the classification Police Officer Trainee, upon successful completion
of the Police Academy all reprimands and counseling records shall not be used in future

disciplinary hearings.

(F) Personnel Service Record shall be subject to the record retention provisions as
established in Section 2129.25.

21
2129.27 Resignation

Any Police Officer whose removal from the service is sought may resign at any time
prior to the decision of the Safety Director. The employee's work record as it pertains to the
resignation shall show only that he resigned of his own accord. Upon request, a copy of the
work record shall be furnished to the employee.

2129.28 Interviews Upon Employment Termination

Upon an employee's resignation or retirement, he shall be afforded an interview with the
Chief of Police and/or his designee. The purpose of this interview shall be to allow the employee
to express reasons for termination and his views on the operation of the Department. A
permanent record shall be made of these reasons and views with a copy being given to the
employee and also sent to the Association.

2129.29 Seniority

Seniority for purposes of determining layoff and recall from layoff rights shall be based
upon an employee's total length of continuous service in the Police Department. Seniority for
purposes of determining eligibility to take promotional examinations in the Department shall be
based upon an employee's total length of service from the date of appointment to the Police
Department. Where more than one employee has been appointed on the same date, then his
seniority shall be in accordance with his position on the original appointment list. The
employee's service with the City in any Department thereof shall be counted for the purpose of
determining the employee's eligibility for all fringe benefits. The City will provide up-to-date
seniority lists of the employees included in the bargaining unit upon reasonable request.

In the event an employee is reinstated after having had a break in his continuous service
in the Police Department for any reason, he shall be reinstated at the salary step that he was at
when he left, provided said employee shall have a new seniority date for the purpose of
computation of all fringe benefits. His new seniority date shall be his original date of hire less
any break in continuous service. Said employee, if reinstated, in accordance with Civil Service
Rules, shall be entitled to full fringe benefits from his first day of re-employment.

2129.30 Bidding for Assignment

All vacancies and/or new assignments created in the Department of Police shall be filled
through the bidding process as set forth in this section and 2129.31 of this Agreement. When a
vacancy occurs, all bids will go out via email alert along with the N & B, as far in advance as
possible to allow employees an opportunity to submit their bids for these vacancies and/or new
assignments.

 

The notice of a vacancy shall be read at all roll calls for a period of three (3) days and
shall remain open an additional four (4) days for a total of at least seven (7) days from the day
first posted. An employee may submit his bid to any of the vacancies in the Department. All
bids submitted shall be accepted by the Department for consideration. All bids will be submitted

22
electronically via the intranet. Officers having difficulty submitting bids electronically can get
assistance from the Personnel section. While on vacation, if an officer does not have the ability
to bid within the timeline of that bid, at the request of the officer, Personnel section employees
shall input an electronic bid on the officer’s behalf.

 

 

 

Category 3 bids shall require three (3) years of Field Operations experience after
graduation from the TPD Academy before being able to bid on a vacancy. An officer must be
off probation before being able to bid for a Category | bid.

 

 

 

After the bids are received, the results of these bids will establish an eligibility list which
will run for a period of not to exceed six (6) months (or the life of this Section, whichever is less)
from the day of posting unless extended at the discretion of the Chief for an additional six (6)
months. When new vacancies occur, additional bids will be accepted within the period of the
list. Any employee previously interviewed shall have the prerogative to ask for another
interview if he feels his qualifications have changed.

2129.31 Filling Vacant Positions

(A) Assignment of Police Officers to vacant positions within the Department will be
accomplished through the procedure established herein.

Vacant positions shall be separated into three categories and assignments shall be made
accordingly:

1. Positions which shall be exempt from the bidding procedure and will be filled at the
discretion of the Chief, both in filling a vacancy and in determining tenure of the Officer in the
position.

Positions which fall in this category are as follows:

Administrative Staff, Special Operations Bureau, Planning, Research and Inspections,
Accreditation Unit, False Alarms, E.A.P./Peer Support, Technical Services Unit, Motor
Pool Office, and Property Management Unit.

 

 

Officers in the Special Operations Bureau _who previously had Category 3 protection
prior to the 2012 CBA shall retain that protection.

The City agrees to maintain _a_ minimum of four (4) Patrolmen_ in the Criminal
Intelligence Section. The current four (4) positions which were originally bid as
Category 3 (Crime Analysis) now incorporated into the Criminal Intelligence Section
will retain Category 3 protection. Any future bids to this Section shall be Category 1.

 

 

 

 

2. Positions where the seniority of the Police Officer shall be given sole preference,
providing the Officer seeking assignment is capable of performing the required duties of the
assignment.

Positions falling into this category are as follows:

23
Traffic Section and Records Bureau. The City shall retain a minimum of eleven (11)
Police Officers in the Traffic Section, and eight (8) Police Officers in the Records
Bureau.

 

 

3. Positions which shall be subject to the selection process as set forth below.

Positions falling into this category are as follows:

Training Section — Academy

Court Liaison Unit

Community Services Bureau

PAL Office

Motorcycle Unit

Canine Unit

Aviation Unit

Investigations Bureau — Persons, Property, SVU, Cold Case Office, Burglary, Theft.
Video Office, Computer Crimes, Auto Theft Unit, Domestic Violence Office,
Northwest Ohio Violent Crime Task Force, Missing Persons, STU (Scientific
Investigation Unit)

Backgrounds and Recruitment Unit

   

  

 

 

 

The selection process for Category 3 positions will consist of a maximum 100 point scale
using the following scoring system:

Written testing and/or task performance 40 point maximum
e Each panel member ranks on a scale of 1-40
e The average of the panel is the applicant’s score
e Must utilize standardized questions not repeated from previous processes

Oral interview 40 point maximum
e Each panel member ranks on a scale of 1-40
e The average of the panel is the applicant’s score
e Must utilize standardized questions not repeated from previous processes

Education 5 point maximum
e Associate Degree/Junior Status or >40 hours of
specialized training 1 point
e Bachelor Degree 3 points
e Postgraduate Degree 5 points

The categories are not cumulative

Discipline 5 point maximum
e 1 major suspension (30 days or greater) -10 points
e 1 minor suspension (less than 30 days) -5 points
e 3 or more reprimands -4 points

24
e = 2reprimands -2 points

 

e = 1 reprimand 0 points
¢ No discipline 5 points
Negative points for reprimand(s) and suspension(s) shall be cumulative
Evaluation 5 point maximum
e Unacceptable 0 points
e Acceptable 2 points
e Excellent 5 points
Seniority 4 point maximum
e 5-9 years 2 points
e 10-14 years 3 points
e 15+ years 4 points
Sick Time Usage 2 point maximum
e Average 2 sick days or less per year for a 3-year period 2 points
e Average 3 sick days 0 points
e Average 4 sick days -1 point
e Average 5 or more sick days per year for a 3-year period -5 points
e Average 10 or more sick days per year for a 3-year period —_-10 points

Sick time usage is subject to a panel review. If an acceptable explanation for excessive sick time
usage can be articulated, the penalty can be reduced or eliminated

The applicants will be ranked in order based on the above 100 point scale. Tie scores will be
broken by the most senior officer receiving the higher ranking.

Selection will be made in the following manner:

e The most qualified candidates will consist of those that registered an actual score of 70
points or higher.

¢ Only the most qualified candidates will be considered for assignment.

e The first vacancy filled will be from the person scoring the most points and the second
selection will be made by administrative selection. The third selection will be from rank
order (next highest on the list), and the fourth by administrative selection. This pattern of
selection will continue for the pendency of the list.

e  Ifnone of the candidates score at least 70 points, the position shall be rebid.

(B) For all other positions, except as otherwise stated herein and except for those in the
Operations Division, Central and Scott Park District Stations, bids will be accepted for

 

25
assignment to the Division and assignment within the Division will be at the discretion of the
Department Head.

 

 

In selecting Officers to be assigned to vacancies, a standard job description and
qualification form shall be available to all Officers seeking to bid for the assignment. The
Officer shall complete the standard bidding form relative to the vacancy, in advance of the
interview with the Bureau Head or his designee.

The interview shall consist of a standard questioning format for all interviews. The
Bureau Head or his designee shall make recommendations to the Chief of the Department, who
will have the final determination as to the Officers to be selected.

Qualifications, competence and seniority shall be given fair consideration by the Chief in
selecting Officers to fill these vacancies. For the purpose of this section, seniority shall be
defined as the employee's accumulated length of service with the Department.

(C) When an Officer has been assigned to a vacant position under the second and third
categories, the Officer will retain the assignment except where there are general changes of
assignment or where there is just cause for removal. Officers assigned to the Tactical Operations
Team and the Drug and Gang Reduction Team shall serve in a six (6) month probationary
period.

In the event the Chief of Police due to general changes of assignment removes employees
and transfers them to other Bureaus or Sections, the employee(s) shall be removed by reverse
seniority. When the affected vacancies are back filled, the assignments shall be filled with the
most senior displaced employee being the first to be returned and all other returned employees
falling in that order provided the return occurs within four (4) years of the change in assignment.

 

2129.32 Career Enhancement Program
1. PURPOSE

The purpose of the Career Enhancement Program (CEP) is to provide the path to
improve the skills, enhance productivity, evaluate performance, promote professional growth, as
well as job satisfaction for Patrolmen. This concept is further designed to provide compensation
for advanced education as well as certain designated skills or a combination of formal education
and professional training. The CEP is an alternative career path which as designed will assist in
retaining as well as creating highly motivated and skilled police officers. The net result will be
an economic asset to the City of Toledo.

2. THE PROGRAM
The Career Enhancement Program is a nine-level phased program; based upon the

accumulation of point scores for education and achievement, as well as certain specified specific
job assignments.

26
3. ENTRY INTO THE PROGRAM

The Career Enhancement Program is open to any police officer who meets the
following minimum entry qualifications:

A.

A minimum of three (3) full years from the date of appointment to the Police
Department.

Concurrence by the CEP Committee (defined herein).

qd)

(2)

@)

qd)

(2)

All police officers who wish to be placed within the program must
submit their respective application to the Commander of Personnel.

Applications will be reviewed annually and shall be submitted on the
Career Enhancement Application Form after November Ist and by
November 30th of each year. Points shall be based upon achievement
as of December 31.

Movement of an officer into one of the CEP pay steps shall not be
considered as a promotion under City Charter or Civil Service Rules.

It shall be the full responsibility of the officer to properly complete the
application form (as established) as well as to provide such
documentation/materials which will enable the CEP committee to make
a determination.

Documentation for specialty assignments shall include but not be
limited to the followin: ignment record or supervisory
memorandum showing service of three (3) months in the specialty
assignment since the preceding January Ist. Provided, however, Field
Training Officers shall be eligible for assignment points for any year in
which they serve one day or more. No assignment points shall be
provided in years they have not served at least one day as a F.T.O.
Documentation for academic accomplishments shall be by diploma or
certified transcript.

 
  

 

 

 

4. COMPENSATION FOR SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION

A.

Compensation for the successful completion of any step contained in this
program shall be defined in the Collective Bargaining Agreement and shall be
automatic.

Payment shall be based upon the following conversion factor: each five (5)
points = one-half of one percent (0.5%).

27
Cc. Payment for each year of eligibility will occur in January of the following year
in a lump sum payment by special check based upon the appropriate
percentage of the base annual full rate effective in January of the prior year.
Payments shall be made in January of 2015, 2016, and 2017. Officers who
leave the City in good standing during the year shall receive upon application a
pro rata payment as part of their severance pay.

5. APPLICATION CRITERIA

An applicant should fill out the complete CEP application for consideration for entry into
the program. The officer shall include the following point assessed value factors that have been
achieved as of December 31* of that year.

6. COLLEGE/DEGREES
Points are not cumulative for degrees and must be from a college/university accredited by

an appropriate accrediting association of colleges and universities. The maximum points
allowed for formal education shall be twenty (20) and shall apply at time of completion.

  

Associate Degree — 10 points Bachelor Degree - 15 points
Advanced Degree - 20 points

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7. SPECIALTY ASSIGNMENTS POINTS
LS.B. Investigators 20
Sr. LS.B. Investigators (over 15 yr. w/Dept.) 30
Drug and Gang Reduction (after 6 months) 20
Sr. Drug and Gang Reduction (over 15 yrs. w/Dept., after 6 months) 40
Tactical Operations Officers 20
Sr. Tactical Operations Officers (over 15 yrs. w/Dept.) 40
FOD Sr. Patrol Officers (over 15 yrs. w/Dept.) 20
Sr. Officers (over 15 yrs. w/Dept. and assigned outside

F.O.D. or L.S.B., for life of the agreement) 20
Field Training Officers (in yrs. serving as FTO) 10
Sr. Field Training Officers (in yrs. serving as FTO and

over 15 yrs. w/Dept.) 30
Accident Reconstructionist (assigned to F.O.D.) 10
Sr. Accident Reconstructionist (over 15 yrs. w/Dept. assigned 30

to F.0.D.)
Hazardous Device Unit 40
Forfeiture/ Bulk Cash Unit 20
Sr. Forfeiture/ Bulk Cash Unit (over 15 yr. w/Dept.) 40
Metro Drug Task Force Unit (after 6 months) 20
Sr. Metro Drug Task Force Unit (over 15 yr. w/Dept. after 6 months) 40
Motorcycle Unit 40

 

28
FOD Canine Unit Handler 20

 

 

Aviation Unit 40
Special Intelligence Group 20
Sr. Special Intelligence Group (over 15 yr. w/Dept.) 40

 

Officers shall be limited to one specialty assignment or senior status category despite any
overlap (e.g., Senior Accident Reconstructionist with 15 years seniority, assigned within F.O.D.
receives total of 30 points).

The combined assignment and education points eligible for conversion shall be capped at
fifty (50) points.

8. CEP COMMITTEE

The Committee shall be composed of two (2) representatives: one (1) from the
Association and one (1) from the Administration. Any expansion of the committee shall be by
agreement of the parties. The committee shall serve to review CEP applications and educational
reimbursement requests under the terms set forth herein and in the collective bargaining
agreement. If the committee is unable to agree upon a particular CEP Application or Educational
Reimbursement Request the matter shall be resolved by the Chief in conjunction with the
Association President and a third party agreed upon by the parties. The committee shall
undertake such other studies and activities as are agreed upon by the parties consistent with the
purpose of the program. Any recommendations of the committee that affect wages, hours, terms
and conditions of employment shall be subject to agreement by the Association and the City.

9. WAGE RATES

For the purposes of rates of pay, the financial incentives established in the Step Program
shall not be added to the officer’s base wage rate.

2129.33 Training Courses

When training courses of general interest are offered through and/or by the Toledo Police
Department, the Police Chief shall select the employees from among applicants who have
completed their probationary period and are permanently assigned. Provided, however, that
employees who only need an update shall not be covered by this provision.

The course shall be announced within a reasonable time after notification is received by
the Department and Officers shall be allowed to submit a request for said course as time allows
with a minimum of three (3) days allowed whenever possible.

Courses of a specialized nature shall first be made available to Police Officers
permanently assigned to the appropriate Bureau, Section or Units.

 

The City agrees to accept the responsibility to train the employees covered in Section
2129.02 in the use of firearms.

29
2129.34 Military Service
(A) Military Leave

An employee who is called into military service shall be placed on an approved leave of
absence during the period of time he is required to serve. Upon discharge, the employee shall
have ninety (90) calendar days to report back to the City to be reassigned in accordance with the
law. The employee shall accrue seniority while on such leave as provided in this article.

(B) Seniority During Military Service

All employees who leave the service of the City to enter that of the United States Armed
Forces or the services of the U.S. Maritime Commission, or who are drafted by the United States
Government for civilian services, will, upon their return, within ninety (90) days from release
from such services, be granted all seniority rights as if continuously employed by the City during
such service. Sick leave accrued prior to the date of an employee's entrance into the military
service shall be preserved until his return to City employment.

Whenever vacancies occur in the classified service by reason of military leaves of
absence, appointments may be made for the duration of the emergency or earlier return to service
of the employee granted such leave for military service. All such appointments shall be subject
to the priority rights of the permanent employees granted military leaves.

(C) Military Pay

When an employee is called for short-term military leave, including weekend drills, it
shall be defined as an active duty military assignment issued by the President of the United
States, an act of Congress, or a state of emergency as ordered by the Governor of the State of
Ohio (excluding voluntary duty) for a period of less than 51 days (either continuous or
interrupted) or 408 hours in any calendar year. When an employee is called to active duty
with their assigned military unit (excluding voluntary duty), they are entitled to a leave of
absence from their respective City position without loss of pay for the time they are
performing service in uniform services. They shall receive 51 days or 408 hours per calendar
year of City paid military leave. While on military leave, the City shall continue all employer
benefit coverage including: vacation and sick leave accrual allowance, lump sum and stipend
payments, pension contributions and spouse and dependent health care coverage. An
employee shall qualify for short term military leave coverage even if the leave is not for a one
month continuous military assignment. An employee shall be entitled to all pay (both City
and military) received during their short term military assignment.

Long term military leave shall be defined as a military duty assignment that exceeds
fifty-one (51) days (either continuous or with interruption) or where a short term military
leave assignment extends beyond the fifty-one (51) days. When an employee’s military duty
exceeds the short term leave period specified above because they have been called to active
duty as a result of an executive order issued by the President of the United States, an act of
Congress, or a state emergency as ordered by the Governor of the State of Ohio they shall be
paid the difference between his/her regular rate of pay they would have received pursuant to
the contract, and the base pay they received from the military, for such a period. The City
shall continue all employment benefits coverage for said employees during this period, to
include: vacation and sick leave accrual; allowance, lump sum and stipend payments:
pension contributions; and spouse and dependent health care coverage. This provision is
intended to provide all employees, called to active duty as described, with the same amount of
pay and benefits they would have received had the need for their military service not arisen.
Payment and benefits shall be made to employees from the date of absence as a result of
active military duty until they return to City employment and payroll.

(D) The employee upon submitting their military training schedule for the following year
shall be granted the right to use their vacation time and/or trades to cover their training absences.

2129.35 Seniority During Industrial Disability

An employee who is unable to work because of industrial (service connected) disability
shall accumulate seniority during this period of sickness or disability not to exceed two (2) years
duration, unless by mutual agreement this period is extended in writing.

2129.36 Layoff Procedure

When there is a lack of work or funds which makes necessary a reduction of the work
force, the City shall lay off employees in accordance with the procedure outlined herein.

In making layoffs of permanently certified employees, the employees to be laid off shall
be the ones having the least amount of continuous Police Department seniority with the City.
Prior to any layoffs, the City of Toledo will notify the TPPA thirty (30) days prior to the
effective date of any pending layoffs.

In the event of a layoff that affects operational efficiency in Field Operations, the Chief
shall have the authority to temporarily reassign to Field Operations those officers who are
working in assignments where minimum staffing exists.

 

 

 

2129.37 Recall From Layoff
Names of permanent employees laid off shall be placed on a re-employment list for the
appropriate recall. Names of probationary employees who are laid off shall be returned to the

eligibility list from which certification was made.

Provisional employees who are laid off shall return to the eligibility list from which
certification was made. Layoffs shall be in accordance with seniority in classification.

2129.38 Acting Time

The Chief of Police or Deputy Chief in charge of the affected Bureau shall determine
when acting time is necessary.
When it is necessary to appoint an employee to act in the place of a Sergeant, then the
employee in the affected Section or Unit who stands highest on the promotional list to be
promoted and who is eligible for promotion to Sergeant shall be given the acting time. In the
event there is no list, then the employee in the affected Section or Unit who has the most
seniority shall be given the acting time.

Acting time shall be paid for the actual number of hours worked at the starting rate of a
Sergeant, until such time as the employee has served one thousand and forty (1,040) hours of
acting time, after which the employee shall be paid at the full rate of a Sergeant.

2129.39 Personal Leave of Absence

Any request for an excused absence without pay for a period of five (5) work days or less
may be granted by the Chief of Police and/or his designee without the necessity of preparing
formal leave papers. Upon approval of the City, a leave of absence without pay may be granted
for up to thirty (30) calendar days in any calendar year.

Requests for such leave of absence shall be made by the employee in writing on the form
provided by the City. Such application shall be made as far in advance as possible.

Employees on such approved leaves of absence for thirty (30) calendar days or less shall
have their hospitalization-surgical-drug prescription-life insurance benefits continued in force by
the City during this period of time.

A leave of absence for more than thirty (30) calendar days in a calendar year may be
granted by the City. An employee on an approved leave of absence for more than thirty (30)
calendar days in any calendar year shall not receive hospitalization-surgical-drug prescription
benefits during the period of such leave. However, the employee may arrange to prepay through
the Division of Accounts the premiums necessary to continue the employee's hospitalization-
surgical-drug prescription-life insurance benefits in force during the period of time exceeding
thirty (30) days the employee is on leave.

It is the parties' express intent that this chapter of the code shall not be applied or
interpreted in such a manner as to cause or constitute a violation of any law, specifically
including the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. Any remedy for violation of this act shall
be as set forth in the Act.

2129.40 Fringe Benefits While on Leave of Absence

An employee on an approved leave of absence shall continue to accumulate seniority
during the period of his absence. An employee on an approved leave of absence of thirty (30)
calendar days in any calendar year or less shall have his hospitalization and surgical insurance
and group insurance death benefit continue in force by the City. An employee on an approved
leave of absence for more than thirty (30) calendar days in any calendar year shall not receive
fringe benefits during the period of such leave, however, an employee may arrange to prepay
through the Division of Accounts the premiums necessary to continue the employee's
hospitalization and surgical insurance and group insurance death benefit in force during the
period of time the employee is on leave. The exceptions to this benefit curtailment are a leave
pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 or an industrial injury leave as provided
in this Chapter.

2129.41 Family Leave

A Police Officer will be eligible for parental leave for that period of time that he/she is
physically incapable of performing his/her regular work related duties. The Police Officer will
be required to document his/her physical condition in a Statement of Attending Physician
forwarded to the City.

Application for such leave will be made on the approved form. The Police Officer, in the
event of extended disability resulting from pregnancy or childbirth, shall be entitled to use
his/her accumulated sick time, bonus days and vacation days, and may submit a request to the
Director of Human Resources for extended sick benefits. The employee's prior work record with
regard to his/her usage of sick days and his/her seniority will be taken into account in
determining eligibility for such extension. In the event the requested extension is denied, then
the employee may be placed on leave of absence as provided in Section 2129.39, "Personal
Leave of Absence".

The Police Officer may request additional release time prior and/or subsequent to the
above stated period of disability. Such requests shall be made as provided elsewhere in this
Agreement.

2129.42 Disability Assignments

Police officers who become temporarily disabled as a result of a non-duty illness or
injury and are incapable of performing normal police duties may be placed in a temporary
assignment that the Officer is physically capable of performing in lieu of placement on sick leave
or leave without pay.

1. PREREQUISITES:

The following prerequisites must exist for a Police Officer to be considered for a non-
duty temporary disability assignment:

a. The Officer must qualify for the use of sick leave; and

b. The City's physician, in his/her sole judgment, must certify that the Officer is
temporarily incapable of normal assignment but is capable of the available temporary disability
assignment; and

c. An existing assignment must be available, suitable as a temporary disability
assignment; provided, however, that a minimum of ten assignments shall be available at all times
for officers with temporary disabilities and limited capacities apart from those necessary for
pregnancies.
2. CONDITIONS:
The following conditions shall apply to the temporary disability assignment:
a. The location and nature of the assignment shall be at the sole discretion of the Chief;

b. The duration of the assignment shall be for the period of the temporary disability as
solely determined by the City's physician or a ninety (90) calendar day period, whichever is less;

c. The Police Officer shall receive full pay and benefits during the period of the
temporary disability assignment;

d. The Police Officer is prohibited from engaging in or accepting secondary employment
during the period of the temporary disability assignment.

3. EXTENSIONS - NON-DUTY DISABILITIES:

Extensions on temporary disability assignments may be provided at the sole discretion of
the Director of Public Safety and Director of Human Resources under the following conditions:

a. The Officer's disability was sustained in a manner that would qualify the Officer for
sick pay; and

b. The City's physician, in his/her sole discretion, has certified that the Officer;
(i) _ is still incapable of normal assignment, and
(ii) is capable of the available temporary disability assignment, and

(iii) should be capable of returning to normal assignment within the term of the
extension; and

 

c. A medical review will occur prior to the granting of any extension, and may occur
during the term of the extension to determine the Officer's capability of returning to work; and

d. Police Officers who are incapable of returning to normal assignment within the period
of their temporary disability assignment will take such leave as they may be entitled under other
provisions of this agreement.

2129.43 Sick or Off-Duty Injury Leave

When an employee who is sick or has been injured off duty has no sick days left, and an
extended Sick Leave With Pay has not been granted, then the employee may be placed on a
Leave of Absence Without Pay unless he has been assisted through the Time Bank, as provided
elsewhere in this Agreement.

 
The request for leave must be accompanied by the Statement of Attending Physician
verifying the necessity for such leave. The leave may be granted for periods of thirty (30) days
at a time depending on the condition the employee, not to exceed one (1) year from the date the
employee's sick pay has been exhausted. Where mutually agreed, this period may be extended
for an additional one (1) year.

2129.44 Other Employment While on Leave

No employee shall be granted a leave of absence for the purpose of entering employment
for another employer or becoming self-employed unless, after review of the circumstances, the
Chief of Police elects to grant same. In the request for said leave the circumstances must be
defined in detail.

If a leave of absence is falsely obtained and the employee is found to be employed by
another employer or be self-employed while on leave, the employee shall be given the
opportunity to resign from the service with the City. If he fails or refuses to resign, then he may
be discharged provided that the discharge will be subject to review under the disciplinary
procedure provided herein.

2129.45 Work Schedules

The assignment sheet for the Department shall be posted by the 25th of each month.
Except by mutual agreement, scheduled days off shall not be changed during the month unless
the Police Officer is paid time and one-half (1 1/2.). In scheduling extra days as required by the
Department, no police officer will be required to pay back more than one (1) day in each bi-
weekly pay period.

Requests by police officers to pay back additional days may only be granted in such
work periods wherein the scheduling of additional days would not exceed the maximum non-
overtime hours limitations of the Fair Labor Standards Act.

Police Officers who do not owe days, shall not have regularly scheduled key days off
pulled except for scheduling of special events, parades, and training.

Officers who owe the City days shall be permitted to pay back owed days by using
accumulated compensatory time, bonus days, and discretionary days, but only 2 of the owed
days may be paid back using accumulated compensatory time.

 

 

 

The officer’s request to use compensatory time and bonus days for owed days shall be
submitted by January 15 on a written Report and submitted to the Watch Commander.

 

 

Owed days not paid back with compensatory time or bonus days will be scheduled by
the Watch Commander or his/her designee. Days off contiguous to a vacation period shall not
be pulled.

 

 
An officer shall be assigned _a permanent key at the beginning of each calendar year.
If a change in keys is required for the good of the operation as dictated by the Deputy Chief of
the affected Bureau, the Department will first accept volunteers. In the event there are not
enough volunteers, key changes will occur by reverse seniority, based on operational needs.

 

 

 

 

2129.46 Permanent Shifts

(A) The Department shall maintain a permanent non-rotating shift schedule for all
members of the Association. The Department will establish the hours of each shift as well as the
staffing levels.

(B) Only Police Officers who have three (3) full years of actual police service from
their date of appointment will be permitted to bid for shifts in Field Operations.

(C) (1) A Police Officer assigned to Investigative Services shall not become eligible
to bid for shifts until the employee has been gned to Investigative Services for one (1) full
calendar year prior to the actual bidding of assignments. The Chief of Police reserves the right
for all personnel assignments within Investigative Services.

 

 

(2) In the event that back filling and/or the establishment of new shifts occurs after the
bidding as set forth in paragraph (C)(1) above, the following procedure shall be followed:

@ When a vacancy occurs on a shift other than days and it is necessary to
back fill, detectives who previously and unsuccessfully bid the shift as their first or second
choice shall be given first preference. The most senior detective bidding the shift where the
vacancy occurs shall get the assignment provided he/she is still interested.

 

(ii) Requests for volunteers to these assignments will then be offered, however,
the Chief of Police reserves the right to reject Officer's requests.

(iii) When a Police Officer is compelled to fill these shift assignments, this shall
be accomplished by reverse Department seniority provided the officer has one (1) year of
seniority within the Investigative Services from those who are eligible to bid.

(iv) Officers with less than one (1) year in Investigative Services may be
considered for those assignments when there are an insufficient number of qualified volunteers.

(D) The Drug and Gang Reduction and Property Recovery units shall not be included
in the bid selection process, due to the specialized nature of these assignments.

(E) Shift starting and ending ranges shall be established as follows: day shift start
0600-0800, end 1400-1600; noon to eight shift start 1100-1300, end 1900-2100,
afternoon shift start 1400-1600, end 2200-2400, eight to four shift start 1900-2100,
end 0300-0500, midnight shift start 2200-2400, end 0600-0800.
(F) — Field operations shift officers with permanent shift selection rights (three full years
of actual police service from their date of appointment) shall be able to designate
and select their station preference by seniority. The Chief shall have the right, at
his sole discretion, to change the district station assignment of not more than 10%
of the total number of officers who have permanent shift selection rights.

(G) For officers assigned or working at the Police Tow Lot, the shift times shall be
0730 x 0930 for start times, and 1530 x 1730 for end times. Saturday Public hours shall be
reduced to 1100 x 1600. Patrolman will remain working 0830 x 1630 on Saturdays as they
currently are scheduled. This allows the public continued reasonable Saturday hours to
facilitate the release of vehicles, and the Tow Lot personnel extra work time to complete tasks
with regards to junk vehicle, inventory, etc.

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

2129.47 Starting Time

   

and the Police Officer shall
signed to.

The starting time shall be determined on an operational bas:
be made aware of the established starting time for the operation he

2129.48 Quitting Time

Police Officers will be furnished an ample amount of time to take all measures necessary
in connection with the shift change.

2129.49 Workday

The work day and starting time shall be determined on an operational basis, and the
employee shall be made aware of the established starting time for the operation to which he is
assigned.

The employee's work day shall be eight (8) continuous hours of work.

Providing the posting requirements of Section 2129.45 (Work Schedules) have been
complied with, employees may be required to work shifts with varied starting times throughout
the month. The rate of pay for such schedule shall be the appropriate straight time rate.

2129.50 Work in Excess of Regular Workday

All work in excess of the regular eight (8) hour workday shall be overtime and shall be
compensated at the rate of time and one-half (1 1/2) of the employee's regular rate of pay, except
in cases where the employee is required to double back when changing shift, in which case the
employee may be required to report back on the same day and is not entitled to overtime pay for
such doubling back. When an employee is required to report back to work at a time not
contiguous to his regularly scheduled eight (8) hour workday, he shall be guaranteed a minimum
of four (4) hours pay at the overtime rate.
The Chief or Deputy Chief in charge of the affected District Station, Division, Section or
Unit shall determine when it is necessary to utilize Patrol Officers, including investigators, for
on-call purposes. Whenever possible, on-call assignments shall be made on the basis of equal
rotation. Members of the TPPA may not refuse on-call assignments.

 

 

 

 

Officers who have been assigned “on-call” duties will be assigned a take home car and
also a pager. They shall be available at all times during the on-call period and shall remain fit for
duty. They shall not refuse to accept an assignment during the on-call period. If extenuating
circumstances exist which would prevent_an officer from being available for an “on-call”
assignment, he or she shall immediately notify the ranking on-duty command officer at the

 

 

 

 

 

ation in which they are

Officer_assigned “on-call” duties shall be compensated at seven (7) hours pay at the
overtime rate at time and one-half for each one (1) week interval, regardless if they are called.
This seven (7) hours shall be compensated in “money” and cannot be taken as “compensatory
time.”

 

 

2129.51 Court Appearance Time

Employees who are required to return to make court appearances at a time not contiguous
to the beginning or end of their shift, shall be paid a minimum of two (2) hours at time and one-
half (112) for such required court appearances. In the event the employee is held beyond the
guaranteed two (2) hour period, he shall be compensated at time and one-half (114) to the nearest
tenth (10th) for the period of time his presence is required by the court.

The City reserves the right to implement a system whereby officers shall be required to
contact the appropriate court liaison unit on the date of a scheduled court appearance for
approval to attend. In the event this program is implemented, the officers shall be compensated
for one (1) hour at the overtime rate for each date that a call is made and a court appearance is
not required. When an appearance is required, compensation will occur as set forth in the
preceding paragraph and the one (1) hour compensation will not result.

2129.52 Compensatory Time

A Police Officer who has worked overtime shall if he so elects be allowed to receive
compensatory time off at the overtime rate, in lieu of pay provided he does not exceed the 480
hour accumulation limitation set forth in the Fair Labor Standards Act, as amended. Upon
reasonable request by the Police Officer, days off accumulated due to overtime shall be granted
upon approval of the Section Commander. Requests must be written and signed, using the form
designated by the Department. Whenever possible, the request shall be made at least three (3)
days prior to the requested days off unless an unforeseen emergency makes it impossible for the
Police Officer to give such notice.

Compensatory time off shall be granted whenever there are no more than ten (10%)
percent of the Police Officers assigned to the Section or Unit requesting the day off for either
vacation time or compensatory time. A request for vacation days will be considered first and
then requests for compensatory time will be considered.

However, when conditions permit, the Section Commander may, at his discretion, allow
the individual Police Officer, in excess of ten (10%) percent to take days off. In the event the
Police Officer has not taken all compensatory time in excess of one hundred (100) hours by April
30th of the year following the year in which the time was earned, then he or she shall be paid for
all such hours in excess of one hundred (100) hours in the next regular paycheck at the overtime
rate.

 

2129.53 Holiday Premium

Employees who work on the eight (8) major holidays shall be compensated twelve (12)
hours at their regular straight time rate for having worked on those days. The eight (8) major
holidays for which such additional compensation shall be paid are: New Year's Day, Martin
Luther King Day, Easter Sunday, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day
and Christmas Day.

2129.54 Equalization of Overtime

Except for: overtime that is the result of the Police Officer being required to appear in
court for Court Time; overtime that arises on the beats that is of an emergency nature; and
overtime that arises as a result of a detective being assigned to a particular case, all other
overtime shall be distributed as evenly as is reasonably possible among the Police Officers in the
appropriate Bureau, Section or Unit.

2129.55 Overtime Procedure for Police Officers

Police Officers may refuse overtime. However, when it is imperative that the overtime
be worked then a sufficient number of Officers shall be required to work the required overtime.
When it is necessary to require a Police Officer to work Field Operations shift overtime the
following procedure will be utilized:

 

A. District Commanders shall ensure that Commanders for each respective Watch work
collectively to create a Recall List based on Departmental Seniority that combines officers
from each District Station.

 

1. Shift 8 personnel shall be incorporated into the Recall List for Watch 6 in this
manner, and when voluntarily recalled to fill in manpower requirements on Watch 6 they shall
have an option to work Watch 6 hours or their designated Shift 8 hours.

 

 

 

2. Shift 7 personnel (when applicable) shall be incorporated into the Recall List
for Watch 5 and when voluntarily recalled to fill manpower requirements on Watch 5 they
shall have an option to work Watch 5 hours or their designated shift 7 hours.

 

 

 
B. On the 1‘ of every month Watch Commanders will begin the process of obtaining
Officers’ daily availability for recall in the following month. This process will be completed
no later than the 15" of the month. This list will be forwarded to the Operations Staff Office
who will formulate a combined Recall List by date and seniority for posting purposes. They
will post this list prior to the first day of each month at the location where Monthly Sheets are
posted and provide a copy to each Watch and Shift Commander.

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Patrol officers voluntarily recalled using this procedure must work the District
Station that has the requirement for personnel.

 

2. The option to work remains voluntary upon contact. The voluntary recall list
will be utilized first.

 

3. The Shift Command shall contact all additional officers NOT on this recall list
who are on a day off for that shift on the designated recall date, for voluntary recall (Central
and Scott Park Stations) and afforded the recall by seniority.

 

 

 

4. If the required number of officers is not attained through the shift recall, then
volunteers will be requested from the previous shift to the one requiring recall. If the
required number is not attained, then volunteers will be requested from all other field
operation shifts.

 

 

 

5. If the required number of officers is not attained through the previous shift
voluntary request, then officers shall be involuntarily (forced) recalled by shift and their
assigned station requested by recall utilizing reversed seniority.

 

 

 

6. If the required number of officers is still not attained through the involuntary
(forced) shift recall, then officers shall be forced by reversed seniority, of those working on

the previous shift, by reverse se ty.

 

 

 

7. For the purpose of involuntary (forced) recall the shift 8 officers shall be
included on shift 6 only at the Scott Park station. The officers whose assigned shifts are shift
Tor shift 8 will only work their assigned shift hours if involuntarily (forced) recalled.

 

 

 

Cc. In the event_of an “emergency” recall is to be implemented without_prior shift
knowledge or an excessive amount of “sick” calls on a designated shift this following

procedure shall be utilized:

 

 

1. The combined voluntary shift recall list shall be utilized first.

 

2. Shift Command shall attempt to call officers on a day off to attempt to fulfill
the required recall.

 

3. If the number of required officers is not obtained, volunteers will be requested
from the previous shift at both district stations.

 

     

40
4. If the number of required officers is still not obtained, involuntary (forced)
recall of the previous shift by reverse seniority of those working at the district station where

 

 

D. Shift_watch commanders at the district stations shall be responsible to maintain an
accurate record of those officers involuntarily (forced) through this policy by date/shift.

 

The foregoing procedure is an effort to streamline the voluntary recall process, while
still providing equalization in the opportunity for patrol officers to work voluntary recall when
required. Patrol Officers while participating in this process on a monthly basis shall provide
up-to-date _contact_information to their Watch Commander. The Deputy Chief of the
Operations Division in collaboration with the District and Watch Commanders shall
determine the required number of patrol officers required to work on any given date and shift
based on officer safety concerns and operational imperatives.

 

 

 

 

 

This recall procedure shall be renewed each calendar month. If issues and/or concerns
are identified by either party, the Department and the Toledo Police Patrolman’s Association
may amend this procedure only by mutual agreement.

 

 

2129.56 Recall; Special Events

In situations involving a special event where substantial numbers of officers are required
to work on an overtime basis, and there is adequate planning time available, the following
Special Event Recall Procedure will be utilized:

A request for volunteers will be distributed to the entire Department. Any officer who
has a complete uniform, is fit for duty and whose regular assignment will not interfere with the
overtime assignment, may volunteer to work.

In selecting officers to work this voluntary overtime, Department seniority will be used.
First preference will be given to Officers regularly assigned to the Field Operations Bureau. If
not enough officers have volunteered from the Field Operations Bureau, volunteers from the
other bureaus will be used for the remainder of the positions.

If there are not enough volunteers to fill all the required positions, the remainder will be
filled by canceling days off of officers within the Field Operations Bureau, on a reverse seniority
basis, from among officers whose regular assignment will not interfere with the overtime

Si
assignment.

 
 

 

 

Officers who are on a regularly scheduled vacation shall be eligible for voluntary recall;
however, these officers shall not be ordered to work recall.

Officers -may not trade days with themselves for the purpose of becoming eligible for
recall.

41
Officers recalled will be paid at a rate of time and one-half (1!) for the hours worked and
shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours.

2129.57 Accumulation of Sick Days

Regular employees of the Department of Police shall be credited with sick days in
accordance with the following formula: One and one-quarter (114) days hours shall be credited
for each month of service, not to exceed fifteen (15) days per calendar year. Such days shall
continue to accumulate at such rate without any maximum limitation.

An employee granted a Leave of Absence Without Pay for thirty (30) calendar days or
more shall not accumulate sick pay during the period the employee is on such leave.

(A) Officers shall be credited with sick days in accordance with the following formula:
one and one quarter (14) days shall be credited for each month of service, not to exceed fifteen
(15) days per calendar year. Such days shall continue to accumulate at such rate without any
maximum limitation. Provided the conditions of Section 2129.81, Termination and Severance
Pay, have been met, unused sick leave accumulated to the time of termination shall be paid at the
rate of one-half (¥2) for all such accumulated sick time up to two hundred (200) days and full pay
for accumulated sick time in excess of two hundred (200) days.

An Officer who dies as the direct result of injuries sustained in the course of employment
with the City, or who is totally and permanently disabled as a result of injuries received under
unusual circumstances which may arise in the performance of his law enforcement duties, shall
receive payment for the full accumulation of sick pay at the time of death or retirement.

Officers who accumulated sick leave at a different rate prior to July 1, 2009 under the
former “Plan B” shall accrue sick leave in the manner set forth above, i.e. (1 % days shall be
credit for each month of service, not to exceed (15) days per calendar year.)

Officers who accumulated sick leave under former “Plan B” shall not be entitled to any
retroactive application of this higher sick leave accumulation benefit. Sick leave balances that
existed under the former “Plan B” shall be maintained as of June 30, 2009. There will be no
retroactive application of the new sick leave rate to this balance.

(B) An employee who has 25 years of service credit may have up to 33% of his/her
accumulated sick pay in excess of 1600 hours converted to compensatory time annually.

The sick pay selected under this program will be deducted from the total hours available
at the time requested.

The employee who accepts accumulated sick pay under the provisions allowed in this
section will not be entitled to paid extension of sick time effective with the acceptance of pay.

2129.58 Bonus Days

An employee shall be given bonus days provided he earned sick pay benefits in the
previous year in accordance with the Bonus Day Table set forth below:

42
MONTHS SICK DAYS TAKEN
WORKED

12 5 5 5 42 4 3% 3 2 1 "Y 0
11 424 4% 4% 4 3% 3 2M % 0
10 4 4 4 3% 3 2% 2 1 0
9 3% 3% 3% 3 2% 2 % 0
3 3 3 2% 2 1% 1 0

7 2% WM 2M 2 1% 1 "Y 0
6 2 2 2 1% 1 "Y 0

5 1% 1% 1% 1 "Y 0

4 1 1 1 "Y 0

3

2129.59 Sick Pay Usage

Sick pay is pay to the employee for the necessary absence from duty on a regularly
scheduled work day because of illness, injury or exposure to contagious disease not in the course
of his employment, or illness in the employee's immediate family that necessitates the
employee's absence from work or would result in serious hardship to his family. Attendance to
the immediate family member at a hospital while undergoing serious medical attention shall be
included under this provision.

Sick pay shall be made for illness or injury incurred as a result of outside employment.
Sick pay is not to be made to any employee as a result of any action within the control of the
employee such as intentional self-inflicted wounds, use of drugs, or alcoholic beverages, while
committing a felony or other criminal action.

For the purpose of this section, immediate family shall include only the employee's
father, mother, sister, brother, spouse or child or life partner. A “Life Partner” relationship must
have been pre-certified by the Department of Human Resources before sick pay usage may
occur. The family illness provision shall be for a limited period of time (not to exceed three (3)
days) to enable the employee to secure other arrangements for the care of the member of his
immediate family.

2129.60 Reporting; Proof of Illness

(a) The employee, while absent on sick pay, must notify the Police Department under
agreed practices. When he or she is recuperating from surgery or some other major medical
condition, and is advised by his physician that a change of location would hasten his or her
recovery, he or she may do so with the approval of the office of the Chief of Police. The
employee then shall be allowed, under these conditions, to continue to receive sick pay benefits.

43
(b) When an employee is off sick for five (5) consecutive work days, they shall
immediately submit a statement of attending physician substantiating the illness. If the employee
remains off work past the time allowed on the initial statement of attending physician, they shall
submit additional statements of attending physician as required by the City.

(c) The City reserves the right to investigate the use of sick time. An employee found
guilty of abusing sick pay benefit provisions thereto set forth or whose reasons for absence are
falsified, shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action.

2129.61 Sick Pay Extension

In the event of the extended illness of an employee and after having exhausted all
accumulated sick days, bonus days and vacation days, then a request may be made to the
Director of Human Resources for extended sick pay benefits. The employee's prior work record
with regard to his usage of sick days and his seniority will be taken into account in determining
eligibility for such extension. In the event the requested extension is denied, then the employee
shall be placed on Personal Leave of Absence as provided in Section 2129.39, and the
Association shall be notified.

2129.62 Injury Pay

(a) Employees injured in the course of and arising out of their employment under such
circumstances as would cause such injury or disability to be compensable under the Worker's
Compensation Laws of the State of Ohio will be eligible to participate in the City's injury pay
program. The Cost Containment Committee referenced below will select the program
physician(s) and medical facilities from submitted proposals.

(1) Employees sustaining a work related injury that requires medical attention at a
medical treatment facility (i.e., sprains, simple fractures, etc.) will be transported to and treated
by a program physician or medical facility. The program physician, along with rendering a
diagnosis and prognosis, will determine if the employee is capable of returning to regular duties,
whether a transitional work assignment is appropriate, and the necessary rehabilitation plan to be
followed; this plan will include the duration of any transitional work assignment not to exceed 30
calendar days and indicate any physical therapy the injured employee may require. The program
physician(s) may require follow-up medical evaluations.

  

(2) Employees sustaining a work related emergency/trauma injury (i.e., life threatening,
severe body injury) may be treated at any medical treatment facility to which emergency medical
personnel transport them. The employee will subsequently be examined by the program
physician. The designated program physician will determine if the employee is capable of
returning to regular duties or if a transitional work assignment is appropriate and the necessary
rehabilitation plan to be followed; this opinion will include the duration of any transitional work
assignment not to exceed 30 calendar days and indicate any physical therapy the injured
employee may require. The program physician(s) may require follow-up medical evaluations.

 

44
(3) An employee may, after the initial evaluation by the program physician, elect to
continue treatment with their personal physician provided the program physician's
recommendations are followed. The employee will sign any necessary waivers to allow their
personal physicians to release information to the program physician. The employee's personal
physician will be the physician of record for Workers' Compensation purposes.

(b) Upon the program physician's determination that an injury requires the employee to
be off work, wherein the employee reports said injury within twenty-four (24) hours of the
incident of illness or injury, paid leave shall be granted by the Department of Human Resources
for up to 60 days.

Should such disability exceed sixty (60) calendar days, the Department of Human
Resources, on application therefore and proof of continued disability, may extend the period
during which such person is carried on the regular payroll. The cumulative length of such
extended period or periods shall not exceed two (2) years for that particular injury or illness
claim.

Injury pay extension requests, accompanied by a "Statement of Attending Physician"
setting forth the illness or injury and the need for additional time, must be presented to the
Department of Human Resources no later than one (1) week after the expiration of the original
sixty (60) day disability period. If the above requirements are not fulfilled, the request for injury
pay extension may not be considered.

(c) Workers' Compensation: At the expiration of the injury leave granted, if the
employee is still unable to return to work, the employee may elect in writing to use accumulated
sick and other accrued time. If the employee is still unable to return to work, payment of normal
wages will be stopped and the Industrial Commission will be requested to begin weekly payment
under the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act.

(d) If the opinion of the employee's treating physician conflicts with that of the program
physician and such opinion is presented to the City in seven (7) calendar days of the program
physician's evaluation, and if the physicians cannot agree after consultation, the employee will be
referred for a third opinion. The Cost Containment Committee referenced below will establish a
panel of occupational health specialists for third opinions. The third opinion shall be
determinative of the employee's injury pay status under the contract and shall not be subject to
further appeal or review. If the third opinion is consistent with the program physician's plan and
the employee fails to abide by the rehabilitation plan, or if the employee enters and later drops
out of the plan, then the city can recoup injury pay advanced from the employee's sick time
accumulation. If the employee does not have a sufficient sick time balance, the City shall recoup
the injury pay by reducing future sick leave earnings by one-half until the injury pay is fully
recouped.

(e) Employees who sustain injuries in the course of and arising out of their employment
under such circumstances as would cause such injury or disability to be compensable under the
Worker's Compensation Laws of the State of Ohio who choose not to be evaluated by the
program physician or who choose not to follow that physician's recommended program and go

45
only to the physician of their choice are not entitled to any paid injury leave benefits contained in
this collective bargaining agreement. Notice of intent not to participate in the City's injury
program must be given within three (3) work days of the injury. Any and all work-related injury
claims will be processed through and conform with the Workers' Compensation Act.

(f) False Claim: The City reserves the right to recoup benefit payments to any employee
who is guilty of submitting a false claim, or abuse of the privileges covered in this Section, or
working for another employer while on injury leave, and may take disciplinary action.

(g) An employee working in a transitional work assignment will be compensated at their
regular rate of pay. The employee will not be entitled to bid rights, overtime, etc., since the
employee is not fit to perform all of the duties of the classification. With regard to the rights of
other employees, the employee in the transitional assignment will be deemed not to be working
out of classification.

Transitional work assignments will be identified by the Department of Human Resources
in consultation with those Departments who have appropriate tasks available. The currently
available assignments and the tasks involved in each Department will be provided in writing to
the Union.

It is not the intent of this section to allow Departments to provide transitional work above
that identified nor is a Department required to provide transitional work where no such
appropriate tasks have been identified and recognized.

(h) With the intent of this injury program being to minimize time away from work and
return the healthy employee to active employment as soon as possible, the Joint Labor-
Management Health and Safety Committee (Section 2129.86) will also serve as a cost
containment committee for Workers' Compensation.

Upon examination and recommendation by the Police physician, an Officer disabled as a
result of an on-duty injury shall be given a temporary assignment that he is physically capable of
performing until such time as he is able to return to normal duties.

 

2129.63 Parental Pay

(a) A female Police Officer shall be entitled to sick pay for maternity to the extent of the
total accumulated days to the credit of the employee. If the Police Officer has used all of the sick
pay to which she is entitled and extended sick benefits have been denied, then the employee shall
be placed on leave without pay as provided in Section 2129.39, "Personal Leave of Absence".

(b) All Police Officers shall be entitled to use up to ten (10) days from their accrued sick

days for the purpose of parturient requirements. The ten (10) days when used in accordance with
this section shall have no effect on Bonus Days as provided in Section 2129.58.

46
(c) Those officers on an approved FMLA (Family Medical Leave Act) leave may hold
three (3) weeks vacation and 15 days sick time in abeyance for later use in accordance with the
vacation and sick time provisions of this agreement.

2129.64 Report to Physician Designated by the City

In any case where an employee is required to report to a physician designated by the
City, it shall be on City time, except in cases where he is off the payroll. After an employee is
released for duty by his family physician, in the event the City requires the employee to report to
a physician designated by the City before return to work, no additional sick time shall be charged
against the employee pending his examination by the physician designated by the City.

When a disagreement exists between the family physician and the City physician, the
City and the Association will mutually establish a list of acceptable physicians and the employee
will be directed to a physician from the list in order to obtain a third opinion. This opinion will
prevail. In the event a third opinion is required, no additional sick time shall be charged against
the employee pending his examination by the physician jointly authorized in this matter.

The cost of the third opinion will be borne by the City. For the purpose of this contract, a
physician will be defined as a person graduated from a recognized school of medicine and
licensed by the State of Ohio to practice medicine.

2129.65 Death Benefit

A death benefit in the amount of fifty thousand ($50,000) dollars shall be paid to the
designated beneficiary of an employee of the City of Toledo upon death. Each employee should
furnish the City with a Designation of Beneficiary. In the event the employee has failed to
designate a beneficiary, then the benefits shall be paid in accordance with the inheritance laws of
the State of Ohio.

The amount of death benefits paid to the Designated Beneficiary shall be the same as that
amount provided for persons defined as Sergeants in the Department of Police, for the term of

the Agreement.

In the event an employee dies in the line of duty the city shall pay all funeral expenses
not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000).

2129.66 Hospitalization; Prescription Drug; Dental Insurance
(A) General Provisions
The City shall continue to provide hospital, medical, surgical, major medical, outpatient

diagnostic laboratory services, prescriptive drug, dental care, and benefits under the terms and
conditions set forth below.

47
(1) Coverage shall be provided to each employee, each employee's spouse, and all
unmarried dependent members of the employee's family to age twenty-three (23) or other age as
determined by applicable state or federal law.

Where the spouse of a City employee has health care coverage through a different
employer, the spouse must enroll in his/her employer's plan. Dependents shall be covered as
provided by the "Birthday Rule". Coordination of benefits shall be provided so that coverage is
extended to the spouse and dependents that is not provided by the other employer's plan. In cases
of demonstrated hardship due to excessive co-premiums (i.e. 40% co-premiums or premium
payments equaling 30% or more of earnings) special consideration will occur.

(2) Coverage for this purpose shall be furnished through the insurance carrier(s) selected
exclusively by the City on a fair fee or other basis until such time as some other insurer may be
selected or the City determines that it would be in its best interest to insure these benefits. The
Association shall receive advance notice of and the reasons for the change in carriers.

(3) Coverage shall be provided at the levels existing as of December 31, 2002 except as
set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) herein.

(B) The following health care cost containment procedures shall be effective for all
employees enrolled under traditional coverage:

(1) Second surgical opinions, pre-admission notification or certification, emergency care
limitations, concurrent review, post-admission concurrent review, outpatient surgery, continued
treatment and technological review, medical case management, planned discharge, and other
procedures as may be established under the medical review programs established by the City
shall be followed.

  

(2) Full-time employees covered by another employer's health care program due to
marriage or other reasons may waive their City of Toledo coverage and receive twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in additional life insurance coverage. This shall also be extended
to those employees whose spouses are also employed by the City.

(3) Coverage for nervous and mental treatment is limited as follows: inpatient care shall
be maintained at a maximum of thirty-one (31) days per calendar year. Outpatient coverage shall
be expanded to a maximum of twenty-two visits per year at fifty percent (50%) co-insurance.

(4) Coverage for Drug and Alcoholism treatment is limited to a maximum of twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) lifetime benefits for all in-patient and out-patient care. Inpatient
care shall be maintained at a maximum of thirty-one (31) days per calendar year. Inpatient
coverage shall be at one hundred percent (100%) for an individual’s first admission, seventy-five
percent (75%) for a second admission, and fifty percent (50%) for a third admission. No
coverage shall be provided beyond three (3) admissions per lifetime or thirty-one (31) days per
calendar year. Outpatient coverage shall be expanded to a maximum of twenty-five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) per calendar year at fifty per cent (50%) co-insurance. Employees using drug

  

48
and alcohol treatment programs must use the Police Department Employee Assistance Program
when one is available.

(5) The panel of providers and/or P.P.O. selected by the City for managing and providing
nervous and mental, drug and alcohol treatment must be utilized. The City has the right to
request proposals toward a managed care plan for this purpose with an effective date of June 1,
2000 or thereafter. The selection shall be by mutual agreement of both parties. The schedule of
benefits in effect as of December 31, 2000 shall be maintained, without additional co-pays or
deductibles.

(C) The following cost sharing plan and cost coverage restrictions shall be effective for
all employees:

(1) There shall be a five hundred dollar ($500.00) annual per person maximum on
chiropractic care in 2003, which shall increase to a one-thousand dollar maximum effective July
1 of 2004, and a thirteen hundred dollar (1,300.00) annual per person maximum on physical
therapy, both subject to the major medical deductible (one hundred dollar ($100/individual) and
two hundred dollar ($200.00/family) and co-insurance (80%/20%).

(2) Major Medical benefits shall be paid to a lifetime maximum of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per person with a one hundred dollar ($100.00)/individual and two hundred
dollar ($200.00) /family deductible and 80%/20% co-payment; provided that coverage for
nervous and mental, drug and alcoholism is limited per paragraph (b)(3) and (4).

(3) There shall be a sixty-five dollar ($65.00) co-pay for all emergency room visits, which
shall be waived if the individual is admitted or if the visit is between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m., or on a Saturday after 12:00 noon, or on a Sunday.

 

 

 

 

(4) There shall be a monthly co-premium paid by each employee for hospitalization,
prescriptive drug and dental insurance. Employees will pay the following monthly co-
premiums:

Single Single + 1 Family
Coverage Coverage Coverage
Effective with the first full $48 $80 $92
pay period of July 2012
Effective with the first full $71 $120 $129
pay period of July 2013
Effective with the first full $94 $160 $166
pay period of July 2014

 

 

 

 

 

 

The co-premiums will be made by payroll deduction on a pre-tax basis. Spouses who
are both employed by the City of Toledo will pay one co-premium payment based on the level
of coverage selected. The “Birthday Rule” and the “Spousal Exclusion” language in Part A of
this section continue to apply to coverage options.

49
(D) Effective March 1, 1994, the availability of Health Maintenance Organization (HMO)
and Preferred Provider Organization (PPO) shall be discontinued. All employees, including
those in the Traditional Plan, shall thereafter be enrolled in the Consortium Plan. Consortium
Plan coverage and benefits shall be at the Traditional Plan levels as of December 31, 1993 except
as otherwise provided herein. Consortium Plan Medical Providers shall be restricted to those
hospitals, physicians, and other care providers designated in the plan as developed by the City in
cooperation with the Cost Containment Committee. It is understood that the City will now be
utilizing the hospital, physicians; and ancillary providers panels through the Western Lake Erie
Employer’s Cooperative (WLEC)/Cooperative Health Network (CHN).

(E) The Cost Containment Committee formed from among the representatives of the
various bargaining units, including the Association, shall be maintained. The Committee shall
develop other cost containment measures, which shall include: 1) enhanced managed care,
such as pre-certification, concurrent review, and utilization review; 2) changes of coverage or
benefits, such as increased deductibles, limitations on coverage, and contributions from
employees; 3) increased claims control, such as coordination of benefits, subrogation,
workers' compensation deferral, patient audits, and claim audits; 4) alternate delivery systems
such as preferred provider organizations for specific benefits and direct provider negotiations;
and 5) development of participative employee plan by which employees will be encouraged to
contain costs, audit bills, correct lifestyles, maintain wellness, and undertake other cost
savings measures. The committee shall meet regularly on at least a monthly basis and
attendance shall be required. The committee shall develop annual goals, objectives, and
timetables directly aimed at reducing health care costs. Subcommittees may be formed as
deemed necessary by the co-chairpersons to study issues, develop reasonable solutions, and
report back to the committee. Goals and objectives not met within the established time
frames shall be critically reviewed by the Committee. No changes in benefits during the term
of the contract as they affect TPPA shall be permitted unless the TPPA representative on the
Cost Containment Committee is authorized to do so by the TPPA through its president. In
the event any change in benefits is required by either federal or state law, the TPPA and City
shall negotiate the replacement language. If no agreement is reached, the matter shall be
subject to an interest arbitration. The parties shall use a panel of seven arbitrators with
experience in interest arbitration.

 

(F) The union releases the City from any obligation to expend monies currently in the
Healthcare Savings Fund created pursuant to former paragraph (g) of this Section on future cost
increases or for wellness programming. The union further releases the City from any obligation
to consult with the Cost Containment Committee relative to the transfer or expenditure of those
funds. Annual reports from third party administrators of the City’s health benefits, including any
such reports showing costs and cost reductions, shall be shared with the Cost Containment
Committee.

(G) Coverage for well baby care, pap tests, and office visits shall be offered to all
employees enrolled under conventional coverage as follows:

(i) Well baby care limited to routine examinations and immunization for an infant until
the infant's first birthday.

50
(ii) Pap tests as well as office fee will be paid in full once every twelve (12) months.

(iii) Office visits for routine services rendered in the physicians office, including physical
examinations and family planning shall be subject to a ten dollar ($10.00) co-payment, which
shall be counted toward the individual’s major medical deductible.

   

Fees that the physician charges for the services under paragraphs (i), (ii), and (iii) shall be
paid on the same ba as other covered services (e.g. usual, customary, and reasonable).
Payments for services under part (G)(i) and (iii) of 100% will be made for the first three hundred
($300.00) per single contract or six hundred ($600.00) per family per calendar year. The ten-
dollar ($10.00) office visit co-pay shall not be counted toward the $300/$600 limits. After
deductibles are reached, payment shall then be under the major medical plan; provided, however,
that the bill shall be reduced by the ten dollar ($10.00) office visit co-pay before the 80%/20%
co-payment formula is applied.

 

(H) The City shall provide a three tier closed formulary prescriptive drug purchase
program with a co-payment structure of a six dollar ($6.00) co-payment for tier 1 drugs
(generics); a fifteen dollar ($15.00) co-payment for tier 2 drugs) preferred brand name drugs);
and A thirty-dollar ($30.00) co-payment for tier 3 (non-preferred brand name drugs). This
program will include a generic drug substitution option. The City shall select the provider for the
formulary drug program, who shall group drugs according to determinations made by the
provider’s therapeutic committee as it deems necessary.

The city may implement managed care for the prescriptive drug program. This would
allow for an evaluation of the interaction of an individual’s different prescriptions on a voluntary
basis. Recommendations could then be made to the individual and his/her physician for more
effective drug therapy.

(J) The City shall continue to provide a major dental plan which provides the following:
Type A Services: Preventative 100%

Type B Services: Major and Minor Restorative 80%
Deductible for Type B Services $50.00 per person per
year maximum payment of $1,300.00 per year.

Type C Services: Orthodontia 60%
Maximum lifetime benefit for Type C Services for any
covered person $1,300.00 coverage limited to dependent
children under age 19.

Such benefit shall continue in effect for the duration of this agreement. The City,

however, may select an alternative carrier or become self-insured as it deems necessary. The
coverage to be provided to each employee shall be either an individual or family contract, as may

51
be appropriate. The selection of the insurance carrier to provide the coverage herein is the
exclusive right of the City.

(J) Vision Care: Beginning in July, 2000, the City shall contribute fifteen dollars
($15.00) per employee per month for vision care benefits to the Toledo Police Patrolman’s
Association. Said amount shall be used by the Association to purchase whatever vision care
benefits they will buy. The City shall have no responsibility relative to the administration of this
vision care plan.

 
  

(K) The City agrees that all conditions and terms relating to the
hospitalization-prescriptive drug-dental insurance shall be maintained at not less than the highest
minimum standards in effect as of the effective date of this agreement as found in 2129.101
"Duration of Agreement". It is further agreed that any terms or conditions agreed to that are in
excess of those established herein shall not be reduced.

(L) Upon mutual agreement of the parties to this agreement, the parties agree to re-
open this agreement for the limited purpose of negotiating the terms of this section 2129.66.
“Hospitalization; Prescriptive Drug; Dental Insurance.” It is the parties’ intent to meet as part
of a multi-unit negotiation (AFSCME Local 7 Main Unit & Com-Ops, AFSCME Local 2058
TPCOA, TPPA Local 10, Teamsters Local 20, TFCA, AFSCME Local 3411, and UAW
Local 12) regarding the terms of hospitalization, prescription drug and dental insurance. Each
unit would subsequently ratify any tentative agreement. If the parties to this agreement are
unable to mutually agree on revisions, the existing language of section 2129.66.
“Hospitalization; Prescriptive Drug; Dental Insurance” shall remain in effect for the term of
this agreement.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2129.67 The Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund

(A) The City will continue to participate in the Police and Firemen's Disability and
Pension Fund as provided in the Ohio Revised Code.

(B) The City will implement a pension "pick-up" plan in accordance with Internal
Revenue Service regulations and Ohio Attorney General opinions, whereby State and Federal
Income Taxes on employee pension contributions by all bargaining members may be deferred.

(C) Effective with the second full pay period of April 2012 the City will pay zero
percent (0%) of the employee’s pension contribution, and the employee shall be responsible
for the remaining percentage (employee payment increased from 0% to 10%).

(D) In the event the employee share of the pension contribution increases due to a
change in law or regulation during the term of this agreement, the employee shall be

responsible for paying the entire increase in the employee share.

(E) Effective the second full pay period of April 2012, and pursuant to sub-section
(C), the parties agree and understand that the City’s pension pick-up plan referred to in this

52
article will terminate, and the City will no longer implement or participate in any pension
pick-up plan.

2129.68 Safety Equipment

The City will provide an employee purchase plan whereby employees will be able to
purchase safety shoes, safety glasses, including prescriptive lenses. The purchase program for
the safety shoes and the safety glas shall make these items available to the employee with
sixty (60%) percent of the cost of the item to be paid by the City and the remaining forty (40%)
percent to be paid by the employee or the purchase of one pair of safety shoes from vendor of
choice per year which complies with uniform specifications will be subject to reimbursement of
$50.00 following submission of paid receipt.

 

The Safety Committee of the Association and the City shall mutually agree to a
specification for a bullet proof vest which will then be competitively bid.

In reference to the above safety equipment, the City will acknowledge the Association's
recommendations as to what would be appropriate for their members.

A payroll deduction system will be established under this program through the means of
an automatic deduction from the employee's paycheck.

The following stipends shall be provided to all officers:

(A) $150.00 - Police safety equipment not provided by the Department, but conforming
to Department specifications and regulations in the event the Officer purchases same.

(B) $75.00 - Advanced Law Enforcement Training and educational material
(C) $275.00 - Maintenance of the physical fitness necessary to for effective police work.

Said stipends shall be payable in the gross amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) by
January 31 of each year for the term of this Agreement to those officers then on the payroll.

2129.69 Vacations

(A) All employees shall be entitled to annual vacation with pay in accordance with the
following table:

AMOUNT OF CONTINUOUS SERVICE DURING

PREVIOUS YEAR THROUGH DECEMBER 31 VACATION

Less than | full calendar year .916 days for each
full month of service

After 1 full calendar yr. of service 2 wks.

After 7 full calendar yrs. of service 3 wks.

53
After 14 full calendar yrs. of service 4 wks.
After 21 full calendar yrs. of service 5 wks.
After 24 full calendar yrs. of service 6 wks.

(B) In addition to the above, after one (1) full calendar year of service, the employee shall
be entitled to one (1) full additional discretionary vacation day. Effective January 1, 2016, in
addition to the above, after one (1) full calendar year of service, the employee shall be entitled to
two (2) full additional discretionary vacation days. The discretionary day must be used or it will
be lost. If an employee is denied the opportunity to utilize his/her day by the end of the year,
he/she shall be compensated eight (8) hours at their current base wage rate.

 

 

 

(C) An employee should take vacation in the calendar year following the year in which it
was earned. In the event an employee is not allowed to schedule and/or take his vacation in the
year in which it should have been taken, he may request that such unused vacation be carried
over to the following year. Such request must be submitted to the Department of Human
Resources prior to December | of each year. All such carry-over vacation must be taken no later
than April 30 of the following year. In the event that the City has not allowed the employee to
take the vacation time to which he is entitled by April 30 of the year following the calendar year
in which it should have been taken, then he should be paid for such unused vacation days.

(D) Employees shall be allowed to schedule and take vacations as provided herein in
accordance with existing Departmental procedures. Employees shall have the right to select
vacation time by seniority. At least ten (10%) percent of the employees assigned to the shift
shall be granted vacation in any vacation period. Requests for vacation time will be considered
first.

In determining eligibility for vacation, only continuous years of service shall be
counted. Except where an employee has served nine (9) full calendar years with the City and has
terminated and then returns to the City, such employee shall be entitled to count the prior service
for determining eligibility for vacation.

2129.70 Paid Holidays

All Police Officers of the Department of Police shall be entitled to fifteen (15) holidays
per year. Each Police Officer shall have the option of having up to fifteen (15) days off, or of
having a lesser number of days off and receiving pay for the difference between the number of
scheduled days off and the total number of holidays up to a maximum of fourteen (14) days for
which he or she may elect to receive pay.

In the event the Police Officer elects to take days off, they are to be scheduled in a way as
not to impair the operation of the Shift or Bureau to which he or she is assigned. If the Police
Officer has elected to work up to fourteen (14) of these extra days in lieu of days off, then he or
she shall be compensated at his or her regular straight time rate of having worked on those days.
He or she shall be paid a bonus of ten (10) hours for each of the extra days scheduled.

54
The Police Officer who elects to take the bonus payment in lieu of the extra scheduled
days off shall receive up one hundred forty (140) hours of bonus pay to be distributed to him or
her at the time he takes his or her regular vacation or in a separate check to be issued on a
quarterly basis. The hours shall be payable at the rate of pay the Police Officer earns at the time
these checks are dispersed.

2129.71 Funeral Pay

An employee shall be granted three (3) days funeral pay to arrange for and/or attend the
funeral of a member of the immediate family. For the purpose of this section the employee’s
immediate family shall include father, mother, brother, sister, spouse, child, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, stepmother, stepfather, stepchild, Life Partner,
grandmother, grandfather, grandchild, spouse’s grandparent, and any other relative residing in
his household. A “Life Partner” relationship must have been pre-certified by the Department of
Human Resources before funeral pay usage may occur.

In the event of the death of the employee’s father, mother, brother, sister, spouse or child,
the employee, upon giving notice, shall have the right to take up to an additional three (3) days of
sick pay. Such additional time shall be charged to the employee’s accumulated sick days, but
shall have no effect on Bonus Days as provided in Section 2129.58.

Should a death or burial in the immediate family occur in a city located more than one
hundred fifty (150) miles from Toledo, an additional two (2) days for travel shall be granted and
paid.

The employee may take two (2) days to attend the funeral and reserve a day to attend to
legal matters made necessary by the death, but such time provided herein shall be taken within
two (2) weeks after the date of burial.

This benefit shall also be extended when the relative is a veteran being returned for
burial.

One (1) day of funeral pay shall be granted to attend the funeral of the employee’s or the
employee’s spouse’s or life partner’s foster mother, foster father, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew,
sister-in-law and brother-in-law, if such funeral occurs on an employee’s regular workday and if
the employee is scheduled to work that day. When a special filial relationship exists between the
employee and any relative for whom he would normally be granted one (1) day of funeral pay,
three (3) days funeral pay will be granted upon the furnishing of an affidavit to the Department
of Human Resources setting forth the facts as to the special relationship.

Employees with a start time of 2000 hours or later shall be afforded the option to utilize a
funeral day the night prior to the funeral.

2129.72 Jury Duty

Any Police Officer who is required to serve on the jury in any court of record shall be
paid his regular rate of pay during such periods.

55
Police Officers may retain the jury fee paid to them.
2129.73 Unemployment Compensation

The City shall extend the provisions of the Ohio Unemployment Compensation Law to
Police Officers.

2129.74 Compensated Time Considered as Time Worked

Holidays, vacation days and other time off to which a Police Officer is entitled as a
matter of right under or by virtue of any Ordinance of the City and this Agreement shall be
considered as time worked, and compensated accordingly, except that such paid time off need
not be considered in determining hours worked for the purposes of the Fair Labor Standards Act.

2129.75 Wage Rates
With the understanding between the City and the Association that there shall be full
cooperation in effecting reasonable and efficient economies, the wage rates to be paid to

employees in each salary group defined in this agreement are set forth in the schedule attached:

Effective the first full pay period of January 2015 the rates which were effective in July of 2014
shall be increased by three-quarters of one percent (0.75%).

 

Police rates effective the first full pay period of January 2015:

 

Hourly *Daily *Bi-Weekly *Annual
Rate Rate Rate Rate

Police Officer Trainee 22.720 181.76 1,817.60 47,257.60
Police Officer - Probationary 24.140 193.12 1,931.20 50,211.20
Police Officer - 1 Year 25.560 204.48 2,044.80 53,164.80
Police Officer - 2 Year 26.980 215.84 2,158.40 56,118.40
Police Officer — Full Rate 28.400 227.20 2,272.00 59,072.00
Police Officer - 5 Year 28.771 230.17 2,301.68 59,843.68
Police Officer - 10 Year 29.139 233.11 2,331.12 60,609.12
Police Officer - 15 Year 29.504 236.03 2,360.32 61,368.32
Police Officer - 20 Year 29.879 239.03 2,390.32 62,148.32
Sergeant-At-Arms 34.361 274.89 2,748.88 71,470.88

Effective the first full pay period of January 2016 the rates which were effective in January of
2015 shall be increased by three-quarters of one percent (0.75%).

 

56
Police rates effective the first full pay period of January 2016:

Police Officer Trainee
Police Officer - Probationary
Police Officer - 1 Year
Police Officer - 2 Year
Police Officer — Full Rate
Police Officer - 5 Year
Police Officer - 10 Year
Police Officer - 15 Year
Police Officer - 20 Year

Sergeant-At-Arms

Hourly
Rate

22.890
24.321
25.752
27.182
28.613
28.987
29.358
29.725
30.103

34.619

*Daily
Rate

183.12
194.57
206.02
217.46
228.90
231.90
234.86
237.80
240.82

276.95

*Bi-Weekly
Rate

1,831.20
1,945.68
2,060.16
2,174.56
2,289.04
2,318.96
2,348.64
2,378.00
2,408.24

2,769.52

*Annual
Rate

47,611.20
50,587.68
53,564.16
56,538.56
59,515.04
60,292.96
61,064.64
61,828.00
62,614.24

72,007.52

Effective the first full pay period of January 2017 the rates which were effective in January of

2016 shall be increased by three-quarters of one percent (0.75%).

 

Police rates effective the first full pay period of January 2017:

Police Officer Trainee
Police Officer - Probationary
Police Officer - 1 Year
Police Officer - 2 Year
Police Officer — Full Rate
Police Officer - 5 Year
Police Officer - 10 Year
Police Officer - 15 Year
Police Officer - 20 Year

Sergeant-At-Arms

Hourly
Rate

23.062
24.504
25.945
27.387
28.828
29.204
29.578
29.948
30.329

34.879

*Daily
Rate

184.50
196.03
207.56
219.10
230.62
233.63
236.62
239.58
242.63

279.03

*Bi-Weekly
Rate

1,844.96
1,960.32
2,075.60
2,190.96
2,306.24
2,336.32
2,366.24
2,395.84
2,426.32

2,790.32

*Annual
Rate

47,968.96
50,968.32
53,965.60
56,964.96
59,962.24
60,744.32
61,522.24
62,291.84
63,084.32

72,548.32

New wage rates for employees with less than three (3) years of service shall be

established effective on the above wage increase dates using the following formulas:

Police Officer Trainee Rate

Police Officer Probationary Rate

57

= 80% of new full rate
= 85% of new full rate
Rate After 1 Full Year = 90% of new full rate
Rate After 2 Full Years = 95% of new full rate
Rate After 3 Full Years = New full rate.

The Police Officer Trainee Rate shall be paid during the period from the date of
appointment through the date of graduation from the Police Academy. The Police Officer
Probationary Rate shall be paid from the date of appointment until one (1) full year thereafter
despite the employee's continuing Police Officer Probationary status.

After twenty-six (26) full years service from the date of appointment to the Department,
employees shall be paid an annual payment of two percent (2%) of the 1988 annual base rate of a
police officer, which shall not be added to their base rates. This amount shall be paid during the
week in which they begin their twenty-seventh year of service.

In order to facilitate compliance with the Fair Labor Standards Act, the City will adjust its
regular pay rates for Police Officers to include stress allowance and shift premiums for purposes
of all overtime payments. The stress allowance add-on shall be determined by dividing the
annual stress allowance by 2080 hours. Existing regular pay rates will continue to be utilized for
all other purposes. Payment for over-time hours worked in an acting capacity shall be based
upon the regular rate for that rank including stress allowance and shift premium. All other
overtime hours shall be paid at the regular rate for the police officer's permanent rank including
stress allowance and shift premium.

 

2129.76 Clothing Allowance

The City shall provide required uniform clothing, insignia, leather goods, and all required
equipment, except socks and foot gear. The Deputy Chief in charge of the Support Services
Bureau will determine when such issued items should be replaced.

Provisions shall be made to provide repairs to Police uniforms at City expense.

Employees assigned to work in civilian clothes for a period in excess of sixty (60) days,
shall be compensated on a pro-rated basis not to exceed five hundred twenty dollars ($520.00)

annually.

Such payment to be made July | of each year, based on the number of months in the
previous twelve (12) month period that the employee was required to work in civilian clothes.

2129.77 Overnight Pay

Any employee ordered to be away from home overnight shall receive an additional four
(4) hours pay at straight time for each full night away from home.

58
2129.78 Travel Allowance

Employees authorized to use their private motor vehicle on City business shall be
compensated at the rate per mile which may be deducted from the employee's Federal Income
Tax without having to itemize specific expenditures as established by Internal Revenue Service
letter.

2129.79 Termination and Severance Pay

Employees who terminate their employment with the City for any reason shall have their
termination pay computed in the following manner.

A. They shall be compensated for any earned vacation and bonus vacation including any
vacation carried over from the previous year plus vacation earned the year in which the
employee terminated. The computation of the vacation earned in the year in which the employee
terminated shall be in accordance with the following table:

Entitled to 2 weeks - 0.916 x the number of months worked
Entitled to 3 weeks - 1.333 x the number of months worked
Entitled to 4 weeks - 1.750 x the number of months worked
Entitled to 5 weeks - 2.166 x the number of months worked
Entitled to 6 weeks - 2.583 x the number of months worked

B. In addition to the above, the employee shall be paid for any holidays worked for which
he has not been compensated either in the form of pay or time off. If the employee was entitled
to discretionary holidays and has not taken them and terminates on or before June 30, he shall
receive pay for one (1) retionary holiday. If the employee terminates after June 30 he shall
receive pay for two (2) discretionary holidays.

 

C. Employees who retire or die or who separate in good standing from employment after
twenty-five (25) years of service shall also receive severance pay for unused sick time in
accordance with the provisions of Section 2129.57, Accumulation of Sick Days.

D. An employee shall be entitled to the pay-outs herein no later than 90 days after said
employee terminates.

2129.80 Shift Premium
The City shall pay a shift premium to employees as provided herein.

A shift premium of fifty ($0.50) cents per hour worked shall be paid to any employee who
is scheduled to start work on or after 11:00 a.m. and before 3:00 a.m. the following day.

In addition to the above, an additional premium of twenty ($0.20) cents per hour worked
shall be paid to_any officer assigned to the Operations Division, Field Operations Bureau.
working from the Scott Park or Central District station, with start times between the above-listed
hours.

 

 

 

59
2129.81 Police Service Allowance

To give recognition to the unique nature of the services performed for the community by
the Police Officer each Police Officer shall receive an annual payment in the amount of $750 on
or about the first (1) of July each year for the term of this Agreement.

 

2129.82 Time Bank

The Time Bank shall continue in operation with the administration of such bank under the
control of a committee of six (6) members. The chairman of said committee shall be determined
by the Association. The committee shall maintain control of and operation of the Time Bank.
The provisions of this Time Bank are for employees only.

The Association shall provide the office of the Chief of Police with the name of the
current chairman of the committee.

A Police Officer may contribute a sick day from his accumulated sick time to the time
bank or elect to work a regular day off. However, a Police Officer may only work a regular day
off if in so doing his hours worked within the work period will not exceed the maximum non-
overtime hours limitation under the Fair Labor Standards Act. Notification of contributions of
sick time and hours worked must be provided to the Police Administration in advance.

2129.83 Disaster Time Bank

The Disaster Time Bank shall continue in operation, with the administration of such bank
under the control of the Association. The purpose of the Disaster Time Bank is to provide the
employees covered herein, in the event of a natural disaster or severe personal crisis with a
program whereby, the employee may be afforded the opportunity to have other employees fulfill
the responsibilities to the City in terms of working for the employee for a period not to exceed
ten (10) days per request. All other time off must be exhausted: vacation days, bonus days,
discretionary vacation days and compensatory time. This is to exclude all sick time. A police
officer may only work for a fellow officer if in so doing his hours worked within the work period
will not exceed the maximum non-overtime hours limitation under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Notification of a contribution of hours worked must be provided to the Police Administration in
advance.

2129.84 Payday

The employee shall be paid bi-weekly every other Friday. Shift workers on the second or
third shifts and/or an employee not scheduled to work on a Friday payday shall have the right to
receive his check after 2:00 p.m. on Thursday.

(a) In the event that an error has occurred which results in a substantial shortage in the

employee's pay, and the amount owed is not in dispute, then a special check shall be prepared
immediately so that an employee receives his full pay when due.

60
(b) If any minor error is made in an employee's pay, it shall be corrected no later than the
next paycheck. If not corrected on the next paycheck, then a voucher shall be issued
immediately to correct the error, providing the employee so requests.

(c) In the event that payday falls on a holiday, the employees shall receive their paychecks
on the day prior to the holiday. When the eight (8) major holidays fall on Thursday and payday
would be on Friday of that week, then the employees shall receive their paychecks on
Wednesday prior to the holiday.

(d) In the event that an error has occurred which results in overpayment to an employee,
the City will deduct said overpayment from the next paycheck.

(e) When an employee elects to receive his bonus payment and/or accumulated
compensatory time in lieu of days off as provided in Section 2129.52 (Compensatory Time), he
shall receive such payment in a separate check on a quarterly basis. The Commissioner of
Accounts will determine said dates of payment.

2129.85 Safety and Welfare

The City shall make reasonable provisions for the safety, health and welfare of its
employees. Protective devices as required by law to properly protect officers from injury shall
be provided by the City.

The Association shall have the right to have three (3) representatives on the Police
Department Safety Committee.

Any recommendations of the Safety Committee forwarded to the Administration and not
approved and implemented by the City to the satisfaction of a majority of the committee shall be
subject to the grievance procedure up to the Third Step.

2129.86 Provisions for Safety

(a) The parties will establish a labor-management Health & Safety Committee. The
Association will be represented on this Committee by the Association President or Vice
President and one (1) other designated representative. The City will be represented by a
designee of the Director of Human Resources and by Commissioners or other administrators
designated by the Appointing Authority based on specialty areas (e.g., construction,
transportation, pollutants, etc.). This Committee may also include representatives from other
bargaining units within the City. The Committee will be required to consider all issues brought
before it regardless of the bargaining unit impacted.

(1) This joint Committee shall review all general and/or special Departmental safety rules
for compliance with required safety standards and wherever possible, such rules shall be adopted
Citywide.

(2) This joint Committee will also perform the following functions:

61
(a) The Committee may recommend periodic inspections of the various locations when
necessary by staff of the Human Resource Development Section of Human Resources
Department.

(b) The Committee shall make recommendations for the correction of unsafe or harmful
work conditions and the elimination of unsafe or harmful practices as reported to the Committee
by representative(s) of the Human Resource Development Section of the Human Resources
Department and Departmental Safety Committees.

(c) The Committee may recommend investigation of any potential worker exposure to
dangerous substances, fumes, noise, dust, etc.

(d) The Committee shall be provided written identification of any potentially toxic
substance to which workers are exposed together with material data sheets, if any.

(e) The Committee may develop a safety award program which may include cash awards
and/or other premiums that, upon mutual agreement between the Appointing Authority and the
Association, may be adopted/implemented during the term of this collective bargaining
agreement.

(f) The Committee shall develop other cost containment measures, which shall include:

1. Enhanced managed care and utilization review;

2. Increased claims control and claims audits;

(g) The Committee shall develop annual goals, objectives, and timetables directly aimed
at reducing Worker's Compensation costs. Goals and objectives not met within established time
frames shall be critically reviewed by the Committee. If the City, it its sole discretion, is

d sfied with progress in meeting goals and objectives or with the Committee's action or
inaction, the City may take such actions as it deems necessary to exact cost containment.

 

 

(h) The Committee shall review and analyze all reports of work-related injury or illness,
as submitted by the representative of the Human Resources Development Section and
recommend procedures for the prevention of accidents and disease and for the promotion of
health and safety of employees.

 

(i) The Committee shall promote health and safety education and/or participate in such
programs.

(j) The Committee may ask the advice, opinion and suggestions of experts and authorities
on safety matters and recommend to the representative of the Human Resource Development
Section that experts and authorities from the Industrial Commission of the State of Ohio Division
of Safety and Hygiene, and the Toledo Lucas County Safety Council as well as international
representatives of the Association be utilized on an as-needed basis as determined by the
Committee.

 

62
(3) Sub-committees may be formed as deemed necessary by the co-chairpersons to study
issues, develop reasonable solutions, and report back to the Committee.

(4) Annual savings directly attributable to the cost containment measures provided herein
shall be placed in a Worker's Compensation fund to be used as a reserve for payment of future
cost increases. Savings shall be considered directly attributable to cost containment measures
when a direct correlation can be established between a measure adopted herein and a per
employee reduction in the City's cost in providing both injury pay and Worker's Compensation
benefits from the preceding year.

 

(5) Association representatives will receive their regular pay while on Committee
business.

(6) The Committee shall meet regularly, on at least a monthly basis, and attendance shall
be required. Actions taken in the absence of a bargaining unit representative shall be binding
upon that bargaining unit. The City will provide minutes of each meeting.

2129.87 Rules and Orders

All Rules and Special Orders shall be issued in written form and shall be submitted to the
Association via FAX copy three (3) calendar days before they are to take effect. These matters
shall be subject to the grievance procedure provided in Section 2129.14 up to the Third (3rd)
Step, to the Director of Safety. The decision of the Director relative to Rules and Special Orders
appealed under the provis: of this section shall not be subject to arbitration. However, the
reasonableness of the application of a Rule or Special Order in specific disciplinary proceedings
shall be a matter for arbitration.

 

A copy of the Department Manual, Rule changes, and Special Orders shall be provided to
each Police Officer defined within this agreement.

The Association will be provided copies of all Administrative, Personnel, Notices and
Bulletins, Bureau, District and Section Orders. The issuance of these orders will not be subject
to any appeal procedure. However, if the implementation of such orders violates any section of
this contract, then it shall be subject to the grievance procedure.

2129.88 Retraining

Counseling is not a disciplinary step and should not be used when employees are in direct
violation of Department guidelines, policies, rules, and procedures. Counseling shall be regarded
as a suitable step of retraining dealing with employees whom, by their actions have shown lack
of understanding of Department guidelines, policies, rules, and procedures.

When it becomes necessary for a supervisor to counsel an employee, it shall be done in

private in a manner which will not cause embarrassment to the employee. The employee shall be
permitted to have an Association representative present during the counseling and the

63
representative may speak on the employee's behalf. The employee shall be made aware that a
record of such counseling is being maintained in the supervisor's files or records, and the
employee shall be given a copy of the supervisor's notation. The employee shall acknowledge
receipt of same by signing and dating the original copy.

All counseling records shall be removed from files after a period of twelve (12) months
from the date of issuance.

2129.89 Official Issued Equipment/Uniform Inspections
Inspections of official equipment and of uniforms shall be done on City time.
2129.90 Retirement

A Police Officer, upon attaining the age of sixty-five (65) years, shall be retired by the
City and his employment terminated as of the last day of the month in which the employee has
attained the age of sixty-five (65).

A police officer, upon honorable retirement under service or disability circumstances, may
purchase his service pistol for the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). Additionally, at the officer's
request, the Department Armorer shall deactivate the pistol for display purposes. This is
respectfully offered on behalf of the grateful citizens of Toledo and the City in homage to the
retiring officer's years of selfless, faithful service.

2129.91 Outside Employment

No employee of the City shall accept outside employment that is adverse to or in conflict
with his municipal employment. In the event said employee shall be injured while engaged in
outside employment, he shall be entitled to any sick benefits which have been accumulated by
virtue of his employment by the City.

2129.92 Trade Days Off

Police Officers shall be allowed to trade days off with other Police Officers who are able
to do the work. Written notification signed by both Police Officers involved in the trade must be
provided on the form supplied by the Department. All trades must be completed within the
calendar year. Police Officers shall be allowed to trade days off with themselves whenever both
of the following conditions are met:

(1) There are no more than ten (10%) percent of the Police Officers assigned to the shift
requesting the day off for either vacation time, compensatory time, or trades with themselves;
and,

(2) The trade will be completed within the work period, or, if not completed within the
work period, within the next work period, and the trade will not cause the Police Officer's non-

64
overtime hours to exceed the maximum non-overtime hours limitation of the Fair Labor
Standards Act in the work period in which the day is paid back.

Police Officers asking for vacation days or compensatory time will be given first
preference and then Police Officers requesting to trade a day off with themselves. Written notice
shall be given at least three (3) days prior to the requested trade, except in the case of unforeseen
emergencies which make it impossible for the Police Officer to give such advance notice.
However, when conditions permit, the Shift Commander or Bureau Head may, at his discretion,
allow the individual Police Officer, in excess of the ten (10%) percent, to trade days off.

A police officer shall be permitted to trade with another officer citywide, as long as both
officers are within the same shift and the same bureau (trades between district stations in field
operations shall be allowed). Days traded must both be within the same FLSA period. Officers
are limited to trade two (2) days per month in this manner. The two-day restriction is not meant
to restrict total day off trades or the trades as they are presently handled.

2129.93 Critical Incidents

Anytime a member(s) of the Association is involved in a Critical Incident, the member(s)
shall receive the necessary time off to relieve the stress which has resulted from the Critical
Incident. The duration of the time shall be discussed by the Chief of Police with the Employee
Assistance Program Officer, but the decision shall rest solely with the Chief of Police.

A Critical Incident is defined as: "any event which has emotional power to overwhelm a
person's common effective abilities to cope."

The Police Officer shall continue to receive his normal rate of pay for these days and they
shall not be charged against sick time

2129.9 Critical Incident Protocol

In the event of a serious officer injury, an officer-involved shooting, or other critical
incident involving an officer (on-duty, or off-duty if the Department has knowledge of the off-
duty critical incident), the Department shall notify the Union President or his or her designee by
telephone. The Union shall provide the Department with contact information for this
notification.

2129.95 Educational Reimbursement

(A) The City shall reimburse tuition costs for degree required and/or job-related
courses taken at an educationally accredited college or university by full-time permanent
officers. Such course work must be approved as job-related prior to enrolling by submitting a
description of the course to the office of the Chief of Police. In the event there is a dispute,
the Career Enhancement Committee shall determine the status of a job-related course.

65
(B) The City shall reimburse one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of tuition and
general fees, for a total of ten (10) credit hours per quarter or eight per semester, regardless of the
number of courses comprising these totals. These costs will be reimbursed upon the documented
presentation of a "C" or 2.0 grade or better.

(C) Non-accredited schools will be included, if job related.
2129.96 Residency Requirement

In the event that the Toledo City Council enacts Home Rule Authority under the
provisions or the State of Ohio Residency Law (O.R.C. 9.481 Section B2b “Residency
Requirements Prohibited for Certain Employees”), employees covered under this Collective
Bargaining Agreement shall be allowed to reside in the following counties:

Lucas County, Ohio
Defiance County, Ohio
Fulton County, Ohio
Hancock County, Ohio
Henry County, Ohio
Ottawa County, Ohio
Putnam County, Ohio
Sandusky County, Ohio
Seneca County, Ohio
Williams County, Ohio
Wood County, Ohio
Hillsdale County, Michigan
Jackson County, Michigan
Lenawee County, Michigan
Monroe County, Michigan
Washtenaw County, Michigan
Wayne County, Michigan

2129.97 Administrative Responsibility

Except as otherwise provided herein, the City shall retain all rights and duties pursuant to
the Charter of the City to operate and direct the Department of Police.

2129.98 Continuation of Services

The services performed by the employees included in this Agreement are essential to the
public health, safety and welfare. The Association and the City, therefore, agree there shall be no
strikes, no lock-outs, no interruption of the work for any cause whatsoever, nor shall there be any
work slowdown or other interference with the delivery of services to the public. For the purpose
of this Agreement, a "strike" means, concerted action in failing to report to duty; willful absence
from one's position; stoppage of work; slowdown, or abstinence in whole or in part from the full,

66
faithful, and proper performance of the duties of employment for the purpose of inducing,
influencing, or coercing a change in wages, hours, terms and other conditions of employment.

Stoppage of work by employees in good faith because of dangerous or unhealthful
working conditions at the place of employment which are abnormal to the place of employment
shall not be deemed a strike.

For the purpose of this Agreement, a "lock-out" means preventing an employee from
performing their regularly assigned duties as a means of bringing pressure on the employee or an
employee organization to compromise or capitulate to the employers terms regarding a labor
relations dispute.

No Police Officer shall be required to perform any job duty of any other Toledo City
employee. In the event of a work stoppage by any Toledo City employee, no Police Officer shall
be required to perform the job duties of the striking employee.

2129.99 Savings Clause

If any article or section of this contract or any rider thereto should be held invalid, illegal
or unenforceable by operation of law or by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or if
compliance with or enforcement of any article or section should be restrained by such tribunal
pending a final determination as to its validity or legality, the remainder of this contract or any
rider thereto, or the application of such article or section to persons or circumstances other than
those as to which it has been held invalid or as to which compliance with or enforcement of has
been restrained, shall not be affected thereby.

It is the further intent of the parties that should any article or section of this contract be
found invalid, illegal, unenforceable or inoperative, that section or article shall be renegotiated in
an attempt to provide validity, legality, operativeness or acceptability to such section or article.

2129.100 Mid Term Bargaining

In the event the City, as a result of exigent circumstances (as this term is defined under
Ohio law developed under R.C. 4117) that were unforeseen at the time of negotiations or the
passage of legislation which conflicts with the terms of this Agreement, finds it necessary to
seek a change or changes to a term or terms of this Contract, the City, after approval by City
Council, shall notify the Union of the proposed change or changes. The Union may, with ten
calendar days of such notice, submit a written demand to bargain over such change or
changes.

Should the Union demand to bargain as provided herein, the parties shall engage in
good faith bargaining for a period of not less than five days and not more than ten days.
Bargaining shall be conducted by teams consisting of not more than four persons, unless a
larger number is mutually agreed to by the City and the Union.

67
If the bargaining teams have not reached agreement by the end of the bargaining
period, the parties will engage in mediation for a period of not more than ten days, or until a
resolution is reached or impasse is declared by either party, whichever first occurs. The
mediator shall be gned by the State Employment Relations Board, unless the parties
mutually agree on a mediator.

 

If the parties have not reached agreement by the end of the mediation period, the City
may elect to submit the unresolved issue or issues to conciliation. The conciliator shall be
selected and the hearing conducted in accordance with the provisions of R.C. 4117 and the
implementing provisions of the Ohio Administrative Code. The City shall maintain the
status quo until the conciliator provides his or her decision. If the City does not elect to submit
the unresolved issue or issues to conciliation, the status quo shall be maintained.

Proposed changes to this agreement that arise within 120 days of the Agreement’s
expiration will not be deemed mid-term issues. Such issues will be held over until
negotiations for a successor agreement commence and this procedure will not apply.

2129.101 Canine Unit

As long as the City maintains a Canine Unit, for the effective operation of that unit,
the following waivers of contractual articles apply:

 

 

2129.03 Field Training Officer
Upon selection as a Canine Handler, any officer holding the title of Field Training

Officer shall resign that position.

 

2129.20 Drug Testing
Due to a Canine Handler’s access to narcotics and other drugs for training purposes,

Canine Handlers may be randomly tested once annually for drugs.

 

 

2129.30 Bidding for Assignment
It is understood that any officer selected as a Canine Handler shall waive his/her right

under Section 2129.30, “Bidding for Assignment” within the Department for a period of (7)
seven years or when the service working life of his/her canine is terminated, whichever comes
first. Absent the termination of the canine’s service life, any bid submitted within the seven

7) year time frame shall not be accepted.

 

 

 

 

If the service life of the canine is terminated by the City veterinarian, the affected
officer shall have the option to maintain his/her position within the Canine Unit (if_a
replacement canine is to be purchased) or return to Field Operations where his/her bid rights
will be restored.

 

 

 

2129.32 Career Enhancement Program
Due to the extensive training involved in becoming a Canine Handler and the need for

continuous training, the City agrees to create a category within the Career Enhancement
Program Specialty Assignments titled “Canine Handler” with an assessment of 20 points.

 

 

 

68
2129.46 Permanent Shifts

Shift selection shall be by seniority among the Canine Handlers. However, shift
selection will be made by canine specialty. Dual Purpose/Explosives Canine Handlers shall
select_shift_assignment_among each other. Dual Purpose/Narcotics Canine Handlers shall
select shift assignment among each other.

 

 

 

   

2129.50 Work in Excess of Regular Workday

Canine Handlers will be required to perform tasks at home outside of normal working
hours related to their position. These tasks would include bathing, brushing, exercising
feeding, grooming of the dog, cleaning of the dog’s kennel and/or transport vehicle.
administering medications for illness, transporting the dog to and from an animal hospital,
veterinary clinic or kennel, and training the dog at home. Per the Garcia Act, the Canine
Handlers will be compensated an additional 3.5 hours at time and one half per week.

 

 

 

 

 

 

2129.52 Compensatory Time
2129.58 Bonus Days
2129.69 Vacations

All compensatory time off, Bonus Days and vacations shall be selected by seniority by
shift among canine handlers regardless of station assignment.

 

 

Purchase of Canine

Should a canine, which is assigned to a Canine Handler, have its service life
terminated by a City-designated veterinarian after the warranty period from the vendor or
kennel, the gned Canine Handler shall have the option to purchase the dog for a sum of

One Dollar ($1.00).

 

 

 

 

 

All care and equipment related to the canine shall be provided by the City of Toledo
Police Department during the canine’s service life. An annual stipend of $250.00 shall be
provided to the Canine Handler in the month of June for carpet cleaning.

 

 

 

Job Description — Field Operations Division — Dual Purpose Canine Handler

Both the City of Toledo Police Department_and the Toledo Police Patrolman’s
Association have reviewed the Job Description-Field Operations Division-Dual_ Purpose
Canine Handler description and accept it in its entirety.

 

 

 

 

2129.102 Motorcycle Unit

Effective January 1, 2015, the Motorcycle Unit, which are Category three (3)
positions, shall transfer to the Traffic Section, a Category two (2) position. Officers in both
the Traffic Unit and Motorcycle Unit shall retain their current contractual category positions.
Section 2129.31 Filling Vacant Positions

 

 

 

   

All contractual earned time off will be selected within the Motorcycle and Traffic
Unit’s individual Category group. The allowance of officers being off on a selected date that

 

 

69
is dependent_on the 10% rule, or trade request _will also _be inclusive of their individual
category group. (Section 2129.92 Trade Days Off)

 

 

All overtime opportunities within the Traffic Section, provided through Grant Funding
or City funded shall be equalized for all patrolmen working the Motorcycle Unit and Traffic
Unit. Overtime opportunities which are Motorcycle Unit specific, as determined by the
Traffic Section Commander, shall be equalized only to the Motorcycle Unit. (Section

2129.54 Equalization of Overtime

 

 

 

 

Field Operations Division (FOD) shift recall opportunities shall not be afforded to
patrolman assigned to the Traffic Section.

 

Traffic Unit_administration positions staffed _by patrolman shall not be assigned to
Motorcycle Unit patrolman and Traffic Unit patrolman shall not be assigned Motorcycle Unit
positions.

 

 

Training for Accident Reconstruction and Commercial Vehicle enforcement shall be
afforded to all patrolmen in the Traffic Section on a voluntary basis.

 

 

The workday shift hours for the Motorcycle Unit shall be determined prior to annual
permanent shift selection beginning for the calendar year 2015 as determined by the Deputy
Chief of Operations. (Section 2129.46 Permanent Shifts)

 

 

 

2129.103 Life Partner
Definitions

Life Partner, as specified in Sections 2129.59 and 2129.71, shall be defined as two adults who
have chosen to share in one another’s lives in an intimate and committed relationship of mutual
caring. The partners must be living together in the same living quarters, and must also intend to
remain together. The partners must have agreed to be jointly responsible for the basic living
expenses incurred during the life partnership. To qualify a Life Partner for purposes of Sections
2129.59 and 2129.71, the City employee must apply for pre-certification from the Department of
Human Resources.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Registration of Life Partnership

Declaration: _To establish the existence of a life partnership to qualify for benefits in
Sections 2129.59 and 2129.71, persons shall register as life partners by executing a
declaration of life partnership to be filed with the department, which shall be forwarded to the
Department of Human Resources. The declaration shall be signed by the life partners and
shall affirm under penalty and perjury that each life partner:

 

 

 

 

 

1. Is at least 18 years old and competent to contract;
2. Is the sole life partner of the other person;

 

70
3. Is not related to each other by kinship to a degree that would bar

marriage in this state;
4. Has not been a registered life partner with another individual during

 

the six months immediately prior to the application date unless that

 

life partner was terminated by death or marriage; and

 

5. Share with his or her life partner _a relationship of mutual support.

 

caring and commitment, and intent to remain in such a relationship.

 

Additional Requirements:

Members who are applying for the extension of benefits outlined_in Section
2129.59 and Section 2129.71 shall provide proof that they and their life partner,
who may be a city or a non-city employee, are jointly responsible for each other=s
common welfare and share financial obligations. Such joint proof of responsibility
may be demonstrated by the existence of one of the following upon registration:

a.
b.

moao

Termination:

They have a common or joint ownership of residence.

They have a current lease for a residence identifying both
applicants as tenants.

They jointly own a motor vehicle.

They have a joint bank account or credit union account.
They have a joint credit account.

They have identified each other as primary beneficiaries in
their wills.

 

 

 

 

1. __A life partnership is terminated by any of the following:

 

a. the death of one of the partners;
b. the marriage of one of the partners; and
c. the filing of a termination statement.

2. The employee may terminate the life partnership by submitting to their Department
administrator a form provided by the Department administrator. The termination form shall
be signed by both partners, or, if in the event of death or that one of the partners do not know
the whereabouts of the other, a statement of such shall be noted on the termination form. The

 

Department_administrator must notify the Department of Human Resources regarding such

termination.

3. An individual whose life partnership has been terminated may not file another
declaration of life partnership under this section until at least 6 (six) months after the date on
which the Department administrator received the termination statement. The 6-(six) month
time limitation does not apply if the earlier life partnership ended because one of the life

partners died.

71
4. Once the life partnership termination form has been filed, this will cease the benefits
provided in Section 2129.59 and Section 2129.71.

 

 

2129.104 Duration of Agreement

This agreement shall be effective as of the first day of January 2015, and shall remain in
full force and effect through December 31, 2017, and thereafter until terminated, amended or
repealed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4117, Ohio Revised Code.

 

72
Date:

For the TPPA: For the City of Toledo:

73
