MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Between
CITY OF OAKLAND
and

OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

Effective July 1, 2015 through June 30, 2019

i

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
PREAMBLE
ARTICLE |
A.
B.
c.

D.
ARTICLE II

A.
B.

Cc.
D.
ARTICLE Ill

Tammoop>

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

TABLE OF CONTENTS

  
 
  
 

GENERAL PROVISIONS ..
Recognition...
Discrimination Prohibited
City-Association Relationship
Association Security...
Dues Deduction.
Release Time....
Limitations
Bulletin Board Space.
Use of City Facilities
Police Administration Building Lounge

8. Member Parking...
Attachments..............
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS.

General...
Scheduling.
1. Non-Patrol Officer:
2. Patrol Officers
3. Arbitration......
Deployment...
Rest Periods...
DIRECT PAY FOR SERVICE

 

 

 

 

 

NO apoNn>s

 

 

   
 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 

Police Officer Trainee ..
Adjustments for Overpayments.
Court Ordered Salary Deductions.
Salary Steps for Rank of Police Officer.

  
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMAANNYNNO®OOHARARRRAROWNNBABBUED

 

 

 

 

 

Overtime... 9
Premium Pay. 11
1. Acting Pay..... 11
2. Standby Pay.. 11
3. Bilingual Pay 11
4, Other Premium Assignment Pay.. 212
5. Longevity Premium Pay 12
6. Premium Pay Provisions and Restrictions . 13

 

ii
%
ARTICLE IV

moOOM>

mn

ARTICLE
A.

ARTICLE VI
A.

ARTICLE Vil ALLOWANCES...

A.

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

 

RETIREMENT .... .
Retirement Benefits 14
Optional Benefits .... 16

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 

Military Service Credited as Public Service..
Limitation to Operability ........
Deferred Compensation Plan
Retiree Medical Trust (ERISA).
INSURANCE PROGRAMS
Insurance Programs.
1. Health Insurance
2. Dental Insurance....
3. Helicopter Insurance .
4. Life Insurance.........
LEAVES AND HOLIDAYS
Vacation Leave...
1.

  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2.

3. Paychecks During Vacation .
4, Buy-back ,
Sick Leave

1. Definition...

2. Accrual

3. Pregnancy Disability Leave..
Leave of Absence Without Pay
Family Death Leave...
1. Definition of Immediate Family
2. Entitlement
Military Leave...
Family Care and Medical Leave .
Holidays
1. Designated Holidays .
2. Floating Holiday
3. Holiday Pay..

 

Uniform Allowance
1. Initial Uniform Allowance..
2. Annual Uniform Allowance
3. Uniform Boots ..........

 

iti
4. Body Armor...

 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

B. Shift Differential
Cc. Meal Allowance.... :
ARTICLE VIII SELF-IMPROVEMENT INCENTIVES 25
A. Intermediate and Advanced Post Certificates 26
1. Intermediate Post Certificate
2. Advanced Post Certificate.
3. Single Benefit Eligibility
B. Education Incentives.
1. Associate of Arts Degree ..
2. Bachelor and Master Degrees .
3. Single-Benefit Eligibility........
Cc. Retirement System Contingency .
D. Tuition Reimbursement. ..

ARTICLE IX SPECIAL PROVISIONS

moom>

orozzrxzer-iroen

R.
ARTICLE X

A.

B.

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

 
 
 
  
 

Transfer Policy.....
Promotional MOU
Use of Non-Sworn Employees...
Equipment.
Employee Health Assistance Programs.
1. Psychological Counseling ........
2. Substance Abuse Treatment Program...
Physical Fitness/Exercise Physiology Program
Reduction in Force...
Rank Reductions .
Furloughs...
Annutiant Employees...
Notification of Critical Incidents.
Patrol Schedule ...
Personnel Files....
New Hires
Workers Compensation .
Probationary Period
Transitional Assignments for Employees Temporarily Disabled
Administrative Interviews ...

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.

Definition

Election of Grievance Appeal Process

 

 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

iv
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 

Cc. Procedure
Step 1 Initial Procedure.
Step 2 Appeal to Department Head
Step 3 Employee Relations Officer - Association Representative. 35
Step 4 Conflict Resolution Process...

Step 5 Civil Service Board/Arbitration
Time Limits
Immediate Dispute Resolution .
Consolidation
Closing Arguments .
Grievances that Involve Appeal of Discipline
Complaints... cece eeseeseseesaeeeteneeeeseerensee
Caloca Appeals...
NSA Compliance .
ARTICLE XI SCOPE..
Resolution..
Full Understanding...
Existing Benefits ..
Waiver
Modification
Non-Nullification Clause.
Duration
APPENDIX A - ARBITRATOR’S AWARD..
APPENDIX B - UNIT PT BENEFITS/EXCLUSIONS
APPENDIX C - CIVIL SERVICE BOARD/HEARING OFFICER
APPENDIX D - PSYCHOLOGICAL & SUBSTANCE ABUSE COUNSELING EXHIBITe4
APPENDIX E - SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL IMPLEMENTATION AGREEMENT .
ATTACHMENT 1 - CITY ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO. 567...
ATTACHMENT 2 - DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4...
ATTACHMENT 3 - MOU ON PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATIONS
ATTACHMENT 4 - OAKLAND CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION 77044

ATTACHMENT 5 - LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING REGARDING DENTAL .
ATTACHMENT 6 - OAKLAND CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION & ORDINANCE........ 140

1A PONV >

ALrrommo

QOMNMOOW >,

 

 
 
  

 

v

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
PREAMBLE

We, the undersigned, duly appointed representatives of the City of Oakland and
of the Oakland Police Officers’ Association, a recognized employee organization,
hereinafter referred to as “City” and “Association,” do hereby jointly prepare and execute
on the 22 day of March, 2016 the following written Memorandum of Understanding.

ARTICLE | GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Recognition

City agrees to recognize the Oakland Police Officers’ Association as the
exclusive recognized bargaining representative, within the scope of representation as
described in the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act, as amended, for City employees officially
designated to be members of Representation Unit PP, and for members of Unit PT as
set forth in Appendix B.

B. Discrimination Prohibited

City and Association agree that they shall not discriminate in any way on account
of race, creed, religion, gender, national origin, political affiliation, age, sexual
orientation, mental or physical disability, medical condition, political affiliation or military
service. City further agrees that no employee shall be discriminated against because of
Association membership or activity. .

C. _—_City-Association Relationship

City and Association hereby restate their joint commitment to the achievement
and maintenance of a relationship built on open communication, which fosters the
equitable resolution of the concerns of each party regarding wages, hours, and other
terms and conditions of employment.

1. Association Security

An employee in one of the classes included in Units PP and PT employed during
the term of this Agreement shall, as a condition of continuing employment with the City
and, in the case of a newly hired employee, within thirty (30) calendar days of
employment, execute a payroll deduction authorization form as furnished by the
Association, and thereby become and remain a member in good standing in the
Association; or execute a payroll deduction authorization form as furnished by the
Association, and thereby pay to the Association a service fee; or, in the case of
employees who certify that they are members of a bona fide religion, body or sect which
has historically held conscientious objections to joining or financially supporting public
employee organizations, execute a payroll deduction authorization form as furnished by
the Association, and thereby pay sums equal to service fees to (1) Oakland Police

i
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION: *
Activities League; or (2) Friends of the Oakland Public Library; or (3) Friends of Oakland
Parks and Recreation.

Upon seven (7) days’ notice to the City from the Association that an employee
described above has failed to maintain the employee's membership in good standing or
has failed to maintain employee's current service fee payment or has failed to maintain
employee's current charitable contribution payments to the charity designated above,
then the City shall (1) counsel the employee of the employee's obligation under this
provision, and (2) inform the employee that further failure to maintain the appropriate
payments shall subject the employee to discharge.

The service fee payment shall be established annually by the Association,
provided that such agency shop service fee will be used by the Association only for the
purposes of collective bargaining, contract administration and pursuing matters
authorized by law.

The OPOA acknowledges its obligations to individuals in the bargaining unit
pursuant to Gov. Code 3502.5 and shall comply therewith.

The parties further acknowledge the City’s obligation, subject to applicable state
law, to collect funds on behalf of the OPOA and transfer said funds to the OPOA within
forty-five (45) days of the date of collection.

Annually, the Association will provide an explanation of the fee and sufficient
financial information to enable the service fee payer to gauge the appropriateness of the
fee. The Association will provide a reasonably prompt opportunity to challenge the
amount of the fee before an impartial decision maker not chosen by the Association and
will make provision for an escrow account to hold amounts reasonably in dispute while
challenges are pending.

The Association shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers and
employees, from and against any and all loss, damages, costs, expenses, claims,
attorney fees, demands, actions, suits, judgments, and other proceedings arising out of
any discharge action resulting from this provision.

2. Dues Deduction
City shall deduct, at least monthly, the amount of Association regular and
periodic dues and insurance premiums as may be specified by the Association. Said
deduction, together with a written statement of names and amounts deducted, shall be
forwarded prompily to the Association office.
3. Release Time
a. General Release Time
Except as provided below, no City employee or officer of the OPOA shall be
compensated for conducting Association business:

2
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
(i) An Association representative
processing a grievance shall be allowed a reasonable period
of release time to do so, provided that no more than one
such representative will be granted such rélease time to
process the grievance.

(ii) | A reasonable number of
Association representatives shall be allowed reasonable
release time to engage in meet and confer discussions, or
other discussions, with representatives of the City.

(iii) In addition, the Association
President will be granted full release time from his/her
normal duties at his/her rank base pay, including all benefits.

b. Release Time Bank

The City shall establish a release time bank for employee contributions of vested
leave time (vacation or CTO). Bargaining unit members may contribute vested leave
time in full-hour increments to the release time bank. This time will be converted to
release time on an hour-for-hour basis. The Union shall designate elected officers or
members who may use the time in the release time bank for up to fifty (50) working
days paid leave of absence during each year of the term of this Memorandum, subject
to approval of the department head, to attend. educational and training programs for
labor and employee relations. The time is to be utilized by such persons when said
seminars, conferences, or conventions are held at a time or location which precludes
attendance in addition to the performance of his/her regular duties.

4. Limitations

No organization other than the Association, through its designated
representatives, shall conduct Association business with the City in matters concerning
wages, hours, and other terms or conditions of employment. If such activity (i.e., a
violation of the Recognition Section, Article |, A, of this Memorandum of Understanding)
has occurred, the City shall discontinue any dues deduction for said organization as
might be collected by the City. The provisions of this Section shall not, however,
preclude the rights of an individual to represent himself / herself as provided by
applicable State law.

5. Bulletin Board Space

The City shall provide reasonable space on bulletin boards for official Association
notices at each central work area, provided that such notices are approved for posting
by the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative and further provided that
such approval shall be reasonably given. Posted material shall not be obscene,
defamatory, or of a partisan political nature, nor shall it pertain to public issues which do
not involve the City or its relations with City employees.

3
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
6. Use of City Facilities

City shall reasonably make available conference rooms and other meeting areas
for the purpose of holding Association meetings during off-duty time periods.
Association shall provide timely advance notice of such meetings, and agrees to pay
any additional costs of security, supervision, damage, and cleanup, and shall comply
with City regulations for assignment and use of such facilities.

7. Police Administration Building Lounge

Association may continue to use the space provided by the City in the Police
Administration Building Lounge to provide food and beverage service for use by City
and County employees and their guests. In lieu of any monthly rental obligation to the
City, the Association agrees to make a three hundred dollar ($300.00) monthly payment
directly to the Police Activities League.

In the event that the Association no longer can provide such food and beverage
service, and upon written notice from the Association to the City and the Police
Activities League, the provisions of this section shall expire.

8. Member Parking

The City and the Association shall continue good faith discussions regarding the
City taking over the OPOA lease on the CalTrans owned parking lot near the Oakland
Police Administration Building and the outcome of these talks are not to be subject to
arbitration.

D. Attachments

This Memorandum of Understanding is, in part, based on a previous interest
Arbitration and Award issued March 11, 2008 by Arbitrator Barry Winograd, attached as
Appendix A. It is attached for reference purposes.

It is understood that the provisions set forth and as modified in Appendix B apply
to City of Oakland employees officially designated to be members of Representation
Unit PP -- Uniformed Police Officers and, as proscribed by Appendix B, Unit PT --
Police Officer Trainees, represented by the Association

ARTICLE Il MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
A. General
The City retains and reserves all the rights, power, authority, duty, responsibility,

and obligations conferred on and vested in it by its Charter and by the laws and
Constitutions of the State of California and the United States of America.

4
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
The City reserves its right to determine matters outside the scope of representation.

The City reserves its right to propose changes in wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of employment not covered by this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions
of Charter Section 910 and this Agreement.

Except as limited by Charter Section 910 and by the specific provisions of this
Agreement, the City retains all rights, powers, and authority granted to it by law or the
Charter, including, but not limited to, the exclusive right to determine the merits, necessity,
and organization of any service or activity the City may now or hereafter provide; to
determine the City’s mission and the mission of the Police Department and its employees,
and to assign work to, direct, and schedule employees; to set standards of service; to
determine the methods, means, and personnel by which the City will conduct its operations;
to finance City operations and to determine financing methods; to establish and enforce
reasonable dress and grooming standards and to determine the style or type of City-issued
apparel, equipment, and technology; and to take all actions necessary to carry out its
mission and these reserved rights.

Except as expressly provided in this Agreement, neither the City nor the Union
concede or relinquish its rights under Charter Section 910.

B. Scheduling

Except for employees assigned to positions with flexible work schedules or power
squads, the City shall notify the affected members at least twenty-one (21) calendar days
prior to implementation of any change to an employee’s regular schedule. The City shall
exercise good faith in establishing work schedules. The functional needs of the City shall
prevail in work scheduling.

1. Non-Patrol Officers

a. The Department may change the schedules of employees assigned to
positions with existing flexible work schedules (e.g. PSOs, CRT).

b. For employees assigned to CID, the City has discretion to flex start times
on regularly scheduled days. Regularly scheduled days off may be
changed at the time of the patrol draw.

c. Three (3) times per year, the City may “flex” schedules of non-patrol
officers by advancing the start and end times by three (3) hours for a
period of not less than fourteen (14) days and not more than sixty (60)
days. However, no officer shall be flexed for more than one-hundred and
twenty (120) days per year.

(i) Flex Premium. Non-Patrol Officers
with flexed power shift schedules shall receive a five percent
(5%) premium to their base pay for their entire shift during
the flex period.

5
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
(ii) Shift Differential. Shift differential
and other premium pays shall continue to be paid to eligible
non-Patrol Officers whose shift is flexed as stated above.

(iii) Notice. The City shall notify the
affected members at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior
to the effective date.

2. Patrol Officers

a. For purposes of this section, “Patrol Officer” is defined as an
individual whose primary function is responding to dispatched calls
for service. These officers are assigned to the Bureau of Field
Operations, participate in the patrol draw, and attend a regularly
scheduled lineup consistent with their start times.

b. The Department will establish the start and end times of available
patrol shifts prior to the patrol draw. It is understood that the
Department shall not make any permanent changes to shift times
except at the time of the patrol draw. ,

c. Patrol Officers shall maintain the same regular schedule for the
length of the draw period, except as permitted in this section.

d. Up to three (3) times per year, the City may “flex” schedules by
advancing the start and end times of Patrol Officers assigned to two
power shifts with starting times after 12:00 pm, up to three (3) hours
(for example: 1:00 pm to 4:00 pm) for a period of not less than
fourteen (14) days and not more than sixty (60) days. However, no
officer shall be flexed for more than one-hundred and twenty (120)
days per year.

(i) Flex Premium. Patrol Officers
with flexed power shift schedules shall receive a five percent
(5%) premium to their base pay for their entire shift during
the flex period.

(ii) Shift Differential. Shift differential
and other premium pays shall continue to be paid to eligible
Patrol Officers with flexed power shift schedules.

(iii) | Notice. The City shall notify the
affected members at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior
to the effective date.

3. Arbitration
Shift scheduling is not subject to interest or expedited arbitration.

6
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
Cc. Deployment

The City retains the right to direct its workforce. This right includes but is not
limited to the rights to temporarily re-deploy personnel during their assigned shift from
one assignment to another. The functional needs of the City shall prevail in deploying
personnel. Matters pertaining to deployment shall not be subject to interest or
expedited arbitration.

D. Rest Periods

A member who is involuntarily held over beyond his / her regular shift, or is called
back to work, is entitled to a guaranteed eight (8) hour consecutive rest period prior to
the commencement of his / her next duty assignment. The member shall advise his /
her supervisor of the need for the rest period.

ARTICLE Ill DIRECT PAY FOR SERVICE
A. Salary

Effective July 1, 2015, the base salary for represented employees shall be
increased by four percent (4%).

Effective January 1, 2016, in recognition of an agreed upon equity
adjustment, the base salary for represented employees shall be increased
by two and a half percent (2.5%).

Effective January 1, 2017, in recognition of an agreed upon equity
adjustment, the base salary for represented employees shall be increased
by one percent (1%).

Effective May 1, 2017, the base salary for represented employees shall be
increased by four percent (4%).

Effective January 1, 2018, the base salary for represented employees
shall be increased by two and a half percent (2.5%).

Effective January 1, 2018, in recognition of an agreed upon equity
adjustment, the base salary for represented employees shall be increased
by one percent (1%).

Effective July 1, 2018, in recognition of an agreed upon equity adjustment,
the base salary for represented employees shall be increased by two
percent (2%).

Effective January 1, 2019, the base salary for represented employees
shall be increased by two and a half percent (2.5%).

7
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION: *
B. Step Adjustment

Payment for first step classification only will be reduced by ten percent
(10%) for those employees hired on or after July 1, 2011.

Cc. Police Officer Trainee Pay

For those employees hired on or after July 1, 2011, those classified as
Police Officer Trainee will receive a salary that is fifteen percent (15%) less than
the new first step established in Article Ill, Section B of this MOU

D. Adjustments for Overpayments

In the event the City erroneously overpays a unit member, regardless of
fault, the City shall recover any overpayment as follows:

The City will provide written notice to each employee when he/she
receives a wage overpayment. The notice will advise the employee of the
amount of overpayment and request that the employee either reimburse the City
for the full amount of overpayment or consent to deduct the overpayment from
the employee's paychecks. The notice shall also advise employees of the right
not to consent, provided however, the City may pursue appropriate legal action.

E. Court Ordered Salary Deductions

If the City is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction to garnish the
wages of any employee or if a court of competent jurisdiction orders the City to
make payroll deductions from the wages of any employee in favor of the City ora
third party, the City shall assess and collect against the employee's regular salary
one dollar ($1.00) per deduction per pay period to compensate the City for the
costs of making such court-mandated payroll adjustments.

F. Salary Steps for Rank of Police Officer

Except as regards to probationers as set forth in the paragraph below,
advancement within the salary schedule specified for an employee's
classification shall be on the basis of one (1) year's satisfactory service as
evidenced by a performance evaluation. A salary step increase for an employee
who is entitled to such an increase shall be effective at the beginning of the pay
period in which the anniversary date of appointment in such classification falls.

With regard to probationers, advancement to step 2 shall occur upon the
successful completion of probation.

8
*

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION:
G. Overtime
1. Overtime

Whenever, in the judgment of the Chief of Police or his/her designated
representative, an employee is required to work in excess of his/her regular work
week or regular work day, including work on a holiday as designated in Article 5
Section G, he/she shall be compensated for such overtime worked at the rate of
one and one-half (1-1/2) times the hourly base rate of pay for his/her
classification. Where the City’s obligations under the FLSA exceed its
obligations under this MOU, the City will pay overtime based on FLSA
requirements. It is understood that the City’s obligations under the FLSA are
calculated based on a 28-day cycle under section 7K of the FLSA pursuant to
Administrative Instruction 124.

a. Minimum Overtime Guarantee

An employee who is called back to work after he/she has completed
his/her regular shift and has left his/her place of employment, or who is required
to make a job-related court appearance on off-duty hours shall be compensated
for a minimum of two and one-half (2-1/2) hours of overtime worked. An
employee who is required to make a job-related court appearance on his/her
scheduled day off shall be compensated for a minimum of four (4) hours of
overtime worked. An employee who is required to work on his/her scheduled day
off shall be compensated for a minimum of five (5) hours of overtime worked. It
is expressly understood that an employee who works overtime (including court
appearances) immediately prior to or subsequent to his/her regular work: shift
shall be compensated at the overtime rate of pay for the time actually worked,
with no minimum number of hours of overtime guaranteed; further, it is
understood that an employee who is on compensatory leave (OTA) or other paid
leave of absence, excepting vacation leave, is not eligible for overtime
compensation.

b. Form of Compensation

An employee who works overtime and who is thus eligible for overtime
compensation shall receive overtime compensation in the form of cash or
compensatory leave subject to the following provisions:

(i) (i) Except for special events and
third party or other reimbursed overtime (which is “paid
only”), Employees who are exempt from the provisions of
FLSA choosing cash compensation for direct charge
overtime pursuant to Article Ill Section E, may defer payment
for a later date. Employees covered under the provisions of
FLSA choosing cash compensation for overtime may defer
payment for a later date on overtime hours earned up to the

9
*

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
171 hour FLSA work period limit. Employees shall receive
deferred overtime pay a maximum of twice each fiscal year,
payable in the months of December and July. Deferred
overtime payment requests for December must be made in
writing by November 1 on a form, which shall be provided by
the Department. Payments for such requests will be by
separate check payable on the first Friday, in the month of
December, which is not a payday. Any remaining or
unclaimed deferred overtime will be paid at the end of each
fiscal year by separate check on the first Friday, in the month
of July, which is not a payday. Deferred overtime cannot be
accumulated from one fiscal year to the next and it will be
paid at the salary level at which it was earned.

(ii) The maximum amount of
compensatory time which may be accrued shall be three
hundred (300) hours. Any employee who has a balance of
three hundred (300) or more hours in his/her compensatory
time bank (this includes both the pre-April 5, 1986
compensatory time bank and post-April 5, 1986
compensatory time bank) shall receive any subsequent
overtime earned in cash, until the balance once again drops
below three hundred (300) hours. The City will buy down
CTO banks in excess of three hundred (300) hours at a rate
of no more than a total of two hundred (200) hours per
calendar year.

(iii) | However, notwithstanding this
provision, the City may elect to buy down any overtime
worked (OTW) credit in excess of ninety-six (96) hours.

c. Canine Handlers

Each employee regularly assigned and working as a Canine Handler is
authorized to spend and shall be deemed to have spent fifteen (15) hours per
month, over and above his/her regularly scheduled hours of work, in ordinary
care and informal training of the assigned dog for such ordinary care and training
that cannot be performed during regularly scheduled work hours. For those
overtime hours incident to caring for the dog only, the employee shall receive
overtime compensation at the rate of one and one-half (1 1/2) times the hourly
rate of the State of California or City of Oakland minimum wage whichever is
higher. This same overtime compensation rate of one and one-half times the
State of California or City of Oakland minimum wage. whichever is higher per
hour shall also be paid for hours in addition to the above referenced fifteen hours
for extraordinary care of the dog. Any duly authorized additional work performed
by such individual not related to caring for the dog, shall be compensated

10
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
pursuant to Article Ill, Section E, paragraph 1 at the rate of one and one-half (1
1/2) times the employee's hourly base rate of pay.

In addition to overtime compensation for the ordinary and extraordinary
care of the dog, each canine handler shall receive a monthly allowance of fifty
dollars ($50.00) to cover dog food and expenses related to the care of the dog.

H. Premium Pay
1. Acting Pay

Any employee who has been assigned, in writing, by an authorized City official,
and who, pursuant to such assignment, assumes and performs all of the ordinary day-
to-day duties and responsibilities of a position of higher classification other than his/her
own for one (1) work day shall be paid the salary of that higher classification for such
higher classification time worked. Lieutenants acting as Captains shall be eligible to
receive overtime pay at the Lieutenant overtime rate of pay.

2. Standby Pay

An employee who is placed on standby duty, in writing by an authorized
supervisor, shall receive one dollar ($1.00) for each hour on standby up to a maximum
of twenty-four (24) hours per day. In the event an employee is called out to work during
his/her standby period, the standby pay for that calendar day shall be reduced by the
amount of overtime compensation paid for such work.

The City agrees to limit involuntary, compulsory standby to fourteen (14) full days
per year for officers not assigned to the Criminal Investigation Division and Internal
Affairs.

3. Bilingual Pay

On recommendation of the Chief of Police and the Director of Personnel, the City
may approve payments of Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) per pay period to a bilingual
employee whose abilities have been determined by the Director of Personnel as
qualified to fill positions requiring bilingual speaking and/or writing ability. Bilingual skill
payments will be made when:

a. Public contact requires continual eliciting and explaining information
in a language other than English (including sign language); or

b. Where translation of written material in another language is a
continuous assignment; or

c. The position is in a work location where there is a demonstrated
need for language translation in providing services to the public.

11
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
A bilingual employee whose assignment is comprised of at least fifty percent
(50%) non-English speaking members of the public, as determined by the Chief of
Police, or an employee whose assignment utilizes their bilingual skills at a higher level,
as determined by the Chief of Police, may receive bilingual payments of an additional
Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) per pay period.

Determinations made by the Chief of Police and/or the Director of Personnel
under this provision shall not be subject to the grievance procedure.

4. Other Premium Assignment Pay
a. Motorcycle

An employee who has completed a Department approved motorcycle training
program and who, thereafter, is regularly assigned to duty as a motorcycle officer shall
receive five percent (5.0%) in addition to his/her regular base rate of pay.

b. Aerial Patrol Duty

An employee who is assigned to the Helicopter/Airport Security Section of the
Patrol Division shall receive five percent (5%) in addition to his/her regular base rate of
pay when the employee is assigned to the Helicopter Unit on a fulltime basis, whether
as a licensed pilot or as a pilot trainee.

c. Field Training Officers

An employee who is certified in writing by the Chief of Police to be a Field
Training Officer (FTO) shall receive seven and one-half percent (7.5%) in addition to
his/her regular base rate of pay.

d. Evidence Technician Premium

An employee who is assigned in writing and who, pursuant to such assignment,
regularly performs the duties of an Evidence Technician, including leading civilian
evidence technicians as needed, shall receive a five percent (5%) premium in addition
to his/her regular base rate of pay.

5. Longevity Premium Pay

At the beginning of each fiscal year during the term of this Memorandum, eligible
represented employees shall receive longevity premium pay in accordance with the
rates enumerated below:

PERS P&F
a. 7 through 9 years of service $1275
b. 10 through 14 years of service $1475

12
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
c. 15 through 19 years of service $1675
d. 20 or more years of service $1875 $1168.30

Payment shall be in a lump sum, included with uniform allowance. Such
payment shall be by separate check, payable on the first Friday, in the month of July,
which is not a payday. Eligibility for receipt of special premium pay under this provision
shall be determined as of the beginning of each fiscal year.

6. Premium Pay Provisions and Restrictions
a. Premium Pay During Paid Leave

Premium pay shall continue to be paid during a paid leave of absence for an
employee who, during such leave, is regularly assigned to a position in which he/she is
eligible for such premium pay. Such regular assignment or removal from such regular
assignment shall be accomplished by a personnel order.

b. Premium Pay During Non-Paid Leave
Premium pay shall not be paid during an unpaid leave of absence.
c. No Pyramiding

There shall be no "pyramiding" of premium and/or overtime pay. Nothing in this
section prevents an employee from receiving multiple premium payments, which are
computed on his/her base rate of pay.

d. Retirement System Contingency

It is expressly understood and agreed that premium pay provided herein shall not
be construed for any purposes as “compensation,” as that term is used in the Police
and Fire Retirement System (Article XXVI of the City Charter).

If a court of competent jurisdiction determines that the premium pay rates, or any
of them, are subject to the Police and Fire Retirement contributions, then the obligation
of the City shall be such that the new premium pay rates (as reduced) plus the City's
obligation to said system, shall be equal to the premium pay rate(s) as described herein.

e. Premium Pay - Retirement Systems

The City and Association agree that the City contribution rate for agreed upon
premium pay and longevity premium pay for members of the Public Employees'
Retirement System (PERS) shall be such that the amount, plus the PERS retirement
contribution, shall be equal to the premium pay for the members of the Police and Fire
Retirement System.

13
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ARTICLE IV RETIREMENT
A. Retirement Benefits

The City agrees to continue to contract with the Public Employees’ Retirement
System (CalPERS) to provide retirement benefits for eligible bargaining unit members in
accordance with the Public Employees’ Retirement Law and related regulations.

1. Tier One: Safety 3.0% at 50 Retirement Plan — Unit Members Hired Prior
to July 1, 2011

Section A.1. (including subsections) shall apply to bargaining unit members hired
prior to July 1, 2011

a. 3% at 50 Retirement Plan

The 3% at 50 retirement plan will be available for each bargaining
unit member covered by Section A.1.

b. Required Bargaining Unit Member Contribution

Each bargaining unit member covered by Section A.1 shall pay the
full member contribution of nine percent (9%).

c. Final Compensation Based on Twelve Month Period

For the purposes of determining a retirement benefit, final
compensation for bargaining unit members covered by Section A.1
shall mean the highest twelve (12) consecutive month period of
compensation earnable.

2. Tier Two: Safety 3% @ 55 Retirement Plan ~ Unit Members Hired On or
After July 1, 2011 But Before January 1, 2013 and Classic Unit Members,
as Determined by CalPERS.

Section A. 2 (including subsections) shall apply to bargaining unit members
hired on or after July 1, 2011 but before January 1, 2013. In addition, this
Section A.2 shall apply to bargaining unit members hired on or after January 1,
2013, who are qualified for pension reciprocity as stated in Government Code
Section 7522.02 (c) and related CalPERS reciprocity (Classic Members).

a. 3.0% at 55 Retirement Plan

The plan will be available for each bargaining unit member
covered by Section A. 2

b. Required Bargaining Unit Member Contribution

14

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
Each bargaining unit member covered by Section A.2 shall
pay the full member contribution of nine percent (9%).

c. Final Compensation Based on Three Year Average

For the purpose of determining a retirement benefit, final
compensation for bargaining unit members covered by
Section A.2 shall mean the highest three (3) consecutive
year period of compensation earnable, as specified in
Government Code 20037

3. Tier Three: Safety 2.7% At 57 Retirement Plan — Unit Members Hired On
or After January 1, 2013.

Section A.3 (including subsections) shall apply to bargaining unit members who
were hired on or after January 1, 2013 and who do not qualify for pension reciprocity as
a Classic Member, as stated in Government Code Section 7522.02 (c)

a. 2.7% at 57 Retirement Plan

The 2.7% at 57 retirement plan will be available for each
bargaining unit member covered by Section A. 3.

b. Required Bargaining Unit Member Contribution

As required by Government Code Section 7522.30, bargaining
unit members covered by Section A.3 shall pay, through payroll
deductions, fifty percent (50%) of normal cost.

c. Final Compensation Based on Three-Year Average

As required by Government Code Section 7522.30, for the
purpose of determining a retirement benefit, final compensation
for bargaining unit members covered by Section A.3 shall be
based on the highest average annual pensionable
compensation earned by the member during the thirty-six (36)
consecutive months of service.

Employee Contribution to Employer Share

Effective January 1, 2013, all represented members shall pay the full, normal
employee retirement contribution of nine percent (9%)

Effective January 1, 2016, all represented “Classic” members (as defined as Tier
One and Tier Two members in Section A of this Article) shall pay two percent (2%) of
the employer's share of the CalPERS pension cost. Such contributions shall be made
on a pre-tax basis pursuant to section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and will
be attributed to the employee’s CalPERS account to the extent permissible by the

15
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
California Public Employee Retirement Law. An additional one percent (1%) shall be
effective January 1, 2017.

B. Optional Benefits

For members in all three tiers, the City will continue to maintain the current
agreement with CalPERS for optional benefits in accordance with the Public Employees
Retirement Law and the Public Employees Pension Reform Act of 2013.

C. Military Service Credited as Public Service

Members may elect to purchase Military Service Credit in accordance with
applicable CalPERS Service Credit Purchase Options requirements.

D. Limitation to Operability

This provision shall be operative only as long as the City of Oakland “pickup” of
employee retirement contributions continues to be excludable from gross income of the
employee under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code.

E. Deferred Compensation Plan

Represented employees may participate in the City’s established deferred
compensation plan. The Oakland Police Officers’ Association shall have one voting
member on the City’s Deferred Compensation Committee.

F. Retiree Medical Trust (ERISA)

The parties agree that no later than one year from the approval of this MOU by
the City Council, the parties will contract with a third party administrator for purposes of
permitting the members of OPOA to participate in an IRS qualified retirement medical
trust. The plan shall enable members of the OPOA to make pre-tax voluntary
contributions into the trust. The City shall pay administrative fees in an amount not to
exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00) per member per year.

ARTICLE V INSURANCE PROGRAMS
A. Insurance Programs
1. Health Insurance

The City agrees to contribute toward the premium cost of coverage in the
established Public Employees’ Medical and Hospital Care Act Plan (PEMHCA). Such
contribution shall be an amount equal to one-hundred percent (100%) of the premium
cost of employee and dependent health insurance coverage in the applicable Bay Area
Kaiser (PEMHCA) plan.

16

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
An-eligible unit member will be enrolled in the CalPERS PEMHCA Bay Area
Kaiser Plan with employee-only coverage, unless the unit member submits an
Employee Benefits Enrollment form for a different PEMHCA health plan for enrollment
of self and dependents, if any. The exception is if a unit member is enrolled in
PEMHCA under another CalPERS member's health plan, as CalPERS does not
permit dual enrollment. .

Any new member, graduating from a City-sponsored police academy, who
does not submit enrollment forms within thirty (30) days of eligibility, will be enrolled in
the CalPERS Bay Area Kaiser Employee Only plan (“1-party”) by default. During the
period pending the eligible member's submittal of PEMHCA enrollment forms, the City
will maintain the member's coverage through available non-CalPERS PEMHCA
medical coverage for up to 30 days, after which, member will be enrolled in the
default plan. If dependent information is on file, the new member will be enrolled in the
default CalPERS Bay Area Kaiser for member and spouse or family coverage for
member, spouse or family coverage for member, spouse, and dependent children.

Any member requesting to change from the default CalPERS Bay Area Kaiser
plan, absent a qualifying life event, will be subject to the CalPERS PEMHCA
enrollment waiting period of ninety (90) days, unless the plan change has been
approved by CalPERS as a result of their Appeals process

Health Insurance Reopener

The parties agree that the City may request that the OPOA reopen the MOU,
specifically this section A, for purposes of engaging in discussions concerning
modification of the health insurance identified in section 1 hereinabove. Such reopener
shall be limited and subject to the following:

a. The reopener shall be exercised in years three or four.

b. The reopener can only be exercised between January 1° and March 1* of
each year.

c. Any modification of section 1 hereinabove, specifically health plans,
providers, premiums, or benefits are subject to mutual agreement of the
parties.

2. Dental Insurance

A. For Department employees, OPOA will continue to provide dental insurance.
Upon verification by Delta Dental the City shall contribute the amount the City
would be required to pay to obtain the current benefit level under a plan
covering active employees administered by the City through Delta Dental.
Until such time as. verification is provided, the City will continue to pay one
hundred thirty six dollars and eighty-seven cents ($136.87) per month per
employee to OPOA.

17

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
Both parties agree to provide all waivers necessary to determine and verify the
appropriate amount of the City’s contribution. The City agrees to provide the OPOA
with Delta Dental’s written estimate of premiums.

The parties waive their right to any legal action or remedy regarding the dispute
and claims over dental payments and calculation errors made pursuant to the 2001-
06 MOU, and submitted to Arbitrator Winograd at the interest arbitration held
January 2008. The waiver is effective for all claims existing prior to March 1, 2008.
Pursuant to Arbitrator Winograd’s Award (attached as Appendix A), any monies in
the OPOA IBT Trust will remain in the trust, subject to the terms and conditions of
the trust plan document;.and any monies held in escrow by the City shall be
released from escrow and retained by the City.

B. The parties agree that for the purposes of establishing the dental benefit /
premium obligation for the term of the MOU (2015 — 2019), that they will
continue to negotiate and if no agreement is reached within 120 days, the
matter will be submitted to binding arbitration.

3. Helicopter Insurance

City agrees to provide life insurance coverage in the amount of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000) for each employee while flying in a City helicopter on
Official duty.

4. Life Insurance

The City agrees to contribute the amount of twelve dollars ($12.00) per month
per represented employee toward the cost of employee life insurance coverage.

ARTICLE VI LEAVES AND HOLIDAYS
A. Vacation Leave
1. Entitlement

a. Employee shall be credited with vacation leave from the date
of his/her appointment by the City as a former sworn Ranger
or a sworn member of the Police Department, at the rates
enumerated in subsections (i) through (iv) below. Such
leave shall be at his/her regular base rate of pay, plus any
applicable premium rate of pay and/or self-improvement
incentive pay.

i. One hundred twenty hours (120 hours) per year
through the first ten (10) continuous years of service.

18
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ii. | One hundred forty-four hours (144 hours) per year
beginning with the eleventh (11th) year of service, up
to and including the thirteenth (13th) continuous full
year of service.

iii. | One hundred sixty hours (160 hours) per year
beginning with the fourteenth (14th) year of service,
up to and including the twentieth (20th) continuous full
year of service.

iv. | Two hundred hours (200 hours) beginning with the
twenty-first (21st) year of continuous service.

b. Effective the first pay period after January 1, 2009, employees’
vacation banks will be credited with accrued vacation on a biweekly
basis.

c. Effective the first pay period after January 1, 2009, Police Officers
will be given the option to use their accrued vacation before
entering the FTO program.

2. Usage

Vacation leave may be taken only upon the approval of the Chief of Police or
his/her designated representative.

3. Paychecks During Vacation

If a pay period falls within an employee's scheduled vacation period, the
employee shall be entitled to receive prior to the start of such vacation period, upon
request in accordance with established City procedures, any regular paycheck(s) which
would normally be received during said period.

This provision shall apply only to employees whose scheduled vacation leave is
five (5) consecutive working days or longer.

4. Buy-back

Employees may sell back to the City up to one hundred twenty (120) hours of
accrued vacation leave each calendar year provided that:

a. The employee has taken at least forty (40) hours of vacation leave
during the preceding calendar year;

b. The employee's remaining balance, after buy-back has occurred, is
at least one (1) year's accrual at the accrual rate applicable at the
time of buy-back.

19
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
B. Sick Leave
1. Definition

Sick leave is defined as a period of time taken by a bargaining unit member for
the purpose of recuperation from a non-industrial injury or illness. Sick leave is a non-
vested benefit and may not be cashed out or used for any purpose, except in
accordance with this MOU.

2. Accrual

Effective July 1, 2008 a bargaining unit member shall earn sick leave at the rate
of 3.692 hours per pay period up to a maximum of ninety-six (96) hours per calendar
year. Sick leave credits may be accumulated not to exceed four hundred eighty (480)
hours.

a. Transition Credit

In recognition of the transition from the sick leave program in existence prior to
the implementation of this MOU, bargaining unit members will be credited with ninety-
six (96) hours per year of sick leave credit during the past five years, up to a maximum
of four hundred eighty (480) hours.

b. Sick Leave Incentive Program

Effective July 1, 2011, fifty percent (50%) of all accrued sick leave time in
members’ secondary/"virtual” sick time banks shall be converted to vacation time. Once
this conversion occurs, the secondary/"virtual” sick time banks shall be eliminated.
Thereafter, members’ sick leave bank accruals in excess of four-hundred and eighty
(480) hours shall be converted annually. Such conversion shall occur no later than the
first pay period in January of each calendar year. Fifty percent (50%) of the excess sick
leave hours shall be converted to vacation time. Upon final separation from service,
members’ sick leave bank accrued balances shall be cashed out on a fifty percent
(50%) basis.

3. Pregnancy Disability Leave

Pregnancy Disability Leave will be determined by an appropriate Departmental
policy. In the absence of a revised Departmental policy, City Administrative Instruction
No. 567 (Attachment 1), as it may be amended from time to time, will apply. If either
policy is in conflict with any provision of this MOU, the MOU shall prevail. This provision
is not subject to the MOU grievance procedure.

C. Leave of Absence without Pay
At the discretion of the Chief of Police, a permanent employee may be granted a
leave of absence without pay for up to one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days.

20
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
D. Family Death Leave
1. Definition of Immediate Family

For purposes of this provision, immediate family shall be defined as mother,
father, husband, wife, son, daughter, brother, sister, grandfather, grandmother, father-
in-law, and mother-in-law, grandchildren in the custody of grandparents who are unit
members, and domestic partners of unit members who have filed a Declaration of
Domestic Partnership, in accordance with established City policy.

2. Entitlement

Upon approval of the department head or his/her designated representative, an
employee may be granted family death leave up to an amount not to exceed forty (40)
hours. Such leave shall not be charged against vacation or sick leave. In order to be
eligible for family death leave, an employee must have worked full time for the City for a
period of three (3) consecutive months.

E. Military Leave

Under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act
(USERRA) (38 U.S.C. section 4301 et. seq.), an employee taking a leave of absence to
perform military performance is entitled to be reemployed, with reinstatement of
benefits, on completion of the service, as long as the following prerequisites are
satisfied:

1. With certain exceptions, the cumulative leave must not have exceeded
five years;

2. The employee must have provided proper advance notice to the City of
the employee's military service;

3. The employee must report back to work or submit an application for
reemployment in a timely manner after conclusion of military service; and

4. The employee must not have been separated from military service with a
disqualifying discharge or under other than honorable conditions.

lf an employee is eligible to be reemployed, the employee must be restored to
the job and benefits the employee would have attained if the employee had not been
absent due to military service. An employee taking military leave retains all of his/her
seniority-based benefits as if continuously employed. The employee returning from
military leave is also entitled to pension benefits as if continuously employed throughout
the leave period.

During a leave for military service, an employee has the right to elect to continue
his/her existing health insurance plan for up to twenty-four (24) months. If the employee

21
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
does not elect to continue coverage during military leave, the employee retains the right
to be reinstated to the City's health insurance plan when the employee is reemployed.

Any bargaining unit member, who has completed one full year of service with the
department, or one full year of service with OPD and active military service combined,
shall be entitled to receive his or her salary for the first 300 hours of a military leave
period.

Military pay shall not exceed 300 hours in any one fiscal year.

An employee may elect to use accrued vacation time or personal time off in lieu
of unpaid leave for the portion of military leave which is paid. The period of city
compensation for military which is unpaid. The period of city compensation for military
may be extended by resolution of the city council. This provision shall be governed by
Oakland City Council Resolution #77044, Attachment 4, in the absence of specific
provisions set forth in this section.

F. Family Care and Medical Leave

The City's Family and Medical Leave policy is set forth in the City's
Administrative Instruction No. 567 as may be amended from time to time.

This provision is not subject to the MOU grievance procedure.
G. _—_— Holidays
1. Designated Holidays
The following days are designated as holidays:
January 1st.
The third Monday in January, known as "Martin Luther King Day."
February 12th, known as "Lincoln Day”.
The third Monday in February.
The last Monday in May.
July 4th.
The first Monday in September known as “Labor Day”
September 9th, known as "Admission Day."
November 11th, known as "Veterans Day".

The Thursday in November appointed as "Thanksgiving Day”.
22
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
The Friday after Thanksgiving.
December 25th

The Chief or designee shall determine which positions shall be filled on each
designated holiday. However, all officers assigned to Patrol shall report to work on any
holiday which falls on one of their regularly assigned work days unless the officer has
the day off through the holiday or vacation draw.

2. Floating Holiday

In addition to such compensatory leave as may be earned by an employee
pursuant to Article III, Section E, hereof, City agrees to credit each employee with eight
(8) hours compensatory leave for each year this Agreement is in effect. Said
compensatory leave shall be credited to each employee's record at the beginning of the
City’s fiscal year. An employee whose employment with the City terminates during the
fiscal year shall be paid termination pay, in accordance with established City
procedures, for his/her accrued compensatory leave, less the said eight (8) hours,
unless he/she first uses all compensatory leave on the books after said eight (8) hours
is credited and subsequently earns additional compensatory leave.

3. Holiday Pay

All qualifying bargaining unit employees will be paid straight time for the full
length of their regularly scheduled shift for each holiday as designated in Article VI
Section G. In order to qualify for receipt of compensation for a designated holiday, a
unit member must be in paid status the work day before and the work day after the
designated holiday.

Pursuant to Article Ill, Section E, in addition to the straight-time holiday pay, if the
holiday is worked, the employee shall be paid for all hours worked at the overtime rate
of time and one-half (1.5). If the holiday is not worked because of a regular day off, or
by employer request, employee will be paid holiday pay at the straight time rate. In the
event that a holiday falls on a member's day off, the member may take the holiday in
pay or comp time at straight time, at his/her election.

ARTICLE Vil ALLOWANCES
A. Uniform Allowance
1. Initial Uniform Allowance

The City agrees to provide to an employee covered by this Memorandum, at the
time of employment, an initial uniform allowance of four hundred dollars ($400.00).

23
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
A new employee shall receive the annual uniform allowance payable at the time
of employment; provided however that the annual uniform allowance at the beginning of
the first full year of employment shall be prorated on the basis of service from the date
of employment up to and immediately preceding the first full fiscal year, to the extent
that such service period is less than a full fiscal year.

2. Annual Uniform Allowance

Effective the first pay period after July 1, 2008, the City shall provide an annual
uniform allowance of eight hundred dollars ($800.00) to represented employees
covered by this Memorandum.

In the event that an employee separates from City service, for whatever cause
(except in the case of death resulting from on-the-job injury), during the fiscal year for
which the annual uniform allowance has been paid, such payment shall be adjusted on
a pro rata basis in relationship to the period of service in the final fiscal year of
employment.

The annual Uniform Allowance shall be paid in combination with Longevity
Premium Pay, as a separate check.

3. Uniform Boots

An employee who becomes regularly assigned as a motorcycle officer after the
effective date of this Agreement shall receive one pair of approved boots which shall
meet specifications set forth in the pertinent Police Department General Order.

4. Body Armor

Employees who elect to purchase body armor in-lieu-of standard City issued
body armor shall receive a voucher for the cost of standard City issued body armor
provided however that all body armor worn by employees and eligible for
reimbursement under this provision must meet minimum safety requirements set by the
City. Further, employees shall be entitled to a voucher only in accordance with the
normal schedule for replacement of body armor, unless otherwise approved by the
Chief of Police or his/her designee.

B. Shift Differential

1. Shift differential pay is provided as an incentive for retention of employees
in certain off-hours work assignments. Accordingly, only employees who
are assigned in writing by the Chief of Police or his/her designee to a work
unit that requires a regular work schedule with late evening and/or early
morning hours or to an assignment with a flexible hours schedule, may be
eligible for shift differential pay.

2. When so assigned, employees whose regular scheduled shift includes five
or more hours between the hours of 5:00 P.M. and 12:00 midnight shall

24
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
receive a six and one quarter percent (6.25%) shift differential premium in
addition to his/her regular base rate of pay. Employees whose regular
scheduled shift includes five of more hours between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 7:00 A.M., shall receive an eight and one-quarter percent
(8.25%) shift differential premium in addition to his/her regular base rate of

pay.

3. Problem Solving Officers (PSO) and Crime Reduction Team (CRT)
Members shall receive a six and one quarter percent (6.25%) shift
differential premium in addition to his/her regular base rate of pay to
compensate for their flexible schedules. PSO’s and CRT’s are not eligible
for flex pay or any other shift differential.

4, Shift differential shall continue to be paid during vacation leave, sick leave,
and during other paid leave up to a total of thirty (30) calendar days, for an
employee who is then regularly assigned to a position in which the
employee is eligible for such differential or premium pay. Provided,
however, that continued payment of shift differential for employees on paid
leave resulting from an on the job injury shall be in accordance with Labor
Code section 4850 et seq. and applicable case law. Implementation of
shift differential shall be accomplished in accordance with Appendix E.

C. Meal Allowance

Each employee who, when directed to do so, works continuously two (2) hours or
more immediately before or after his/her regular shift working day shall be paid a meal
allowance of eighteen dollars ($18.00). In the event such an employee continues to
work beyond such first two (2) hours, and such work is not a part of his/her regular shift,
he/she shall be paid an additional meal allowance of eighteen dollars ($18.00) for each
successive four (4) hour period continuously so worked. Meal allowance shall not be
paid for regularly scheduled overtime work (i.e., overtime scheduled at least twenty-four
(24) hours in advance, where such overtime is not an extension of a regular work day),
or in those instances where the City furnishes meals. However, an individual who works
overtime beyond the scheduled overtime shift of eight (8) hours shall be entitled to
receive meal allowances as provided above.

ARTICLE Vill SELF-IMPROVEMENT INCENTIVES

City and Association recognize the importance and the desirability of creating
self-improvement incentives to motivate employees to upgrade their skills and develop
their careers: throughout the department, resulting in mutual benefits to the employee
and to the City. It is agreed by the parties that these objectives can best be met through
special training and continuing higher education. To this end, the following incentives
are established. Effective July 1, 2008, POST Premiums and Educational Incentives
will be treated as separate premiums.

25
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
A. Intermediate and Advanced Post Certificates
1. Intermediate Post Certificate

Effective July 1, 2008, a permanent employee covered by this Memorandum who
has obtained the Intermediate Post Certificate shall receive one and one-half percent
(1.5%) of his/her regular base salary. Permanent employees who qualify shall be
eligible beginning with the first full pay period after submission of verification of
eligibility.

2. . Advanced Post Certificate

Effective July 1, 2008, a permanent employee covered by this Memorandum who
has obtained the Advanced Post Certificate shall receive four and one-half percent
(4.5%) of his/her regular base salary. Permanent employees who qualify shall be
eligible beginning with the first full pay period after submission of verification of
eligibility.

3. Single Benefit Eligibility

There shall be no pyramiding of POST premiums. An employee shall be entitled
to receive only one (1) of the benefits in Article VIII (A) at any one time. The benefit
attaches to the highest certification the employee has earned.

B. Education Incentives
1. Associate of Arts Degree

Effective July 1, 2008, a permanent employee covered by this Memorandum who
has obtained an Associate of Arts degree from an accredited college shall receive an
additional one and one-half percent (1.5%) of his/her regular base salary. Permanent
employees who qualify shall be eligible beginning with the first full pay period after
submission of verification of eligibility.

2. Bachelor and Master Degrees

Effective July 1, 2008, a permanent employee covered by this Memorandum who
has obtained a Bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university shall receive
four and one-half percent (4.5%) of his/her regular base salary; a permanent employee
who has obtained a Master's degree from an accredited college or university shall
receive five and one-half percent (5.5%) of his/her regular base salary. Permanent
employees who qualify shall be eligible beginning with the first full pay period after
submission of verification of eligibility.

26
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
3. Single-Benefit Eligibility

There shall be no pyramiding of Education Incentives. An employee shall be
entitled to receive only one (1) of the benefits in Article VIII (B) at any one time. The
benefit attaches to the highest certification or degree the employee has earned.

C. Retirement System Contingency

It is expressly understood and agreed that the self-improvement incentives
provided herein shall not be construed for any purposes as "compensation", as that
term is used in the Police and Fire Retirement System (Article XXVI of the City Charter).

If a court of competent jurisdiction determines that the self-improvement incentive
rates, or any of them, are subject to Police and Fire Retirement System contributions,
then the obligation of the City shall be such that the new self-improvement incentive
rate(s) (as reduced), plus the City's obligation to said system shall be equal to the self-
improvement incentive rate(s) as described herein.

D. Tuition Reimbursement.
City shall reimburse, upon notice of completion, an employee for the cost of a

job-related academic course, approved in advance by the department head or his/her
designated representative, in accordance with the following table:

GRADE REIMBURSEMENT
A 100% of the cost of the course, or $400.00 whichever is less
B 75% of the cost of the course, or $400.00 whichever is less
Cc 50% of the cost of the course, or $200.00 whichever is less

An employee failing or not completing a course, or receiving a grade lower than
C, shall not be reimbursed. In the event that the course is graded on a Pass/Fail basis,
reimbursement shall be made at fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the course, or two
hundred dollars ($200.00) whichever is less.

An employee shall be allowed to take up to two (2) courses eligible for
reimbursement at any one time.

Tuition Reimbursement shall be paid through regular payroll check or in a
manner specified by the City.

27

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ARTICLE IX SPECIAL PROVISIONS

A. Transfer Policy

It is understood that the City and Association have agreed to a revised transfer
policy (Attachment 2) which it may change from time to time during the term of this
Agreement subject to the Association's meet and confer rights.

B. Promotional MOU

It is understood that the City and Association have agreed to a promotional MOU
(Attachment 3) which it may change from time to time during the term of this Agreement
subject to the Association’s meet and confer rights.

C. Use of Non-Sworn Employees

1.

The Chief of Police or designee may assign or re-assign to non-sworn
employees any work which is not required to be performed by a peace
officer so long as; (a) the assignment or re-assignment of the work does
not result in the layoff of any member of the bargaining unit or the
elimination of any currently budgeted bargaining unit position; or (b) there
is no adverse impact on officer safety.

The Department will notify the Union fourteen (14) calendar days prior to
implementation of the proposed change. In the event that the Union
identifies negotiable impacts of such assignment or re-assignment (under
the MMB), the parties shall meet and confer over those impacts. However,
such meeting and conferring will not alter the City’s right to implement the
change or the timing thereof unless stayed pursuant to Paragraph 3.

In the event that the Union asserts an objection based upon officer safety
(Section 1 hereinabove), and the parties do not reach a resolution of the
dispute the matter will be submitted to expedited arbitration pursuant to
Article X Section E (IDR). An arbitrator may stay the change pending
expedited impasse resolution procedures pursuant to the standards and
procedures set forth in Article X Section E (IDR) regarding the identified
safety impact.

The City may reassign the four (4) positions held by Sergeants in the
Radio Room to civilian supervisors.

D. Equipment

The City shall establish, as a flexible goal, an upper service limit of eighty
thousand (80,000) miles for marked patrol vehicles. The concept of selective retention
shall be used in evaluating marked patrol vehicles which exceed the above goal, since it
is recognized that some vehicles, such as marked patrol wagons, accumulate mileage
but can continue to provide efficient and safe service when properly maintained.

28
oe

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
The City and Association agree that it is desirable for officers routinely assigned
to field duties to be equipped with hand-held radios. As soon as reasonably possible,
the City shall establish and maintain a supply of hand-held radios adequate to
reasonably ensure that each such officer can be equipped with a functioning handheld
radio during his/her tour of duty.

The Department shall ensure the assignment of a person to coordinate activities
associated with the acquisition, design, use and maintenance of police vehicles, radios,
and other field equipment including safety equipment. The Association shall designate a
representative to work with the Departmental Coordinator. They shall maintain liaison
and work cooperatively in efforts to ensure the adequate supply, the appropriate
configuration, and proper maintenance of such equipment.

The City and the OPOA are committed to the full implementation of the East Bay
Regional Communications System Authority (EBRCSA). The parties agree the City will
complete the migration of the EBRCSA system in March 2016, unless circumstances,
outside of the City and/or OPOA’s authority or control, would delay EBRCSA from going
live operationally by the aforementioned time.

E. Employee Health Assistance Programs
i. Psychological Counseling

The City agrees to provide the services outlined and detailed in the attached
exhibit Appendix D, for the term of this agreement. The City agrees to maintain
confidentiality of medical records as provided by law. No data concerning this
information or participation in any approved employee assistance program will be made
part of the bargaining unit member’s personnel file or will be provided to any party
without the written consent of the bargaining group member.

ii. Substance Abuse Treatment Program
1. Substance Abuse Counseling

The City agrees to provide the services outlined and detailed in the attached
exhibit Appendix D, for the term of this agreement.

2. Confidentiality Agreement

All information obtained in the course of examination, rehabilitation and treatment
of bargaining unit members with chemical dependency program shall be protected as
confidential medical information. No data concerning this information or participation in
any approved rehabilitation program will be made part of the bargaining unit member's
personnel file or will be provided to any party without the written consent of the
bargaining unit member.

29
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
3. Modification of Service Agreements

In the event that the provider(s) are unable to deliver the specific and detailed
services currently identified in the contracts with the City, or the services are no longer
available through any provider, the parties will meet to either modify the existing
agreements or secure a new provider.

F. Physical Fitness/Exercise Physiology Program

City agrees to provide a Physical Fitness/Exercise Program for no more than
one-half (1/2) of all employees per year.

G. Reduction in Force

The City agrees that there will be no layoffs of members for the duration of this
MOU. This provision does not apply to termination based on disciplinary proceedings.

Subject to other provisions in this section, in the event that a reduction in force is
required, it shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.02,
Layoff Procedure, of the Personnel Manual, except with respect to paragraph (a) which
is amended as follows:

(a) Seniority Credit. Credit in the class of layoff shall be granted at the rate of
one point for each month of service in that class or in any class higher in the Police
Department in a promotional line of progression. Credit in a class that has been
abolished, combined, divided or otherwise altered shall be granted at the same rate
when the Personnel Director determines that such class was equal to or higher in level
than the class of layoff; otherwise credit for service in such class shall be computed at
the rate of one-half point per month. Service that is less than full-time shall receive
seniority credit on a pro-rata basis.

H. Rank Reversions

There shall be no involuntary rank reversions or demotions of members for the
duration. of this MOU. This provision does not apply to rank reversions or demotions
based on disciplinary proceedings.

|. Furloughs
There shall be no involuntary furloughs of members for the duration of this MOU.
J. Annuitant Employees

Except as provided in this Section, there shall be no annuitants, per diem or hourly
contract employees employed at the Oakland Police Department in positions that have
traditionally been performed by sworn members for the duration of this MOU. During the
term of the MOU, and expiring 24 hours prior to the term of the MOU, the Department
may employ a number of retired annuitants (hereafter “RA’s”) for the limited and

30

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
specific purpose of performing Background Investigations for Police Personnel
applicants, subject to the following provisions:

1. In choosing the RA’s, the Department will establish a committee to evaluate,
reach out to, and hire RA’s. The OPOA will have a seat on the committee.

2. The OPOA and the City will work together, even beyond the activities of the
above committee, to reach out to prospective RA’s to perform Background
Investigations.

3. The RA’s will be limited to performing Background Investigations and will not
engage in any recruitment activities.

K. Notification of Critical Incidents

Pursuant to existing Department notification procedures regarding critical incidents,
the Oakland Police Department shall notify the president of the Oakland Police Officers’
Association; or his/her designee of any critical incident involving a member. The
Notification shall not be delayed and can be made in conjunction with notifications made
to the City’s elected officials. For purposes of this section, a “critical incident” is one
where the member has been involved in a reported level one use of force regardless of
injury; a member has been in a vehicle collision that caused injury to any party, ora
member required immediate hospitalization. Such notification shall occur via telephone
call to the president or his/her designee.

L. Patrol Schedule

For the duration of this MOU, the current 4/10 shift schedule shall be the core
shift in patrol. As such, there shall be no other shift schedule considered for the duration
of this MOU.

M. Personnel Files

Members of the Association shall be afforded access to their personnel files,
including but not limited to supervisory notes, pursuant to the provisions of the Public
Safety Officers’ Procedural Bill of Rights (Gov. Code Section 3300 et seq,).

N. New Hires

The Association and the City agree to discuss compensation and benefits for
new hires through the term of this MOU. Any modification to wages and/or benefits for
new hires shall be subject to mutual agreement. Such discussions shall not be deemed,
nor shall constitute a reopener of the MOU, nor lead to impasse proceedings.

O. Workers Compensation

1. An employee that sustains an injury must notify the Medical Office within
eight (8) hours of the injury. The employee must complete either an Initial Injury Packet

31

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
or Declination Packet within twenty-four (24) hours of injury, or as soon as reasonably
possible.

2. To the extent permitted by applicable law, the City shall advise the OPOA
of members who are receiving workers compensation benefits. The City shall provide
such notice at a minimum of once each month.

3. The City agrees to honor the presumptives specified in and required by
the California. Labor Code sections 3200 through 3219 as amended and any other
presumptives in the Code that apply to police officers. An individual medically
diagnosed with a presumptive condition shall be placed in the ICF pay code. Provided,
however, the City reserves the right to challenge such presumptive diagnosis as
provided for by law. Further, the City reserves the right, as permitted by law, to recover
the ICF pay code and other costs resulting from a presumptive diagnosis of an
injury/illness that is subsequently determined to be non-work related. Pending the
outcome of a disputed presumptive diagnosis, the affected individual shall remain in the
ICF pay code.

P. Probationary Period

The probationary period of an employee appointed to the rank of Police Officer
shall not exceed twelve (12) months in duration except that:

In the case of an individual employee requiring further consideration, the City, at
its option, shall extend the probationary period by an additional three (3) months.
However, the option may be exercised only when the officer's eleventh month
evaluation is rated below "standard" in any category.

In the case of an individual employee requiring further consideration as a result
of an on-the-job-injury or illness or transitional assignment, the City, at its option, shall
extend the probationary period by the amount of time lost as a result of such injury or
ilIness.

In the event of such extension, the probationary period shall be lengthened to
provide for POST required additional training, at the City's expense, if POST so
requires.

Q. Transitional Assignments for Employees Temporarily Disabled
1. Temporary Industrial Disabilities

The City, in its sole discretion, may assign to modified duty, known as
Transitional Assignment, any employee who has been medically released to return to
work with restrictions after an industrial injury. Said assignments will be made pursuant
to the Citywide Return-to-Work Program and in accordance with the Workers’
Compensation laws in the California Labor Code.

32
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
Transitional Assignment will not exceed ninety (90) days without the approval of
the Medical Officer and in consultation with the Chief of Police or his/her designee. If
extended, the Medical Officer will instruct the employee to request an accommodation
through the City's Equal Opportunity Program Division (EOPD).

An employee on Transitional Assignment shall be paid at the regular rate of pay.
Employees performing Transitional Assignments in positions where shift and premium
benefits normally are assigned shall receive such benefits.

The City will periodically review such modified assignments in order to determine
the assignment’s continued feasibility.

An employee must meet standards of satisfactory performance to be considered
for Transitional Assignment. The employee on a modified assignment must meet
standards of satisfactory performance for the duration of ‘the work assignment as
outlined in the Transitional Assignment Agreement.

Administration of the Transitional Assignment Program shall be in accordance
with the Citywide Return-to-Work Program guidelines.

2. Temporary Non-Indusirial Disabilities

The provisions set forth above for industrial disabilities shall also apply to
employees recovering from a non-industrial injury or illness except:

a. That the sole determination of. the employee's medical ability to
perform a transitional assignment with restrictions shall be in the
judgment of the employee's primary treating physician and the City
Physician; and

b. Priority for transitional assignments shall be given to persons
temporarily disabled by industrial disabilities. The City Physician's
determination shall be based on medical criteria and it shall be the
department's sole determination as to whether the medical
restrictions can be accommodated.

c. The assignment may not exceed ninety (90) days. Should a non-
industrial injury require greater than ninety (90) days
accommodation, the Medical Office will instruct the employee to
request an Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) accommodation
through the City's EOPD.

R. Administrative Interviews
The Department shall make reasonable efforts to schedule administrative
interviews with represented employees during normal business hours. Nothing in this
provision shall preclude the Department from scheduling administrative interviews
33
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
during non-business hours where operational needs, exigent circumstances or
economic considerations warrant.

ARTICLE X GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
A. Definition

A grievance is hereby defined as any dispute which involves the interpretation or
application of this Agreement, .or disciplinary action taken against an employee, or
controversy concerning the application of Departmental rules or general orders which
are within the scope of bargaining.

It is the expressed intent of the parties that employees shall receive fair treatment
and shall be disciplined only for just cause. The Department/City shall thoroughly and
adequately investigate all allegations and comply with the members’ due process rights.
Grievances shall be resolved expeditiously and at the lowest possible administrative
level. No grievance filed by an employee, pursuant to the provisions of this Article, may
be resolved inconsistent with the terms of this MOU

B. Election of Grievance Appeal Process

Disciplinary action, defined. as written reprimand, suspension or termination,
imposed upon an employee may be appealed through the Grievance Procedure as set
forth in Section C of this Article. Alternatively and only in the case of a suspension, fine,
demotion, or disciplinary discharge, the affected employee may submit his/her appeal
directly to the Civil Service Board in accordance with Section 3, Subsection 6, of the
Personnel Ordinance (Ordinance No. 8979 C.M.S. as amended). This provision does
not preclude an appeal of a written reprimand to arbitration pursuant to Section C of this
Article. Nothing in this MOU is intended to limit individual employee rights and alternate
appeal processes under the PSOBR.

Once an affected employee has elected to pursue one of the above procedures
for appeal, within the applicable time parameters, such election shall be irrevocable.
After such election, the terms of the Personnel Ordinance or the terms of this
Memorandum of Understanding (whichever is applicable) shall apply, including, if the
grievance procedure of this Memorandum of Understanding is chosen, the subsequent
option for appeal to the Civil Service Board at Step Four (4) as described therein.

34
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION. *
C. Procedure
1. Step 1 Initial Procedure
a. Informal Discussion

The employee or the Association representative may present the grievance orally
to the immediate supervisor within seven (7) calendar days from such time as the
employee or Association should reasonably have been aware of the occurrence of the
incident giving rise to the grievance. The supervisor shall provide his/her response
within seven (7) calendar days following the informal discussion.

b. Formal Submission

Should the grievance remain unresolved, the employee or Association
representative may submit the grievance, in writing to the employee's Bureau Chief. The
formal submission shall be made within seven (7) calendar days of the supervisor's
response to the informal presentation of the grievance, or, if no response is received, at
the conclusion of the seven (7) calendar days period provided for informal discussion.
The grievance shall state the specific section of the Memorandum of Understanding, the
Personnel Rules, or departmental rules or orders alleged to be violated, or the
disciplinary action taken, and the proposed solution. The Bureau Chief shall render a
decision in writing to the employee and/or Association within seven (7) calendar days of
receipt of the formal submission of the grievance. Copies of all written grievances filed
by employees shall be provided to the Association within a period not to exceed five (5)
calendar days. Copies of responses thereto shall also be provided to the Association.

2. Step 2 Appeal to Department Head

Should the grievance remain unresolved, the employee or Association
Ttepresentative may, within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the Bureau Chief's
decision, submit the grievance in writing to the Chief of Police. The Chief, or his/her
designated representative, shall respond to the grievance in writing within seven (7)
calendar days after receipt of the grievance. It is understood that nothing shall preclude
the Association from presenting a grievance to the Chief of Police if it is deemed that
such action is warranted by the nature or circumstances of the grievance.

3. Step 3 Employee Relations Officer - Association Representative

Should the grievance remain unresolved, the employee or Association
representative may, within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the department head
response, submit the grievance in writing to the Employee Relations Officer. The
Employee Relations Officer, or a designated representative shall contact the employee
or representative within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the grievance to schedule
a meeting to attempt to resolve the dispute.

The Employee Relations Officer or designee shall respond in writing to the
grievance within thirty (30) days after the third step hearing. If the Employee Relations

35
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
Officer fails to respond within the thirty (30) days, the Association may move the
grievance to the next step.

4, Step 4 Conflict Resolution Process

The City and the Association encourage grievant(s) to attempt to resolve
grievances through informal means. Either party to the grievance may request an
informal resolution conference. The conference shall be attended by the individual
grievant(s), a representative from the OPOA and the Director of Personnel or his/her
designee. Said conference shall be convened within ten (10) working days of the
request initiated by either party. Participation in, or refusal-by either the grievant(s), the
OPOA or the City to participate in the conference, as well as any evidence, discussions,
documents, statement, findings, recommendations, awards, orders, or any other record
of the conference, shall not be presented as evidence, nor referred to any appeal or
hearing by the grievant(s), Association or the City. In the event that all parties agree,
they may request the assignment of a mediator from the State Mediation and
Conciliation Service to assist in the informal resolution process.

No documentation regarding the Step Four (4) process shall be placed in any
personnel file or other official file maintained for the purpose of making personnel
decisions.

While the parties are utilizing the conflict resolution process set forth in Step Four
(4), the parties may agree to extend the time limits described in Section D of this Article
by no more than forty-five (45) days.

5. Step 5 Civil Service Board/Arbitration

Should the grievance remain unresolved, either the City or the Association may,
within fourteen (14) calendar days of the third step response, submit the grievance to an
impartial arbitrator who shall be selected by mutual agreement or, if such agreement is
not reached, by alternately striking names from a list of seven (7) arbitrators to be
developed by the parties. In the absence of agreement on a list of arbitrators, the
parties will request a list from the California State mediation and Conciliation Service.

The following procedure will be used to determine if a viable permanent list of
arbitrators can be established by the parties:

The parties will independently develop a written list of ten (10) arbitrators that
they would propose be included as a permanent list of arbitrators to adjudicate
disciplinary appeals. The parties will submit their respective lists directly to an agreed
upon neutral third party who will receive the lists on a confidential basis.

Should there be six (6) names that appear on the lists then those six individuals
will be deemed to be the six individuals who will be identified as the permanent panel.
The third party neutral shall transmit to both parties only those names of the six
individuals. No other names shall be disclosed by the neutral.

36
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
In the event that there are not six individuals that appear on both lists, the third
party neutral shall destroy the lists and NOT disclose to either party or any third party,
the names on either list. The neutral shall notify both parties that there were insufficient
names on both lists to establish a permanent list.

In accordance with Civil Service Rules, the employee or Association may elect to
submit a grievance concerning a suspension, fine, demotion or discharge to the Civil
Service Board in lieu of arbitration. Such election is irrevocable.

If the Civil Service Board is selected, appeals shall be handled in accordance
with the procedures established in the Personnel Ordinance and as modified by
Appendix C of this Memorandum of Understanding.

If arbitration is selected, it is agreed that the decision of the arbitrator shall be
final and binding on all parties and that the arbitrator's fees shall be borne equally by the
parties. It is expressly understood that the arbitrator shall have no power or authority to
add to or subtract from the provisions of this Agreement or departmental rules or
general orders; provided that, if any inconsistency between this Agreement and any of
the foregoing rules or orders exists, this Agreement shall prevail.

Notwithstanding the above, the option of arbitration may not be elected in
grievances filed by probationary employees in entry level positions whose basis is
failure to successfully complete the probationary period, or Police Officer Trainees who
are removed from employment for failure to successfully complete the Recruit School.

Unless otherwise agreed to by the employee, in writing, all meetings and
hearings for any disciplinary matter shall be private and confidential, and shall include
only the parties and exclusive representatives.

The City and the Association will alternate hosting the location for arbitration.

At least ten (10) calendar days prior to the first day of the disciplinary appeal
hearing, the parties shall exchange, in writing, the names of expert witnesses that they
intend to call at the hearing. Expert witnesses are defined as those individuals who are
not currently employed by the City of Oakland in any capacity and who are being called
to proffer opinions or conclusions as to matters generally outside of the usual
knowledge of the layperson and for the purpose of assisting the trier of fact in
understanding a particular subject matter. This provision does not preclude either party
from calling any other City or non-City employee as a witness and such witnesses are
not subject to the disclosure provisions in this section.

For all grievances advanced to Step 5, representatives for the parties shall, at
least forty-five (45) calendar days prior to the hearing, participate (either in person or via
telephone) in an informal discussion(s) to consider whether the grievance can be
resolved without a formal hearing. Such discussions shall be off-the-record and there

37

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
shall be no reference, statement or mention of any such discussions or efforts should
the matter proceed to formal hearing.

D. Time Limits

Time limits prescribed in Section C above may be modified by mutual agreement
of the City and Association. Failure by the employee or Union to follow time limits,
unless so extended, shall nullify the grievance. Failure by the City to follow the limits,
unless so modified, shall cause the grievance to advance to the next step.

Steps One (1) and Two (2) may be waived by mutual agreement between the
Association and the Department.

E.
1.

Immediate Dispute Resolution

In the event there is a dispute regarding the interpretation or application of
this Agreement that imminently affects the City’s interests, the
Association, or a substantial number of members represented by the
Association, either the City or the Association may upon written notice
request suspension of the grievance process as described in Section (c)
of this Article and proceed to immediate resolution discussions with the
Chief of Police, the Employee Relations Officer, and an Association
Representative. Such informal labor-management discussions shall be
concluded within thirty (30) days of the date of the initial request for same.

Should the dispute still not be resolved within the thirty (30) day period,
the parties have an additional fifteen (15) days to select an arbitrator from
the panel of four (4) professional neutral arbitrators to be identified by the
parties. The arbitrator assigned to hear the merits of the case will hold a
hearing that is no longer than one (1) day and issue a decision within
forty-five (45) calendar days of the selection of the arbitrator. The
timelines or length of hearing may be shortened or extended by mutual
agreement or upon an arbitrator's ruling on a request for an order
shortening or extending time.

The arbitrator shall have no power to add to or to subtract from the
provisions of this Agreement, the Personnel Rules, or departmental rules
or orders in rendering his/her award.

The informal labor-management discussions will not automatically stay the
City’s action. However, the Association may demand a cease and desist
order at any time upon invocation of the IDR. process. If the Association
makes such a demand, the first arbitrator from the list of four (4)
professional neutral arbitrators, selected at random, that is available within
a forty-eight (48) hour period shall hear the request for a temporary cease
and desist order. The arbitrator shall have the authority to issue a
temporary cease and desist order to stay the implementation of the

38
*

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
proposed change upon a proper showing of irreparable harm and
inadequacy of normal grievance procedure remedies.

5. It is expressly understood and agreed that the provisions of this Section
shall not be invoked for actions involving employee disciplinary actions or
individual grievances.

F. Consolidation

Upon mutual agreement concurrent grievances alleging violations of the same
provisions shall be consolidated for the purpose of this procedure as a single grievance.

G. Closing Arguments
If mutually agreed, closing arguments by the parties may be oral.
H. Grievances that Involve Appeal of Discipline

Appeals of written reprimands shall be initiated at Step One (1). Appeals of
fines, demotions, suspensions and termination may be initiated at Step Three (3),
following completion of the Skelly process.

I Complaints

External complaints that are placed in the employee’s personnel file shall be
removed after five (5) years if there are no subsequent complaints regarding the same
behavior/concerns. It is expressly understood that this paragraph shall not apply to the
retention of complaints in the files of the Internal Affairs Department pursuant to the
Negotiated Settlement Agreement (NSA).

In the event that the Department uses oral reprimands, Unit
Commanders/Supervisors shall purge information noted on subordinates’ oral
reprimand records that is older than three (3) years old by completely blacking out the
old entry(ies) and initialing and dating the correction(s), except as required by the NSA.
In the event the verification of the oral reprimand is listed on a separate card or
documentation the entire document or card shall be removed from the file and
destroyed. The documentation of a reprimand will be purged only if no new offenses of
a similar nature have occurred in the interim.

J. Caloca Appeals

Caloca appeals shall be heard by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.

K. NSA Compliance

The parties agree and represent that nothing in this agreement interferes with full

compliance of the Negotiated Settlement Agreement (NSA). The parties further agree
that should the federal court determine that any provision of this Agreement is in conflict

39
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
with the NSA, the parties shall meet and confer pursuant to Section | and XV.C of the
NSA.

ARTICLE Xi SCOPE
A. Resolution

It is understood that this Memorandum or any part thereof is not binding upon the
City until and unless adopted by ordinances or resolutions of the City Council. This
Memorandum of Understanding resolves in full, for its duration, all issues between the
parties concerning wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment.

B. Full Understanding

The terms and conditions contained in this Agreement represent the full,
complete, and entire understanding of the parties of matters within the scope of
representation. This Agreement supersedes all previous Memoranda of Understanding
between the City and Association. In addition, this Agreement terminates and
supersedes all practices, agreements, procedures, traditions, and rules and regulations
inconsistent with any matters specifically covered in this Agreement.

The parties agree to attach to this Memorandum of Understanding any sideletter
appropriately executed after the adoption of this Agreement. Any sideletter executed
prior to the adoption of this Agreement is hereby terminated and shall no longer be
binding on the parties.

c. Existing Benefits

Existing benefits that are within the scope of representation, provided by
Department Rule and Regulation, ordinance, or resolution of the City Council, and not
covered in this Agreement shall be continued without change unless modified by using
the procedure described in Section E below during the term of this Agreement.

D. Waiver

The City and the Union expressly waive the right to meet and negotiate with
respect to any subject covered in this Agreement. Although nothing in this Agreement
precludes the parties from mutually agreeing to meet and confer or negotiate on any
subject within the scope of representation during the term of this Agreement, neither
party may require the other party to meet and confer or negotiate on the subject matter
covered by this Agreement. This provision shall not apply to matters covered by the
provisions in Article XI, Sections E and F.

40
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
E. Modification

The parties to this Agreement intend that ordinances, resolutions, rules, and
regulations enacted or revised by this Agreement shall be administered and observed in
good faith. When the Department proposes to change any subject within the scope of
representation but not covered or waived in this MOU, the Department will provide the
Union with notice of the proposed change at least seven days prior to implementation of
the proposed change. If the proposed change materially impacts any matter within the
scope of representation, the parties agree to meet and confer or negotiate over the
impact. If no agreement is reached within thirty (30) calendar days after the request to
meet and confer, either party may declare impasse. In the event of impasse, the parties
will resolve the matter pursuant to the impasse procedures of Section 910 of the City
Charter as modified below.

Either party, in its sole discretion, shall notify the other if it desires expedited
arbitration within fifteen (15) days after declaration of impasse. An arbitrator to hear
such case shall be selected by the parties from a panel of four (4) professional neutral
arbitrators to be identified by the parties. The arbitrator must conclude a single day
arbitration hearing and issue a decision within sixty (60) calendar days of the date of
selection. The timelines and/or length of hearing may be shortened or extended by
mutual agreement or upon an arbitrator's ruling on a request for an order shortening or
extending time, or for an extended hearing.

During the life of this MOU, interest arbitration under Charter Section 910 will be
limited to disputes over new subjects not otherwise covered, waived or subject to
different standards or procedures under the terms of this MOU.

If there is a dispute over whether a matter is covered by the MOU, the dispute
will be subject to grievance arbitration. When a grievance is filed and the following
occurs: (1) the matter goes to a grievance arbitration; (2) the arbitrator determines that
the dispute in question is not otherwise covered by the Agreement; but (3) the matter is
subject to arbitration under Charter Section 910 as limited by the preceding paragraph,
then the arbitrator shall have the same authority as if selected as the neutral arbitrator
under the provisions of Charter Section 910 and this Agreement.

F. Non-Nullification Clause

If any provision of this Agreement should be held invalid or restrained by
operation of law or by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this
Agreement shall not be affected thereby.

G. Duration

This Memorandum shall become effective July 1, 2015 and shall remain in effect
until the expiration date of June 30, 2019.

Al
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
H. Equitable Concessions

Concessions in the MOU made by the Association in July of 2011 were and
continue to be contingent upon all other bargaining units in the City of Oakland making
concessions of equal or greater value.

I. 2011 Concessions

Concessions in this MOU shall be non-precedential and shall not be introduced
in any future collective bargaining or interest arbitration for any purpose by either party.
The provisions of the MOU shail not be subject to change in the event the City declares
a fiscal emergency.

Should the City Council or any other council committee support, endorse,
sponsor, calendar or vote to place on the ballot any measure to eliminate or modify
existing provisions of the City Charter Section 910 as it applies to the Association, the
economic concessions made in 2011 and identified in this MOU will be null and void for
the term of this MOU. In such case, the terms and conditions of the MOU in existence in
May of 2011 will control.

42
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
The Oakland City Council approved this Memorandum of Understanding between the
City of Oakland and the Oakland Police Officers Association per Resolution No. 85885
on November 17, 2015, and Salary Ordinance No. 13341 on December 8, 2015.

FOR THE CITY OF OAKLAND FOR THE OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION

Se

Sabrina Landreth, City Administrator

A bbs |

 

 

Sean Whent, Chief of Police Jamgs Bassett Vice President

 

  
   
 
 

 

  

ichardson, Deputy City
rey

(

Renée Mayne, Chief Nodotaer

Director of Employee Relations

 

43
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

*
APPENDIX A

 

ARBITRATOR'S AWARD

BARRY WINOGRAD

Arbitrator and Mediator

1999 Harrison Street, Suite 1400
Oakland, CA 94612

(510) 465-5000

IN ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS PURSUANT TO

AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES

In the Matter of a Controversy Between:

Arbitrator's
File No. 07-139-IA

CITY OF OAKLAND,

Claimant

Io! iD
OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (March 11, 2008)
Respondents

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
) INTEREST ARBITRATION
)
)
)
)
)
[Re: Interest Arbitration] )
)

 

Appearances: Jonathan Holtzman and Charles Sakai (Renne, Sloan,
Holtzman & Sakai), attorneys for claimant; Rockne A. Lucia and
Michael Rains (Rains, Lucia & Wilkinson), attorney for
respondents.

Following several days of evidentiary hearings in December
2007 and January 2008, after the submission of proposals,
briefing and oral argument on unresolved issues, following a

Notice of Intended Ruling dated February 29, 2008, and the

44
he
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
APPENDIX A

absence of any request for further argument by March 7, 2008, the
following Interest Arbitration Award resolves remaining
differences over the terms of a successor Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU). The terms of this Award will be
incorporated into final language for the successor MOU, subject
to the arbitrator's limited retention of jurisdiction as set

forth below.

1. Supersession

To be included in integration and past practice provision

under No. 3, below.
2. Sideletters

Tentative agreement reached. (Past sideletters the parties
agree to incorporate will be incorporated into new MOU, and any
new sideletters will be attached hereafter. If past sideletter
not in MOU, it will no longer be in effect.)

3. en cial Pas ic and Integratio:

A. Modify Firefighter MOU Section 12 to apply to OPOA

45
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX A

unit.

B. include expedited arbitration per IDR process in No. 8,
below, at City or POA option, with carve-out for City prerogative
for deployment and scheduling based on “functional needs.”
Disputes, if any, over application of management action based on
“functional needs” remain subject to regular grievance and
arbitration process.

c. POA can seek immediate stay from axbitrator in IDR
process who will have authority to issue temporary cease and
desist order upon proper showing of irreparable harm and

inadequacy of normal grievance procedure remedies.
4. Management Rights
Modify Firefighter MOU Section 1.6 to apply to OPOA unit.
5. Civilianization
A. Chief can assign duties to non~sworn personnel if sworn
officer not required.

B. Two calendar weeks notice required, with opportunity

for OPOA to express position.

46
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX A

 

Cc. Reassignment of duties permitted, provided no adverse
impact on officer safety, and no layoffs will result, with any
dispute subject to expedited arbitration as set forth in No. 3,
above. As a further limitation, there will be no change in the
assignment of radio room sergeants or desk officers without the
proposed change being first submitted to the IDR process under

No.:8, below.

6. Interest Arbi 2

Interest arbitration under Charter Section 910 for any new
subject not otherwise covered or waived in the MOU. Disputes
over whether a subject is covered by the MOU will be resolved per

Section 10.6 of the Firefighter wou.
7. iev. LCs ined

Tentative agreement.
8. immediate Dispute Resolution

Modify Firefighters MOU Section 10.7 to apply to OPOA unit,

subject to revised time limits, as’ follows: (a) up to 30 days for

4

47
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX A

 

informal labor-management discussion to resolve differences; (b)
up to 15 additional days to invoke IDR arbitration process and to
select an arbitrator; and (c) up to 45 additional days to hold a
hearing that is no longer than one day, and to have a decision
rendered within that 45 day period. (Lime limits can be modified
if the parties agree.) The parties will develop a panel of no
more than four arbitrators to reserve dates in advance on a
quarterly basis. The first available arbitrator on the panel
within 48 hours of arbitration being invoked will have authority
to issue a temporary cease and desist order subject to the

standard set forth in No. 3.C, above.
9. cy an:
Currently subject to separate negotiations by the parties.

10. Salary

July 1, 2006: 2.0 percent
January 1, 2007: 2.0 percent
July 1, 2007: 4.0 percent
July 1, 2008: 4.0 percent
July 1, 2009: 4.0 percent

48
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

ee
APPENDIX A

11. Shift Scheduling Issues

A. For non-patrol, status quo maintained for shift
scheduling, with the following understandings:

1) CRT and PSO: Department has discretion to change
with 6.25 percent flex pay already built-in in lieu of
other shift premiums.

2) CID: Department has discretion to flex for days
already scheduled, and in accord with existing
Department rotations and assignment policies. Weekend
schedules can be set at time of the annual draw.

B. For patrol, no permanent change of shift times by
management except for annual draw.

Cc. For patrol, City can change two power shifts (lpm and 3
pm) by advancing the shift no more than three hours from the
established schedule (that is, 1pm to 4pm, or 3pm to 6pm,
maximum), with two weeks notice, for a minimum of 14 days and a
maximum of 60 days, three times per year, for a total of not more
than 120 days.

D. Shift scheduling not subject to interest or expedited
arbitration,

Ee Five percent premium for entire shift when flexed from

regular schedule.

49
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
APPENDIX A

EF. No loss of differential or premium pay from original
scheduled shift.

G. No Acting Captain pay for Lieutenants.

He Within 30 days, the parties will establish a labor-
management committee to develop plans to insure sufficient rest
between work assignments for officers working patrol, including
taking into account court, administrative, or other duties
required by lawful process, with the objective of an eight hour
rest being guaranteed, and utilizing either schedule flexing/
shifting, or other means mutually agreeable to individual
officers and the Department. If the committee does not develop a
policy within 60 days, the issue will be submitted to the

arbitrator for final determination.

12. Comp Time

A. Provided City determination is consistent, City can
choose, for reasons of budgetary and fiscal soundness, whether a
particular category or type of work will be subject to overtime
or comp time; for example, court appearances, community meetings.
A list of other discernable categories or types of work subject
to City determination will be developed by the City, with prior

notice to the POA, by July 1, 2008. Provided, this city

50
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
APPENDIX A

 

discretion will not supercede the overtime pay required for third
party activity under No. 12.£, below.

B. Cap of 300 hours, and no accrual above that level.

c. Maximum payout of 200 hours per year to get down to
cap.

D. If City wishes, can go down to 96 hour level.

E. Service at special events paid by third parties or by

other reimbursed overtime, to be paid at overtime rate, not

comp time.
13. Vacation

Status quo, subject to conversion as of January 1, 2009 from
traditional model of using days to hours, with biweekly accrual.
Academy cadets will not be required to use vacation before

assuming regular duties.

14. Sick Leave

Status quo applies for sick leave, with new terms effective

vuly 1,°2008, as to the following:

A. City proposal for 96 hours with 480 hour cap.

B. City and OPOA will develop a sick leave incentive
8
51

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

te
APPENDIX A

program.

Cc. The details of this revised sick leave program such
as the (1) disposition of hours over the 480 hour cap; (2)
conversion and transition terms; and, (3) development, aif
feasible, of a retire health benefits trust in lieu of cash

conversion, will be subject to interest arbitration, if needed.
is. JA_Pay
Status quo. City withdraws proposal.

16. Ly Pa

Status quo. Union withdraws proposal.

17. Egst/Education Premiums

Increase existing benefits across the board by 0.5 percent,
effective July 1, 2008. There will be no pyramiding of these
benefits, except that a single additional extra payment will be
made for those with educational degrees, at the highest

applicable rate,

52

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX A

18. = tires 1)

The POA has proposed language to establish a new requirement
for payment to P&F retirees of shift differential premium pay in
lieu of line up pay. However, because such pay wag eliminated in
2001, it is not within the scope of this proceeding because it

does not affect current employees.

19. Gnion Release Time

A. Status quo for Union president incorporated in
Mou.

B. Time bank established for vested time bank with total
employee contribution for 50 days per year for use by OFOA
representatives to attend educational and training programs for

labor and employee relations.

20. Uniform Allowance

A. Initial payment of $400.
B. Annual payment of $800 through CBA term.
Cc. Effective July 1, 2008.
10
53

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

ve
APPENDIX A

21. = Compens.

A. Holiday pay for length of shift scheduled in relevant

payroll period, with pay at straight time rate.

B. If the holiday is worked, paid at overtime rate of 1.5
and also paid for holiday at regular rate.

©. If holiday not worked because of regular day off, or by
employer request, will be paid holiday pay at straight time rate.

D. Department requests to work on a holiday in another

Depeaxtment unit will be subject to normal overtime bid process

for those being asked to work the holiday, with pay as set forth

in No. 21.B, above.

22. loli. =

Employee paid at overtime 1.5 rate.

23. = Floatin:

Status quo (that is, paid in comp time).

a.

54
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX A

24. Holidays ~ Number
Status quo.
25. Duration

Foux years, through June 30, 2010
26. GASB Reeopener

City proposal, subject to the following:
q1) During the term of this MOU, the POA will
participate in discussions undertaken by the City with
employee representatives of other bargaining units.
(2) No change adversely affecting compensation and
axising from GASB discussions will be implemented during
the term of this agreement.
(3) If the parties do not arrive at an agreement on
GASB issues for a successor MOU, it will be subject to an
interest arbitration proceeding on all successor MOU
issues that are not resolved, commencing no later than

September 30, 2010.

12

55
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

e
APPENDIX A

27- Health Insurance

Status que (full employer pickup) -

28. Dental Insurance

As a consolidated interest and grievance arbitration
ruling, and as a condition of the interest arbitration
determination:

A. Fox Department employees, OPOA will continue to
provide dental insurance, and, upon verification by Delta Dental
of what the City would pay for the same benefit level, the City
will pay that cost. Until such time as verification is provided,

the City will continue pay the cost of the current benefit level

to OPOA.
B. Dollars in Trust stay with Trust.
c. Dollars in escrew by City stay with City.
D. OPOA withdraws issue of calculation errors.
29. Zentative Agreements

All tentative agreements previously agreed upon by the

parties are adopted.

a3

56
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION +
APPENDIX A

30. enti of Juri i

The arbitrator will retain jurisdiction to: (a) resolve
any dispute over the formal language to incorporate these terms
and conditions into a successor MOU; and, (b) resolve any
xemaining issues under No. 9 (re: transfer policy and promotional
MOU); No. 10 (re implementation of salary increase; No. 11.H (re

vest between shifts); and, No. 14.C (re sick leave program).

Date: March 11, 2008
BARRY WI#OGRAD
Arbitrator

57
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

e
APPENDIX B

UNIT PT BENEFITS/EXCLUSIONS
The City of Oakland, hereinafter referred to as "City", and the Oakland Police
Officers' Association, hereinafter referred to as "OPOA", hereby agree that the

provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding which apply to employees in Unit PT
are as follows:

PREAMBLE
ARTICLE | - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Entire Article
ARTICLE II - DIRECT PAY FOR SERVICES

A. Salary. Persons employed as Police Officer Trainees will receive a salary that
is ten percent (10%) less than the base salary attached to the entry level, A salary step
for Police Officers on the PERS retirement system.

E. Overtime. Police Officer Trainees shall receive overtime in accordance with
the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act. Accordingly, overtime shall be paid on
all hours worked over one hundred and seventy-one (171) in the established twenty-
eight (28) day work period. All overtime shall be paid in cash.

ARTICLE IV INSURANCE PROGRAMS
A. Insurance Programs.
1. Health Insurance.
2. Dental Insurance.
4. Life Insurance.
ARTICLE V LEAVES AND HOLIDAYS

C. Leaves of Absence.

D. Family Death Leave.

1. Definition of Immediate Family.
2. Entitlement.
Upon Approval of the department head or his/her designated representative, a

Police Officer Trainee may be granted family death leave without pay up to an amount
not to exceed five (5) working days.

58
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX B

ARTICLE VI ALLOWANCES
A. Uniform Allowance.
1. Initial Uniform Allowance.
2. Annual Uniform Allowance.
ARTICLE VII - SELF IMPROVEMENT INCENTIVE
Nothing shall apply.
ARTICLE VIII - SPECIAL PROVISIONS
Nothing shall apply.
ARTICLE IX - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Entire Article

ARTICLE X - RESOLUTION - FULL UNDERSTANDING - NON-NULLIFICATION AND
DURATION

Entire Article.

Deferred Compensation. In addition, City and the OPOA, in accordance with
Treasury Regulations, Section 31.3121 (b) (7), hereby agree to adopt a deferred
compensation plan for employees in Representation Unit T; such plan to be in
accordance with the guidelines set forth in Internal Revenue Code Section 457. Under
this plan, the City will contribute 3.75% of each participating employee's wages
including overtime to a deferred compensation plan administered by Great Western
Savings and referred to by the administrator as an "Index Account". Each participating
employee will contribute an equivalent 3.75% of "wages", as that term is described
above. An employee will be immediately one hundred percent (100.0%) vested as to all
contributions made on his/her behalf, whether by the employee or by the City.

Police Office Trainee Training Costs. The parties recognize that in the past a
substantial number of persons have accepted the benefit of training at the Oakland
Police Academy and then have voluntarily separated from service to join other safety
agencies or have decided for personal reasons that police work is not their preference.
The purpose of this provision is to insure that the recruit either accept a commitment of
service to the City or be responsible for costs associated with Academy training.

Thus the parties agree that any member who, prior to completing five
years of service, voluntarily separates from service with the department shall be
responsible for reimbursing the City, on a full or prorata basis, for up to$11,000 of
the cost of his/her training at the Police Academy. To the extent this amount exceeds
the maximum that may be legally recovered, the City shall be entitled to recover only

59
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX B

the maximum allowable under the law. A schedule of the members’ reimbursement
responsibility is set forth as follows:

Length of Service - Percentage of Repayment Due:
Separation prior to 1 year: 100% repayment of the $11,000;

Separation after 1 year, but before completing the second year: 80% repayment of the
$11,000;

Separation after 2 years, but before completing the third year: 60% repayment of the
$11,000; :

Separation after 3 years, but before completing the fourth year: 40% repayment of the
$11,000;

Separation after 4 years, but before completing the fifth year: 20% repayment of the
$11,000.

Separation after 5 years: 0% repayment.

Repayment shall be due and payable at the time of separation and the City shall
deduct any amounts owed under this provision from the employee's final paycheck. If
said deduction does not fully reimburse the City for outstanding costs, the balance shall
thereupon be due and owing.

A member shall not be deemed to have voluntarily separated under this provision
if the member can demonstrate that at the time of separation a personal emergency or
other extreme facts requiring an absence from service which could not be reasonably
accommodated by either a leave of absence or a request for re-employment upon
cessation of the emergency or extreme facts. A demonstrated health problem of
member or of a person in the member's immediate family is an example of such an
emergency.

60

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX C

CIVIL SERVICE BOARD/HEARING OFFICER

The City of Oakland, hereinafter referred to as: "City", and the Oakland Police
Officers' Association, hereinafter referred to as "OPOA", hereby agree that the: Civil
Service Board may elect to use a Hearing Officer for appeals of suspensions, fines,
demotions or disciplinary discharges filed pursuant to Article VI, entitled Grievance
Procedure, of the current Memorandum of Understanding between the parties covering
the period of July 1, 2001 to June 30, 2006. The parties further agree to the following
provisions governing the use of such Hearing Officers:

1. Hearing Officer Panel. Hearing Officers shall be selected from the pool of
qualified candidates listed below.

2. Order of Use. The Director of Personnel Resource Management shall
establish an ordered list of the Hearing Officers by random. Cases will be assigned to
Officers in order on the list.

Both the appellant and the City shall have one peremptory challenge. In the
event that such challenges are made, the case will move to the Hearing Officer next in
order on the panel list.

If a designated Hearing Officer is not available during the sixty (60) days after the
case is assigned, the case will be reassigned to the panelist next in order. No additional
peremptory challenges beyond a party's first one will be allowed.

3. Conduct of Hearings. Hearings will be open to the public unless otherwise
requested by the appellant.

Hearings will be tape recorded. Copies of the tape will be available to the
appellant, if desired, for a nominal charge. Transcripts of the taped proceedings will be
available upon request at the requesting party's expense.

Closing arguments shall be oral; provided, however, that either party may elect to
submit a closing brief. Such an election must be made following the presentation of the
evidence. Briefs are to be submitted to the Hearing Officer within twenty (20) calendar
days of the close of the hearing. Briefs submitted after the deadline shall not be
considered by the Hearing Officer.

4. Hearing Officer Responsibilities. Hearing Officers shall be responsible for the
conduct of the hearing and shall identify the appeal issue, determine relevant facts,
assess the credibility of witnesses, evaluate the evidence and render an advisory
decision to the Civil Service Board.

The Hearing Officer shall render a written finding and advisory recommendation
to the Civil Service Board within thirty (30) calendar days of the close of the hearing. If

61
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX C

briefs are submitted, the recommendation shall be submitted to the Board within fifty
(50) calendar days of the close of the hearing.

The Hearing Officer shall provide the Civil Service Board the following
documents which shall constitute the official hearing record:

A. A summation page delineating the case name, issue, brief summary of the
case and his/her recommendation.

B. A complete written report documenting the findings.
C. Any documentary evidence, written motions and briefs submitted.
D. The cassette tape(s) of the hearing.

5. Civil Service Board Responsibilities. Upon receipt of a Hearing Officer's
recommendation, the Secretary shall calendar the case for the next regularly scheduled
Board meeting.

In reaching a decision, the Board shall consider only the recommendation and
record but may also consider the cassette tape of the hearing. The Board's decision
shall be made in accordance with Ordinance No. 8979, as amended, which requires a
majority of a quorum to accept, reject or modify an appeal. Copies of the Board's
determination and the recommendation of the Hearing Officer shall be forwarded to the
appellant, appellant's attorney, City Attorney's Office and the affected City Department,
in writing within ten (10) days of the conclusion of the Board's review of the Hearing
Officer's recommendation. If either party disagrees with the Board's determination or the
reasons therefore, it may request the Board to reconsider by filing a written request to
the Board and serving such request upon the opposing party within twenty (20) working
days of the mailing to them of the Board's decision. Any written request must detail the
reasons for reconsideration. Any opposition to reconsideration must be received by the
Board no later than thirty (30) working days following the mailing of the Board's
decision. Thereafter, the Board will review the written reasons for reconsideration and
opposition thereto and will allow oral argument at its next regularly scheduled meeting
following the expiration of the time period allowed for request and opposition to
reconsideration. Any final determination following a request for reconsideration shall be
mailed in writing to the parties no later than ten (10) working days after the Board acts
upon the request for reconsideration.

6. Costs. Costs for the Hearing Officer shall be borne by the City. Costs for
transcribing hearing tapes shall be born ‘by the requesting party. Cost for a copy of the
hearing tape shall be borne by the requesting party.

62
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX C

HEARING OFFICER LIST
Frank Silver

Barry Winograd

Norman Brand

Morris Davis

John Kagel

Bonnie Bogue

Carol Vendrillo

The parties agree to identify additional arbitrators to supplement this list.

63
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

PROFESSIONAL OR SPECIALIZED SERVICE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CITY OF OAKLAND

AND -
MANAGED HEALTH NETWORK (14 uv)
AND—

MEN SERVICES —

Whereas, the City Council has authorized the City Administrator to enter into contracts for professional
or specialized services if the mandates of Oakland City Charter Section 902(e) have been met.

Now therefore the parties to this Agreement covenant as follows:

1. Parties and Effective Date

This Agreement is made and entered into as of July 1, 2014, between the City of Oakland, a
municipal corporation, (“City”), One Frank H. Ogawa Plaza, Oakland, California 94612, and
Managed Health Network and MHN Services (“Contractor”).

2. Scope of Services

Contractor agrees to perform the services specified in Schedule A, Scope of Services
attached to this Agreement and incorporated herein by reference. Contractor shall designate
an individual who shall be responsible for communications with the City for the duration of
this Agreement. Schedule A includes the manner of payment. The Project Manager for the
City shall be Jennie Lim.

3. Time of Performance

Contractor’s services for the employee assistance program shall begin on July 1, 2014, and shall
end on June 30, 2017 with an option to renew for two additional years. For the Substance Abuse
Benefit, the Contractor’s services shall begin on January 1, 2015, and shall end on June 30,
2017 with an option to rénew for two additional years.

4, Compensation and Method of Payment

Contractor will be paid for performance of the scope of services an amount that will be based
upon actual costs but that will be “Capped” so as not to exceed $ 525,000, based upon the scope
of services in Schedule A and the budget by deliverable task and billing rates in Schedule B.
The maximum that will be charged for the entire scope of work will not exceed the Capped
amount, even if the Contractor’s actual costs exceed the Capped amount. Invoices shall state a
description of the deliverable completed and the amount due. Payment will be due upon
completion and acceptance of the deliverables as specified in the Schedule A - Scope of
Services.

In the aggregate, progress payments will not exceed ninety percent (90%) of the total amount
of the contract, with the balance to be paid upon satisfactory completion of the contract.

Professional Services Agreement Between
‘the City of Oakland and Managed Health Network Page 1 of 19 Rev, 0423.2014

64
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

e
APPENDIX D

Progress, or other payments, will be based on at least equivalent services rendered, and will
not be made in advance of services.rendered.

In computing the amount of any progress payment (this includes any partial payment of the
contract price during the progress of the work, even though the work is broken down into
clearly identifiable stages, or separate tasks), the City will determine the amount that the
contractor has earned during the period for which payment is being made, on the basis of the
contract terms. The City will retain out of such earnings an amount at least equal to ten
percent (10%); pending satisfactory completion of the entire contract.

5. Independent Contractor
a. Rights and Responsibilities

It is expressly agreed that in the performance of the services necessary to carry out this
Agreement, Contractor shall be, and is, an independent contractor, and is not an employee of the
City. Contractor has and shall retain the right to exercise full control and supervision of the
services, and full control over the employment, direction, compensation and discharge of all
persons assisting Contractor in the performance of Contractor’s services hereunder. Contractor
shall be solely responsible for all matters relating to the payment of his/her employees,
including compliance with social security, withholding and all other regulations governing such
matters, and shall be solely responsible for Contractor's own acts and those of Contractor’s
subordinates and employees. Contractor will determine the method, details and means of
performing the services described in Schedule A.

b, Contractor’s Qualifications

Contractor represents that Contractor has the qualifications and skills necessary to perform the
services under this Agreement in a competent and professional manner without the advice or
direction of The City. The Contractor warrants that the Contractor, and the Contractor’s
employees and sub-consultants are properly licensed, registered, and/or certified as may be
required under any applicable federal, state and local laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations relating to Contractor’s: performance of the Services. All Services provided
pursuant to this Agreement shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations. Contractor
will promptly advise City of any change in the applicable laws, regulations, or other
conditions that may affect City’s program. This means Contractor is able to fulfill the
requirements of this Agreement. Failure to perform all of the services required under this
Agreement will constitute a material breach of the Agreement and may be cause for termination
of the Agreement. Contractor has complete and sole discretion for the manner in which the
work under this Agreement is performed. Prior to execution of this agreement, Contractor shall
complete Schedule M, Independent Contractor Questionnaire, attached hereto.

Professional Services Agreement Between
‘the City of Onkland and Managed Health Network Page 2 of 19 Rev, 04.23.2014

65
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

c. Payment. come Taxes

Contractor is responsible for paying, when due, all income taxes, including estimated
taxes, incurred as a result of the compensation paid by the City to Contractor for services
under this Agreement. On request, Contractor will provide the City with proof of timely
payment. Contractor agrees to indemnify the City for any claims, costs, losses, fees,
penalties, interest or damages suffered by the City resulting from Contractor’s failure to
comply with this provision.

d. — Non-Exclusive Relationship
Contractor may perform services for, and contract with, as many additional clients,
persons or companies as Contractor, in his or her sole discretion, sees fit.

e Is, Materials and Equipmer

Contractor will supply all tools, materials and equipment required to perform the
services under this Agreement.

f. Cooperation of the City
The City agrees to comply with all reasonable requests of Contractor necessary to the
performance of Contractor’s duties under this Agreement.

g& Extra Work
Contractor will do no extra work under this Agreement without first receiving prior

written authorization from the City.

6. Proprietary or Confidential Information of the City

Contractor understands and agrees that, in the performance of the work or services under this
Agreement or in contemplation thereof, Contractor may have access to private or confidential
information which may be owned or controlled by the City and that such information may
contain proprietary or confidential details, the disclosure of which to third parties may be
damaging to the City. Contractor agrees that all information disclosed by the City to
Contractor shall be held in confidence and used only in performance of the Agreement.
Contractor ‘shall exercise the same standard of care to protect such information as a
reasonably prudent contractor would use to protect its own proprietary data.

7. Ownership of Results

Any interest of Contractor or its Subcontractors, in specifications, studies, reports,
memoranda, computation documents prepared by Contractor or its Subcontractors in

Professional Services Agreement Between
the City of Oakland and Managed Health Network Page 3 of 19 Rev, 04.23.2014

66
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

e
APPENDIX D

drawings, plans, sheets or other connection with services to be performed under this
Agreement shall be assigned and transmitted to the City: However, Contractor may retain
and use copies for reference and as documentation of its experience and capabilities.

8. Copyright

Contractor shall execute appropriate documents to assign to the City the copyright to works
created pursuant to this Agreement.

 

9. Audit

Contractor shall maintain (a) a full set of accounting records in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles and procedures for all funds received under this Agreement; and
(b) full and complete documentation of performance related matters such as benchmarks and
deliverables associated with this Agreement.

Contractor shall (a) permit the City to have access to those records for the purpose of making an
audit, examination or review of financial and performance data pertaining to this Agreement;
and (b) maintain such records for a period of four years following the last fiscal year during
which the City paid an invoice to Contractor under this Agreement.

In addition to the above, Contractor agrees to comply with all audit, inspection, recordkeeping
and fiscal reporting requirements incorporated by reference.

10. Agents/Brokers

Contractor warrants that Contractor has not employed or retained any subcontractor, agent,
company or person other than bona fide, full-time employees of Contractor working solely for
Contractor, to solicit or secure this Agreement, and that Contractor has not paid or agreed to pay
any subcontractor, agent, company or persons other than bora fide employees any fee,
commission, percentage, gifts or any other consideration, contingent upon or resulting from the
award of this Agreement. For breach or violation of this warranty, the City shall have the right
to rescind this Agreement without liability or, in its discretion, to deduct from the Agreement
price or consideration, or otherwise recover, the full amount of such fee, commission,
percentage or gift.

11. Assignment

Contractor shall not assign or otherwise transfer any rights, duties, obligations or interest in this
Agreement or arising hereunder to any person, persons, entity or entities whatsoever without the
prior written consent of the City and any attempt to assign or transfer without such prior written
consent shall be void. Consent to any single assignment or transfer shall not constitute consent
to any further assignment or transfer.with 60 day notice to City.

Professional Services Agreement Between
the City of Gakland and Managed Health Network Page 4 of 19 Rev. 04.23.2014

67

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

12. Publicity

Any publicity generated by Contractor for the project funded pursuant to this Agreement, during
the term of this Agreement or for one year thereafter, will make reference to the contribution of
the City of Oakland in making the project possible. The words “City of Oakland” will be
explicitly stated in all pieces of publicity, including but not limited to flyers, press releases,
posters, brochures, public service announcements, interviews and newspaper articles.

City staff will be available whenever possible at the request of Contractor to assist Contractor in
generating publicity for the project funded pursuant to this Agreement. Contractor further agrees
to cooperate with authorized City officials and staff in any City-generated publicity or
promotional activities undertaken with respect to this project.

13, Title of Property

Title to all property, real and personal, acquired by the Contractor from City funds shall vest in
the name of the City of Oakland and shall be accounted for by means of a formal set of property
records, Contractor acknowledges it is responsible for the protection, maintenance and
preservation of all such property held in custody for the City during the term of the Agreement.
The Contractor shall, upon expiration of termination of this Agreement, deliver to the City all of
said property and documents evidencing title to same. In the case of lost or stolen items or
equipment, the Contractor shall immediately notify the Police Department, obtain a written
police report and notify the City in accordance with “Notice” section of this Agreement.
Contractor shall provide to the City Auditor all property-related audit and other reports required
under this Agreement. In the case of lost or stolen items or equipment, the Contractor shall
immediately notify the Police Department, obtain a written police report and notify the City in
accordance with the “Notice” section of this Agreement.

Prior to the disposition or sale of any real or personal property acquired with City funds,
Contractor shall obtain approval by the City Council and City Administrator in accord with
the requirements for disposal or sale of real or personal surplus property set forth in the
Oakland City Charter and/or Oakland Mur l Code Title 2.04, Chapter 2.04.120. Surplus
supplies and equipment isposal or Destruction.

 

14. Insurance
Unless a written waiver is obtained from the City’s Risk Manager, Contractor must provide the

insurance listed in Schedule Q, Insurance Requirements. Schedule Q is attached at the end of
this sample agreement and incorporated herein by reference.

Professional Services Agreement Between.
‘he City of Oakland and Managed Health Network Page 5 of 19 Rey, 0423.2014

68
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

15. Indemnification

a. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, Contractor shall indemnify and
hold harmless (and at City’s request, defend) City, and each of their respective
Councilmembers, officers, partners, agents, and employees (each of which persons and
organizations are referred to collectively herein as “Indemnitees" or individually as
"Indemnitee") from and against any and all liabilities, claims, lawsuits, losses, damages,
demands, debts, liens, costs, judgments, obligations, administrative or regulatory fines or
penalties, actions or causes of action, and expenses (including reasonable attorneys’ fees)
caused by or arising out of any:

(Breach of Contractor's obligations, representations or warranties under this
Agreement;

(ii) Act or failure to act in the course of performance by Contractor under this
Agreement;

(ii) Negligent or willful acts or omissions in the course of performance by
Contractor under this Agreement;

(iv) Claim for personal injury (including death) or property damage to the extent
based on the strict liability or caused by any negligent act, error or omission of
Contractor;

(v) Unauthorized use or disclosure by Contractor of Confidential Information as
provided in Section 6 Proprietary of Confidential Information of the City
above; and

(vi) Claim of infringement or alleged violation of any United States patent right or
copyright, trade secret, trademark, or service mark or other proprietary or
intellectual property rights of any third party.

b. For purposes of the preceding Subsections (i) through (vi), the term “Contractor”
includes Contractor, its officers, directors, employees, representatives, agents, servants,
sub-consultants and subcontractors.

¢. City shall give Contractor prompt written notice of any such claim of loss or damage and
shall cooperate with Contractor, in the defense and all related settlement negotiations to
the extent that cooperation does not conflict with City's interests.

d. Notwithstanding the foregoing, City shall have the right if Contractor fails or refuses to
defend City with Counsel acceptable to City to engage its own counsel for the purposes
of participating in the defense. In addition, City shall have the right to withhold any
payments due Contractor in the amount of anticipated defense costs plus additional
reasonable amounts as security for Contractor's obligations under this Section 15. In no

” Professional Services Agreement Between
the City of Oaklend and Maaaged Heal Network Page 6 of 19 Rev. 0423.2014

69
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

event shall Contractor agree to the settlement of any claim described herein without the
prior written consent of City.

e. Contractor acknowledges and agrees that it has an immediate and independent obligation
to indemnify and defend Indemnitees from any action or claim which potentially falls
within this indemnification provision, which obligation shall arise at the time any action
or claim is tendered to Contractor by City and continues at all times thereafter, without
regard to any alleged or actual contributory negligence of any Indemnitee.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, Contractor’s liability under
this Agreement shall not apply to any action or claim arising from the sole negligence,
active negligence or willful misconduct of an Indemnitee.

f. All of Contractor’s obligations under this Section'15 are intended to apply to the fullest
extent permitted by law (including, without limitation, California Civil Codé Section
2782) and shall survive the expiration or sooner termination of this Agreement.

g. The indemnity set forth in this Section 15 shall not be limited by the City’s insurance
requirements contained in Schedule Q hereof, or by any other provision of this
Agreement. City’s liability under this Agreement shell be limited to payment of
Contractor in accord to the terms and conditions under this Agreement and shall exclude
any liability whatsoever for consequential or indirect damages even if such damages are
foreseeable,

   

16. Right to Offset Claims for Money

All claims for money due or to become due from City shall be subject to deduction or offset
by City from any monies due Contractor by reason of any claim or counterclaim arising out
of i) this Agreement, or ii) any purchase order, or iii) any other transaction with Contractor.

17. Prompt Payment Ordinance

This contract is subject to the Prompt Payment Ordinance of Oakland Municipal Code, Title
2, Chapter 2.06 (Ordinance 12857 C.M.S, passed January 15, 2008 and effective February 1,
2008). The Ordinance requires that, unless specific exemptions apply, the Contractor and its
subcontractors shall pay undisputed invoices of their subcontractors for goods and/or services
within twenty (20) business days of submission of invoices unless the Contractor or its
subcontractors notify the Liaison in writing within five (5) business days that there is a bona
fide dispute between the Contractor or its subcontractor and claimant, in which case the
Contractor or its subcontractor may withhold the disputed amount but shall pay the
undisputed amount.

Disputed late payments are subject to investigation by the City of Oakland Liaison, Division
of Contracts and Compliance upon the filing of a complaint. Contractor or its subcontractors
opposing payment shall provide security in the form of cash, certified check or bond to cover
the disputed amount and penalty during the investigation. If Contractor or its subcontractor
fails or refuses to deposit security, the City will withhold an amount sufficient to cover the

Professional Services Agreement Between
the City of Oakland and Managed Health Network Page 7 of 19 Rev, 04232014

70
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

claim from the next Contractor progress payment. The City, upon a determination that an
undisputed invoice or payment is late, will release security deposits or withholds directly to
claimants for valid claims.

Contractor and its subcontractors shall not be allowed to retain monies from subcontractor
payments for goods as project retention, and are required to release subcontractor project
retention in proportion to the subcontractor services rendered, for which payment is due and
undisputed, within five (5) business days of payment. Contractor and its subcontractors
shall be required to pass on to and pay subcontractors mobilization fees within five (5)
business days of being paid such fees by the City. For the purpose of posting on the City's
website, Contractor and its subcontractors, are required to file notice with the City of release
of retention and payment of mobilization fees, within five (5) business days of such payment
or release; and, Contractor is required to file an affidavit, under penalty of perjury, that he or
she has paid all subcontractors, within five (5) business days following receipt of payment
from the City. The affidavit shall provide the names and address of all subcontractors and
the amount paid to each.

If any amount due by a prime contractor or subcontractor to any claimant for goods and/or
services rendered in connection with a purchase contract is not timely paid in accordance the
Prompt Payment ordinance, the prime Contractor or subcontractor shall owe and pay to the
claimant interest penalty in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the improperly withheld
amount per year for every month that payment is not made, provided the claimant agrees to
release the prime contractor or subcontractor from any and all further interest penalty that
may be claimed or collected on the amount paid. Claimants that receive interest payments
for late payment Prompt Payment ordinance may not seck further interest penalties on the
same late payment in law or equity.

Contractor and its subcontractors shall include the same or similar provisions as those set
forth above in this section in any contract with another contractor or subcontractor that
delivers goods and/or services pursuant to or in connection with this City of Oakland
purchase contract.

Prompt Payment invoice and claim forms are available at the following City of Oakland
website:

  

aklandnet. vernment/o/CityAdministration/d/CP/s/FormsSchedules/ind
ex.htm or at Contracts and Compliance, 250 Frank H. Ogawa Plaza, Suite 3341, Oakland,
CA 94612. Invoice and claim inquiries should be directed to Vivian Inman, City of Oakland
Prompt Payment Liaison, 510-238-6261 or email vinman@oaklandnet.com.

 

 

18. Arizona and Arizona-Based Businesses
Contractor agrees that in accordance with Resolution No. 82727 C.MLS., neither it nor any of

its subsidiaries, affiliates or agents that will provide services under this agreement is
currently headquartered in the State of Arizona, and shall not establish an Arizona business

Professional Services Agreement Between .
the City of Oakland and Managed Health Network Page 8 of 19 Rev, 04.23.2014

7”
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

headquarters for the duration of this agreement with the City of Oakland or until Arizona
rescinds SB 1070.

Contractor acknowledges its duty to notify the Purchasing Department if its Business Entity
or any of its subsidiaries affiliates or agents subsequently relocates its headquarters to the
State.of Arizona. Such relocation shall be a basis for termination of this agreement.

19. Dispute Disclosure

Contractors are required to disclose pending disputes with the City of Oakland when they are
involved in submitting bids, proposals or applications for a City or Agency contract or
transaction involving professional services. This includes contract amendments. Contractor
agrees to disclose, and has disclosed, any and all pending disputes to the City prior to
execution of this agreement. The City will provide a form for such disclosure upon
Contractor’s request. Failure to lose pending disputes prior to execution of this
amendment shall be a basis for termination of this agreement.

 

20. _ Termination on Notice

The City may terminate this Agreement immediately for cause or without cause upon giving
(30) calendar days’ written notice to Contractor. Unless otherwise terminated as provided in
this Agreement, this Agreement will terminate on June 30, 2017.

21. Conflict of Interest

a, itractor
The following protections against conflict of interest will be upheld:

i, Contractor certifies that no member of, or delegate to the Congress of the United
States shall be permitted to. share or take part in this Agreement or in any benefit
arising there from.

ii, Contractor certifies that no member, officer, or employee of the City or its
designees or agents, and no other public official of the City who exercises’ any
functions or responsibilities with respect to the programs or projects covered by
this Agreement, shall have any interest, direct or indirect in this Agreement, or in
its proceeds during his/her tenure or for one year thereafter.

iii, Contractor shall immediately notify the City of any real or possible conflict of
interest between work performed for the City and for other clients served by
Contractor.

iv. Contractor warrants and represents, to the best of its present knowledge, that
no public official or employee of City who has been involved in the making of
this Agreement, or who is a member of a City board or commission which has

Professional Services Agreement Between
the City of Oakdand and Managed Health Network Page 9 of 19 Rev. 04.23.2014

72
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

been involved in the making of this Agreement whether in an advisory or
decision-making capacity, has or will receive a direct or indirect financial
interest in this Agreement in violation of the rules contained in California
Government Code Section 1090 et seq., pertaining to’ conflicts of interest in.
public contracting. Contractor shall exercise due. diligence to ensure that no
such official will receive such an interest.

y. Contractor further warrants and- represents, to the best of its present
knowledge and excepting any written disclosures as to these matters already
made by Contractor to City, that (1) no public official of City who has
participated in decision-making concerning this Agreement or has used his or
her official position to influence decisions regarding this Agreement, has an
economic interest in Contractor or this Agreement, and (2) this Agreement
will not have a direct or indirect financial effect on said official, the official’s
spouse or dependent children, or any of the official’s economic interests. For
purposes of this paragraph, an official is deemed to have an “economic
interest” in any (a) for-profit business entity in which the official has a direct
or indirect investment worth $2,000 or more, (b) any real property in which
the official has a direct or indirect interest worth $2,000 or more, (c) any for-
profit business entity in which the official is a director, officer, partner,
trustee, employee or manager, or (d) any source of income or donors of gifts
to the official (including nonprofit entities) if the income or value of the gift
totaled more than $500 the previous year. Contractor agrees to promptly
disclose to City in writing any information it may receive concerning any such
potential conflict of interest. Contractor’s attention is directed to the conflict
of interest rules applicable to governmental decision-making contained 'in the
Political Reform Act (California Government Code Section 87100 et seq.) and
it’s implementing regulations (California Code of Regulations, Title 2,
Section 18700 et seq.).

 

vi. Contractor understands that in some cases Contractor or persons associated
with Contractor-may be deemed a “city officer” or “public official” for
purposes of the conflict of interest provisions of Government Code Section
1090 and/or the Political Reform Act. Contractor further understands that, as
a public officer or official, Contractor or persons associated with Contractor
may be disqualified from future City contracts to the extent that Contractor is
involved in any aspect of the making of that future contract (including
preparing plans and specifications or performing design work or feasibility
studies for that contract) through its work under this Agreement.

vii. Contractor shall incorporate or cause to be incorporated into all subcontracts

for work to be performed under this Agreement a provision governing conflict
of interest in substantially the same form set forth herein.

Professional Services Agreement Between
the City of Oakland und Managed Health Network Page 10 0f 19 ev. 04232014

73
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

b. No Waiver

‘Nothing herein is intended to waive any applicable federal, state or local conflict of
interest law or regulation

c Remedi 1d Sancti

In addition to the rights and remedies otherwise available to the City under this
Agreement arid under federal, state and local law, Contractor understands and agrees
that, if the City reasonably determines that Contractor has failed to make a good faith
effort to avoid an improper conflict of interest situation or is responsible for the
conflict situation, the City may (1) suspend payments under this Agreement, (2)
terminate this Agreement, (3) require reimbursement by Contractor to the City of any
amounts disbursed under this Agreement. In addition, the City may suspend
payments or terminate this Agreement whether or not Contractor is responsible for

the conflict of interest situation, 22. _Non-Discrimination/Equal I Practics

Contractor shall not discriminate or permit discrimination against any person or group of,
persons in any manner prohibited by federal, state or local laws. During the
performance of this Agreement, Contractor agrees as follows:

a, Contractor and Contractor’s subcontractors, if any, shall not discriminate against any
employee or applicant for employment because of age, marital status, religion, gender,
sexual orientation, gender identity, race, creed, color, national origin, Acquired-Immune
Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), AIDS-Related Complex (ARC) or disability. This
nondiscrimination policy shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment,
upgrading, failure to promote, demotion or transfer, recruitment advertising, layoffs,
termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for training,
including apprenticeship.

b Contractor and Contractor’s Subcontractors shall state in all solicitations or
advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of Contractor that all qualified
applicants will receive consideration: for employment without regard to age, marital
status, religion, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, race, creed, color, national
origin, Acquired-Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), AIDS-Related Complex
(ARC) or disability.

 

c. Contractor shall make its goods, services, and facilities accessible to people with
disabilities and shall verify compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act by

executing Schedule C-1, Declaration of Compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act, attached hereto and incorporated herein.

d. If applicable, Contractor will send to each labor union or representative of workers with
whom Contractor has a collective bargaining agreement or contract or understanding, a
notice advising the labor union or workers’ representative of Contractor’s commitments

Professional Services Agreement Between
the Cty of Oakland and Managed Health Network Page 11 of 19 Rev, 04232014

14
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

under this nondiscrimination clause and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous
places available to employees and applicants for employment.

23. Local and Small Local Busi iterprise Pros (L/SLBI

a. Requirement ~ For Professional Services, 50% Local and Small Local Business
Enterprise Program (L/SLBE): there is a 50% minimum participation requirement for
all professional services contracts over $50,000. Consultant status as an Oakland certified
local or small local firm and subcontractor/subconsultant status as an Oakland certified
local or small local firm are taken into account in the calculation. The requirement may
be satisfied by a certified prime consultant and/or sub-consultant(s). A business must be
certified by the City of Oakland in order to earn credit toward meeting the fifty percent
requirement. The City has waived small local business enterprise (SLBE) subcontracting
requirements for Oakland certified local businesses that apply for professional services
contracts as the prime consultant with the City. The'SLBE requirements still applies for
non-certified LBEs and non-local business enterprises.

b. Good Faith Effort - In light of the fifty percent requirement, good faith effort
documentation is not necessary.

c. Preference Points — Preference points are earned based on the level of participation
proposed prior to the award of a contract. Upon satisfying the minimum fifty percent
requirement, a consultant will earn two (2) preference points. Three additional preference
points may be earned at a rate of one point for every additional ten percent participation
up to eighty percent participation of the total contract dollars spent with local Oakland
certified firms.

4. A firm may earn up to five (5) preference points for local Oakland business participation
and additional preference points for being a long term certified business in Oakland
regardless of size and for having an Oakland workforce.

e. In those'instances where VSLBE participation is evident, the level of participation will be
double-counted towards meeting the requirement.

f. Additional Preference Points. For Request for Proposal (RFP) and Request for
Qualifications (RFQ), additional Preference Points may be eamed for h having an
Oakland workforce on Non-Construction Contracts

g. Earning extra preference points for having an existing work force that includes Oakland
residents ‘is considered added value. The Request for Proposal “evaluation” process
allows for additional preference points over and, above the number of points earned for
technical expertise. Typically 100 points may be earned for the technical elements of the
REP. Preference points are awarded over and above the potential 100 points,

h, The Exit Report and Affidavit (ERA) — This report declares the level of participation
achieved and will be used to calculate banked credits. The prime consultant must

Professional Services Agreement Between
the City of Oakland and Managed Health Network Page 12 of 19 Rev. 423.2014

75
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

complete the Schedule F, Exit Report and Affidavit for, and have it executed by, each
L/SLBE sub consultant and submitted to the Office of the City Administrator, Contracts
and Compliance Unit, along with a copy of the final progress payment application.

i. Joint Venture and Mentor Protégé Agreements. If a prime contractor or prime consultant
is able to develop a Joint Venture or “Mentor-Protégé” relationship with a certified LBE
or SLBE, the mentor or Joint Venture partners will enjoy the benefit of credits against the
participation requirement. In order to earn credit for Joint Venture or Mentor-Protégé
relationships, the Agreement must be submitted for approval to the Office of the City
Administrator, Contracts and Compliance Unit, prior_to the project bid date for
construction, and by proposal due date for professional services contracts, Joint Venture
Applications and elements of City approved Mentor Protégé relation are available upon
request.

j. Contractor shall submit information conceming the ownership and workforce composition
of Contractor’s firm as well as its subcontractors and suppliers, by completing Schedule D,

Ownership, Ethnicity, and Gender Questionnaire, and Schedule E, Project Consultant
‘Team, attached and incorporated herein and made a part of this Agreement.

k. All affirmative action efforts of Contractor are subject to tracking by the City. This
information or data shall be used for statistical purposes only. All contractors are required
to provide data regarding the make-up of their subcontractors and agents who will
perform City contracts, including the race and gender of each employee and/or contractor
and his or her job title or function and the methodology used by Contractor to hire and/or
contract with the individual or entity in question.

I. In the recruitment of subcontractors, the City of Oakland requires all contractors to
undertake nondiscriminatory and equal outreach efforts, which include outreach to
minorities and women-owned businesses as well as other segments of Oakland’s business
community. The City Administrator will track the City’s MBE/WBE utilization to
ensure the absence of unlawful discrimination on the basis of age, marital status, religion,
gender, sexual preference, race, creed, color, national origin, Acquired-Immune Deficiency
Syndtome (AIDS), AIDS-Related Complex (ARC) or disability.

m. In the use of such recruitment, hiring and retention of employees or subcontractors, the
City of Oakland requires all contractors to undertake nondiscriminatory and equal
outreach efforts which include outreach to minorities and women as well as other
segments of Oakland’s business community.

24. — Living Wage Ordinance

If the contract amount of this Agreement is equal to or greater than $25,000 annually, then
Contractor must comply with the Oakland Living Wage Ordinance. The Living Wage
Ordinance requires that nothing less than a prescribed minimum level of compensation (a
living wage) be paid to employees of service contractors (consultants) of the City and
employees of CFARs (Ord. 12050 § 1, 1998). The Ordinance also requires submission of the

Professional Services Agreement Between
the Cty of Oakland and Managed Health Network Page 13 of 19 Rev. 04232014

76
oe
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
APPENDIX D

Declaration of Compliance attached and incorporated herein as Schedule N and made part of
this Agreement, and, unless specific exemptions apply or a waiver is granted, the consultant
must provide the following to its employees who perform seivices under or related to this
Agreement:

a, Minimum compensation — Said employees shall be paid an initial hourly wage rate
of $12.27 with health benefits or $14.10 without health benefits, These initial rates
shall be upwardly adjusted each year no later than April 1 in proportion to the
increase at the immediately preceding December 31 over the year earlier level of the
Bay Region Consumer Price Index as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
USS. Department of Labor. Effective July 1" of each year, Contractor shall pay
adjusted wage rates.

b. Health benefits ~ Said full-time and part-time employees paid at the lower living
wage rate shall be provided health benefits of at least $1.79 per hour. Contractor
shall provide proof that health benefits are in effect for those employees no later than
30 days after execution of the contract or receipt of City financial assistance.

°

Compensated days off ~ Said employees shall be entitled to twelve compensated days
off per year for sick leave, vacation or personal necessity at the employee's request,
and ten uncompensated days off per year for sick leave. Employees shall accrue one
compensated day off per month of fall time employment. Part-time employees shall
acerue compensated days off in increments proportional to that accrued by full-time
employees. The employees shall be eligible to use accrued days off after the first six
months of employment or consistent with company policy, whichever is sooner, Paid
holidays, consistent with established employer policy, may be counted toward
provision of the required 12 compensated days off. Ten uncompensated days off
shall be made available, as needed, for personal or immediate family illness after the
employee has exhausted his or her accrued compensated days off for that year.

d. Federal Earned Income Credit (EIC) - To inform employees that he or she may be
eligible for Earned Income Credit (BIC) and shall provide forms to apply for advance
EIC payments to eligible employees. ‘There are several websites and other sources
available to assist you. Web sites include but are not limited to: (1)
http://wwwy.irs.gov for current guidelines as prescribed by the Intemal Revenue
Service.

€. Contractor shall provide to all employees and to the Division of Contracts and
Compliance, written notice of its obligation to eligible employees under the City’s
Living Wage requirements, Said notice shall be posted prominently in communal
areas of the work site(s) and shall include the above-referenced information.

£. Contractor shall provide all written notices and forms required above in English,

Spanish or other languages spoken by a significant number of employees within 30
days of employment under this Agreement.

Professional Services Agreement Between
the City of Oakland and Managed Health Network Page 14 of 19 Rev, 04.23.2014

77
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

oe
APPENDIX D

ge Reporting - Contractor shall maintain a listing of the name, address, hire date,
occupation classification, rate of pay and benefits for each of its employees.
Contractor shall provide a copy of said list to the Division of Contracts and
Compliance, on a quarterly basis, by March 31, June 30, September 30 and December
31 for the applicable compliance period. Failure to provide said list within five days
of the due date will result in liquidated damages of five hundred dollars ($500. 00) for
each day that the list remains outstanding. Contractor shall maintain employee
payroll and related records for a period of four (4) years after expiration of the
compliance period.

 

b. Contractor shall require subcontractors that provide services under or related to this
Agreement to comply with the above Living Wage provisions. Contractor shall
include the above-referenced sections in-its subcontracts. Copies of said subcontracts
shall be submitted to the Division of Contracts and Compliance.

25. Equal Benefits Ordinance

This Agreement is subject to the Equal Benefits Ordinance of Chapter 2,32 of the Oakland
Municipal Code and its implementing regulations. The purpose of this Ordinance is to
protect and further the public, health, safety, convenience, comfort, property and general
welfare by requiting that public funds “be expended in a manner so as to prohibit
discrimination in the provision of employee benefits by City contractors (consultants)
between employees with spouses and employees with domestic partners, and/or between
domestic partners and spouses of such employees. (Ord. 12394 (part), 2001)

The following contractors ate subject to the Equal Benefits Ordinance: Entities which enter
into a "contract" with the City for an amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or
more for public works or improvements to be performed, or for goods or services to be
purchased or grants to be provided at the expense of the City or to be paid out of moneys
deposited in the treasury or out of trust moneys under the control of or collected by the city;
and Entities which enter into a "property contract" pursuant to Section 2.32.020(D) with the
City in an amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more for the exclusive
use of or occupancy (1) of real property owned or controlled by the city or (2) of real
property owned by others for the city’s use or occupancy, for a term exceeding twenty-nine
(29) days in any calendar year.

‘The Ordinance shall only apply to those portions of a contractor’s operations that occur (1)
within the city; (2) on real property outside the city if the property is owned by the city or if
the city has a right to occupy the property, and if the contract’s presence at that location is
connected to a contract with the city; and (3) elsewhere in the United States where work
related to a city contract is being performed. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply
to subcontracts or subcontractors of any contract or contractor.

The Equal Benefits Ordinance requires among other things, submission of the attached and
incorporated herein as Schedule N-1, Equal Benefits-Declaration of Nondiscrimination.

Professional Services Agreement Between
{he City of Oakland and Manoged Health Network Page 15 of 19 Rev, 04.23.2014

78
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

26. — City of Oakland Campaign Contribution Limits

This Agreement is subject to the City of Oakland Campaign Reform Act of Chapter 3.12 of the
Oakland Municipal Code and its implementing regulations if it requires Council approval. The
City of Oakland Campaign Reform Act prohibits contractors that are doing business or seeking
to do business with the City of Oakland from making campaign contributions to Oakland
candidates between commencement of negotiations and either 180 days after completion of, or
termination of, contract negotiations.

If this Agreement requires Council approval, Contractor must sign and date an
Acknowledgment of Campaign Contribution Limits Form attached hereto and incorporated
herein as Schedule O.

27. Nuclear Free Zone Disclosure

Contractor represents, pursuant to Schedule P, Nuclear Free Zone Disclosure Form, that
Contractor is in compliance with the City of Oakland's restrictions on doing business with
service providers considered nuclear weapons makers. Prior to execution of this agreement,
Contractor shall complete Schedule P, attached hereto.

 

28. Political Prohibition

Subject to applicable State and Federal laws, moneys paid pursuant to this Agreement shall not,
be used for political purposes, sponsoring or conducting candidate's meetings, engaging in voter
registration activity, nor for publicity or propaganda purposes designed to support or defeat
legislation pending before federal, state or local government.

29. Religious Prohibition

There shall be no religious worship, instruction, or proselytization as part of, or in connection
with the performance of the Agreement. :

30. Business Tax Certificate

Contractor shall obtain and provide proof of a valid City business tax certificate. Said certificate
must remain valid during the duration of this Agreement.

31. Abandonment of Project

The City may abandon or indefinitely postpone the project or the services for any or all of the
project at any time. In such event, the City shall give thirty (30) days written notice of such
abandonment. In the event of abandonment prior to completion of the final drawings, if
applicable, and cost estimates, Contractor shall have the right to expend a reasonable amount

Professional Services Agreement Between
‘the Cty of Oakland and Managed Health Network Page 16 of 19 Rev. 0423°2014

79
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

of additional time to assemble work in progress for the purpose of proper filing and closing
the job. Prior to expending said time, Contractor shall present to the City a complete report
of said proposed job closure and its costs, and the City may approve all or any part of said
expense. Such additional time shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total time expended
to the date of notice of termination. All charges thus incurred and approved by the City,
together with any other charges outstanding at the time of termination, shall be payable by
the City within thirty (30) days following submission of a final statement by Contractor

 

Should the project or any portion thereof be abandoned, the City shall pay the Contractor for
all services performed thereto in accordance with the terms of this Agreement.

32. . Nalidity of Contracts

This Agreement shall not be binding or of any force or effect until it is: i) approved by
resolution of the City Council as required by the Oakland City Charter, Oakland Municipal
Code Title 2.04 and Oakland City Council Rules of Procedure, ii) approved for form and
legality by the Office of the City Attorney, and iii) signed by the City Administrator or his or her
designee.

 

33.  Goveming Law

This Agreement shall be governed by the laws of the State of California.
34. Notice

If either party shall desire or be required to give notice to the other, such notice shall be given in
writing, via facsimile and concurrently by prepaid U.S. certified or registered postage, addressed

to recipient as follows: :
City of Oakland Managed Health Network

Oakland Police Department / Personnel 2370 Kemer Bivd.

455 Seventh Street, 7" Floor San Rafael, CA 94901

Oakland, CA 94607 Attn: Joy Bellomo

Attn: Jennie Lim
‘Any party to this Agreement may change the name or address of representatives for purpose of

this Notice paragraph by providing written notice to all other parties ten (10) business days
before the change is effective.

Professional Services Agreement Between
‘the City of Oskland and Managed Health Network Page 17 of 19 Rey. 0423.2014

80
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

35. — Entire Agreement of the Parties

This Agreement supersedes any and all agreements, either oral or written, between the parties
with respect to the rendering of services by Contractor for the City and contains all of the
representations, covenants and agreements between the parties with respect to the rendering of
those services, Each party to this Agreement acknowledges that no representations,
inducements, promises or agreements, orally or otherwise, have been made by any party, or
anyone acting on behalf of any party, which are not contained in this Agreement, and that no
other agreement, statement or promise not contained in this Agreement will be valid or binding.

36. Modification

Any modification of this Agreement will be effective only if it is in a writing signed by all
parties to this Agreement.

37. — Severability/Partial Invalidity

If any term or provision of this Agreement, or the application of any term or provision of this
Agreement to’a particular situation, shall be finally found to be void, invalid, illegal or
unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, then notwithstanding such determination,
such term or provision shall remain in force and effect to the extent allowed by such ruling and
all other terms and provisions of this Agreement or the application of this Agreement to other
situation shall remain in full force and effect.

 

 

Notwithstanding the foregoing, if any material term or provision of this Agreement or the
application of such material term or condition to a particular situation is finally found to be void,
invalid, illegal or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, then the Parties hereto
agree to work in good faith and fully cooperate with each other to amend this Agreement to
carry out its intent,

38. Time of the Essence

‘Time is of the essence in the performance of this Agreement.
39 Commencement, Completion and Close out

It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to coordinate and schedule the work to be
performed so that commencement and completion take place in accordance with the provisions
of this Agreement.

Any time extension granted to Contractor to enable Contractor to complete the work must be in
writing and shall not constitute a waiver of rights the City may have under this Agreement.

Professional Services Agreement Between
‘the City of Oakland and Managed Health Network Page 18 of 19 Rov. 04.23.2014

81

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

Should the Contractor not complete the work by the scheduled date or by an extended date, the
City shall be released from all of its obligations under this Agreement.

Within thirty (30) days of completion of the performance under this Agreement, the Contractor
shall make a determination of any and all final costs due under this Agreement and shall submit
a requisition for such final and complete payment (including without limitations any and all
claims relating to or arising from this Agreement) to the City. Failure of the Contractor to
timely submit a complete and accurate requisition for final payment shall relieve the City of any
further obligations under this Agreement, including without limitation any obligation for
payment of work performed or payment of claims by Contractor.

40. Approval
If the terms of this Agreement are acceptable to Contractor and the City, sign and date below.

41. Inconsistency
If there is any inconsistency between the main agreement and the attachments/exhibits, the text

 

 

 

  

of the main agreement shall prevail
City of Oakland, Name of Contractor
a municipal corporation Managed Health Network
MBS Seis
a» ) 00 LO-2t-\
(City Administrator's Office) (Date (Signature) (Date)
325558
(gency Director's Signature) Date) Business Tax Certificate No.
1314
Date of Expiration
x G J Approyed as to form gad lesality:
adch on ovol ten f Ni
[ASA sn Meere (Sek 4 Resolution Number
on, LEK hs

‘Accounting Number

Professional Services Agreement Between
‘the City of Oakland and Managed Health Network Page 19 of 19 Rev, 04.23.2014

82
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

SCHEDULE A

CITY OF OAKLAND
AND MANAGED HEALTH NETWORK AND MHN SERVICES

CONSULTING AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CONTRACTORS’
SCOPE OF WORK/OUTLINE OF SERVICES TO BE PERFORMED

The services to be performed by Contractor shall consist of services requested by the Project
Manager or a designated representative, including (but not limited to) the following.

FOR EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (EAP) AND CRITICAL INCIDENT
STRESS MANAGEMENT SERVICES

CONTRACTOR NAME: Managed Health Network

CONTRACT PERIOD: —_ July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2017

CONTRACT AMOUNT: $105,000 per year for EAP (Not to exceed $315,000 for the
contract period)

 

The Contractor referenced above will assist the Oakland Police Department (hereinafter the
“Department”) in providing psychological services as mentioned in Article IX, Section E —
Employee Health Assistance Programs, Psychological Counseling and Substance Abuse
Treatment Program, of the Memorandum of Understanding between City of Oakland and
Oakland Police Officers’ Association effective July 1, 2006 through June 30, 2015.

1. Scope of Services
The service provider's scope of services shall include but is not limited to the following.

For Employee Assistance Program, Contractor agrees to perform the services of a
licensed professional staff (defined as a State licensed Psychologist, Psychiatrist, Clinical
Social Worker, or Matriage-Family-Child Counselor) to:

A. Conduct one-to-one direct counseling for the’ purpose of identifying and evaluating
personal problems and concerns of members and their dependents. Assess and
provide options, recommendations, and alternatives for resolution of such problems.
“Dependent” is defined as follows: The lawful spouse or registered domestic partner
and unmarried dependent children of a member of the Oakland Police Department.
Unmarried, dependent children must be either 18 years or less, or 22 years of age or

 

City of Oakland - Oakland Police Department Page 1 of 8
‘Managed Health Network Contract Period from 7/1/14 to 6/30/17

83
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

less if full-time student, or over the age of 19 and incapable of self-sustaining
employment by reason of mental retardation ot physical handicap, The term
“children” as used herein includes stepchildren, children of registered domestic
partner, adopted children, foster children, and natural children provided such children
are dependent upon the member for support and maintenance. Children of a member
are not considered dependents if they are in the military service. Telephonic and
web/video consultations are also available.

B. Provide up to ten (10) sixty-minute, face-to-face direct counseling sessions per
incident to any sworn member and his/her dependents who voluntarily seeks such
services as it relates to marriage, family and relationship problems, alcohol and/or
drug-related problems, emotional (depression, grief and loss), personal, and/or stress-
related concerns and other non-clinical services to include finance-related problems,
etc. Contractor shall provide the same service to referrals made by any of the Police
Executive Management staff. Fees for any session in excess of the authorized 10 will
be charged to the participant unless’ otherwise arranged and authorized in writing by
the City.

Contractor shall respond to Critical Incident Stress Debriefings (CISD) relating to
distressing and traumatic events occurring at the workplace on an unlimited basis,
except in the case of catastrophic events. A “catastrophic event” is defined as an
incident requiring more than twenty (20) hours of counseling. Said catastrophic event
counseling shall be provided pursuant to a separate, supplemental agreement, upon
the direct request of the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief. Under the terms of the
supplemental agreement, Contractor shall bill the City at the rate of $250 per hour, or
the rate in effect at the time of services, as well as for any travel expenses incurred by
Contractor, including without limitation, practitioner professional fees incurred by
Contractor.

It is expressly understood by the parties to the Agreement that the only services to be
performed by Contractor under Section B are Critical Incident Stress Debriefing,
Early Intervention System, and the sixty-minute counseling sessions for marriage,
family and relationship problems; for alcohol and drug abuse; and for emotional,
personal and stress-related concerns. Such services are to be performed by a licensed
professional staff person as described in paragtaph A above. Any other services that
are provided will not be billed to the City and are done outside the scope of this
‘Agreement.

C. Counseling Sessions for members referred to Contractor by the Deputy Chief of the
Bureau of Services will be provided to identify and clarify medical-behavioral or
personal problems of members who have been identified and referred as evidencing
performance problems in their work or occupation, It is expressly understood by both
parties that the purpose of such referrals from the Deputy Chief is to establish a basis
for corrective action. It is further understood that referral strictly for the purpose of
psychiatric or psychological evaluation to determine suitability as a police officer

 

City of Oakland - Oakland Police Department Page 2 of 8
Managed Health Network Contract Period from 7/1/14 to 6/30/17

84°
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

(commonly referred to as a “fitness for duty” evaluation) is beyond the scope of this
Agreement.

D. Each party shall maintain the confidentiality of information in its possession
contained in the records of members in accordance with applicable state and federal
laws and regulations or other applicable law, and shall not release such information,
either to each other or to any other person or entity, except as permitted by law or in
accordance with a validly executed release.

E. Ifa subpoena is served upon the Contractor for the records or files of any memiber of
the Department requesting testimony about such member, Contractor shall follow
procedures in accordance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations or
other applicable law, and shall not release such information to any other person or
entity, except as permitted by law and in accordance with a validly executed
subpoena.

F. Contractor agrees to comply at all times with all statutory, regulatory and
constitutional limitations on the disclosure of medical information.

G. As requested by the Deputy Chief of the Bureau of Services, Contractor will provide
electronic material, electronic slides or a PowerPoint presentation, and
briefings/training sessions for orientation of members and dependents to inform them
of the purpose, nature, scope, and utilization of the Counseling Program. All such
materials shall be submitted to the Deputy Chief of the Bureau of Services prior to
use in this program. .

1) Contractor shall conduct a combined maximum of six (6) EAP and Substance
Abuse group seminars/orientations/ presentations per year and at times
scheduled by the Police Department Training Section for recruit classes, and
for members and dependents to inform them of the purpose, nature and scope
of services offered by the service provider.

2) A combined maximum of six 2-3 hour EAP and Substance Abuse
Presentations to supervisory/command staff of the Police Department to
acquaint management with their role and responsibilities in recognition and
analysis of performance problems of members appropriate for referral of
counseling services.

H, Provide electronic material in English and Spanish of services offered by Contractor
for distribution by the Police Department.

I Provide comprehensive quarterly and annual utilization reports to the City as well as

 

ad hoc reports when requested.
City of Oakland - Oakland Police Department Page 3 of 8
‘Managed Health Network Contract Period from 7/1/14 to 6/30/17

85
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

J. Assign an Account Manager handling both the EAP and Substance Abuse Program to
meet with client on a quarterly basis to discuss and review program implementation
and utilization.

K. Provide 24/7'(24 hours a day, 7 days a week) live in-take capability throughout
Northern California.

L. COMPLIANCE WITH THE 1979 KNOX-KEENE HEALTH CARE SERVICE
PLAN ACT

All EAP services as described above in this Agreement will be rendered in
compliance with the 1975 Knox-Keene Health Care Service Plan Act.

Contractor shall be responsible for performing or securing the performance of all
specified services in their entirety.

Contractor is subject to regulation by the California Department of Managed Health
Care and this Agreement is subject to the requirements of the Knox-Keene Health
Care Service Plan Act of 1975 (the “Act,” commencing with Section 1340 of the
California Health and Safety Code) and the regulations promulgated thereunder
(found at Chapter 3 of Title 10 of the California Code of Regulations). Any provision
required to be in this Agreement by either of these sources of law shall bind the
parties whether or not provided hereunder. City acknowledges that any provisions
required by the Knox Keene Act apply to this Agreement

FOR SUBSTANCE ABUSE SERVICES
CONTRACTOR NAME: MUN Services

CONTRACT PERIOD: January 1, 2015 through June 30; 2017 for Substance Abuse
Benefit

CONTRACT AMOUNT: $84,000 per year (Not to exceed $378,000 for the contract
period)

 

The Contractor referenced above will assist the Oakland Police Department (hereinafter the
“Department”) ‘in providing substance abuse counseling services as mentioned in Article IX,
Section E — Employee Health Assistance Programs, Psychological Counseling and Substance
Abuse Treatment Program of the Memorandum of Understanding between City of Oakland and
Oakland Police Officers’ Association effective July 1, 2006 through June.30, 2015.

 

City of Oaktand - Oakland Police Department Page 4 of 8
Managed Health Network Contract Period from 7/1/14 to 6/30/17

86
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

1. Scope of Services
‘The service provider’s scope of services shall include but is not limited to the following:

For Substance Abuse Benefits, Contractor agrees to provide Substance Abuse Treatment
(the processes of medical or psychotherapeutic treatment for dependency on psychoactive
substances) to:

‘A. Active Sworn and Civilian employees and Sworn Officer’s Spouse and Dependent
Children. “Dependent” is defined as Oakland Police Department's Sworn Officers”
lawful spouse and dependent children who must be twenty-six (26) years of age or
less if full-time student. Children of a Sworn Officer are not considered dependents if
they are in the military service.Telephonic and web/video consultations are also
available.

B. Provide up to ten (10) sixty-minute, face-to-face direct counseling sessions per
incident to any sworn member and his/her dependents who voluntarily seeks such
services as it relates to alcohol and/or drug-related problems, Contractor shall provide
the same service to referrals made by any of the Police Executive Management staff.
Fees for any session in excess of the authorized 10 will be charged to the participant
unless otherwise arranged and authorized in writing by the City.

 

It is expressly understood by the parties to the Agreement that the only services to be
performed by Contractor under Section B are the sixty-minute counseling sessions for
alcohol and drug abuse. Such services are to be performed by a licensed professional
staff. Any other services that are provided will not be billed to the City and are done
outside the scope of this Agreement.

C. Counseling Sessions for members referred to Contractor by the Deputy Chief of the
Bureau of Services will be provided to identify and clarify medical-behavioral or
personal problems of members who have been identified and referred as evidencing
performance problems in their work or occupation. It is expressly understood by both
parties that the purpose of such referrals from the Deputy Chief is to establish a basis
for corrective action. It is further understood that referral strictly for the purpose of
psychiatric or psychological evaluation tO determine suitability as a police officer
(commonly referred to as a “fitness for duty” evaluation) is beyond the scope of this
‘Agreement.

D. Each party shall maintain the confidentiality of information in its possession
contained in the records of members in accordance with applicable state and federal
laws and regulations or other applicable law, and shall not release such information,
either to each other or to any other person or entity, except as permitted by law or in
accordance with a validly executed release.

 

City of Oakland - Oakland Police Department Page 5 of 8
Managed Health Network Contract Period from 7/1/14 to 6/30/17

87
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

E. Ifa subpoena is served upon the Contractor for the records or files of any member of
the Department requesting testimony about such member, Contractor shall follow
procedures in accordance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations or
other applicable law, and shall not release such information to any other person or
entity, except as permitted by law and in accordance ith a validly executed subpoena.

F. Contractor agrees to comply at all times with all statutory, regulatory and
constitutional limitations on the disclosure of medical information.

G. As requested by the Deputy Chief of the Bureau of Services, Contractor will provide
electronic material, electronic slides or an electronic PowerPoint presentation, and
briefings/training sessions for orientation of members and dependents to inform, them
of the purpose, nature, scope, and utilization of the Substance Abuse Program. All

* such materials shall be submitted to the Deputy Chief of the Bureau of Services prior
to use in this program.

1) Contractor shall conduct a combined maximum of six (6) EAP and Substance
Abuse group seminars/orientations/presentations per year and at times
scheduled by the Police Department Training Section for recruit classes, and
for members and dependents to inform them of the purpose, nature and scope
of services offered by the service provider.

2) A combined maximum of six (6) 2-3 hour EAP and Substance Abuse
presentations to supervisory/command staff of the Police Department to
acquaint management with role and responsibilities in recognition and
analysis of performance problems of memebers appropriate for referral of
counseling services.

H. Provide electronic material in English and Spanish of services offered by contractor
for distribution by the Police Department.

I, Provide comprehensive quarterly and annual utilization reports to the City as well as
ad hoc reports when requested.

J. Assign an Account Manager handling both the EAP and Substance Abuse Program to
meet with client on a quarterly basis to discuss and review program implementation
and utilization.

K. Provide 24/7 (24 hours a day, 7 days a week) live in-take capability throughout

 

Northern California.
City of Oakland - Oakland Police Department Page 6 of 8
Managed Health Network Contract Period from 7/1/14 to 6/30/17

88
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

L. For Substance Abuse Program, provide a 30-day inpatient treatment program to
determine appropriate treatment, length of stay, and appropriate step down to lower
levels fo outpatient care.

2, Reports and Invoices Submission
Reports from the Contractor to the Department shall be forwarded as follows:

Jennie Lim

Medical Unit Supervisor

Bureau of Services

Oakland Police Department

455 Seventh Street, 7" Floor
Oakland, CA 94607Payment Schedule

»

  
  
 

based upon actual costs but will be “capped” so as not to exc
upon the scope of services referenced herein. The maximum
entire scope of work will not exceed the capped amount, even ifthe Contractor’s actual
costs exceed the capped amount. Invoices shall state a description of the deliverable
completed and the amount due. Payment will be due upon completion and acceptance of
the deliverables as specified above. Contractor shall submit an invoice for payment,
forwarded to the Project Manager listed in Item 2 above.

4, Approval

If the terms of the Agreement are acceptable to Contractor and the City, sign and date
below.

Contractor:

Larry S. Tallman,

@lease print name.)

Ae OL tn [0-26-14
(Signature) (Date)

 

City of Oakland - Oakland Police Department Page 7 0f8
Managed Health Network Contract Period from 7/1/14 to 6/30/17

89

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX D

City Representative:

Jae Li

Please print name.)

Sw ype uel
(Si ) (Date)

 

City of Oakdand - Oakland Police Department Page 8 of 8
Managed Health Network Contract Period from 7/1/14 to 6/30/17

90

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
APPENDIX E

SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL IMPLEMENTATION AGREEMENT

Vice/narcotics and traffic are not considered to be shift differential assignments.
All other assignments that are otherwise eligible for shift differential based on scheduled
hours are considered to be shift differential assignments.

Line up pay for those employees currently receiving the pay and working the
extra half-hour shall be eliminated the first full pay period after adoption of this
agreement by the City Council. Those employees currently receiving line up pay and
who are eligible to receive shift differential shall begin to receive the pay at the same
time the lineup pay is eliminated.

Employees not currently receiving line up pay shall be eligible to receive shift
differential effective September 1, 2001.

91
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 1

 

CITY OF OAKLAND
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION
SUBJECT: Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy NUMBER: 567
Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave
REFERENCE: EFFECTIVE
DATE: August 3, 2004

SUPERSEDES: _A1567 dated February 5, 1994
L POLICY

Employees may take unpaid family care and medical leave as prescribed in the federal Family
and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (“FMLA”) and the California Family Rights Act of 1991, as
amended (“CFRA”). Implementation of this Article is governed by the FMLA and the federal
regulations adopted at 29 C.F.R. Part 825 and by the CFRA and the state regulations adopted at
California Code of Regulations, Title 2, division 4, sections 7297.0-7297.11.

I PURPOSE

The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to establish City of Oakland policy, procedures
and responsibilities regarding Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy Disability Leave and
Paid Family Leave.

I. DEFINITIONS

A. Eligibility

To be eligible for family care and medical leave, on the date on which leave is to begin,
an employee must have been employed by the City for at least 12 months, and have been
employed for at least 1,250 hours of service during the 12-month period immediately
preceding the commencement of the leave. (29 C.F.R §825.110, Government Code
§12945,2[a])

1. For the purposes of meeting the 1,250 hours of service eligibility test of this Article,
the determining factor is the number of hours an employee has worked for the City
within the meaning of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 [FLSA] (29 U.S.C. 297),
(29 CFR. §825.110[c]; [see 29 C.F.R. §785 for FLSA])

92
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 1

Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy
Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave AI-567 2

B. Family Care and Medical Leave Entitlement

Subject to the provisions of these administrative regulations and state and federal law, an
eligible employee is entitled to a total of 12 workweeks of leave during any 12-month
period for any one, or more, of the following reasons:

1. The birth of a child and to care for the newborn child;

2. The placement with the employee of a child for adoption or foster care by the
employee. (29 CFR. §825.200[a], §825.112[a]; Government Code §12945.2[c][3]);

3. To care for the employee’s child, parent, or spouse who has a serious health condition;
(See 29 C.F.R. §825.113 and 2 C.C.R. §7297.0 for definitions; Goverment Code
§12945.2[c}[1));

4. To care for the employee’s domestic partner who has a serious health condition and the
employee has filed a Declaration of Domestic Partnership in accordance with
established City policy;

5. Because of an employee’s own serious health condition that makes the employee
unable to perform the functions of the employee’s position, except for disability on
account of pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions, which are covered by
pregnancy disability leave. (Govemment Code §12945.2[c][3]ic]; see 29 CFR.
§825.114-115 for definitions of “serious health condition” and “unable to perform the
functions of the employee's position” and Government Code §12945.2[c][8])

a. For family care and medical leave purposes, the “12-month period” in which
the 12 weeks of leave entitlement occurs shall be defined as a “rolling” 12-
month period measured backward from the date the employee uses any
family care and medical leave.

b. “Twelve workweeks” means the equivalent of 12 of the employee's normally
scheduled workweeks. For eligible employees who work more or less than
five days a week, or who work on alternative work schedules, the number of
working days that constitutes “12 workweeks” is calculated on a pro rata or.
proportional basis.

¢. “Serious health condition” means an illness, injury (including on-the-job
injuries), impairment, or physical or mental condition of the employee or a
child, parent, spouse, or domestic partner of the employee, which involves
either:

93
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 1

Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy
Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave AL-S67 3

i. inpatient care (i.e. an overnight stay) in a hospital, hospice, or
residential health care facility; or

ii. continuing treatment or continuing supervision by a health care
provider, as described in detail in the FMLA and its implementing

regulations.
c Minimum Duration of Leave

1. Intermittent leave is leave taken in separate blocks of time due to a single
qualifying reason, rather than for one continuous period of time. (29 C.F.R.
§825.203[a])

2. Reduced leave schedule is a leave schedule that reduces an employee’s usual
number of working hours per workweek, or hours per workday. (29 C.F.R.
§825.203[a}).

3. Minimum Duration of Leave Taken for Serious Health Condition of a Parent,
Child, Spouse, or Domestic Partner or for the Serious Health Condition of the

Employee

Subject to the provisions of this Article, an employee may take family care and
medical leave intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule to care for a sick
spouse, parent, child, or domestic partner when medically necessary or for the
employee’s own serious health condition when medically necessary. (2 C.C.R.
§7297.3[d), fe)

a. The following conditions must be met for an employee to take family
care and medical leave on an intermittent or a reduced leave schedule
under this section:

i there must be a medical need for leave (as distinguished from
voluntary treatments and procedures);

ii, the _ medical need can be best accommodated through an
intermittent or reduced leave schedule; and

iii, the employee must provide certification of the medical necessity
of intermittent leave or leave on a reduced schedule. The
certification of a serious health condition required below meets
this requirement. (29 CF.R. §825.117)

4. Minimum Duration for Leave Taken for the Birth, Adoption, or Foster Care
Placement of a Child

Family care and medical leave taken because of the birth, adoption, or foster care
placement of a child of the employee does not have to be taken in one continuous
period of time. Any leave(s) taken shall be concluded within one year of the
birth or adoption or.foster care placement of the child with the employee. The

94
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 1

Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy
Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave AI-567 4

basic minimum duration of the leave shall be two weeks. However, the City
shall grant a request for a leave of less than two weeks duration on any two
occasions. (2 C.C.R. §7297.3[d])

5. Leaves shall be taken in increments of at least one hour. Only the amount of leave
actually taken will be counted toward the 12 weeks of leave to which an employee
is entitled. (29 CFR §825.203[d], 29 CFR. §825.205, see also 2 C.CR.
§7297.3[e][2) and [e})

6. Employees needing intermittent leave or leave on a reduced leave schedule must
attempt to schedule their leave so as not to disrupt the City’s operations. (29 C.F.R.
§825.117)

7. The City may, at its discretion, assign an employee to an alternative position with
equivalent pay and benefits that better accommodates the employee's intermittent or
reduced leave schedule, as determined by the City. (29 C.F.R. §825.117, 29 CER.
§825.204)

Iv. PAY STATUS AND BENEFITS

A Except as provided in this section, the family care and medical leave will be unpaid. The
City will continue to provide and pay for group health benefits during the period of leave
on the same basis as coverage would have been provided had the employee been
continuously employed during the entire leave period. (29 CFR. §825.207, 29 CFR.
§825.209; Government Code §12945.2[d], [e}, [f]; 2 C.C.R. §7297.5[c])

1. The employce will be required to continue to pay the employee’s share of premium
payments, if any. An employee's premium payment for the entire period of the unpaid
leave is due before the leave begins. (29 C.F.R. §825.210, 29 CFR. §825.210[a] and
fel)

2. The City’s obligation to maintain health insurance coverage ceases if an employee's
premium payment is more than 30 days late. (29 CFR. §825.212[a] and [c];
Government Code §12935[a], 12945.2), 2 C.C.R. §7297.51f])

3. As permitted by law, the City will recover from an employee its shate of health plan
premiums during a period of unpaid family care and medical leave if the employee fails
to return to work after the employce’s family care and medical leave entitlement has
expired, if the employee's failure to retum to work is not due to the employee’s own
serious health condition or to circumstances beyond the employee's control.
(Goverment Code §12945.2[f], 2 C.C.R. §7297.5; §825.212 and 29 C.F.R. §825.213)

B. Other Benefits

While on unpaid family care and medical leave, an employce will not accrue seniority,
sick leave, vacation leave, or retirement credit. (2 C.C.R. §7297.5[d]; Government Code
§12945.2[f][2))

95

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 1

Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy
Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave ALS67 5

Cc. Relationship of iid Family Care and Medical Leave to Other Leave:
1, Use of Paid Leave

When an employee takes family care and medical leave because of the employee's
own serious health condition, he/she shall be required to use all but 10 days of

his/her accrued sick leave.

An employee may choose to use any accrued sick leave, vacation or other accrued
paid personal time off that the employee is otherwise eligible to use during the
otherwise unpaid family care and medical leave.

2. Concurrent Use of Leave

Any leave of absence that qualifies as family care and medical leave, and is
designated by the City as family care and medical leave, will be counted as running
concurrently with any other paid or unpaid leave to which the employee may be
entitled or required to use for the same qualifying reason under a memorandum of
understanding, City policy, or state law. (Goverment Code §12945.2[e]; 29 C.R.R.
§825.207, §825.208; 29 C.C.R. §7297.5)

3. Workers’ Compensation Leave

The City may count, any time off for an employee’s on-the-job injury against the
employee’s family care and medical leave entitlement when the employee’s injury
meets the criteria for a serious health condition; however, an employee's accrued
paid leave may not be substituted for any part of an FMLA leave that is also a
workers’ compensation leave. (29 C.F.R. §825.207[d][2], also, §825.210{f],
§825.216{d}, §825.2209[d}, §825.307[a]{1])

4. Relationship to Pregnancy Disability Leave

The family care and-medical leave provided under this section is in addition to any
leave taken on account of pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions for
which an employee may be qualified under state law and described in City policy or
relevant memorandum of understanding. (Government Code §12945.2, §12935[a]; 2
C.CR. §7297.6)

¥

California Paid Family Leave (“PFL”)

Beginning on July 1, 2004, employees on FML in order to care for a family member
or bond with a child, and who are eligible for State Disability Insurance (SDI), may
apply for Paid Family Leave benefits (six weeks of partial wage replacement)
through the Family Temporary Disability Insurance program, which is administered
by the State Disability Insurance program.

96
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 1

Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy
Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave AI-567 6

a. PFL must be taken concurrently with Family Medica] Leave. PFL does not
entitle employees to job protection, beyond that provided under FML.

b. Employees must be off work for seven calendar days and use two weeks of
vacation leave, if it has been accrued, before PFL benefits begin. (Employees
need not have worked any minimum amount of time to qualify for PFL.)

c.  PFL does not give an employee any additional rights under CFRA or FMLA.
Employees whose employment is governed by a collective bargaining agreement
that addresses Family Medical Leave may have additional entitlements and rights
pursuant to that Agreement.

v. NOTICES TO CITY

A. An employee should request a family care and medical leave by submitting a completed
Family Care and Medical Leave application and a Health Care Provider Certification form

to the employee’s department personnel representative.

1. The employee must provide written notice to the City as far in advance of the leave
as possible and as soon as the employee reasonably knows of the need for the
leave. If the need for the leave is foreseeable based on an expected birth,
placement for adoption or foster care, or planned medical treatment, the notice
must be provided at least 30 calendar days in advance of the leave. If 30 days
notice is not practicable, such as because of a lack of knowledge of approximately
when leave will be required to begin, a change in circumstances, or a medical
emergency, notice must be given as soon as practicable.

2. The written notice must inform the City of the reasons for the leave, the anticipated
duration of the leave, and the anticipated start of the leave. The employee should
use the City’s Family Care and Medical Leave application whenever possible. (29
C.F.R. §825,302; 2 C.C.R.§7297.4)

3. If an employee fails to give 30 calendar days notice for foreseeable leave with no
reasonable excuse for the delay, the City may deny the family care and medical
leave request until at least 30 calendar days after the date the employee provides
notice to the City of the need for family care and medical leave. (29 C.F.R.
§825.304[b})

4, The employee shall consult with the City and make a reasonable effort to
schedule any planned medical treatment or supervision so as to minimize
disruption to the City’s operations. Scheduling, however, shall be subject to the
approval of the health care provider of the employee or the employee’s child,
parent, spouse, or domestic partner. (2 C.C.R. §7297.4 [a][2])

97
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy
Disability Leave, and P;

ATTACHMENT 1

 

 

id Family Leave AI-S67

 

B. Medical Certification

1.

An employee’s request for family care and medical leave to care for a child, a spouse, a
domestic partner, or a parent who has a serious health condition shall be supported by a
certification issued by the health care provider of the individual requiring-care. If
additional leave is required after the expiration of the time originally estimated by the
health care provider, the employee shall provide the City with recertification by the
health care provider. (Government Code §12945.2[j]; 29 C.F.R, §825.305-306; 2
C.C.R. §7297.11, §7297.0[al)

An employee’s request for family care and medical leave because of the employee’s
own serious health condition shall be supported by a certification issued by the
employee's health care provider. (Government Code §12945.2[k])

As a condition of an’employee’s return from leave taken because of the employce’s
own serious health condition, the employee is required to obtain certification from
his/her health care provider that the employee is able to resume work, (29 C.F.R.
§825.310)

Employees are required to use the “Certification of Health Care Provider or
Practitioner” form available from the City to meet the certification and recertification
requirements of this policy. In addition, for the “fimess for duty” certification required
under Article V B-3 above, the City may provide the health care provider with the
City’s customary “fitness for duty” forms, which may include a job position description
and a list of the job position’s essential functions.

If the City has reason to doubt the validity of the certification provided by an employee
for the employee's own serious health condition, at the City’s discretion and expense
the City may require that the employee obtain the opinion of a second health care
provider designated or approved by the City in accordance with the appropriate
statutory provisions. At the City’s discretion and expense, the City may also require
the opinion of a third health care provider, in accordance with the appropriate statutory
provisions, in the event that the second opinion differs from the opinion in the original
certification. At the employee’s request, the City shall provide the employee with
copies of any second and third medical opinions. (Goverment Code §12945.2(k]; 29
C.F.R. §825.307-308; 2 C.C.R. §7297.4[b}[2])

Under this Article, “health care provider” means a health care provider as defined in
federal and state regulations implementing the FMLA and the CFRA. (29 C.F.R.
§825.11; 2 C.C.R. §7297.{j])

In cases of adoption or foster care placement, the employee must provide written
verification, such as an adoptive home study, an adoption placement agreement, or a
juvenile court order.

98
co

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
ATTACHMENT 1

Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy
Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave AI-567 8

8 An employee shall provide any health care certification or recertification or
adoption/foster care verification required by the City under this AJ within 15 calendar
days of the City’s request, unless it is not practicable for the employee to do so despite
the employee’s good faith efforts. An employee's failure to submit a required
certification, recertification, or verification can result in a denial or delay of leave
approval. :

VI. CITY RESPONSE TO LEAVE REQUEST

It is the City’s responsibility to designate leave, paid or unpaid, as family and medical leave-
qualifying and to notify the employee of the designation. The City shall respond to the leave
request as soon as practicable and no later than 10 calendar days after receiving the request.
(2 CCR. §7297.4[a][6))

A. arents” Dual loyment

Where both parents are entitled to family care and medical leave and both are City
employees, allowable leave for the birth, adoption, or foster care placement of their child
is limited to a total of 12 workweeks in a 12-month period between the two employees.
Their family care and medical Jeave entitlement is not limited or combined for any other
qualifying purpose. (2 C.P.R. §7297.1[c])

B. Employee’s Status on Returning from Leave

Except as provided by law, on a timely return from family care and medical leave an
employee is entitled to be returned to the same position the employee held when leave
commenced, or to an equivalent position with equivalent benefits, pay, and other terms
and conditions of employment. An employee has no right to return to the same position.
An employee has no greater right to reinstatement than if the employee had been
continuously employed during the leave period. The leave shall not constitute a break in
service for purposes of longevity or seniority under any memorandum of understanding,
City policy, or any employee benefit plan. (Government Code §12945.2[g]; 29 C.F.R.
§825.214-219; 2 C.CR. §7297.5[£))

Vu. PREGNANCY DISABILITY LEAVE AND BONDING LEAVE

A. Pregnancy disability means that, in the opinion of her health care provider, an employee
is unable because of pregnancy to work at all or is unable to perform any one or more of
the essential functions of her job or to perform those functions without undue risk to
herself, the successful completion of her pregnancy, or to other persons. Pregnancy
disability also includes severe “morning sickness” and time off needed for prenatal care.

99
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 1

 

Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy
Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave Al-567 9

1. Duration of Leave

a. An employee is entitled to up to four months of leave for the period(s) of
time the employee is actually disabled by pregnancy, childbirth, or related
medical conditions.

b. Pregnancy disability leave may be taken as needed intermittently or on a
reduced work schedule when medically advisable, as determined by the
employee’s health care provider. Only the amount of leave actually taken
may be counted toward the four months of leave to which the employee is
entitled.

2. Eligibility for Leave

There is no length-of-service requirement before an employee disabled by
pregnancy is entitled to a pregnancy disability leave.

B. Transfer

The City will grant the transfer request of an employee affected by pregnancy to a less
strenuous or hazardous position or to less strenuous or hazardous duties if both of the
following conditions are met:

1. The employee’s request is based on her health care provider's certification that a
transfer is medically advisable; and

2. The City can reasonably accommodate a transfer. Any duty assignments resulting
from an approved transfer request under this section will be determined by the
City Manager or the City Manager’s designee.

Cc. Eligibility for Transfer

There is no length of service requirement before an employee affected by pregnancy is
eligible for a transfer under this section.

L Transfer to Accommodate Intermittent Leave or a Reduced Work Schedule

If it is medically advisable for an employee to take intermittent leave or leave on
a reduced work schedule and it is foreseeable based on planned medical
treatment because of pregnancy, the City may require the employee to transfer
temporarily to an available alternative position, This alternative position must
have the equivalent rate of pay and benefits, the employee must be qualified for
the position, and it must better accommodate recurring periods of leave than the
employee’s regular assignment, The temporary assignment does not have to
have equivalent duties. Transfer to an alternative position may include altering
an existing job to accommodate better the employee’s need for intermittent leave
or reduced work schedule.

100
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between-CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 1

Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy
Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave AI-567 10

 

2. Right to Reinstatement After Transfer

When the employee’s health care provider certifies that there is no further
medical need for the transfer, intermittent leave, or leave on a reduced work
schedule, the employee must be reinstated to her same or comparable position in
accordance with Article VII F.

3. Requesting Leave or Transfer

a. An employee shall provide at least verbal notice sufficient to inform the City
of the employee’s need for pregnancy disability leave or transfer, and the
leave’s/transfer’s anticipated timing and duration.

b. An employee must provide at least 30 days advance notice before the
leave/transfer is needed if the need for the leave or transfer is foreseeable. If
30 days advance notice is not practicable, for example because the employee
does not know approximately when the leave/transfer will be required to
begin, a change in circumstances, or a medical emergency, notice must be
given as soon as practicable.

c. The employee shall consult with the City and make a reasonable effort to
schedule any planned medical treatment or supervision so as to minimize
disruptions to the City’s operations. Scheduling, however, shall be subject to
the employee’s health care provider’s approval.

=

‘The City shall respond to the request as soon as practicable and in any event
no later than 10 calendar days after receiving the request. The City will try
to respond to the leave request before the date the leave is due to begin.
Once given, approval shall be deemed retroactive to the date of the first day
of the leave,

D. Medical Certification

1. A request for a pregnancy disability leave or transfer must be supported by medical
certification,

2. A medical certification for a pregnancy disability leave is sufficient if it contains:
a, The date the employee became disabled due to pregnancy;
b. The probable duration of the period(s) of disability; and
c. An explanatory statement that, due to the disability, the employee is unable
to work at all or is unable to perform any one or more of the. essential

functions of her position without undue risk to herself, the successful
completion of her pregnancy, or to other persons.

101
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 1

Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy
Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave AL-567 u

 

3. A medical certification indicating that it is medically advisable for the employee to
be transferred to a less strenuous or hazardous position or to less strenuous or
hazardous duties is sufficient if it contains:

a. The date the need to transfer became medically advisable;
b. The probable duration of the period(s) of the need for the transfer; and

c. An explanatory statement that, due to the employee’s pregnancy, the
transfer is medically advisable.

E. Te f Pre} Disabilit av

1, A pregnancy disability leave is unpaid except that an employee shall be required to
use all but 10 days of her accrued and accumulated sick leave during the otherwise
unpaid pregnancy disability leave, An employee may choose to use any accrued sick
leave, vacation, or other accrued paid personal time off that the employee is
otherwise eligible to use during the otherwise unpaid pregnancy disability leave.

2. During unpaid pregnancy disability leave, the employee is entitled to accrue seniority
and to participate in all employee benefit plans to the same extent and under the same
conditions as would apply to any other unpaid disability leave under established City
policy or memorandum of understanding.

3. During any portion of a pregnancy disability leave that an employee is using other
accrued paid leave, the employee is entitled to accrue seniority and to participate in
all employee benefit plans to the same extent and under the same conditions as apply
to any paid sick leave, vacation, or other paid time off under established City policy
or memorandum of understanding.

4. During any portion of a pregnancy disability leave that is also an FMLA leave, the
City will continue to provide and pay for group health benefits on the same basis as
coverage would have been provided had the employee been in paid status. When the
employee has exhausted any FMLA portion of the leave and the employee continues
on unpaid pregnancy disability leave only, the employee’s entitlement to continued
heath benefit coverage will be the same as any other employee on an unpaid
disability leave of absence.

5. An employee returning from pregnancy disability leave shall retum with no less

seniority than the employee had when the leave began for purposes of layoff, recall,
promotion, job assignment, and seniority-related benefits.

102
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 1

Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy
Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave AI-567 2

6. The employee shall retain employee status while on pregnancy disability leave. The
leave shall not constitute a break in service for purposes of longevity and/or seniority
under any memorandum of understanding or under any employee benefit plan.
Benefits must be resumed upon the employee’s reinstatement in the same manner and
at the same levels as provided when the leave began, without any new qualifying
conditions.

7. As a condition of the employee's return to work from pregnancy disability leave or
transfer, the employee must obtain a release to return to work from her health care
provider stating that she is able to resume her original job duties.

F. Right to Reinstatement from Pregnancy Disability Leave/Transfer

1. Subject to state law and regulations, an employee returning from a pregnancy
disability leave or transfer is usually entitled to reinstatement to the same position. If
the City is excused by law from reinstating her to the same position, the employee is
usually entitled to reinstatement to a comparable position.

2. Reinstatement to the Same Position

An employee has no greater right to reinstatement to the same position or to other
benefits and conditions of employment than if the employee had been continuously
employed in her position during the leave or transfer period. ‘The City may refuse to
Teinstate the employee to her same position or duties for either of the following
reasons:

a. At the time she requests reinstatement, the employee would not
otherwise have been employed in her same position for legitimate
business reasons unrelated to the employee’s pregnancy disability leave
or transfer, such as a layoff.

b. Each means of preserving the job or duties for the employee, such as
leaving it unfilled or filling it with a temporary employee, would
substantially undermine the City’s ability to operate safely and
efficiently.

3. Reinstatement to a Comparable Position

An employee has no greater right to reinstatement to a comparable position or to
other benefits and conditions of employment than an employee who has been
continuously employed in another position that is being eliminated. If the City is
excused from reinstating an employee to her same position, or to the same duties,
under Article VII F-2 then the City will reinstate the employee to a comparable
position unless either of the following occurs:

a, No comparable position is available; or

103
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 1

Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy
Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave AL-567 13

b. Ifthe employee is returning from a pregnancy disability leave that does
not qualify as an FMLA leave, a comparable position is available, but
filling the available position with the returning employee would
substantially undermine the City’s ability to operate safely and
efficiently.

4. If an employee exhausts all available leaves and is still disabled by pregnancy and
unable to return to work, the employee’s reinstatement rights are the same as the
reinstatement rights of any other similarly situated employee.

G. Relationship of Pregnancy Disability Leave to FMLA, CFRA. and Other Leaves

1, Any period of incapacity or treatment due to pregnancy, including prenatal care, is a
“serious health condition” under the FMLA. An employee’s unpaid pregnancy
disability leave will run concurrently with unpaid FMLA leave, up to a maximum of
12 workweeks, and will also run concurrently with any accrued paid leave the
employee is required to use or elects to use under Article VII E above,

2. Bonding/C} ve

a. An employee’s own disability due to pregnancy, childbirth, or related
medical conditions is not included as a “serious health condition”
under the CFRA. At the end of the employee’s period(s) of pregnancy
disability, or at the end of four months pregnancy disability leave,
whichever occurs first, a CFRA-eligible employee may, request to take
unpaid CFRA leave of up to 12 workweeks for reason of the birth of
her child, if the child has been born by this date.

b. CFRA leave for bonding with the child does not require that either the
employee or the child have a serious health condition. There is also no
requirement that the employee no longer be disabled by her. pregnancy
before taking CFRA leave for reason of the birth of her child.

c. The City may, but is not required to, grant unpaid CFRA leave if an
employee continues to be disabled after exhaustion of pregnancy
disability leave and prior to the birth of her child.

3. Maximum Entitlement

The maximum possible entitlement for qualified and eligible employees for both
Pregnancy disability leave under FMLA, state law, and this AI and CFRA leave for
the reason of the birth of the child is four months and 12 workweeks.

104
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 1

 

Family Care and Medical Leave, Pregnancy

Disability Leave, and Paid Family Leave AI-567 14

VIL. ‘EGRATION OF DISABILITY INS! ICE COVERAGE AND PAID LEAVES

An employee may supplement any disability insurance benefits paid under a City provided plan
or SDI with accumulated sick leave and vacation to the extent necessary to make up the
difference between the amount of insurance benefits paid and the normal weekly base pay for
each week of disability.

DEBORAH EDGERLY
City Administrator

105

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

 

VERSION 10
DEPARTMENTAL Effective Date:
GENERAL 28 Apr 08
ORDER

Evaluation Coordinator:
B-4 BOS Deputy Chief
Index as: Evaluation Due Date:
dd mmm 08

Personnel Assignments, Selection
Process, and Transfers Automatic Revision Cycle:

2 Years

‘TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

L DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY

 
 
 
  
    
 
   
 
 

A. Applicable Members...
B. Duration of Assignment
Cc Exempt Assignment......
D. Home Base
E. Intra-Divisional Transfer (Re-Assignmnent
F
G.
H. Operating Principles.
1. Order of Merit List
J.
K.
TL, POLICY... .eessssseesssnvecsneressen eesaneecsvecennesansecnsvecassscoussecsnsnecssnecsonseccenesecsnnseneeseneessseessonees 5

I GENERAL TRANSFER PROCEDURES.
A. OPFICETS ..esersssesserersesssessarssssseeeneeeseen

  
  
  
   

2. One (1) Year Rule
B. Sergeant ......escsesseeesees
1. Initial Assignment After Promotion.
2. One (1) Year Rule

AAI AAAG

IV. TRANSFER LIST PROCEDURES

 

 

 
 

7
A. Personnel Desiring to Transfer. .7
B. Specialized Units... save <7
Cc. Unit Supervisor or Commander/Manager Responsibilities 8
D, Member Responsibilities....... 8
E. Personnel Division Responsibilities. 9

 

 

Vv. TL SELECTION PROCESS..

106
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

e
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 

VI.. ORDER OF MERIT LIST PROCEDURES...
A. Announcement and Application Process
B. Member Responsibilities ..
Cc Supervisor, Commander/Manager Respot

Vil. OML SELECTION PROCESS...
A Overall OML Testing Process

1. Testing Components and Weightin,

B. Testing Components

1 Written Test ..

 

 

 
 
 
  
 

 

 

  
 
  
 
  

Cc.
D.
E. Member Responsibilities ..
F, Transfer Limitations...
G. Where No OML Exists
VIIL. CAP EXTENSIONS ...csssssccssssesscssssnsssessscsssnnanecssceccsssnnenecescescsnevessecssssseseccescensnsnneese 15
IX. REMOVAL FROM ASSIGNMENT AS
A. Duration of Assignment ... 5
B. Voluntary Removal from "Assignment. 5
Cc. Involuntary Removal from Assignment .. 6
D. Permanent Elimination ..........cs 6
E Temporary Deactivation or Reduction in Staffing 6
F, Return to a Reactivated Unit 16
X. LOAN PROCEDURES... - AT
A Final Approving Authorit: 7
B. — Member Loaned............... 7
Cc No Applicable TLs or OML Exists 7
D. Unit Commander/Manager Responsibilitie: 7
E. Bureau Deputy Chief/Director Responsibilities . 7
F Personnel Division Procedures. 18

 

XI. LOAN EXTENSIONS.

XI. DEPARTMENT REORGANIZATION ...ccsssscssssssssssnvsossssssecsensscstsseseseaneesssnuseesessane 18

XII. ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS ....scsccsssssssnesconsescnsscsnssssscssnnssonssnesesnersnnnesnaecsnacssress 19
APPENDIX

 

ii

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

 

    

  

~~ VERSION 10
GEES Y) DEPARTMENTAL Effective Date:
Meare) GENERAL 28 Apr 08
ORDER
. Evaluation Coordinator:
B-4 BOS Deputy Chief
Index as: Evaluation Due Date:
dd-mmm 08
Personnel Assignments, Selection
Process, and Transfers Automatic Revision Cycle:

2 Years

 

PERSONNEL ASSIGNMENTS, SELECTION PROCESSES, AND TRANSFERS

The purpose of this order is to set forth Departmental policy and procedures to permit
members of the rank of Police Officer and Sergeant to transfer to and from assignments in a
manner that enhances their professional development and personal growth while adding
value to the organization’s effectiveness and improved job satisfaction. Additionally, this
order describes the knowledge, skills, and abilities that are required to transfer to
assignments other than the Patrol Division.

L DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY
A. Applicable Members

This policy applies to all members of the rank of Police Officer and Sergeant
of Police classifications.

B. Duration of Assignment (“Cap”)
The length of time a member may be in an assignment (For synopsis of Cap
lengths by type of assignment, refer to the Transfer Policy Summary
Worksheet — Appendix).

Cc. Exempt Assignment
An assignment that is not subject to a Transfer List (TL) or Order of Merit
List (OML) process. Members are selected for such assignments at the
discretion of the Chief of Police.

D. Home Base

The principle organizational unit to which both police officers and sergeants
are assigned is the Patrol Division, not to include T/L or OML assignments.

Page | of 21

108

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

E Intra-Divisional Transfers (Re-Assignment)

The assignment of a member from one unit to another within the same
division.

F Loan
The temporary transfer of a member from one organizational unit to another
for a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days, without authorization by
the Chief of Police.

G. Matrix

A selection criteria survey that gauges basic historical performance measures
for individual members.

The unit supervisor or commander/manager who announces a vacant T/L or
OML position shall-prepare a Matrix for each applicant at the time he/she is
being considered for transfer. The matrix shall include the following
performance measures for the period of three (3) years prior to the selection
date (T/L) or the application closing date (OML):

1. Felony Arrests Made — Total number.

2. Misdemeanor Arrests Made ~ Total number.

3. Citations Issued — Total number.

4, Sick Leave Used — Measured in total number of incidents and hours
of each incident. (Do not include other Leaves of Absences)

5. IAD Complaints, excluding unfounded and exonerated — Total
number.

6. Preventable Vehicle Collisions ~ Total number.

7. Positive/Negative Case Evaluations and Report Review Notices —

Total number.
8. Commendations, Awards, and Letters of Appreciation;
9. Problem solving projects completed;

10, Departmental seniority;

Page 2 of 21

109
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

11. Patrol Division Experience — Uniformed Patrol Division assignments
as a supervisor, patrol officer, patrol rifle officer, canine handler, and
police technician. Time shall be listed in years to the nearest month;

12. Service Time and current status as a Field Training Officer;

13. Other proactive enforcement;-and

14. Performance Appraisals based on the last three (3) Overall
Performance Appraisals

a For T/L — For review to ensure eligibility.

b. For OML — Based on the last three Overall Performance
Appraisals, the following numerical credit shal] be
apportioned as follows:
1) Exceeds Expectations — 100 pts.
2) Fully Effective — 85 pts.
3) Improvement Needed — 60 pts.

a) Unacceptable — 0 pts.
H. Operating Principles

The Department's policy for selection to units outside the Patrol Division is
grounded in the following four principles:

1 Fairness

Personnel transfers shall be based on objective criteria and that bias
and favoritism shall not influence such decisions.

Page 3 of 21

110

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER. B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08
2. Transparency

The selection process for assignments outside of the Patrol Division
shall be conducted in an open and understandable manner. Testing
standards and the skills necessary to succeed in these assignments
shall be clearly articulated.

3. Merit

Selection processes shall be designed to ensure that an OML position

* is filled by a member whose aptitude, skills, and abilities best qualify
them for that specific OML position. Seniority shall be considered
only when two candidates have equivalent qualifications.

4, Responsibility

Unit commanders/managers who screen and test candidates for
assignments shall develop testing procedures that accurately gauge
candidates” skill sets, Commanders/managers shall select those
candidates whose test results indicate their aptitude, skills and/or
abilities most closely match job requirements.

L Order of Merit List (OML)
1.’ A list that is developed based on a competitive selection process in

order to fill vacant positions for selected out-of-Patrol assignments.
The OML is developed based on the results of Division/Section
selection processes and lists in numerical order those who scored
highest in the selection process (i.e., #1 on the OML) to who scored
lowest in that process. An OML shall be valid for:
a A maximum of 18 months;

b. Until the OML is exhausted (i.e., all members on the OML.
have been selected);

c. No other suitable candidates remain on the list; or
d. The list is voided.

2. OML positions shall not use “first come, first served” as a criteria for
selection.

3. Out-of-Patrol assignments that are subject to OMLs are listed in the
Transfer Policy Summary Sheet.

Page 4 of 21

111
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08
I Transfer
The assignment of a member from:
1. One bureau to another; or
2. From one division to another division within the same bureau.

K. Transfer List (TL)
A list that is developed based on “first-come, first-served” that is utilized to
fill out-of-Patrol assignments to which members may wish to transfer. Such
out-of-Patrol assignments are not subject to a competitive selection process.
TL assignments are detailed in the Transfer Policy Summary Sheet.
I. POLICY

A The Chief of Police shall be the final authority regarding transfers of a
member to TL, OML, or exempt assignments.

B. The Chief of Police may pass over an eligible member on a TL or OML for
reasons that include:

1. The member's skills and abilities do not enable the Department to
satisfactorily meet its needs, or

2. The member’s past performance deficiencies make the member
unsuitable for the position sought.

Cc Caps shall apply to newly promoted sergeants in their initial assignment.
D. Members shall return to the Patrol Division after reaching the maximum Cap.

A unit commander/manager may extend an assignment until the next Patrol
year for members who have an anniversary date falling after 1 Oct.

FE. Probationary members (to include sergeants) who are serving their initial
assignment in or out of Patrol may not submit a Transfer Request Form (TF-
605) until they have successfully completed their probationary period.

G. A member assigned to Patrol may have three (3) active TL or OML requests
on file at one time.

Page 5 of 21

112
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER. B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

H In those instances, where a member has submitted a request for a unit or
assignment which has subsequently been "deactivated," he/she may have.
their request remain active but such a request shall be considered one @ of
the member’s three (3) active requests.

L Members who have returned to Patrol from an out-of-Patrol assignment may
submit a Request for Transfer Form (TF-605) up to the limit.

J. Once a member is selected from a TL or OML and accepts an out-of-Patrol
assignment, the member shall only be allowed to have one (1) active request
(TL or OML) on file.

The member shall prepare and submit a Transfer Request Form (TF-605) or
an OML memorandum, if necessary, to the Personnel Division to meet the
one (1) active request requirement.

I. GENERAL TRANSFER PROCEDURES
A. Officers
1. Initial Three (3) Year Patrol Rule

In order to ensure that police officers develop a proper foundation
(based on experience and on-going training) in the police profession,
all new officers shall be required to complete a minimum of three (3)
years in Patrol (includes the time a member spends in the Field
Training Program). After completing the three (3) year minimum
requirement, officers are eligible to transfer to an out-of-Patrol
assignment. The three (3) year requirement may be waived with the
approval of the Chief of Police.

2. One (1) Year Rule

a, After reaching the Cap in an out-of-Patrol assignment, officers
shall be required to serve a minimum of one (1) year in Patrol
prior to being transferred to an out-of-Patrol assignment.

EXCEPTION: The Chief of Police or designee may approve
a transfer of an officer in an out-of-Patrol assignment to
another eligible out—of-Patrol assignment within the Cap. The
combined Cap of the two (2) assignments shall not exceed
eight (8) years.

' Shall not exceed 10 years if the Homicide Section is the out-of-Patrol assignment that will put the member

over the eight (8) year maximum, e.g,, Ifa member is in Homicide for between 8-10 years, the member cannot
transfer to another out-of-Patrol assignment, However, if the member is in an out-of-Patrol assignment for four

Page 6 of 21

113

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER, B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

 

b. A transfer or loan of a member assigned from Patrol to an out-
of-Patrol assignment exceeding 90 days shall not be
considered as “Patrol Time” for purposes of calculating the
minimum “one (1) year in Patrol” rule.

B. Sergeants
1. Initial Assignment After Promotion

Upon promotion to the rank of Sergeant of Police, the member’s first
assignment shall be at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

2. One (1) Year Rule

a. After reaching the Cap in an out-of-Patrol assignment,
sergeants shall be required to complete a minimum of one (1)
year in Patrol prior to being transferred to an out-of-Patrol
assignment,

EXCEPTION: The Chief of Police or designee may approve
a'transfer of a sergeant in an out-of-Patrol assignment to
another eligible out-of-Patrol assignment within the Cap. The .
combined Cap of the two assignments shal] not exceed eight
(8) years.”

b. A transfer or loan of a member from Patrol to a out-of-Patrol
assignment exceeding 90 days shall not be considered as
“Patrol Time” for purposes of calculating the minimum “one
(1) year in Patrol” rule. Exceptions to this rule shal] be
approved by the Chief of Police.

IV. TRANSFER LIST PROCEDURES
A. Personnel desiring to transfer from one organizational unit to another shall
submit a completed Request for Transfer Form (TF-605) to the Personnel
Division.

B. Specialized Units

 

(4) years and gets transferred to Homicide, the member may stay in Homicide for a total of four (4) years plus
two (2) one (1)-year extensions (total 10 years).

* Same as footnote 1.

Page 7 of 21

114

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

Members who are being considered for transfer or are in the process of
transferring to specific specialized units shall comply with the provisions of
DGO E-3.1, DEPARTMENT NOTIFICATION COMPLIANCE,
VERIFICATION.

Cc. Unit Supervisor or Commander/Manager Responsibilities
The unit supervisor or commander/manager:

1. May make internal staffing changes to fill vacant positions prior to
using the established transfer list.

2. Shall notify the top five (5) members on the T/L to determine his/her
continued interest in the available position, and if still interested,
advise the member they are being considered for transfer.

NOTE: Document notification due diligence.

3. Shall prepare a prospective member’s matrix to include the criteria in
Part I, G, of this order.

D. Member Responsibilities
1 Members shall respond within ten (10) calendar days of notification,
to the unit supervisor or Commander/manager making notification,
indicating they are still interested in the position.

2. Failure to respond within the prescribed period shall constitute a
declination by the member.

3, Members shall be responsible for removing their names from those
transfer lists for positions in which they are no longer interested.

* Information from iPAS may be obtained through the candidate's immediate supervisor or the PAS
Coordinator.

Page 8 of 21

115

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08
E. Personnel Division Responsibilities

The Personnel Division shall:
1 Time and date stamp each Transfer Request Form;
2. Update the Transfer List of the specific-assignment; x

3. Forward a copy of the time and date stamped Transfer Request Form
to:

a The submitting member; and

b. The unit supervisor or commander/manager of the unit for
which the T/L was established.

4, Maintain a copy of the Transfer Request Form(s) until the member:
a. Is transferred per the Transfer Request Form;
b. Requests removal from the list; or
. c. The TL expires.
V. TLSELECTION PROCESS
A The unit supervisor or commander/manager shall forward the completed
matrices and selection recommendations through the chain-of-command to
the Chief of Police. ‘
B. The final selection shall be made by the Chief of Police.

Cc. Any member who is passed over shall be notified. This shall not constitute a
refusal or declination by the member.

D. Any member who declines the same TL position on three (3) separate
occasions shall be removed from the TL for that position.

E. The unit supervisor or commander/manager shall: :

1. Document a transfer waiver on a Transfer List / Order of Merit List
Transfer Waiver Form (TF-605c);

2. Forward a copy to the Personnel Division;

Page 9 of 21

116
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER . B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

3. Forward a copy to the member; and

4. Retain a copy in the appropriate unit file.

F At no time shal] a member be permitted to transfer to a TL position unless the
member is able to perform the essential functions of the position, with or
without reasonable accommodation.*

G. Where no TL exists, the unit supervisor or commander/manager shall
announce the position in the Daily Bulletin. If, after the announcement, there
are no responses, the unit supervisor or commander/manager shall confer
with the Chief of Police who shall approve a transfer of an appropriate
member to meet the functional needs of the Department.

VI. ORDER OF MERIT LIST PROCEDURES

A. Announcement and Application Process

1 When a unit position vacancy is anticipated and no OML exists, the
supervisor, commander, or manager who oversees the position shall
prepare a Daily Bulletin announcement.

2. The announcement shall, at a minimum, contain the following
information:

a

b.

Position;

Normal work schedule (days off, work shift);

List of minimum skills and competencies required;
Additional desirable skills;

Duty description to include performance measures and
responsibilities;

Selection process and schedule;
Source materials for designated selection testing;

Training and travel requirements related to the position; and

 

* Reasonable accommodation is defined in accordance with the California Fair Employment and Housing Act
and the Americans with Disabilities Act.

Page 10 of 21

117
e

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B+4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

i Closing date/time for applications.

B. Member Responsibilities

Upon announcement of an OML position, interested members shall forward.
an OML Assignment Interest Form (TF-605e) through his/her chain-of-
command to the appropriate supervisor or commander/manager seeking
qualified candidates. No endorsements shall be documented on the Form.

Cc. Supervisor, Commander/Manager Responsibilities

The supervisor, commander, or manager shall:

1,

* Same footnote as:3.

At least 28 consecutive days prior to the application closing date,
ensure the announcement is forwarded for distribution as follows:

a Daily Bulletin for at least seven (7) consecutive days;
b. _ Personnel Division for posting in the Personnel Division; and
c. Department-wide email.

Receive and maintain all OML Assignment Interest Forms in unit
files.

Once the application period is closed, prepare and submit a plan for
the selection and testing process to his/her first-level
commander/manager for approval.

Prepare a matrix for each candidate to include the criteria in Part I, G,
of this order.°

Page 11 of 21

118
c%

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

VIL OML SELECTION PROCESS
A. Overall OML Testing Process

1 Testing Components and Weighting
Testing components that are applicable to each assignment are
designated in the Transfer Policy Summary Worksheet. There are four
(4) possible testing components:

a. Matrix (to include performance appraisal numerical credit);
b. Written Test;

c. Practical Test; and/or

d. Oral Board.

2. Every testing process shall use the matrix. If the matrix is the only
testing component, it shall be weighted as 100% of the testing
process,

3. The sum of multiple testing components shall be 100%.

B. Testing Components

Following the completion of a Matrix for each applicant, the supervisor or

commander/manager shall prepare and conduct an appropriate practical test

and/or an oral board as indicated in the Transfer Policy Summary Worksheet.

Any combination of the practical test and oral board results may be used to

determine if the applicant will be allowed to continue in the process.

1. Written Test
The content of the written test shall measure the aptitude, knowledge,
skills, and abilities required for the vacant position. All written tests
shall be reviewed and approved by the appropriate Division
Commander/Manager.

Unit commanders/managers conducting OML testing (written,

practical and/or oral boards) shall maintain completed and graded
tests until the expiration of the OML.

Page 12 of 21

119
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date

OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08
2. Practical Test

The content of a practical test shal] measure the aptitude, knowledge,
skills, and abilities required for the vacant position. A practical test
may be given to demonstrate the applicant’s ability to Perform the
essential tasks/job functions of the position.

3. Oral Board
The content of the oral interview shall focus on the applicant’s
documented work performance and his/her knowledge, skills, and
abilities that qualify him/her for the vacant position.
Cc. Placement List
1. At the completion of the testing process, the supervisor, commander
or manager shall tabulate the scores and prepare an Order of Merit
List (OML) based on their cumulative score in the testing process.
2. The OML shall be effective for 18 months after the published date of
the list or until the list is exhausted or no other suitable candidates
remain on the list, or the list is voided.
D. Unit Supervisor or Commander/Manager Responsibilities:
1 The supervisor or unit commander/manager shall
a. Personally contact the top five (5) eligible member(s) on the
OML and advise that he/she is being considered for transfer
when a vacant OML position needs to be filled to determine

his/her continued interest in the available position.

b. Document a transfer waiver on a Transfer List / Order of Merit
List Transfer Waiver Form (TF-605c);

c. Forward a copy to the member; and

d. Retain a copy in the appropriate unit file,

Page 13 of 21

120

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08
2. Specialized Units

Members who are being considered for transfer or are in the process
of transferring to specific specialized units shal] comply with the
provisions of DGO E-3.1, DEPARTMENT NOTIFICATION
COMPLIANCE VERIFICATION.

E. Member Responsibilities

1

Members shall respond within ten (10) calendar days of notification
to the unit supervisor or commander/manager making notification
indicating they are still interested in the assignment.

Failure to respond within the prescribed period will constitute a
declination by the member.

Members shall be responsible for renioving their names from OML

"positions in which they are no longer interested.

Any member who declines the same OML position on three (3)
separate occasions shall be removed from the OML for that position.

Unit commanders/managers are responsible for notifying the
Personnel Division in writing when a member declines an OML
position or is removed from an OML for this reason.

F. At no time shall a member be permitted to transfer to an OML position unless
the member is able to perform the essential functions of the position, with or
without reasonable accommodation’ as determined by the unit
commander/manager.

G. Where no OML exists, the unit supervisor or commander/manager shall
announce the position in the Daily Bulletin. If, after the announcement, there
are no responses, the unit supervisor or commander/manager shall confer
with the Chief of Police who shall approve a transfer of an appropriate
member to meet the functional needs of the Department.

§ Same as footnote 3.

Page 14 of 21

121
te

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

VIII. CAP EXTENSIONS

Out-of-Patrol assignments shall have a Cap of five (5) years in length. A Deputy
Chief Director may allow three (3)-one (1) year extensions, for a total of eight (8)
years in the assignment.

Members assigned to the Homicide Section shall have a Cap of eight (8) years. The
BOI Deputy Chief may allow two (2)-one (1) year extensions for a total of 10 years
in the assignment.

IX. REMOVAL FROM ASSIGNMENT
A. Duration of Assignment

Members shall be transferred out of an out-of-Patrol assignment in
accordance with the Caps listed in the Transfer Policy Summary Worksheet.

B. Voluntary Removal from Assignment

Ll Members who are in an out-of-Patrol assignment may voluntarily
request a transfer by providing a written request to be transferred to
Patrol at any time.

2. Unit commanders/managers shall endeavor to accommodate such
requests however, the functional needs of the Department shall
prevail.

3. An officer in an out-of-Patrol assignment may voluntarily transfer to
another eligible out-of-Patrol assignment, within the Cap, with the
approval of the Chief of Police or designee. The combined Cap of the
two assignments shall not exceed eight (8) years.

4. Any member who voluntarily transfers back to Patrol before the end

of the established out-of-Patrol Cap shall spend a minimum of one (1)
year in Patrol before moving to another out-of-Patrol assignment.

Page 15 of 21

122
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

_¢. Involuntary Removal from Assignment -
Members may be transferred for the following reasons:
1. Conduct

A member may be transferred when misconduct makes them unsuited
for continued service in his/her assignment.

2. Performance

A member may be transferred when he/she is performing at a less
than overall “Fully Effective” level.

D. Permanent Elimination of an Out-of-Patrol Assigned Position

If an out-of-Patrol position is eliminated, the member who held it shall be
eligible for another out-of-Patrol position without the one (1) year “Patrol
Time” requirement. The combined Cap of the two assignments shall not
exceed eight (8) years.

E. Temporary Deactivation or Reduction in Staffing of an Out-of-Patrol
Assigned Position

Ifa member is transferred as a result of a temporary deactivation of an out-
of-Patrol assignment, the member shall be placed on the existing transfer list
for the respective assignment based on unit seniority. The respective
member’s Cap time shall cease.

F Return to a Reactivated Unit

1 Members returning to an out-of-Patrol position that had been
temporary deactivated or reduced in staff shall be allowed to return,
provided the member remains eligible, to the unit to serve out his/her
remaining Cap time. The Department shall use the existing transfer
list to fill reactivated positions.

2. If any member, placed on the transfer list as a result of a temporary
deactivation and serving less than one (1) year in Patrol, declines the
transfer back to the reactivated unit, he/she shall be removed from the
transfer list.

3. If a member who was transferred, as a result of a position.

deactivation, has served one (1) year in Patrol, that member may
return to the reactivated unit as a new transfer.

Page 16 of 21

123
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

 

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER Be4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

X. LOAN PROCEDURES

A.

The Chief of Police shall be the final approving authority regarding
involuntary loans.

If possible, the member loaned shall be either the first eligible member on the
TL (for TL positions) or the first eligible member on the OML (for OML,
positions).

Ifno applicable TLs or OML exists, the Chief of Police shall approve loans
to meet the functional needs of the Department.

Unit Commander/Manager Responsibilities

A unit commander/manager who needs a loan of personnel shall submit a
justifying loan request to his/her Deputy Chief/Director requesting the loan.

The justifying loan request shall contain the following information:
1. Reason for loan;
2. Number of personnel. required; and

3. The number of days, up to 90 days, during which the loan shall be in
force and the duty hours,

Bureau Deputy Chief/Director Responsibilities

The Bureau Deputy Chief/Director to whom a loan request is submitted shall:

1. Endorse the request
If approved, the Bureau Deputy Chief/Director shall designate a
candidate from within his/her own bureau or, if none is available, the
request shal] be denied or forwarded to the Chief of Police with an
endorsement requesting that the loan be filled from another Bureau.
The loan shall be discussed at the weekly Personnel meeting.

2. Upon approval by the Chief of Police, the justifying letter shall be
forwarded to the Personnel Division.

The member shall be placed on the next issued Departmental

Personnel Order and become effective on the date designated by the
Chief of Police. .

Page 17 of 21

124
we

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

F. Personnel Division Procedures

1. The Personnel Division shall repoit the current status of loans on the
weekly Personnel Distribution Report (PDR). Loans shall be
designated on the Departmental Personnel Order in the same manner
as a regular transfer except in the column titled “Replacing” the words
“Loan Status” shall be entered with the loan expiration date. The
number of loans for the calendar year for each loaned member in the
PDR shall also be listed,

2 When the loan date expires, the Personnel Division shall
automatically place a loaned person’s name on the next Departmental
Personnel Distribution Report (PDR) transferring him/her back to
his/her previous organizational unit.
XI =LOAN EXTENSIONS
A. . Members are subject to only two (2) consecutive 90-day loans.

B. Unit commander/mangers shall ensure members on loan to their division/unit
shall not exceed 90 days without approved authorization.

c. Prior to the end of the first 90-day loan period, the unit commander/manager
may submit an extension request through the chain-of-command to the Chief
of Police for approval.

D. Upon approval, the Personnel Division shall automatically place a person’s
name on the next PDR extending the loan.

XII. DEPARTMENT REORGANIZATION
Notwithstanding Departmental reorganizations, a member’s letters for Transfer List

positions and standings on OMLs shall remain in effect. Renaming units or making
minor modifications to the job descriptions shall not nullify Transfer Lists or OMLs.

Page 18 of 21

125
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

XI. ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS

All rights to redress for Department compliance with procedures contained in this
policy shall be subject to the grievance procedure contained in the current
Memorandum of Understanding, except that such grievances shall not be subject to
Immediate Dispute Resolution, arbitration or any provisions of City Charter Section
910. The Chief of Police or designee shall be the final authority on all grievance
issues related to this order.

By Order of

Wayne G. Tucker
Chief of Police Date Signed:

Page 19 of 21

126

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 2

127

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
“ NOILVIDOSSV SYIDAIO ADITOd GNVTAVO Pur GNVIAVO AO ALID 4294124 QNTIGNVISUAGNN AO WAGNVIOWA

8C1

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT

 

 

Backgrounds/Recrui

APPENDIX

Transfer Policy Summary Worksheet

      

 

B4

 

 

 

 

Effective Date
28 Apr 08

 

 

 

BEO Admin

 

Chief of Staff.

NA

 

CID (See Included Units)’

<|<|<|<

~<|<|~<|-<

on

1O jm! }O

-<\z\z\z

Zz \z\<|jz

~<|<|<|z

z\<j2\z

 

 

Narcotics Charging _

 

Weapons Charging

 

CLASS

ala
=

 

Communications Supervisor

 

CRT

 

Facilities Dev Coordinator

 

Foot Patrol

Jen fen [on fen fon fox fon

 

FTO Coordinator

FTO exp is a prerequisite

 

Helicopter Unit

Chief may extend addit't 10 yrs.

 

Homicide

 

Intelligence

 

IAD

Exempt but subject to Cap.

 

Information Technology

 

K-9

 

OIG

 

Patrol Rifle Coordinator

PRO experience prerequisite

 

Problem Solving Officer

 

Public Information Officer

 

Ranger Unit Supervisor

 

Records and Warrants.

 

 

 

 

Fleet Tow Coordinator

 

~<|~<}z|<|-<|<|<|<|<|<|<|<|<|<|<|<|<}z|«]<|<

z|z|<|z|z|<|<|z|<|<|<|<|<|<|x|<I<|<|<|zlz2

 

 

 

4A fO(4/OlOjOlO|m|m10/O;O}4/OjOlA

iz \2z\2|\<|z/z\2z|<|z|Z\2\<|~|2|2\2|z\2 |Z }«|<

 

z\z\z|<|z|z\z|<|<|z|z|<|<|2\z\2\z\2\2\2|=

 

z\z|z|<|z|<|<|<|<1<|<|<|<!<|z|<|<|2|<|<|<

 

z\z|z\z\2\z|2|2\2|<|<|z\2|2|2z\2]2|Z2]2|\z/2

 

 

 

 

7 CID includes the following investigative units - Robbery, Assault, Property/Theft, Crime Analysis

Page 20 of 21

&@ LNAWHOVLLV
% NOLLVIDOSSY SYFIAAO JDT1Od ANVTAVO PU? UNVTAVO AO ALID 422194 QNIGNVISYTCGNN AO WAGNVYOWIA
6cI

DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER B-4 Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT 28 Apr 08

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Tow Hearing Officer
Warrant Officer,

 

~<|-<
z\z
lex
-1|-1
iz jz
Zz

 

 

ABAT

Gang Unit
Fugitive Unit
PAC.
SDU-1
TETE

 

 

 

 

 

<|<|<|<]<|<
<|<|<l<|<}z
jon fen fon fon foxfon
2/2 \Z2)Zz/2j2

 

 

SOS Supervisor
K-9 Coordinator
Reserve Coordinator
Tech. Coordinator
Traffic Division (See Included Units)*
Special Events Unit

 

K-9 handler exp prerequisite

 

 

Current Evidence Technician

 

 

IAjOjAlOlO} jOJO/O|AjOjo

~<|~< I< |< |< | 2
<|<|z|z|2|«
len on fon [on for fon
z\z\z|z\2z|2

 

 

Cadet Coordinator
In Service Training Officer
Range master
Recruit Training Officer
Taser Coordinator.
YFSD (See Included Units)°
Unidentified Assignments*** TBD | TBD | TBD
* With two (2)-one (1) year extensions = 10 years
“ The Chief of Police has the authority to extend a K-9 beyond the Cap to meet the functional needs of the Department.
“~ Any assignment not listed in this chart shall be categorized by the Chief of Police.

 

 

 

 

<|<|<|<}-<]<
I< |Z \<|2)\<|z2
erfen fon fon fen fon

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Blz|<\z\z[z]2 Z/Z\Zi2/Z)z IZjZ\2z\/Z/2z)\2 ZZ
Blz|<\<)~<\z|z zlz|<|2|</<| |<|<|<|2|<|z

4

3 |= |7|4/4/F/F IZ 12/2 |\2|2\2 IZ\2l2zjzj2z\2 z\2

IB|4/Ojojo|Ala

oS
la jz \-<|z\<jz\z2

4
4
io

 

* YESD include Domestic Violence / Physical Elder Abuse, Family Violence Intervention Unit, Missing Persons and Child Abduction Unit, Special Victims Unit, Vice
& Child Exploitation Unit, SAFE Task Force, PAL.

* Traffic Division includes Traffic Enforcement, Traffic Investigations, Traffic Safety & Crossing Guards, Vehicle Abatement, Abandoned Auto, Commercial Vehicle,
Fleet & Taxi, Scofflaw, and Bicycle Recovery.

Page 21 of 21

é INAWHOVLLV
ATTACHMENT 3

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
ON PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATIONS BETWEEN THE
CITY OF OAKLAND
AND
OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
JULY 1, 2015 — JUNE 30, 2019

130

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 3

Discrimination Prohibited. City and Association shall not discriminate in any way on account of
race, color, religion/religious creed, sex/gender, pregnancy, marital status, national
origin/ancestry, ages, physical and/or mental disability, medical condition, sexual
orientation, gender identity, military or veteran status, or status in any other group
protected by federal, state or local law.

Promotional Examinations

Scheduling. Stage 1 of each promotional examination normally will be held within thirty
(30) days prior to the date of expiration of the eligibility list for a classification. In
the event a promotional list is exhausted and that occurs more than ninety (90)
days before the expiration date of the list pursuant to this MOU, stage 1 will
commence within ninety (90) days of the date of exhaustion. In the event a
promotional list is exhausted less than ninety (90) days before the expiration date
of the list, stage 1 will commence within thirty (30) days of the expiration date of
the list. In all other circumstances the City retains the right and has the option to
extend the list for up to thirty (30) days to fill any existing vacancies. The City will
notify the Association if the list is so extended.

Sign-up. An eligible employees may sign up to take the next examination at any time
before the announcement of that examination, by sending a completed notice of
intent form stating his/her desire to the Personnel Office of the Police
Department. The Police Department will issue, with the announcement of an
examination, a list of employees who have submitted a notice of intent. Any
eligible employee whose name does not appear on the list may sign up for that
examination by submitting a notice of intent to compete (promotional exam) form
to the Police Personnel Office, within fourteen (14) calendar days from the
posting date of the announcement.

Announcement. The announcement for a promotional examination shall include a
general description of the examination portions and the weights assigned to
each.

Examination Eligibility. Applicants must serve as employees of the Oakland Police
Department for the time periods enumerated below to be eligible for the
respective promotional examination. Service at another police organization shall
not count toward the minimum years of service necessary to take the respective
examination.

Minimum Qualification Criteria:
a) Five (5) years as a Police Officer --- to Sergeant of Police; and

b) Three (3) years as Sergeant of Police --- to Lieutenant of Police; and

131
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 3

c) One (1) years as a Lieutenant of Police --- to Captain of Police.

The above periods of service eligibility shall be determined as of the closing date of the
application period.

Examination Weights. Weights of portions of a promotional examination shall be based
on a current specification/job analysis for the classification being examined, as
solely determined by the City.

Observers for promotional examinations shall be selected on the basis of the following
criteria:

a) Prior to the examination, the declared and agreed observer shall be
selected by the Chief of Police, the Director of Personnel and the
President of the Association.

b) The observer shall be an active or a retired police officer.

c) The observer may be from another law enforcement agency and shall
have held the rank at least one rank above that of the candidates being
examined.

d) Every reasonable effort shall be made to ensure a panel with a diverse
composition. .

There shall be one observer per examination.

a) The observer shall report to the City any and all suspected examination
process irregularities, including but not limited to those that may discriminate
on the account of race, color, religion/religious creed, sex/gender, pregnancy,
marital status, national origin/ancestry, ages, physical and/or mental disability,
medical condition, sexual orientation, gender identity, military or veteran
status, or status in any other group protected by federal, state or local law.
The Association is invited to attend this meeting.

The observer is required to report any suspected irregularities referenced in the
preceding paragraph to the Office of Personnel’s designated examination
administrator by the conclusion of the examination phase in which the alleged
irregularity occurs. If the exam administrator fails to address the observer's
concern to the observer's satisfaction, the observer shall promptly report the
concern to the Director of Personnel Resource Management.

If an observer fails to report the suspected irregularity to the examination
administrator by the conclusion of the examination phase in which the
suspected irregularity occurs, the observer must report the suspected

132
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 3

irregularity to the Director of Personnel Resource Management as soon as
reasonably possible.

b) The observer shall not report on nor disclose the content of an examination.

c) The observer shall not report on nor disclose the comparative performance of
candidates participating in an examination. The observer shall not discuss
the performance of an individual candidate, unless that candidate files a
grievance alleging discrimination or examination irregularities as defined in
Section 7.a, above. In that case, the City, and the observer will meet to
discuss the observer's observations regarding the candidate’s performance.
The Association is invited to attend this meeting.

d) The observer shall be present at all phases of the examination, including: the
training of the raters and the examination portions, except in the case of
simultaneous portions/exercises where the observer can physically watch
only one exercise without being disruptive. The scoring integration session
with the raters may be monitored by the observer.

e) An examination candidate shall have the right to exclude the observer from
any exercise, which requires the candidate to perform alone before any
rater(s).

f) The observer is strictly limited to passively observe and shall not talk, disrupt,
provide any information or clues to any candidate or rater during the
examination process, nor interrupt proceedings in progress, or otherwise
disturb the examination process.

g) The observer shall at all times protect the confidentiality of the examination
content and each and every candidate’s performance.

8. Conduct of Examinations.

a) Some portion of each promotional examination shall be an objective
written test. “Objective” means a test that has a predetermined list of
correct answers, which eliminates subjective opinion or judgment in the
scoring process.

b) It is the intent of the parties to maintain candidate anonymity during the
testing/scoring process of promotional examinations.  Candidate’s
anonymity in the scoring of promotional examinations shall be
accomplished as follows:

In the written portion of the examination, candidates shall sign in and
receive a pre-numbered test package containing all test materials for this

133
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION: *
c)

qd)

e)

e)

9)

ATTACHMENT 3

portion of the examination. As soon as possible after the last candidate
has signed in, the list of candidates with their test identification numbers
shall be sealed in a tamperproof envelope and retained by the Office of
Personnel for future identification in the testing process.

As soon as practicable, after the final weighted scale scores, including all
challenges, item analysis, etc. have been determined, the envelope
containing the list of candidates and their test identification numbers shall
be opened in the presence of the neutral observer, and the candidate’s
name shall be linked to his/her ID number for the written test score. The
City will provide a copy of the scale ranked scores to the neutral observer
immediately upon completion of it.

If the examination is given in stages, for any stage requiring rating sheets
and/or any other scoring instruments, the same numbered process and
test materials procedures as outlined above shall be employed.

Candidates shall be required to complete a confidentiality agreement,
which precludes candidates from sharing test information until the
examination in progress is completed. Candidates violating the
confidentiality agreement will have their names removed from the eligibility
list.

Pass point shall be established solely at City discretion and will be
available for review by the Association only, within a reasonable time
period after completion of the promotional exam.

To the extent possible, the same assessors will be used to rate all of the
candidates in exam process for each respective exercise.

Sergeant of Police promotional examination shall use the following merit
points for service as an FTO:

i. Any employee serving in good standing as a FTO, for the Oakland
Police Department, for a minimum of one (1) year, in his/her prior five
(5) years of service as of the closing date of the application period for
the Sergeant of Police promotional examination shall receive one (1)
additional point to his/her cumulative raw score.

ii. Any employee serving in good standing as an active FTO, for the
Oakland Police Department, in excess of two (2) years in his/her prior
five (5) years of service as of the closing date of the application period
for the Sergeant of Police promotional examination, shall receive two
(2) additional points to his/her final score.

Examinations shall be completed according to the following timeliness:

134
te

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
ATTACHMENT 3

Sergeants: Ninety (90) days from the commencement of stage 1
to list publication.

Lieutenants: Sixty (60) days from the commencement of stage 1 to
list publication.

Captain: Forty-five (45) days from the commencement of stage 1
to list publication.

h) Upon written request of an exam candidate, the City will provide the
candidate and the OPOA a copy of its multiple choice key review which
provides explanations for actions taken on test questions which are
challenged, miskeyed, double keyed and/or eliminated.

i) Nothing in this agreement shall preclude the OPOA and the City, after
consultation prior to an examination, from mutually agreeing to alternate
methods, dates or any other modifications to provisions of this agreement
with regard to conduct of examinations, including but not limited to
extending the time deadlines noted above.

9. Duration of Eligibility Lists. Eligibility lists established by promotional
examinations shall be in effect for a period of twelve (12) months. The list may be

extended as defined in Section B. 1.

10. Certification of Eligibility to Fill Vacancies.
In the case of certification from a promotional list to fill a position, for which no reinstatement list

exists, the Direct of Personnel Resource Management shall certify to the appointing authority
five (5) names. In the case of certification from such lists to fill multiple vacancies, the Director
shall certify a number of names equal to the number of vacancies to be filled and four (4)
additional names; provided, however, that a a lesser number may be certified when there is not
the required number on the eligible list.

No person shall be certified from an eligible list more than six (6) times for the same or a similar
position, except at the request of an appointing authority, provided that certification for
temporary services shall not be counted as one of such certifications.

Dispute Resolution. If a dispute arises involving the interpretation or application of this
Promotional MOU, that dispute shall be resolved as provided by the existing Grievance
Procedure contained in the current MOU.

D. Term. This Promotional MOU shall become effective July 1, 2015 and shall remain in
effect for a period of four (4) years, terminating on June 30, 2019.

135
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION ™*
ATTACHMENT 3

PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

136
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 4

 

OAKLAND CITY COUNCIL WMamasg 7
RESOLUTION No. 7704

C.M.S. all ck

  

    
 

 

RESOLUTION EXTENDING CERTAIN PAY AND BENEFITS ‘ss
TO CITY EMPLOYEE MEMBERS OF THE MILITARY yy 6%
RESERVE RECALLED TO ACTIVE DUTY IN RESPONSE TO ee
THE EVENTS OF SEPTEMBER 11, 2001 %, %
‘Oo tT

WHEREAS, the President of the United States has signed an order to recall persons in the
military reserve to active duty in order to combat the terrorist threat to our nation; and

“WHEREAS, some of those reservists are City employees; and

WHEREAS, the City of Oakland currently: provides military leave continuance of certain pay
and benefits for a maximum of 30 calendar days per fiscal I year to employees who have been in
bean o

City service for at least one (1) year and have dered to report to active duty; and

‘WHEREAS, the City Council believes it to be in the public interest to ensure that those
employees recalled to active duty during this crisis are able to continue providing for their
( families while in the service of their country without undue hardship or loss; an

several City employees have been recalled to active military duty and have or are
near to exhausting the 30 calendar days of military leave pay and benefits currently provided for;
now, therefore, be it

RESOLVED: That any full-time employee of the City of Oakland who has a least one year of
service or one year of combined active military service and City service and is involuntarily
ordered to active duty shalt continue to receive military leave pay and benefits for a period of up
to 90 additional. calendar days; and be it .

FURTHER RESOLVED: That the military leave pay provided for by this resolution shall be
discounted by the amount of active duty military Day an allowances received by the employee
such that the employee does not receive more than the employee's City base pay; and be it

FURTHER RESOLVED: That the City Council does hereby delegate to the City Manager the
authority to consult and confer with the City's employee organizations as to the practical details
of calculating the appropriate amount of military leave pay provided for by this resolution such
that the employee does not receive more in combined military leave pay and active duty military
Pay than the employee's City base pay, and to resolve any disputes that arise with regard to same;

137

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 4

Recall to Active Duty Page 2

' FURTHER RESOLVED: That the military leave benefits (as distinguished from military leave
pay) provided by this resolution shall be the same as those currently provided during the initial
0 days of military leave; and be it .

FURTHER RESOLVED: That the City Manager may at his discretion extend the additional
period of military leave pay and benefits provided by this resolution, but in no case beyond a total
period of one year for any employee; e it

FURTHER RESOLVED: That the City Council will consider further recommendations on this
matter that ate deemed ap, ‘iate by the City Manager after consultation with City staff and
employee organizations; and be it

FURTHER RESOLVED: That this resolution is intended to address a specific, limited need,
and is not intended to create a permanent increased military leave benefit or beneficial past
practice.

 

IN-COUNCIL, OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA, MAR 262002 20:

PASSED BY THE FOLLOWING VOTE: /

AYES- BRUNNER, UHAIYG, MAYNE, NADEL, SPEES, REID, (Wand PRESIDENT DE LA FUENTE — C,
NOES-
ABSENT-
ABSTENTION-

Faxagel -Chana, win -2

    
  

ATTESK.
CEDA FLOYD
City Clerk and Clerk of

of the City of Oakland, Gafifornia

 

138
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 5

Letter of Understanding
. Between the
Oakland Police Officers’ Association .
and the Clty of Oakland.

The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations for a successor MOU (MOU
-expired on June 30, 2015) they reached an accord on how to resolve the current
dispute between the OPOA and the City concerning the City's claim thatthe City.
overpaid the OPOA for dental premiums as set forth in A below. The parties also
“agreed to continue fo negotiate the terms of the dental provision of the MOU and
absent an agreement arbitrate that issue as set forth in B below, and further
reférenced in Article V.2.B. Dental insurance of the MOU. Specifically, on October
43, 2015, the parties agreed as follows:"  ~

A. “City Claim -The parties agree to arbitrate within 120 calendar days the -
dental claim with the OPOA in a separate, non-successor negotiation,
non-MOU related atbltration, The parties will engage in mutual

. document discovery for this arbitration.
' Q B. Dental Plan Reimbursement — The parties agree to arbitrate within 120
: . calendar days separate from the City claim In.A (above): that will
determine the relmbursement claims and accounting methodology the
_parties should use under the current MOU language. .
- G. Dental Plan-- Current plan of reirnbursement remains in effect unless
the parties mutually agree to a change in plan.”

Therefore, the parties affirm the October 13" agreement and that the 120 calendar
days referenced above shall commence upon f full ratification (first City Council
: Feading).

City Of Oakland

Boal Has

‘Daled Dien 20308

 

139
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
ATTACHMENT 6

 

 

 

 

 

eH ‘Approved at to For and Legeliy
OFFICE of HER! chene ATTACHMENT?
itis NOV =§ PH 32 ity Attorney
OAKLAND CITY COUNCIL

ResoLuTionNo,_85885 cms.

 

RESOLUTION APPROVING THE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE CITY OF OAKLAND AND THE OAKLAND POLICE
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION FOR EMPLOYEES IN CLASSIFICATIONS IN
UNITS PP1 AND PT1, COVERING THE PERIOD OF JULY 1, 2015 TO JUNE.30,
2019

WHEREAS, the Memorandum of Understanding to be entered into between the City of
Oakland and the Oakland Police Officers’ Association has been presented to the City Council for
determination pursuant to Section 3505.1 of the Government Code.of the State of California: and

WHEREAS, the key provisions of the Memorandum of Understanding are described in
the Report from the City Administrator dated November 2, 2015; and

WHEREAS, the terms and conditions contained in said Memorandum of Understanding
are in the best interests of the City; now, therefore, be it

RESOLVED: That said agreement be, and is, hereby approved; and be it.

FURTHER RESOLVED: That the provisions of said Memorandum of Understanding
are effective as of July 1, 2015.

IN COUNCIL, OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA, Nov 1 ? 2015
PASSED BY THE FOLLOWING VOTE:

AYES - BROOKS, CAMPBELLWASHINGTON, GALLO, GUILLEN, KALB, KAPLAN, REID and
PRESIDENT GIBSON MCELHANEY .__ zy

Noes - (75,
ABSENT -

ABSTENTION - 6

     

LaTonda Simmons
City Clerk and Clerk of the Council
of the City of Oakland, California

   

CERTIFIED COPY
Legatift that this

 

Ss

140
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

*
ATTACHMENT 6

   
  

 

usin idmasodlatea atetin Het amen
eee ChyaCCa A AAC

 

   

Jas Sennen all ae
ms

ial ee ,

—

 

   

   
 

141
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

c%
ATTACHMENT 6

    
   

   
 

yen mde an
aes

Spool emyaisieen ay a poems
oo edi ts ay lear es tne
. Sarna nga sy ey lay

‘ aan ocean ip Beto enlete sete
ee

  

 

: .
BM I aulbibetlon, Yon (inde, Slanse or phiaes of thiaDtdinan
Pe coer recat
nll nsaot ately of ena ora fo
Connell neath fe woulld have: nie sectton,
pba ified or moonlit r .

  
 
 

       
    

142
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between CITY OF OAKLAND and OAKLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION *
