MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

Between

THE METROPOLITAN GOVERNMENT OF
NASHVILLE AND DAVIDSON COUNTY

And

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE,
ANDREW JACKSON LODGE #5

Representing

Sworn members of the Metropolitan Nashville-Davidson
County Police Department

Effective July 1, 2009 to June 30, 2012
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE

Preamble......

 
  

Article 1. Recognition.
Article 2. Union Membership................cc0c0ceeccee cee ceecee eee con teeveneenveretnennneee

 

5
Article 3. Non-Discrimination.............0006.cc0 oe coe eee ete ee eter eecenee ene
Article 4. Listed Representatives............ 2.0 ceceecccc ccc cce cee cee cee cee ceeceevensenenscttecseteceteteateneeD
Article 5. Assignment of UNION President...... 2.2.00... 0.0 ccc cece cece ces tee etree cee cenceeeee cre nee ene
Article 6. Access to METRO Property... 2.0.00... cece cece cee terre etree eee tener terete ee AO
Article 7. Physical Bulletin Boards.....0..0..0..0cc cece cee cee cee ceeceecesces ces cus ere eae seeaeeaveteeserees 41
Article 8. Use of Electronic Mail/Folder/Bulletin Boards.............0...0. ccc ceecc teeter 12
Article 9. Worksite Meetings.
Article 10. Personnel Polic:

 

 

Article 11. Corrective Action and Discipline.

 

Article 12. Grievances/Right to Representation.............0.c:ccceveeseeeeeceeeeeeenseneeeresensersenr eed 7
Article 13. Payroll Deduction Of Dues.............c cesses cece ceeceeceeceeseeeeeeentneserseeessteaee aren 1B
Article 14. Wages and Benefits... beee cee eeeteseeeeeeeuees
Article 15. Mutual Rights and Obligations cece ee tee esse nesses eeeeeeeeeseseeeseeeseceeee severe 20
Article 16. Youth Camp Assignment.............0....000c tec cee tere eee etree eens cecetetereeeeee 2d
Article 17. Severability... vee eee seer eee eeeeeeeee sate eeeeee cee eeeeeesaeeeeeeseeeceeuaecereeeaee tees en
Article 18. Wages, Benefits ts & Negotiations.
Article 19. Duration.....

 

 

 
PREAMBLE

This Memorandum of Understanding (hereafter “MOU”) is made and entered into by
and between the Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County (METRO)
and the Fraternal Order of Police, Andrew Jackson Lodge #5, (hereinafter “UNION’”).

The parties enter into this MOU for the purpose of establishing a harmonious and
cooperative relationship between METRO and the UNION, and to provide for equitable
and peaceful adjustment of differences which may arise, and to more effectively carry
out the personnel policy and administration of the Metropolitan Charter, and the Rules
and Policies of the Civil Service Commission.

Employees of the Metropolitan Government affected by this MOU shall have, and be
protected in the exercise of the right, freely and without fear of penalty or reprisal, to
meet and confer through representatives of their own choosing on questions of wages,
hours, retirement benefits and all other terms and conditions of employment.

It is recognized and agreed by the parties that any term or provision defined or stated
herein, contained herein, or regulated by the provisions of any lawful governing
authority, shall be considered modified, amended, or deleted, as applicable herein,
should that term, provision or condition be modified, amended or deleted in or from the
provisions of that governing authority. These governing authorities shall include, but are
not limited to, any state and federal statutes and/or regulations derived therefrom,
regulations and procedures of the Metropolitan Nashville Police Department, Rules and
Policies of the Metropolitan Government Civil Service Commission, the Metropolitan
Government Benefit Board or any other controlling Metropolitan Government entity.

This MOU does not confer any additional right or standing on any individual employee
and does not constitute a law, ordinance, resolution, executive order, Civil Service Rule
or written policy for the purposes of filing any grievance or other dispute.

This MOU is entered into between the parties with the understanding that METRO, like
all Tennessee municipal governments, has no statutory authority to enter into binding
agreements with its employees.
14

1.2

1.3

1.4

ARTICLE 1 - RECOGNITION

METRO recognizes and acknowledges that the UNION is the authorized
Representative of all sworn personnel of the Metropolitan Police Department
below the rank of Captain. METRO further recognizes that the UNION is the
authorized Representative of all sworn personnel of the Metropolitan Police
Department at the rank of Captain and above on all matters allowed by this MOU
except those pertaining to selection, promotion and managerial issues. METRO
further recognizes and agrees to meet with the UNION.

This MOU does not apply to employees outside the represented unit as defined
in Paragraph 1 of this Article.

This MOU shall not prejudice the rights of any employee to refrain from engaging
in membership or activity of the named UNION and shall not prejudice any right
guaranteed to employees by the Metropolitan Charter or the Metropolitan Civil
Service Rules and Policies.

It is understood that the sole purpose of this MOU is to allow the UNION to
represent all employees who desire to be represented in the above-described
represented unit in the exercise of the rights of said employees expressly set
forth in Rules and Policies of the Metropolitan Civil Service Commission, and the
provisions of this MOU.
2.1

ARTICLE 2 - UNION MEMBERSHIP

It is agreed that any employee is free to join and assist the UNION without fear of
retaliation of any kind. No department supervisor or agent of METRO and no
member, Listed Representative, or agent of the Union shall interfere with,
restrain, coerce, or intimidate an employee in the exercise of his/her right to join
or refrain from joining the UNION. No department supervisor or representative of
METRO and no member, Listed Representative or agent of the Union shall
discriminate against any employee with regard to employment, or the terms and
conditions of employment, including but not limited to promotions because
he/she has formed, joined, or chosen to be represented by the UNION, served as
a Listed Representative, or because he/she has given testimony or taken part in
any grievance procedure or other hearing, negotiation or conference on behalf of
the UNION, or refrained from engaging in any such activity.
3.1

ARTICLE 3 - NON-DISCRIMINATION

The provisions of this MOU, in accordance with applicable Federal and State
Laws, shall be applied equally to all ernployees without discrimination as to race,
color, national origin, sex, age, religion or disability. The UNION agrees to abide
by the law as it applies to the UNION’s responsibility to apply this provision of the
MOU to all employees within the represented unit as defined above.
ARTICLE 4 - LISTED REPRESENTATIVES

4.1 | METRO agrees to recognize duly authorized UNION Listed Representatives in
the representation of employees under the terms of this MOU and the Rules and
Policies of the Civil Service Commission.

4.2 The UNION shall provide the Chief of Police with a list of the designated UNION
Representatives, including a designation of the Union President and shall notify
the Chief of Police of any changes in designation.

4.3. Listed Representatives shall be subject to all rules, regulations, procedures,
directives, etc., of the government and the Metropolitan Nashville Police
Department.
5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

ARTICLE 5 - ASSIGNMENT OF UNION PRESIDENT

The UNION President at his/her option will be placed on extended temporary
assignment upon being selected to represent the membership as a liaison
between the METRO Police Department, the Metropolitan Government and all
levels of management and all branches and members of the UNION. The

UNION President will be responsible for reporting any change in his/her regular
duty status to the individual designated by the Chief of Police to be responsible
for the maintenance of the worksheet; i.e. sick days or vacation days.

The UNION President, while on assignment, shall continue to receive his/her full
salary and all benefits he/she is normally entitled to as a sworn member of the
Metropolitan Police Department.

The UNION President shall remain eligible for promotion to the next rank, if so
qualified. When directed, the UNION President shall report to the Chief of Police
or designee. While assigned, the Union President shall adhere to the following
minimal requirements to maintain certification as a Police Officer:

QONMOOWDS

Respond to emergency recall;

Maintain uniform;

Attend court as may be required;

Report usual and customary changes in personnel records;

Attend in-service training required for those of equal rank;

Carry proper identification;

Be subject to all rules, regulations, procedures, directives, etc., of the
government and the Metropolitan Nashville Police Department.

While on assignment, the Union President will be charged with the following
responsibilities and duties:

A. Facilitate communications between the management of the Metropolitan
Police Department and the Union;

B. Help promote a professional public image for the UNION and the METRO
Police Department;

Cc. Aid in the creation of better community awareness regarding the needs of
local law enforcement;

D. Assist the Union members in resolving grievances;

E. Monitor the activities of METRO boards, offices, legislation before the
Metropolitan Council, and other bodies which affect the working conditions
of the officers and their ability to provide police service;

F. Promote good working conditions throughout the department and foster

cooperative problem solving between the UNION and METRO.
5.5

5.6

Upon completion of the assignment, the UNION President shall be returned to
the bureau in which he/she was working prior to his/her acceptance of this
position.

Only non-supervisory sworn personnel will be eligible for assignment as the
UNION President, unless otherwise agreed to by the Chief of Police.
6.1

6.2

6.3

ARTICLE 6 - ACCESS TO METRO PROPERTY

It is agreed that UNION Listed Representatives shall have visitation rights to all
areas of employment so long as it does not hinder or interfere with necessary
operations of the Metropolitan Government.

METRO agrees that its officers, managers and supervisory personnel will
accommodate all reasonable requests for such visitation and will take no action
to hinder, harass or intimidate the UNION’s Listed Representatives during the
course of such visitation.

The UNION Listed Representatives shall notify the appropriate supervisor of
such visits in advance whenever possible and, in any event, shall report his/her
presence and purpose first to the supervisor.

10
7.14

7.2

7.3

7A

ARTICLE 7 - PHYSICAL BULLETIN BOARDS

The UNION shall have the right to place notices on METRO Nashville Police
Department Community Bulletin Boards, which are defined as those physical,
non-electronic bulletin boards not reserved for official Metro Nashville Police
Department notices and publications.

In addition, the UNION shall be allowed to erect a physical bulletin board of its
own on METRO Property with the permission of the Chief of Police. The size and
location shall be subject to approval by the Chief of Police. No reasonable
request made in accordance with this section shall be denied.

Community Bulletin Boards and the UNION bulletin board may be used only for
the following notices:

Recreational and social affairs of the UNION;
Notices of UNION meetings;

Information regarding UNION elections;
Reports of UNION committees;

Rulings on regulations of the UNION; and
UNION newsletters.

T™mMOODY

All posted materials must be signed or initialed by the UNION’s President or a
Listed Representative and a copy shall be promptly sent to the Chief of Police.
No notice or announcement that contains defamatory statements about METRO
or any METRO Official or employee shall be posted. In the event unauthorized
material is posted, it shall be promptly removed by the UNION President or a
Listed Representative upon notification by the Chief of Police or his designee. If
UNION material is removed, the Chief of Police or his designee will promptly
notify the UNION President or a Listed Representative.

11
8.1

ARTICLE 8 - USE OF ELECTRONIC MAIL/FOLDER/BULLETIN BOARDS

The UNION, by and through the UNION President, shall be allowed to establish
and maintain a public folder within the police department's e-mail system. The
use of this folder shall comply with METRO’s E-mail and internet policy. The
Union, by and through the Union President, shall be allowed to use its public
folder to post and distribute materials to members of the represented unit
provided that the distribution of information is in accordance with Article 7 above.
The UNION shall have ‘read only’ access to the departments’ electronic Police -
Policy Drafts bulletin board.

12
9.1

9.2

9.3

9.4

9.5

ARTICLE 9 - WORKSITE MEETINGS

The UNION shall be allowed to hold meetings with employees before or after
regular scheduled working hours so long as such meetings do not interfere with
the proper operation of METRO. All meetings by the UNION with employees,
other than those meetings specifically set out in 12.3, shall be controlled by this
Article.

METRO agrees that meetings may be held at no charge in the most appropriate
space available to the work site if such space is not then occupied or in use.

When practicable, the UNION agrees to request use of such space in writing or
e-mail at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the time for such meeting.
The UNION request will state the time and the location of the meeting.

Within twenty-four (24) hours after receiving such notice, the department head or
designee will advise the UNION in writing or e-mail whether the time and location
of the meeting are approved. If a time and location are not approved, that will be
confirmed in writing or e-mail, with a reason given as to why it was not approved.

No meeting is to be held while an attendee of the meeting is scheduled to be at
work. All meetings must be before or after the employees regular work hours. It
should be announced at the beginning of each meeting, and during meetings
when others come in, that the meeting is only for employees who are not
scheduled to work; and meetings must be scheduled at other times for
employees who are working.

13
10.1

10.2

10.3

10.4

10.5

ARTICLE 10 - PERSONNEL POLICY

It is understood that the personnel policy of METRO and its administration is
specifically provided for by the Metropolitan Charter, and the Metropolitan Civil
Service Commission is legally responsible for developing and fostering the
effectiveness of this personnel policy in the manner provided by Article 12 of the
Metropolitan Charter and its established Rules and Policies set forth in Section
12.06 of the Metropolitan Charter.

It is agreed that the Rules and Policies of the Metropolitan Civil Service
Commission, as they may be amended from time to time by the Metropolitan Civil
Service Commission, shall be made a part of this MOU, by reference as if copied
herein verbatim and attached hereto.

It is agreed that the UNION will be recognized as the Representative of any
employee member covered under this MOU in connection with any matter
affecting a member and arising under Article 12 of the Metropolitan Charter or
the Rules or Policies of the Metropolitan Civil Service Commission, where such
representation is specifically authorized, provided that the affected employee, in
writing, has designated the UNION as his Representative for this purpose,
subject to Paragraph 12.3 of Article 12 herein.

It is recognized and agreed that the employee benefit system of the Metropolitan
Government is specifically provided for by the Metropolitan Charter, and that the
Metropolitan Employee Benefit Board has the responsibility for developing and
fostering the Employee Benefit Plan in the manner provided for in Article 13 of
the Charter and by the Board’s Rules and Regulations established in accordance
with Section 13.02 of the Charter.

Leave time is available in accordance with Civil Service Rules, Chapter 4,
Attendance and Leave. The following types of leave are currently authorized:

Holidays

Vacation

Sick Leave

In-Line-of-Duty Injury Leave
Bereavement Leave
Administrative Leave with Pay
Jury Leave

Military Leave

Maternity Leave

Leave Without Pay

Leave from Civil Service Status
Family and Medical Leave Act
Parent Teacher Conferences
Personal Leave
In the event any of the above types of leave are redefined, modified or amended
by the Metropolitan Government Civil Service Commission, this Article shall
likewise be considered redefined, modified or amended and shall be interpreted
and read to reflect any such change, redefinition, modification or amendment as
if originally contained herein.

15
11.1

11.3

ARTICLE 11 - CORRECTIVE ACTION AND DISCIPLINE

Corrective action is when a departmental supervisor issues an oral or written
reprimand. Refer to Civil Service Rule 6.3, Corrective Action (Reprimand) for
further information concerning corrective action.

Disciplinary actions include suspension, demotion, and/or dismissal from
employment. Refer to Civil Service Rule 6.5, Types of Disciplinary Action, for
further information.

In the event the terms “corrective action” and/or “disciplinary action” are
redefined, modified or amended by the Metropolitan Government Civil Service
Commission, this Article shall likewise be considered redefined, modified or
amended and shall be interpreted and read to reflect any such change,
redefinition, modification, or amendment as if originally contained herein.
12.1

12.2

12.3

12.4

12.5

 

ARTICLE 12 — GRIEVANCES/RIGHT TO REPRESENTATION

Procedures for processing a grievance can be found in Civil Service Rules,
Section 6.9, “Employee Grievances.”

It is agreed that to the extent consistent with the Rules and Policies of the
Metropolitan Civil Service Commission, the Union may be designated as the
grieving party and present a grievance on behalf of one employee for the
purpose of determining the rights of similarly situated employees, either in the
entire represented unit or in a category of employees within the represented unit,
as to any issue within the confines of Civil Service Rule 6.9 ; the outcome of
which may impact upon the terms and conditions of ernployment of employees
within the represented unit. The UNION shall at all times bear the burden of proof
to establish that A) the issue is grievable; and B) the issue impacts the terms and
conditions of employment of either the entire represented unit or a category of
employees within the represented unit.

Civil Service Rules grant employees the right to the presence of a
representative whenever they are presented with a disciplinary situation
(Rule 6.6.2). In addition, Civil Service Rules grant employees the right to
the presence of a representative at all stages of the Grievance Procedure.
Subject to the provisions of Civil Service Rule Section 6 requiring the use of
licensed attorneys for appeal proceedings, the parties to this MOU agree
that employees within the represented unit may designate a Listed
Representative as their representative for both disciplinary actions and
grievances. The parties further agree that a Listed Representative may, with
the prior permission of his immediate supervisor, be released from his
duties for a reasonable period of time during working hours and without loss
of pay, for the sole purpose of acting as an employee representative for
disciplinary action and grievance meetings and/or hearings.
Representatives shall endeavor to conduct such business in a timely
manner. Supervisor permission shall not be unduly withheld. Meetings
between the employee and his designated representative/Listed
Representative, held in preparation for disciplinary action and grievance
meetings and/or hearings will not be conducted during the Listed
Representative’s duty hours.

Nothing in this MOU shall be deemed consent by Metropolitan
Government to non-lawyers practicing law without a license.

In the event the term “grievance” is redefined, modified or amended by the
Metropolitan Government Civil Service Commission, this Article shall
likewise be considered redefined, modified or amended and shall be
interpreted and read to reflect any such change in definition, modification or
amendment as if originally contained herein.
13.1

13.2

13.3

13.4

13.5

 

ARTICLE 13 - PAYROLL DEDUCTION OF UNION DUES

METRO agrees to deduct UNION dues from the pay of all employees covered by
this MOU who request, in writing, that such deductions be made on the next
payroll date, but not later than thirty (30) days from receipt of the dues
withholding request. The written authorization for the deduction of UNION dues
shall specify the amount to be deducted from each paycheck and will be based
on a written certification, by the UNION to METRO, of the appropriate authorized
dues to be deducted for every member.

Authorizations for payroll deductions shall become effective on the next payroll
date occurring at least thirty (30) days after receipt of the authorization for the
deduction by the Payroll Division of the Department.

Employees who have retired from Metropolitan Government, and who are
receiving either a service pension or disability pension may authorize payroll
deduction of the UNION dues from their pension checks, in accord with the
provisions of this Article.

Upon written authorization from any employee, UNION dues, which may include
initiation fees, shall be deducted from wages and forwarded to the UNION on
their behalf. No authorization shall be allowed for payment of assessments or
fines. The procedure followed in authorizing deduction shall be for each
employee to execute a written assignment on a form agreed to by the parties.
Dues shall be deducted in accordance with payroll periods.

In the event the UNION votes to change the dues formula, the UNION shall notify
METRO at least thirty (30) days prior to any change.
14.1

14.2

14.3

14.4

ARTICLE 14 - WAGES AND BENEFITS

The parties hereto agree that wages paid to employees in respective positions or
job classifications shall be in accordance with the approved METRO Pay Plan.

It is agreed that employees will be paid twice a month on the 7th and 22nd.

METRO shall supply the UNION on a semi-annual basis, when requested, data
processing runs of names and classifications of all workers within the
represented unit.

The UNION may, from time to time, supply the Metropolitan Government
Department of Human Resources literature or notices to be forwarded by mail to
all, or a Union-selected partial list of all, sworn employees. The Department of
Human Resources will promptly cause this literature or notices to be forwarded
by United States Mail to all, or a Union-selected partial list of all, sworn
employees. The UNION shall reimburse METRO the reasonable cost for
forwarding such literature or notices by mail.

19
ARTICLE 15 - MUTUAL RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS

15.1 The parties agree to abide by the provisions set forth in this MOU. This MOU
may be amended in writing by mutual agreement of the parties any time during
the period of time in which it is in effect.

15.2 The UNION shall not initiate or engage in, and no members of the UNION shall
participate or engage in, any strike, slowdown, boycott, or other interruption of work
(primary or sympathy) affecting the Metropolitan Government. Upon receiving notice
from METRO of any interruption of work, the UNION will take all reasonable steps to
terminate such activities and induce officers to return to work. The Mayor shall have
full and binding authority to determine if a strike, slowdown, boycott or other
interruption of work has in fact occurred. The Mayor's determination shall not be
binding on a court and nothing herein shall be construed to limit the parties’ rights to
seek a judicial determination as to whether or not an interruption of work has
occurred. Should any interruption of work occur, METRO shall, within one (1)
business day, notify the UNION that such activity exists and request information
from the UNION as to whether the activity has been authorized or initiated by the
UNION. Within one (1) business day following receipt of notice from Metro, the
UNION shall respond to METRO's request in writing. Upon receiving notice of an
interruption of work, the UNION will take all reasonable steps to terminate such
activity and induce UNION members to return to work. Employees who participate in
a strike, slowdown, boycott, or other work interruption may be subject to disciplinary
action.

15.3 Violation of this Article by the UNION initiating or engaging in a strike, slow down,
boycott or other interruption of work or the UNION's failure to respond to METRO'S
request for written confirmation as to whether the UNION has authorized or initiated
the action shall be cause for METRO to terminate this MOU. Termination of this
MOU shall be effective upon METRO delivering written notice to the President of the
UNION in addition to whatever other remedies may be available to METRO at law or
in equity. Nothing herein shall limit the authority of the Mayor in cases of civil
emergencies. METRO and the UNION are bound by certain laws, regulations,
ordinances and other directives. Nothing herein shall contravene or minimize such
laws, regulations, ordinances or directives.

15.4 The Metropolitan Government shall not lockout employees during the term of this
MOU.

20
ARTICLE 16 —- YOUTH CAMP ASSIGNMENT

16.1 The Metropolitan Nashville Police Department recognizes and acknowledges that
its participation in the Andrew Jackson Youth Camp for disadvantaged children is a
worthy investment in the community, providing significant long term positive benefits.
Therefore, to the extent resources reasonably permit, the Metropolitan Nashville Police
Department will give favorable consideration to placing employees on Administrative
Leave With Pay (ALWP) to serve as counselors for the Andrew Jackson Youth Camp.

21
17.1

ARTICLE 17 - SEVERABILITY

It is specifically agreed that the provisions of this MOU are declared to be
severable. If any section, Article, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of
this MOU is judicially determined to be void, illegal or unenforceable, the
remainder of the MOU shall continue in full force and effect and be binding on the
parties hereunto, to the extent allowed by law. If any section, Article, provision,
sentence, clause, phrase or part of this MOU is judicially determined to be void,
illegal or unenforceable, the UNION or METRO may exercise the right to request
additional meet and confer sessions regarding the part or parts of this MOU
which are declared void, illegal or unenforceable. During such additional meet
and confer sessions, the remainder of this MOU shall remain in full force and
effect, provided that these provisions are not declared void, illegal or otherwise
unenforceable.

22
18.1

18.2

 

ARTICLE 18 - WAGES, BENEFITS, AND NEGOTIATIONS

Upon the UNION’s request, appropriate representatives of the Metropolitan
Government shall meet and confer with the UNION over proposals for changes in
the General Pay Plan and in other economic employee benefits. The
Metropolitan Government shall provide notice to the UNION of its annual budget
cycle. The appointing authority shall meet and confer with the UNION on request.
All such negotiations shall proceed in a timely manner.

In all matters of representation, both parties shall act in a timely manner with

prompt exchange of proposals. All negotiations will be conducted in good faith
by both parties.

23
ARTICLE 19 - DURATION

19.1 The term of this MOU is three years, extending from July 1, 2009 to June 30,
2012. This MOU may be modified by mutual agreement.

19.2 If modifications are proposed, both parties shall meet and confer in good faith
with respect to the matters covered by such proposed modifications.

19.3 Notwithstanding any provision of this MOU to the contrary, this MOU shall remain

in full effect after any expiration date while discussions are continuing for a new
MOU or part thereof between the UNION and METRO.

24
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this Memorandum of

Understanding the ie day of CLM 2009.

APPROVED AND RECOMMENDED TO THE METROPOLITAN CIVIL SERVICE
COMMISSION FOR ACCEPTANCE.

(eel rn ate:
KARL DEAN rN date: FAP 72)
Date: 2d loP

 

Principal Officer, the FOP

thde fobeko L—— Date: 12/4/04

RITA ROBERTS-TURNER
Director of Human Resources

Md: -, filed Date: L104

RICHARD RIEBELIN
Director of Finance

APPROVED BY THE METROPOLITAN CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION:

Fi tho ff forth ___ pate: /Z2/ B/oq

Bill Farmer
Chairman, Civil Service Commission

26
