NAM eos
Deborah F. Moore-Carter, Labor Commissioner &) (|

AGENCY | Office of the Labor Commissioner
aopress} 417 East Fayette Street, Suite 1405

 

Memorandum of Understanding M E M oO
SUBsECT! FOP Unit I, FY 2014-2016 (410) 396-4365

TO DATE: January 15, 2015
Honorable President and Members
of the Board of Estimates

Dear Mr. President and Members:

ACTION REQUESTED OF THE BOARD OF ESTIMATES:
The notation of the Board of Estimates is requested on the attached Memorandum of

Understanding (MOU) covering FY 2014-2016 between the City of Baltimore, the Baltimore
City Police Department and the:

Fraternal Order of Police, Inc. Unit I,
Police Officers, Police Agents and Flight Officers

AMOUNT AND SOURCE OF MONEY:
Wage increases for employees covered by the MOU are included in the budget for the
Baltimore Police Department

BACKGROUND AND EXPLANATION:

In accordance with the Municipal Employees Relations Ordinance (MERO), the Office of the
Labor Commissioner has concluded negotiations with the Fraternal Order of Police, Unit I. The
results of the negotiations have been reduced to writing in the form of the attached
Memorandum of Understanding covering Fiscal Years 2014-2016.

The Memorandum of Understanding has been reviewed for form and legal sufficiency by the
Baltimore City Police Department’s Legal Affairs Office.

MBE/WBE PARTICIPATION: N/A
BALTIMORE CITY RESIDENTS FIRST (BCRF):

BCRF applicable: _ yes X no
If not, why: X_ Other (FOP Unit 1)
BCRF Certification Statement completed and returned to Agency: ____ yes X_no
LABOR COMMISSIONER: NOTED BY THE BOARD OF ESTIMATES:
Pp fe
Deborah F. Moore-Carter Date Clerk Date
JAN 21 2015

DFMC:bmr
Attachment (MOU)
cc: Andrew Smullian

Anthony Batts

Henry Raymond

Gene S. Ryan

28-1418-5917 1400-10-53
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

between

THE BALTIMORE CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT

and the

BALTIMORE CITY LODGE NO. 3,
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, INC.
UNIT I

POLICE OFFICERS, POLICE AGENTS AND FLIGHT OFFICERS

FISCAL YEARS 2014-2016

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
BALTIMORE CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT and
BALTIMORE CITY LODGE NO. 3, UNIT I

DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLE, POLICIES, AND PURPOSES
ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
ARTICLE 2
CHECK-OFF
ARTICLE 3 2
LODGE SECURITY
ARTICLE 4
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
ARTICLE 5
NON-DISCRIMINATION
ARTICLE 6 3
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
ARTICLE 7
LODGE REPRESENTATIVES
ARTICLE 8
VACATIONS, HOLIDAYS, DAYS OFF AND SPECIAL LEAVE
ARTICLE 9
SAFETY
ARTICLE 10
HEALTH AND WELFARE
ARTICLE 11
OVERTIME AND HOURS OF WORK
ARTICLE 12
COMPENSATION
ARTICLE 13
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT
ARTICLE 14
COURT TIME

 

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

u

 

”
N

 

”
w

 

n
+

 

e
a

 

e
~“

 

e
o

 

ARTICLE 15
PROTECTION AGAINST LIABILITY

ARTICLE 16
DISCIPLINE

m
o

 

8

 

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 i
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE 17 25
UNIFORMS AND CLOTHING
ARTICLE 18 26
APPOINTMENT TO POLICE AGENT
ARTICLE 19 26
DISABILITY
ARTICLE 20 26
JOINT LABOR-MANAGEMENT LIAISON COMMITTEE
ARTICLE 21 26.
BULLETIN BOARDS AND COMMUNICATION
ARTICLE 22 27
ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE FOR LODGE REPRESENTATIVES
ARTICLE 23 28
NO STRIKE, SECONDARY BOYCOTT OR LOCKOUT
ARTICLE 24 28
WORKING CONDITIONS
ARTICLE 25 30
PROMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS
ARTICLE 26 31
PROPERTY REIMBURSEMENT
ARTICLE 27 31
MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY
ARTICLE 28 37
LAYOFFS
ARTICLE 29 38
PERSONAL PRONOUNS
ARTICLE 30 38
PRESERVATION OF BENEFITS
ARTICLE 31 38
PRINTING OF MEMORANDUM
ARTICLE 32 38
SEVERABILITY
ARTICLE 33 39
DURATION

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 7
 

 

 

 

ADDENDUM A 41
HEALTH & WELFARE BENEFITS

ADDENDUM B 57
SALARY SCHEDULES

ADDENDUM C 60
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT

ADDENDUM D. 61
ADMINISTRATIVELY CLOSED IAD CASES

ADDENDUM E. 62

 

REASONABLE SUSPICION FOR DRUG TESTING WHILE INVESTIGATING CASES OF DEADLY
FORCE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ADDENDUM F 63
PAYMENT FOR COURT APPEARANCES (RETIRED POLICE OFFICERS)

ADDENDUM G 64
LEAVE FOR LODGE REPRESENTATIVES

ADDENDUM H. 65
BREAKING TIES FOR PROMOTIONS

ADDENDUM I 66
RETIREE HEALTH CARE PREMIUMS

ADDENDUM J 67
NEIGHBORHOOD PATROL BUREAU SCHEDULE

ADDENDUM K 74
RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING

ADDENDUM L 75
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION AND RECRUITMENT

ADDENDUM M 76
WAGE REOPENER

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 iii
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BALTIMORE CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT and
BALTIMORE CITY LODGE NO. 3, FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, UNIT I

DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLE, POLICIES, AND PURPOSES

It is the intent and purpose of the Baltimore City Lodge No. 3, Fraternal Order of
Police, Inc. ("Lodge") and the Baltimore City Police Department ("Employer" or
"Department") to promote and improve the efficiency of the operations of the City of
Baltimore and the Baltimore Police Department. In order to render the most efficient public
service to the citizens of the City, the Lodge and Employer agree that this goal can best be
achieved through an orderly, constructive and harmonious relationship between them. The
parties hereto are in further accord that effective employee relations in the public service
requires a clear statement of wages, hours and working conditions and of the respective
rights and obligations of labor and management and requires a mechanism for the peaceful
and equitable resolution of differences which may arise. For these purposes the parties
enter into this Memorandum of Understanding ("Memorandum").

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION

Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Employee Relations Ordinance, Article 1,
Sections 119-137 of the Baltimore City Code (1983 Replacement Volume, as amended) and
the Code of Public Local Laws of Baltimore City, Section 16-8A, the Employer recognizes
Baltimore City Lodge No. 3, Fraternal Order of Police, Inc. as the sole and exclusive
representative of Unit I, all sworn police personnel below the rank of Sergeant, with the
exception of (a) those employees determined to be confidential by the Labor Commissioner
in accordance with the Municipal Employee Relations Ordinance and (b) probationary
employees. Solely for the purposes of this Memorandum and Lodge membership and
representation, "probationary employee" means any sworn employee who has not
completed entrance level training, and this in no way modifies the probationary period as
defined in Section 16-10 (e) (2) of the Code of Public Local Laws of Baltimore City or the
Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights.

ARTICLE 2
CHECK-OFF

The Employer agrees to deduct Lodge dues and service fees from the pay of any
eligible employee whom it is certified to represent and who authorizes such deductions in
writing pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Employee Relations Ordinance. The
Employer shall transmit all such monies withheld to the Lodge within fourteen (14) days of
said deduction. The Employer agrees to supply the Lodge or its designee with a dues and
service fee deduction computer printout on a quarterly basis throughout the term of this
Memorandum. Said printout shall include each individual's name, address, workplace,
annual salary, and amount deducted per pay period. Charges for deducting the cost of

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 1
Lodge-sponsored programs, if any, shall be in accordance with city-wide policies currently in
effect.

Such authorization shall be continued from year to year unless revoked in writing by
the employee, thirty (30) days prior to the anniversary date of the authorization.

The Lodge shall indemnify and save the Employer harmless from any and all claims,
grievances, actions, suits or other forms of liability or damages that arise out of or by
reason of the disposition of the funds deducted under this Article as soon as they have been
remitted by the City to the Lodge.

Pursuant to the Municipal Employee Relations Ordinance, no other employee
organization, within the meaning of the first sentence of Section 120 (d) of the Ordinance,
shall be entitled to check off dues and service fees.

ARTICLE 3
LODGE SECURITY

All eligible employees covered by this Memorandum of Understanding (a) who are
employed after July 1, 1984 and elect not to join or remain members of the Lodge or (b)
who were employed prior to July 1, 1984 and had previously executed membership or dues
authorization cards as members of said Lodge, but hereinafter elect to terminate such
membership and/or revoke said dues authorization cards, shall, as a condition of continued
employment, pay a service fee to the Lodge in an amount not to exceed the then current
Lodge dues in order to defray the costs incurred by the Lodge in the negotiation,
administration and implementation of the terms of the Memorandum, and all modifications
and amendments thereto, including related proceedings before an impasse panel or
arbitrators, in the processing of grievances, and in any and all other proceedings and
matters for which the Lodge is the employees' exclusive representative as a result of its
certification.

ARTICLE 4
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Subject to the provisions of this Memorandum, the Employer shall have all of the
rights set forth in Article 1, Section 123 of the Baltimore City Code (1983 Replacement
Volume, as amended), Article II, Section 27 of the Baltimore City Charter (1996 Edition) and
the Code of Public Local Laws of Baltimore City, Subtitle 16, Police Department, which
provisions are incorporated herein by reference.

ARTICLE 5
NON-DISCRIMINATION

The provisions of this Memorandum shall be applied equally to all employees in the
bargaining unit for which the Lodge is the certified representative without discrimination as
to age, sex, marital status, race, creed, color, national origin, political affiliation, disability as

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 2
defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), or sexual orientation.

ARTICLE 6
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE

A. Subject to any limitation of existing law, any grievance, defined in the Municipal
Employee Relations Ordinance at Section 120 (f) as a dispute concerning the application or
interpretation of the terms of this Memorandum of Understanding or a claimed violation,
misrepresentation or misapplication of the rules or regulations of the Employer affecting the
terms and conditions of employment, may be settled in the following manner:

STEP 1:

A grievance may be initially filed orally with the aggrieved employee's immediate
supervisor within thirty (30) calendar days from the event or when the aggrieved
employee should have reasonably known of the grievance. The designated Lodge
Representative may represent the employee in presenting the grievance. The parties
shall attempt to resolve the grievance informally. Consultation with second level
supervision is permissible provided all parties agree.

STEP 2:

If not resolved at Step 1, the grievance shall be filed in writing with the District
Section, or Unit Commander. (The “Sections” or "Units" referred to in this paragraph
are the Police Commissioner's Staff, Divisions, and Sections, the Staff, Sections, and
Units of the Deputy Commissioners, and the Sections within the Investigation and
Intelligence Bureau, Neighborhood Patrol Bureau, Management Services Division,
and Professional Standards and Accountability Bureau). The writing shall state
generally the substance of the grievance and identify the aggrieved employee. The
parties shall meet within seven (7) days of the filing of the grievance at this step to
discuss its substance. The District or Unit Commander shall give his decision in
writing within seven (7) working days after the aforesaid meeting.

STEP 3:

If not resolved at Step 2, the grievance may be presented to the relevant Division
Chief (Neighborhood Patrol Bureau, Management Services Division, Investigation and
Intelligence Bureau and Professional Standards and Accountability Bureau,), who
shall meet with the designated Lodge Representative and the aggrieved party within
ten (10) working days after the grievance has been denied, and shall give his answer
in writing within ten (10) working days of this meeting.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 3
Special Provision - STEP 3:

Within thirty (30) days of an alleged grievance, the Lodge is authorized to present
said grievance at this step if the grievance affects a significant number of employees
in more than one (1) District, Section, or Unit. Should this provision be used, the
affected Division Chief will meet with the Lodge Representative(s) within ten (10)
working days of the filing of said grievance and will provide, in writing, an answer
within fourteen (14) days following the aforementioned meeting.

STEP 4:

If the grievance is not resolved at Step 3, the grievance may be presented to the
Police Commissioner or designee who shall meet with the designated Lodge
Representative(s) within ten (10) working days of the denial and shall give his
response within fourteen (14) working days of the meeting.

STEP 5:

a) If a grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved at Step 4, the Lodge
may, within ten (10) working days of the completion of Step 4, initiate
arbitration by written notice to the Police Commissioner and the Labor
Commissioner of the Lodge's decision to arbitrate.

b) Within five (5) working days after receipt of the notice, the parties shall
attempt to agree upon an arbitrator. If such attempts fail, within ten (10)
working days after receipt of a panel of seven (7) names obtained from the
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service upon the request of either party,
the parties shall alternately strike names from that panel until one (1) name
remains. That person shall be the arbitrator.

c) Briefs shall be filed only if the arbitrator determines they are necessary.
d) The arbitrator's decision shall be final and binding on all parties.

e) The Employer cannot present a grievance to the arbitration step.

f) The cost of any arbitration proceedings under this Memorandum shall
be equally divided between the Department and the Lodge.

g) Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall not be counted in
computing time limits.

The Lodge shall be the exclusive representative in all grievance matters, except that

an employee may represent himself as provided in Section 124 (c) of the Municipal
Employee Relations Ordinance, and except that if a grievance has not been resolved in Step
1, an aggrieved employee may request, upon notice in writing within five (5) calendar days

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 4
after conclusion of Step 1, that the grievance be submitted to the Personnel Service Board
in accordance with the provisions of Section 16 of the Code of Public Laws of Baltimore City.
If the employee makes such a request, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to
have his grievance processed through Steps 2-4 hereof. Section 124 (c) of the Municipal
Employee Relations Ordinance shall apply to any adjustment of an employee's grievance by
the Department or the Personnel Service Board pursuant to this paragraph.

Cc. All grievances in writing shall be filed on a form developed jointly by both parties.
The grieving party shall retain a copy of the grievance form submitted.

D. It is agreed that the arbitrator is not empowered to hear, reverse, remand, set aside
or in any way modify a judgment in a disciplinary proceeding. Such judgment shall
continue to be appealable only in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Law
Enforcement Officers' Bill of Rights.

ARTICLE 7
LODGE REPRESENTATIVES

A. The Lodge may appoint representatives in the Department as follows:

One (1) in each District of the Neighborhood Patrol Bureau

One (1) in the Special Operations Section

One (1) in the Investigations and Intelligence Bureau

One (1) in the Professional Standards and Accountability Bureau
One (1) in the Management Services Division

One (1) Employee at Large

B. A written list of Lodge Representatives shall be furnished to the Department
immediately after their designation and the Lodge shall notify the Department promptly of
any change of such representatives.

Cc. After appropriate notice to his Commanding Officer, a Lodge Representative shall be
granted reasonable time off during working hours with pay when he is engaged in
processing (investigating and presenting) a grievance under Article 6 of this Memorandum,
and where it will not interfere with the operations of the Department.

ARTICLE 8
VACATIONS, HOLIDAYS, DAYS OFF AND SPECIAL LEAVE

A. Whenever employees in the bargaining unit are required to work on any day they are
entitled to observe as a legal holiday as designated by departmental directive, they shall be
granted a day in lieu thereof within sixty (60) days before or after such holiday, unless
provisions of Article 8, Section 1.3 apply.

B. Effective January 1, 2015, employees shall receive thirteen (13) annual holidays.
Maryland Day shall no longer be observed as an official holiday. Holidays, as distinguished

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 5
from vacation days, shall be equal to an employee's shift (e.g. 8 hour or 10 hour shift).
Cc. Holiday Leave is not subject to accrual or accumulation.

D. The above provisions also apply to employees whose regularly scheduled H days
coincide with designated holidays.

E. Employees who work on the actual day for Thanksgiving, Christmas and/or New
Year's shall be paid an additional four (4) hours compensation. (Five (5) hours for
employees working a ten (10) hour shift).

F. Effective July 1, 2014 Personal Days (PL days) are eliminated. Any accrued but
unused PL days must be used by September 30, 2014.

G. DEFINITIONS
Leave, for the purposes of this Article, is defined as:

Vacation Leave (V days)

Holiday Leave (P days)

Personal Leave (PL days)

Regular Scheduled Days Off (H days)
Compensatory Leave (C Hours)

Vib WN

H. REQUEST FOR LEAVE

1. Leave requested prior to February 10 for the calendar year. Employees
requesting leave at the beginning of the calendar year shall designate all
Vacation (V Days), and Holiday Leave (P Days) to be taken. All leave requests
shall not be unreasonably denied. Leave requests submitted prior to February
10 as part of the calendar year leave request process shall be granted on the
basis of seniority within rank. Any leave requests submitted pursuant to this
Section which have not been approved or denied as of February 20 shall be
deemed approved. All H Days connected to leave submitted and approved
pursuant to this Section shall receive the same protections from cancellation
as said leave.

2. Leave requested after February 10 and leave requested before
February 10 to be taken on or before February 20. An employee's
request for Vacation, Holiday or Personal Leave submitted after February 10 of
any year, or requested before February 10 to be used on or before February
20 (to include a block of leave that begins on or before February 20), shall be
granted on a first come, first served basis. Such leave shall be approved or
denied by the member's immediate supervisor, or by the person filling that
position during the supervisor's absence, within ten (10) days of submission.
Any written requests for Vacation, Holiday or Personal Leave which has not

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 6
been approved or denied within 10 days of the submission shall be deemed

approved.

3. In those instances where a senior police officer puts in for vacation leave and
subsequently withdraws same and then decides to resubmit a request for the
same leave days on or before February 10", said leave shall be granted unless
another police officer has already submitted a leave request for the same

dates, regardless of the officer's seniority

1 VACATION LEAVE (V DAYS)

1. Employees shall be granted the same number of vacation days as in the past and
consistent with the schedule which is set forth in the Administrative Manual. The rate of
vacation leave accrual is based upon the eligible employee's length of continuous service
and is earned at a set rate for each completed month of service.

For reference purposes, the present vacation schedule is as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

COMPLETED YRS OF VACATION DAYS EARNED | PER YEAR FULL-TIME
CONTINUOUS SERVICE PER MONTH EMPLOYEE

0 through 5 1 | 12

6 through 10 1h [15

11 through 13 1h 18

14 through 18 1% 21

19 or more 2 | 24

 

 

Employees who work a 5 day/8 hour and 36 minute schedule shall be charged one vacation
day when they take off a work day. Employees who work a 4 day/10 hour and 36 minute
schedule shall be charged with 1.25 days of vacation when they take off a work day.

2. Employees’ current vacation buckets will be allowed to go into the negative by one
year’s worth of vacation days. Employees may use such vacation consistent with usual
scheduling practices. (If an employee leaves employment during the year and uses more
vacation for the year than has been accrued, the employee will be required to reimburse

the City for such used vacation.

A. Vacation Leave, one or more days, scheduled and approved prior to February 10"
shall be cancelled only in the event of an extreme emergency declared by the Police
Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee or when otherwise directed by the

Police Commissioner.

These criteria shall also be followed for any other type of leave (P, PL, and H days)
which is obviously scheduled in conjunction with Vacation Leave.

B. Regardless of date scheduled and approved, a vacation leave period in a block of
five (5) or more days for non-patrol employees (consisting of a minimum of three (3)

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016

7
Vacation days, not more than two (2) P or PL days, and excluding H days used to
achieve said block) shall be cancelled only in the event of an extreme emergency
declared by the Police Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee or when
otherwise directed by the Police Commissioner. This shall also apply to any H days
taken in conjunction with the vacation period.

3. Regardless of date scheduled and approved, a vacation leave period in a block
of four (4) or more days for patrol employees (consisting of a minimum of three (3)
Vacation days, not more than one (1) P or PL days, and excluding H days used to
achieve said block) shall be cancelled only in the event of an extreme emergency
declared by the Police Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee or when
otherwise directed by the Police Commissioner. This shall also apply to any H days
taken in conjunction with the vacation period.

4, It is not the intent of Section 1.2 to preclude a member from making a
vacation period using more than two (2) P or PL days. However, this type of
vacation period would not receive the same protection against cancellation as that
described in Section H.3.

5. The Vacation Leave accumulation bank for bargaining unit employees is one
hundred ninety-two (192) days including any previously accrued K days through June
30, 2000. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, under no circumstances
shall any days be accrued beyond 192 for any reason after December 31% of any
calendar year.

6. Effective January 1, 2015, vacation leave accumulation for all current
employees shall be capped at one hundred twenty-five (125) days. Employees who
have already accrued 192 vacation leave days or a number between 125 and 191 of
accumulated vacation leave days as of January 1, 2015 shall maintain those days .
Employees hired after January 1, 2015 may accumulate up to 45 vacation leave days.

J. PERSONAL LEAVE (PL DAYS) (for FY 2014 only) AND HOLIDAY LEAVE (P DAYS)

1. Personal Leave (PL days) and Holiday Leave (P days) submitted and approved
and not meeting the criteria set forth in Section 1.2.3 may be cancelled only for
operational reasons after the employee has been given a minimum of fourteen (14)
days notice.

2. Notice of cancellation given less than fourteen (14) days shall entitle the
employee to an additional four (4) hours compensation at his or her regular rate of
pay. (Five (5) hours for employees working a ten (10) hour shift). In addition, the
employee shall receive the day back.

3. If a Holiday Leave day (P day) is cancelled, the employee shall be permitted to
utilize this day within the remaining time period, as set forth in Article 8, Section A,
or within sixty (60) days, whichever period is greater.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 8
4. In the event two (2) or more employees have scheduled and approved Holiday
Leave on the same day and it becomes necessary to cancel said leave, the last
requested leave shall be the first cancelled, unless the employees agree otherwise.

5. When Holiday Leave cannot, for operational reasons, be granted within the
specified period, the District/Unit Commander may, at his discretion, approve either
an exception to the time restriction or authorize payment for the holiday at the
employee's specified overtime rate.

K. SCHEDULED DAYS OFF (H DAYS)

1. An employee shall be given a minimum of fourteen (14) days’ notice of any
change in his or her Regular Scheduled Days Off (H days) which are not being taken
in conjunction with an approved vacation as provided in Sections H.1 and 1.3 of this
Article. Notice given of less than fourteen (14) days shall entitle the employee to an
additional four (4) hours compensation at his or her regular rate of pay (five (5)
hours for employees on the 4x 10 schedule).

2. An employee who has an H Day cancelled, whether with more than 14 days’
notice or otherwise, shall receive four (4) hours pay (five (5) hours in the case of
employees working the 4 x 10 shift). The employee shall also have the right to take
the cancelled day off if it can be scheduled within the same work period, governed
by manpower constraints. If the employee is unable to reschedule the substitute day
off within the same work period, the employee shall receive pay only for the
cancelled day at his or her regular rate of pay for the day forfeited (i.e. 10 hours for
those on the 4x10 schedule and 8 hours for those on an 8 hour schedule). This pay
shall be in addition to any penalty that may be required under section 1, above.

3. An employee retains the option to request a change in his or her regularly
scheduled H days within the twenty-eight (28) day work period. His or her
immediate supervisor may grant the request. In that circumstance, the above
provisions of this Section shall not apply

4. Regardless of the foregoing sections 1 and 2, The Employer shall have the right
to designate five (5) days each year on or after February 21 (immediately following
the close of the February 20 vacation period) on which all H days will be considered
cancelled. Employees working on such H days will be paid time and one-half for
working such days but shall have no right to take the day off. The only exception to
this provision shall be for those employees who have scheduled vacation days (and
any H days in conjunction with that vacation) during the annual scheduling period,
who shall not have their vacation or H days cancelled on the days designated in this
Section 4.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 9
L. SCHEDULED DAYS CHANGED OR CANCELLED

An employee's scheduled days off or approved leave shall not be changed or
cancelled solely for the purpose of avoiding the payment of overtime, over the objection of
the employee. This provision shall not apply if such day is cancelled for operational reasons.

M. | TRANSFERS, REASSIGNMENTS, PROMOTIONS

Changes or cancellation of leave as covered in Sections H, I and J shall not apply in
cases of voluntary transfers, voluntary reassignments, promotions or disciplinary actions.
Sections H, I and J of this Article cover involuntary transfers and involuntary reassignments.
In cases of promotions only, Section H.1 dealing with vacation leave which has been
scheduled and approved prior to February 10", shall apply.

N. LEAVE ORDER OF PRIORITY

When it becomes necessary, for operational reasons, to cancel previously scheduled and/or
approved leave, the following order of priority for cancellation shall be adhered to:

PL Day - Personal Leave (eliminated July 1, 2014)

C Day — Compensatory Leave

P Day - Holiday Leave

V Day — Vacation Leave

H Day — Regular Scheduled Day Off

mewn

O. BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

An employee shall be granted four (4) consecutive work days of leave of absence
with pay for the death of a member of the employee's immediate family. The immediate
family includes: Mother, Father, Sister, Brother, Spouse, registered domestic partner (as
defined by the Baltimore City Code, provided the name of the domestic partner is filed on
record with the Baltimore City Department of Personnel in advance), Child, Grandparent,
Grandchild, Mother-in-law, Father-in-law, step or half-blood relatives, or any relative
residing in the same household as the employee. These four (4) days of leave will be
granted beginning either on the day of death or the work day immediately following the day
of death, at the employee's request. In the event that funeral arrangements are delayed
because of out-of-town travel or other extenuating circumstances, the four (4) consecutive
work-day requirement shall be waived. The employee shall also be granted four (4)
consecutive work days of leave of absence with pay in the event of a stillborn birth.

One. (1) day's leave of absence will be authorized for the death of the employee's
Aunt, Uncle, or Great Grandparent. This one (1) day leave of absence must be taken within
four (4) calendar days of the date of death.
P. PATERNITY LEAVE

Employees in the Unit shall be eligible for leave under the Family and Medical Leave

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 10
Act (“FMLA”) for birth of an employee's child. The employee shall be permitted to use any
accrued vacation or personal leave days, banked days, P days, VMI days, compensatory
time and five (5) accrued sick leave days up to a maximum of twelve (12) weeks of FMLA
leave. Time off granted in accordance with this provision will be considered leave days
pursuant to the Agency’s FMLA policy. This leave shall be granted unless the Police
Commissioner shall declare a public emergency requiring the cancellation of all leave
throughout the agency for a stated period of time after which the affected employee(s)
shall be returned to paid leave as described herein.

Q. DONATION LEAVE

Subject to approval by the employee's Commanding Officer, an employee with
banked vacation days may transfer up to two (2) vacation days per calendar year to another
Unit employee (donee) who is experiencing a personal hardship, providing the following
conditions are met:

1. The donee has exhausted all of his/her accrued leave including Vacation,
Personal Leave, K-Days (while applicable) and Medical Incentive Days.

2. The transfer of vacation days pursuant to this program are strictly donations.
Vacation days may not be transferred in exchange for cash or other remuneration.

3. The donee must be experiencing a hardship for which the transfer of days
provides relief.

4. All days transferred pursuant to this provision are irrevocable transfers.

5. A donee may receive no more than 30 transferred days in any one calendar
year.

6. Use of donated days by members on suspension or termination is not
authorized.

Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Police Commissioner will exercise sole
authority as to the continuance of this program and may terminate this program upon 30
days written notice to the bargaining unit and any affected personnel.

R. Payment for Unused Leave

Upon resignation, termination of employment or retirement from the Department,
employees shall be paid in full for any accumulated vacation and personal leave at their
regular rate of pay.

Ss. Medical Leave Bank

The Fraternal Order of Police (FOP) Medical Leave Bank hereinafter referred to as

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 1
“the Bank” will continue in effect. Membership in the Bank will be voluntary for all
employees hired after June 25, 1997. All new employees who request membership in the
bank will be assessed one (1) day of medical leave for deposit in the Bank.

An employee in the bargaining unit may receive a grant from the Bank only after:

1, Filing an application with the Medical Leave Bank Committee.
2. Submitting satisfactory medical evidence of the illness or injury.
3. Submitting evidence of having exhausted all accumulated leave.

The Board of Directors of the Bank shall be composed of two (2) representatives of the FOP
appointed by the FOP President and two (2) representatives of the Employer appointed by
the Police Commissioner.

New employees must join the Bank within the first thirty (30) days after completion of their
entrance level training or lose their right to join until the next contribution period.

Employees may relinquish their membership in the Bank at any time; if they do so,
however, they will lose their contribution in the Bank and will not be allowed to join again
until the next contribution period.

All contributions will remain in force and cannot be returned even upon cancellation of
membership.

Unused medical leave days in the bank at the end of the year shall be carried over to the
next year.

On or before April 1, 2012, the Labor Commissioner will convene a labor-management
committee to establish an audit system which will keep accurate records of the number of
days in the leave bank and to otherwise monitor activities of the medical leave bank. For a
detailed description of the Bank please refer to the brochure entitled “Baltimore City FOP
Medical Leave Bank”.

ARTICLE 9
SAFETY

A. The Employer and the Lodge will cooperate in the enforcement of safety. Any
concerns or suggestions regarding safety may be directed to the Joint Labor-Management
Liaison Committee.

B. The Employer shall replace any bullet proof vest issued to an employee in the Unit
immediately upon its mandatory replacement date as determined by the manufacturer of
the vest. Additionally, all radio batteries shall be replaced immediately upon the expiration
date as specified by the manufacturer of the battery and/or the battery is determined to be
defective by a Departmental Supervisor of any rank.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 12
ARTICLE 10
HEALTH AND WELFARE

A. For the term of this Agreement, through December 31, 2015, the parties recognize,
and agree to, the Health and Prescription Drug Plan Agreement as approved by the Board of
Estimates on November 7, 2012, which is attached hereto in Addendum A, along with three
attachments thereto: (A) Schedule of Standard Plan Design; (B) Schedule High Option Plan
Design; and (C) 2012 vs. 2013 Active Rate Comparison.

B. Effective January 1, 2008, the Employer reserves the right to adjust the percentage
of the retiree’s contribution for those employees who retire with less than twenty (20) years
of service on or after January 1, 2008. This provision shall not apply to any employee who
receives disability retirement benefit.

C. During the term of this Memorandum, the Department will continue in effect the
stress management program providing services related thereto at no or nominal cost for
employees and family members affected by the employees' job-related stress problems;
except that if the provider contract is put up for bids, the bid specifications will be subject to
the approval of both the Lodge and the Department prior to their submission to the Bureau
of Purchases or Board of Estimates. In the event the Lodge or the Department is
dissatisfied with the selection of the provider or the content of the specifications
promulgated by the Board of Estimates, the Lodge and the Department shall jointly appeal
to the Board of Estimates.

D. The waiver form will continue to limit the waiver disclosure of the doctor's opinion
and such facts as shall, in his professional judgment, be necessary to comport with
professional standards while protecting the patient's privacy.

E. The face value of the death benefit for active employees shall be equivalent to the
employee's annual salary at time of death. The retiree death benefit is $7,000.00.

F. WAIVER OF GENERIC DRUG REQUIREMENT

The Employer agrees to provide the Lodge with copies of the proposed bidding
specifications for the City's prescription drug program providers for the Lodge's review and
comment. The parties will meet and confer with a view to reaching an agreement over a
workable provision that would enable participants to obtain proprietary drugs under the
program, when expressly prescribed by the treating physician as medically necessary.

G. SECTION 125 PLAN

The Employer will continue to administer the Section 125 Plan whereby the
employees’ contributions to health care, vision, and prescription programs would be
excluded from Federal and State taxes.

H. The Employer shall remit an annual payment of $650 (to be paid bi-weekly) to each

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 13
employee who, with satisfactory proof of alternative health insurance coverage received in
another plan, elects not to take any coverage under a City Health Care Plan. If, after
waiving coverage under any City Health Care Plan, the employee loses coverage due to the
death of a spouse or other person who is a source of coverage, divorce, loss of employment
or deletion of benefits (or such other qualifying event as determined by the Employee
Benefits Division), the employee may enroll in a City Health Care Plan and consequently
relinquish the waiver payment. The employee must notify the City's Employee Benefits
Division within thirty (30) days after a qualifying event occurs in order to enroll in a City
Health Care Plan. The Employer shall apportion the payment should an employee either
enter or leave a City Health Care Plan within a calendar year.

I. An employee shall be entitled to a Hospital Bill Audit Gain sharing payment of 332%
of an overpayment (or other billing error resulting in an overpayment to the health care
provider), up to a maximum of $500 to the employee for each incident. In order to qualify
for the Gain sharing payment, the employee must: (a) identify an overpayment of more
than $250 (in the aggregate) in a hospital bill that is presented to an employee or his or her
dependent and (b) notify the City's Employee Benefits Division of the error within thirty (30)
days after receipt of an Explanation of Benefits from the Health Plan. Payment shall be due
and made only if the error is verified and the amount overpaid actually is recovered to the
City's benefit.

J. The Employer will provide continued health care coverage at active employee rates
for benefit-eligible survivors (spouses and eligible dependents) of those members who were
enrolled in City health care plans and were killed in the line of duty at any time prior to or
subsequent to January 1, 1995. If survivors or enrolled dependents become eligible for
Medicare, they must enroll in the City retiree health care plan for coverage.

K. Unmarried dependents shall be covered by Employer's Prescription Drug and Vision
Care Programs until the end of the calendar year the dependents reach age 26.

L. Optical Plan

Optical plan benefits shall apply to current and future retirees, widows, and
dependents. The plan shall include an eye exam every twenty-four months and prescription
glasses, if needed.

ARTICLE 11
OVERTIME AND HOURS OF WORK

A. Hours of Work and Overtime for Non-Patrol Assignments
1. Employees may not be required to work more than five (5) work days in the
established seven (7) day work period (Sunday to Saturday) at straight time
rates.

2. The workday for employees in non-patrol assignments shall consist of eight
(8) hours and thirty-six (36) minutes, including roll call and a Y2-hour lunch.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 14
All time worked in excess of eight (8) hours and thirty-six (36) minutes or in
excess of five (5) days shall be compensated at overtime rates.

Roll call will begin twenty-one (21) minutes before the eight (8) hour tour. No
additional compensation shall be paid for work performed during the first
fifteen (15) minutes after the tour. Accordingly, employees in Non-Patrol
Assignments shall be compensated for 8.33 hours each day.

B. Hours of Work and Overtime for Patrol Assignments

1.

The work schedule for employees in the Neighborhood Patrol Bureau shall be
four (4) days of work in a calendar workweek (Sunday-Saturday) at 10.6
hours (10 hours and 36 minutes) per day. All time worked in excess of ten
(10) hours and thirty-six (36) minutes or in excess of four (4) days shall be
compensated at overtime rates. A Side-Letter Agreement setting forth the
scheduled shift times and a copy of the schedule and leave groups is attached
herewith as Addendum J.

The work period for patrol employees shall be 28 days.

Shifts B and C shall rotate on a twenty-eight (28) day basis pursuant to
Addendum J. Shifts A and D shall be permanent.

There shall be four (4) leave groups from which H days shall be determined,
and parties have agreed upon a chart/schedule setting forth the various leave
groups.

Roll call will begin at the top of the hour for all employees in the
Neighborhood Patrol Bureau. Employees working in the Neighborhood Patrol
Bureau (4-day week) shall be paid for 10 hours and 24 minutes (10.41 hours)
each day.

Each year prior to January 1, employees in the Neighborhood Patrol Bureau
will have the ability to sign up for their respective shift and leave group. The
choice of shift and leave group will be based on seniority of officers.

C. Provisions Applicable to Both Non-Patrol and Patrol Assignments

1.
2.

All days and hours of paid leave shall be treated as days and hours worked.

The Employer shall not vary or rearrange an employee's scheduled tour of
duty hours to avoid the payment of overtime when hours of overtime are
previously worked unless agreed to at the sole option of the employee.

Employees of the Bargaining Unit required to attend roll call preparation as
officers in charge (“OIC”) will receive compensation at their appropriate
overtime rate.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 15
4. Mandatory Overtime Assignments.

In the event that the Department shall find it necessary to mandate that a
Unit employee work in an overtime capacity that is not contiguous with a
employee's regularly scheduled shift, the Department shall make every effort
to solicit volunteers from within the employee's unit of assignment to work
mandated overtime assignments. In the event that there are insufficient
volunteers, the Department agrees to permit a reasonable number of
employees to be exempt from working mandatory overtime on the basis of
exigent circumstances including, but not limited to, family illness, attendance
at educational classes, approved secondary employment, pre-paid social
events, etc.

5. Changes to the employee's scheduled work hours with less than forty-eight
(48) hours’ notice from the start of the originally scheduled shift shall entitle
the affected employee to the payment of two (2) additional hours
compensation at the employee's regular rate of pay for each shift worked with
less than the required forty-eight (48) hours’ notice.

ARTICLE 12
COMPENSATION

A. FISCAL YEARS 2014-2016 COMPENSATION

1. Effective July 1, 2013, all bargaining unit employees shall receive a 2%
across the board wage increase.

2. Effective July 1, 2014, employees shall receive the following wage
increases: Employees with less than 7 completed years of service: 5%.
Employees with more than 7 completed years of service but less than 15
completed years of service: 8%. Employees with more than 15 completed
years of service: 11%

3. Effective July 1, 2015, bargaining unit employees shall receive a 6%
across the board wage increase.

4. Scheduled salary steps shall remain in effect.

B. Effective July 1, 2000 and in the subsequent fiscal years respectively, progression
within the rank of Police Officer, Police Agent and Flight Officer shall be as set out in
Addendum B Salary Schedule. This progressive schedule supersedes all other salary scales
and longevity pay provisions set out in prior agreements. Transition from the former salary
schedule to the new salary schedule shall be in accordance with the transition rules
established by the Department of Personnel.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 16
Cc. PAYMENT DATES

All remuneration due to or elected by an employee shall be based on the date on
which the employee's anniversary date falls within the pay period. In the event that the
employee's anniversary date falls within the first half of the pay period, the employee shall
receive the payment for the entire pay period. If the anniversary or promotion date falls
within the second half of the pay period, the payment shall be made as of the next
succeeding pay period. The City agrees that an employee's new salary shall be effective as
of the actual date of his/her promotion.

D. The Employer will pay all remuneration due to or elected by an employee as provided
in Paragraph C above. The parties agree that the failure to effect a pay adjustment on time
is a violation of this Memorandum, subject to the grievance procedure herein. The City
agrees to rectify the error as soon as possible.

E. SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL

All employees covered by this Memorandum are entitled to pay at their scheduled
rate plus a differential of $.45 per hour if assigned to a tour where the majority of their
work hours occur between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m., or $.40 per hour if assigned to a tour where
the majority of their work hours occur between 2 p.m. and 10 p.m.

F. TUITION REIMBURSEMENT

During FY 2015 and 2016, the Employer shall maintain a fund of $350,000.00 per
fiscal year for a tuition reimbursement program. Within budgetary constraints, an employee
shall be granted benefits under this Article and shall be reimbursed, providing the employee
meets all qualifications as listed in the Administrative Manual, for 50% of the tuition cost of
a maximum of 10 credits per semester, consisting of no more than 4 courses for taking a
job-related course or in a degree program that benefits the City services. To receive the
benefit the Employee must obtain a grade of an “A” (GPA 4.0), a “B” (GPA 3.0) or a “C”
(GPA 2.0). The Employee must document completion of the course with a transcript from
the education program in which he/she was enrolled. Additionally, to qualify for
reimbursement, college credits must be received by the Employee for courses taken and
successfully completed at an accredited educational institute.

The BPD will meet and confer with the FOP to develop policies and procedures for
administering tuition reimbursement.

ARTICLE 13
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT

A. An employee may work in approved secondary employment not to exceed thirty-two
(32) hours per week. No more than twenty (20) of those hours shall be worked in
assignments outside those administered by the Overtime Unit unless the remaining 12

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 17
hours of City Secondary are not available, in which case the employee may work up to the
32 hour limit without restriction. The Police Commissioner may authorize other approved
secondary not subject to the twenty (20) hour limit such as hotels, hospitals, and schools.

During a week where the employee is off five (5) or more leave days, other than
medical leave, a employee shall not work more than forty (40) hours of approved secondary
employment.

B. Employees who are required to be armed as a condition of secondary employment
outside Baltimore City and who take enforcement action related to said secondary
employment using a firearm that does not comply with General Order 0-4 shall not be
considered as acting in the line of duty as Baltimore Police Officers and, therefore, shall not
be disciplined for taking such action.

Cc. An employee may be armed with an authorized handgun while engaged in secondary
employment outside Baltimore City. Within Baltimore City, an employee may not be armed
with a sidearm other than a handgun authorized by the Department and shall be authorized
to wear the uniform while engaged in secondary employment, subject to the conditions
provided in a letter from the Police Commissioner to the President of the Lodge dated
February 1, 2012 that appears as Addendum C (Secondary Employment) to this.
Memorandum.

D. Consistent with current policy governing conflict of interest and unauthorized
occupational areas, secondary employment will not be prohibited. Authorized secondary
employment will not be suspended or revoked for disciplinary reasons.

E. The Employer will, to the extent practicable, offer assignments to City secondary
employment and scheduled overtime on a rotating basis and will allocate available
opportunities equitably and fairly among employees in the unit. To that end, when
particular skills are required to perform scheduled overtime on subsidized projects, all
available employees who have those skills shall be offered the overtime. In addition,
employees who have reached the 25% overtime cap shall not be foreclosed from working
emergency and authorized, scheduled overtime when other volunteers are not available to
perform it.

F. Consistent with current policy governing conflict of interest, lawful secondary
employment outside of Baltimore City shall be allowed, as long as the following conditions
are met:

1. The employee is acting as a private citizen, and without exercising the powers
and duties of a Baltimore Police Officer;

2. The employee does not present Baltimore Police Credentials as his or her
authority to carry out the duties required of the secondary employment;

3. The employee, except when employed in accident reconstruction or arson

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 18
investigation, is not acting as a special police officer or private detective; and

4. The employee is not operating a private detective, guard and/or watchman
agency.

G. When a Unit employee has an approved and scheduled City secondary employment
assignment and reports to that assignment site on time, in uniform (if required) and ready
to work, said employee shall be paid a minimum of two (2) hours at the employee's regular
overtime rate in the event that the scheduled City secondary employment assignment is
cancelled upon the employee’s arrival at the work site.

H. The City agrees to meet with the FOP to discuss guidelines for allowing employees to
work in establishments which serve, sell, or dispense alcoholic beverages. This meeting
shall occur within thirty (30) days of the notation of this Memorandum of Understanding by
the Board of Estimates.

ARTICLE 14
COURT TIME

When an employee is required to attend two (2) or more courts on the same day,
with a starting time of two (2) or more hours between each court on his regular day off or
during non-regularly scheduled working hours, he shall receive a minimum compensation of
four (4) hours at time and one-half (1/2). In other respects, present court time policy shall
continue.

ARTICLE 15
PROTECTION AGAINST LIABILITY

Protection against liability shall be in keeping with Section 16-13 of the Code of
Public Local Laws of Baltimore City.

However, legal counsel will be provided in any civil case when the plaintiff alleges
that an employee should be held liable for acts alleged to be within the scope of his
employment and/or his official capacity. In exchange for the City of Baltimore's agreement
to provide legal counsel as provided for herein, the employee and/or employee's counsel
shall provide documents or transcripts produced in the Court proceedings to the office of
the City Solicitor upon its request. The requirement to produce said documents shall be
limited to those cases where the City is requested to authorize a monetary settlement or
pay a judgment for monetary damages. In no event shall the City be entitled to receive any
documents in any case where a verdict is rendered in favor of the defense. In the event the
current contract for providing legal services is terminated, the Lodge and the Department
agree to make a joint recommendation to the City Solicitor for specifications for successor
counsel. Subject to the fellow-employee exclusion provision and approval of the Board of
Estimates, indemnification will also be provided to any member of the unit who is made a
defendant in litigation arising out of acts within the scope of his or her employment. The

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 19
City will provide indemnification to any member of the Unit who is made a defendant in
litigation arising out of acts within the scope of his/her employment that results in a
monetary judgment being rendered against the employee.

ARTICLE 16
DISCIPLINE

A. Suspension

1. Emergency suspension with or without pay may be imposed by the
Department when it appears that the action is in the best interest of the public and
the law enforcement agency. Any employee arrested and charged with a criminal
offense, a serious traffic violation involving death or serious personal injury, and/or
an act alleged or committed by such employee of such a nature that, in the judgment
of the appropriate superior officer, the interest and welfare of the public, the
Department, or the individual is best served by such action, such employee shall be
immediately suspended from duty with pay. When an employee is charged with a
criminal offense, said charge(s) shall be supported at least in part by the
investigative findings of another law enforcement officer. Any employee suspended
from duty with pay shall be given a suspension hearing as soon as reasonable
following the suspension from duty, wherein a determination will be made at that
time whether or not the employee shall remain suspended with or without pay
and/or be placed on administrative duties. Suspension without pay may only be
imposed in accordance with this Section and only in the case of an employee charged
with a felony.

2. Any employee who is suspended without pay on the basis of pending criminal
charges and who is found not guilty, or who has the criminal charges dropped
entirely shall be immediately reinstated to pay status with all benefits, including but
not limited to health, incremental pay raises, and all lost pay from the effective date
of his/her suspension through the date of reinstatement to pay status, except in a
case where the State has an appeal pending. In felony cases, where the case has
been reduced to a misdemeanor or some less charge, the employee shall be
reinstated to pay status with all benefits pending any further administrative hearing
on the matter to determine whether or not the employee shall be returned to duty.

3. Suspensions for Allegations of Domestic Violence
(a) The Department shall continue to have the right to suspend a
employee’s police powers (including taking his/her weapon) upon a complaint
of domestic violence. Following such suspension, a hearing shall be held
within three (3) work days from the date of the first action/suspension.

(b) The hearing shall be conducted as in the past with the understanding
that the representative of the Department hearing the matter shall consider all
relevant evidence when deciding whether to continue the suspension,
including but not limited to: (1) evidence of injury; (2) the statement of the

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 20
complaining party; (3) corroboration of the allegation by a third-party; (4) any
criminal charge, (5) a court order pertaining to the parties, (6) substantial
prior history or pattern of domestic violence (Substantiated shall mean some
actual proof of a prior incident of domestic violence), and (7) a fitness for duty
report or evaluation with respect to this incident that the Department shall
initiate within 24 hours of the suspension.

(c) Following the hearing and based upon the evidence presented, the
Department’s representative shall make a decision within twenty-four (24)
hours whether or not to sustain the suspension and set forth a short written
statement of the reasons for that decision. If it is determined that the
suspension is not warranted, the fact that there is an open IAD file on this
matter shall not be the sole bar to lifting the suspension.

B. Discipline for Minor Violations

1. Unless otherwise mutually agreed, the Department shall provide to counsel for
an accused employee a copy of the IAD casebook material (excluding information
that discloses an investigative technique, the identity of confidential sources, and
recommendations as to charges, disposition or punishment) for Minor Violations
Discipline not less than thirty (30) days prior to the employee's one person
Departmental Hearing Board at no cost. The same material should be provided in a
timely manner to a bargaining unit employee or his counsel on request whenever the
Department offers punishment.

2. For Minor disciplinary matters, where a one person Departmental Hearing
Board is established at the discretion of the Department, such hearing shall be
scheduled no sooner than thirty (30) days from the date that counsel for the accused
receives a copy of the charges and the IAD case book material, unless a shorter
period is mutually agreed upon by the Department and Counsel.

3. A unit employee shall be entitled to one (1) peremptory challenge of persons
designated as members of a one person Departmental Hearing Board. No individual
assigned to Traffic may sit as a member of the Traffic Accident Review Board.

4. For purposes of this Paragraph B, Minor Violations are defined as “Violations in
which no more than a 3-day suspension or a $150 fine may be imposed pursuant to
the Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights (LEOBR) definition of Summary
Punishment.

Cc. Discipline for Major Violations

1. Unless otherwise mutually agreed, the Department shall provide to counsel for
an accused employee a copy of the IAD casebook material (excluding information
that discloses an investigative technique, the identity of confidential sources, and
recommendations as to charges, disposition or punishment) not less than forty-five

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 21
D.

(45) days prior to the employee’s Departmental Hearing Board at no cost. The same
material should be provided in a timely manner to a bargaining unit employee or his
counsel on request whenever the Department offers punishment.

2. For major disciplinary matters, where a three-person Departmental Hearing
Board is established, such hearing shall not be scheduled any sooner than forty-five
(45) days from the date that counsel for the accused receives a copy of the charges
and the IAD case book material, unless a shorter period is mutually agreed upon by
the Department and counsel.

3. A unit employee shall have the option of a Departmental Hearing Board
conducted by a panel composed of an Administrative Law Judge (hereinafter “ALJ”)
and three sworn members, one being of equal rank. If the employee is represented
by counsel, the counsel shall, with the consent of the member, have the option of
selecting the ALJ process. If the employee is unrepresented, the employee shall
make the selection. The ALJ will act as the Departmental Hearing Board Chairperson
and make evidentiary and legal rulings but will not be a voting member of the panel
during deliberations on verdict or sentencing. In no event shall an ALJ be appointed
to a Departmental Hearing Board without the consent of the accused employee or
his/her counsel of record.

4. If an accused employee declines the option of including an AL) on a
Departmental Hearing Board as defined in Paragraph C.3 herein, the accused
employee shall be entitled to three (3) peremptory challenges of persons designated
as members of the Departmental Hearing Board. Only two (2) peremptory
challenges may be used to strike the Hearing Board Chairperson. No individual
assigned to Traffic may sit as a member of the Traffic Accident Review Board. The
Department agrees to choose panel members on a random basis by computer from
those management and unit members who are in the trial board pool. The
Department shall give the Lodge notice and opportunity to be present when the
panel is chosen and the Lodge may designate either Lodge Representative or
designee who may observe the random selection of the panel. The Department will
increase the number of officers in the pool to 50 and maintain approximately 30
sergeants and 20 lieutenants in the pool. The pool shall also include command staff
under the Deputy Commissioner rank other than those who have been excluded for
bona fide reasons by the Commissioner or his designee.

5. For purposes of this Paragraph C, Major Violations are defined as “Violations in
which 4-days or more suspensions/loss of leave or more than $150 fine may be
imposed.

Participation on a Departmental Hearing Board. No civilians other than an

Administrative Law Judge may serve on a Departmental Hearing Board.

E.

Upon request, IAD will expeditiously complete an investigation that it has initiated

into alleged misconduct by an employee.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 22
F. Within ten (10) days after IAD’s report of the results of its investigation has been
confirmed, the Department shall advise the affected employee of its finding, i.e., whether
sustained, not sustained, unfounded or exonerated. If the investigatory report is to be
referred to the Civilian Review Board (CRB), the Department may advise the employee that
the result is subject to revision. It is understood that where an investigation of a charge
encompasses multiple charges growing out of the same incident, advisement concerning
the outcome may be deferred pending completion of the entire investigation.

G. If an accident is found to have been non-preventable, all records of the accident shall
be expunged from the employee's file. If an employee requests expungement of a formal
complaint or other material from any file of the employee pursuant to the Law Enforcement
Officers' Bill of Rights, the complaint and/or material shall be expunged within sixty (60)
days of the request. The Department agrees promptly to give the employee written notice
that the records have been expunged pursuant to his or her request.

H. — In the event that the Department takes disciplinary action against an employee on
account of conduct reasonably attributable to a disabling condition, the following shall
apply:
1. No Departmental Hearing shall be conducted provided the employee has
expeditiously filed an application with the Retirement Board for a special or ordinary
disability pension under the Fire and Police Employees’ Retirement System.

2. In the event the employee has expeditiously filed an application and the
Retirement Board has not rendered a decision regarding the employee's application
within four (4) months from the date the employee filed the application, the
Department may proceed with the Departmental Hearing.

3. In the event the employee is denied ordinary disability retirement, the
Department may proceed with the Departmental Hearing. Subsequent applications
for retirement will not impact on the Department's administrative process.

I. No Departmental Hearing, except a Suspension Hearing, shall be held on any
charges that relate to conduct which is also the subject of a criminal proceeding, until such
time as criminal charges are disposed of prior to any appeal, except an appeal de novo to a
Maryland Circuit Court.

 

J. Pending IAD investigations into off-duty, non-criminal misconduct shall not bar
consideration for promotion. If an employee under investigation for any other reason is
passed over for promotion solely because of a pending investigation and is then cleared, the
Police Commissioner will consider the individual for promotion to the next available vacancy
and will make application to the Civil Service Commission for a waiver if necessary to make
promotion from an expired list. The decision of the Police Commissioner and the City's
Personnel Director is final and not subject to the grievance procedure.

K. Notice of routine disciplinary actions shall be distributed only to the affected

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 23
employee, the employee's counsel, the Commanding Officer, the Chief of the Division
involved, the Chief of Internal Affairs Division, the Chief of the Human Resources Division,
the Directors of the Personnel, Inspections, and the Equal Employment Opportunity
Compliance Divisions, the Office of Legal Affairs, and the Police Commissioner. No other
publication shall be made, except in unusual circumstances wherein the Department finds
that announcement of the discipline is in the public interest.

L. Should the Department require an employee to forfeit vacation as punishment for a
sustained offense or violation, the employee shall have the option to be suspended for the
same period or to pay an equivalent fine. It is understood that the Department's policy is to
give a priority to vacation forfeiture over mandatory fines or suspensions.

M. — The Department shall make every effort to impose suspensions without pay so as to
avoid the cessation of Employer health care benefits due to non-payment of required
Employer/Employee contributions. In the event that the Department shall levy a
suspension without pay of sufficient duration to require the employee to pay for
continuance of his/her Employer's sponsored health benefits, the Department agrees to pay
its proportionate share of the cost of health benefits on behalf of the suspended employee
for the pay period(s) so affected.

N. A traffic safety review board shall conduct a hearing to determine if a departmental
accident is preventable or non-preventable.

If the Board determines the accident to be preventable, it shall recommend
disciplinary punishment in accordance with the Department's traffic accident disciplinary
matrix.

0. The Department agrees to establish a protocol for advising employees that three (3)
years have elapsed since a finding by the Department or a Hearing Board that a formal
complaint was either not sustained, exonerated, unfounded, or a Hearing Board acquitted
the accused employee, dismissed the action, or made a finding of not guilty, and that the
employee may request expungement of such matter from any file containing the record of
the formal complaint.

P. The Department agrees that employees should not be disciplined and shall not be
terminated from employment solely on the basis of being placed on the “witness do not call
list” by the office of the State’s Attorney for Baltimore City.

Q. The Department agrees to expunge any allegation in an employee's file three years
after a finding of “un-sustained, exonerated, unfounded or when a hearing board acquitted
the law enforcement officer, dismissed the action, or made a finding of not guilty.” The
Police Commissioner shall convene a committee with an equal number of representatives
from the Department and the Lodge to discuss the implementation of this policy and related
issues.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 24
R. When an employee is required to make a statement in reference to a complaint
being investigated by the Department, the employee shall be given a copy of any prior
statement or report which that employee wrote/authored relating to the complaint being
investigated.

S. The Department agrees to provide counsel with a calendar of Trial Board Hearings on
a regular basis (e.g. monthly) so that counsel has sufficient advance notice of trial board
hearings. An accused employee who is not represented shall be given reasonable advance
notice of his/her hearing.

T. When an employee is required to give a statement pertaining to a complaint of
misconduct by the employee, the Department shall provide the employee with notice that
the employee has the right to legal counsel, the date and location (if applicable) of the
incident, the nature of the conduct for which the employee is being questioned (e.g.
excessive force in making an arrest; the circumstances involved in the discharge of his/her
weapon including the date and location; unlawful arrest; etc.) and the CRB form and/or
Blue Team entry, provided the Department may question the employee (as part of the
statement) regarding any matter relating to the misconduct in question regardless of
whether it is specified in the document provided.

ARTICLE 17
UNIFORMS AND CLOTHING

A. The Department agrees to consider suggestions from the Lodge regarding the
selection of replacement coats. New coats shall be issued in keeping with established
replacement standards.

B. An annual clothing allowance shall be paid, on a quarterly basis, to employees
assigned to plainclothes positions designated by General Order R-5. Effective July 1, 1990,
the clothing allowance shall be $500.

Cc. The department shall provide up to four boxes of practice ammunition for use by
employees at firing ranges operated by the BPD in each fiscal year as a part of their annual
uniform and equipment allotment. The Quartermaster will issue a paid slip upon request by
employee. Upon presentation of the paid slip to the District Range Officer, the appropriate
box of practice ammunition will be provided for use at the BPD range.

No practice ammunition is authorized for use outside the BPD firing range where
issued.

In addition, the Department will issue each employee an approved departmental
flashlight. Such light will be considered a part of the employee's standard issued
equipment. Replacements will be issued thereafter consistent with Departmental Policy.
The type of flashlight available shall be determined by the Department, and may change
from time to time as determined by the Police Commissioner.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 25
ARTICLE 18
APPOINTMENT TO POLICE AGENT

It shall be the policy of the Department that during the term of this Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU), all eligible and qualified police officers and/or flight officers in Unit I
who have received or obtains a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university,
and who have one (1) year of completed service shall receive an annual salary as reflected
in Addendum B, Grade 799 — Police Agent and Grade 796 - Flight Officer of this MOU, no
later than six (6) months from the date of eligibility as expressed herein.

ARTICLE 19
DISABILITY

The Department and Counsel for the Lodge shall meet and confer for the purpose of
adding additional qualified psychologists and psychiatrists to those the Department uses to
evaluate if an employee is fit for duty. No psychologist or psychiatrist shall be appointed to
the panel without the Department's concurrence.

ARTICLE 20
JOINT LABOR-MANAGEMENT LIAISON COMMITTEE

There shall be established within the Department a Joint Labor-Management Liaison
Committee consisting of up to four (4) representatives of the Department appointed by the
Police Commissioner and up to two (2) representatives from Unit I and up to two (2)
representatives from Unit II.

The Committee shall meet not less than quarterly except upon the majority consent
of the Committee. It shall consider, evaluate, and, if in agreement, shall make
recommendations to and/or advise the Police Commissioner and/or his designee with
respect to specific matters bearing upon the economy, efficiency, or other improvement in
Departmental operations and/or upon the welfare of its employees whether or not such
matters are negotiable. Lodge Representatives shall be deemed to be in duty status while
attending such meetings.

ARTICLE 21
BULLETIN BOARDS AND COMMUNICATIONS

A. The Department agrees to provide reasonable bulletin board space labeled with the
FOP logo and name within each District and Division for the purpose of allowing the Lodge
to inform its membership of Lodge business and activities. The Lodge President and/or
Lodge Secretary shall sign all such notices. No scurrilous or defamatory material shall be
posted. The Department shall remove any materials posted in violation of this Section. The
space so designated shall be maintained in an orderly manner, to include periodic removal
of outdated material.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 26
B. The Department will permit the Lodge to use the Departmental mail system for non-
bulk communication to select employees. All mail must be directed by name and
assignment and will not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the membership of the Lodge at
any one (1) mailing.

Cc. The Department shall permit a designated representative of the Lodge to address
recruit classes for two (2) consecutive class periods of not less than forty-five (45) minutes
each. During the term of this Memorandum, a representative of the Lodge, designated by
the President, will be allowed one-half of an hour to address each in-service training group.
Upon prior notification to the Lodge President, the Police Commissioner reserves the right to
revoke this arrangement.

ARTICLE 22
ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE FOR LODGE REPRESENTATIVES

A. During the term of this Memorandum, the President of Baltimore City Lodge No. 3,
Fraternal Order of Police, Inc., shall be granted a full-time leave of absence from his duties
for the Police Department, mandated in-service training excepted, but shall remain on the
payroll of the Police Department for the purpose of performing full-time duties on behalf of
the Lodge. During such leave, the President shall continue to accumulate seniority and
shall receive all benefits as if he were fully on duty including, but not limited to, pension
accruals and fringe benefits.

B. A paid leave bank of 300 days per year shall be created for employees of the Lodge
to use to attend scheduled conferences, seminars, Board and Committee meetings and
conventions. The bank may be used interchangeably with Unit II. Each use shall be
requested in advance by the President of the Lodge (or his designee) in writing, specifying
the person or persons using such leave, the hours requested, and the purpose for the
leave. The request shall be granted, subject to the needs of the Department. Each Unit
employee permitted to be absent pursuant to this provision shall be responsible for giving
his supervisor advance notice of absence from work for Lodge business.

C. The President of the Lodge and two (2) persons designated by him shall be
permitted to visit Police Districts, Units, and other work locations in connection with
grievance matters. Visits shall be preceded by reasonable notice.

D. The Department shall permit use of its Police Districts and other designated work
locations for the purpose of conducting election voting, which shall be conducted without
interference with regular business operations.

E. The Department shall provide the Lodge with a roster of all new sworn employees
and their addresses.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 27
ARTICLE 23
NO STRIKE, SECONDARY BOYCOTT OR LOCKOUT

A. The Lodge agrees that during the term of this Memorandum it shall not engage in,
initiate, sponsor, support, or direct a strike or secondary boycott or directly or indirectly
picket the Employer or any of its property in furtherance of a strike. The Employer agrees
that there shall be no lockout during the term of this Memorandum.

B. If the Lodge shall violate any of the provisions hereof:
1. _ Its designation as exclusive representative may be revoked by the Department;

2. It may be ineligible to participate in elections or to be certified as exclusive
representative for a period of two (2) years thereafter; and

3. The Department may refrain from making payroll deductions for such
organization's dues for a period of two (2) years thereafter.

Cc. Nothing in this Memorandum shall deprive the Employer of remedies available to it
under applicable law in the event of a strike.

ARTICLE 24
WORKING CONDITIONS

A. VACATION REQUESTS
Special vacation requests that deviate from current policy shall be considered.
B. — WORK OUT-OF-TITLE

1. Employees shall not be assigned to perform painting or maintenance of
buildings and grounds, except upon mutual agreement.

If a bargaining unit employee is directed temporarily to assume the responsibilities and
privileges of a higher rank or if designated and fulfilling the duties of Field Training Officer
he or she shall receive additional compensation. If so designated as acting out-of-title at
the start of the employee's tour of duty, the employee shall be paid out-of-title for the
entire day unless the employee fails to complete the tour of duty for circumstances beyond
the control of the Department. No two employees may work out-of-title in the same
Position. The out-of-title compensation shall be $14.00 per day. Field Training Officer
compensation shall be $40.00 per day.

c LOST OR STOLEN PROPERTY

If an employee has reimbursed the Department and the lost property is subsequently
recovered without damage, the Department will refund the reimbursement.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 28
D. FOOTWEAR

Employees in the unit may wear military-style black leather boots that retain a shine,
except when the Class A uniform is worn on formal occasions.

E. "DETECTIVE" TITLE

The title "Detective" shall be restored to employees in the Applicant Investigation
Unit of the Personnel Division.

F. DETAILS

1. In the event that an employee is detailed to another position, that employee's
vacated position will not be permanently filled by another employee. Upon the
expiration of the detail, the detailed employee will be returned to his/her former
position.

2. Any employee who is involuntarily detailed outside of his/her assignment for
more than thirty (30) days shall have the opportunity to challenge the detail to the
Deputy Commissioner of his/her corresponding bureau.

G. BODY ART

Employees in the bargaining unit who are engaged in any assignment that requires
the employee to wear summer Departmental uniform, i.e. short sleeve shirt, who display
any visible body art, except for body art that shall be located on the employee's face, shall
be supplied at the Department's sole expense with a sufficient number of long sleeve
tropical shirts and/or cosmetic make-up to cover the displayed body art. Employees who
must wear the long sleeve tropical shirts as described herein shall NOT be required to wear
a neck tie while wearing the long sleeve tropical shirt.

H. LEAVE GROUPS

All employees in the bargaining unit who are reassigned within their patrol sector or
assignment for operational reasons by the Department which results in a change to their
leave group affecting their scheduled “H” days shall be treated as follows:

1. Employees shall be involuntarily reassigned to a new leave group in reverse
seniority order (i.e. the least senior to be involuntarily reassigned first).

2. Employees who voluntarily request reassignment to a new leave group shall
be reassigned on the basis of seniority (i.e. the most senior employee shall be
voluntarily reassigned first). Seniority means total length of Departmental service.
In the event that two or more employees of a patrol sector or other unit have equal
seniority, the tie(s) shall be broken on the basis of their last written performance

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 29
evaluation, i.e. the most favorable evaluation shall serve as the tie breaker.

L The FOP shall be afforded the opportunity to provide meaningful input to the process
of evaluating boundaries for possible current post, sector and district realignment.

ARTICLE 25
PROMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS

A. PROMOTIONS

1. There will be at least sixty (60) days notice in advance of written examinations for
promotions. All relevant study materials for promotional examinations shall be made
available to employees at least sixty (60) days prior to the written examination.

2. A funded vacancy which involves promotion shall be filled within a reasonable
period of time, following the vacancy. The parties shall meet to further define the
process for filling vacancies.

B. | TRANSFERS

1. The Department agrees to post notice for a period of five (5) consecutive days
on appropriate bulletin boards and Departmental E-mail systems of all vacancies that
it intends to fill by permanent transfer to any position other than patrol and the
Commissioner's Office. Assignments within any Bureau, Division, Section or Unit will
continue to rest with Command. Notice of the posting will be given at roll call.
Employees may submit written requests for consideration of the posted vacancy.
Every employee who is eligible for consideration will be interviewed by the
appropriate Command. When the vacancy is filled, applicants shall be notified as to
whether they received the position. Requests which were submitted and interviews
conducted shall remain active for sixty (60) days for any vacancies which may arise.
The Department shall also consider new requests for consideration which may be
filled for subsequent vacancies. The current system to accept District-to-District
transfer will continue, but requests will have a one (1) year life and therefore must
be renewed on a yearly basis. Seniority, meaning length of service in rank, shall be
considered. The foregoing shall not apply to transfers of persons determined by the
Police Medical Director to be permanently unable to perform all the duties of a Police
Officer, Police Agent, Flight Officer, Sergeant, or Lieutenant due to disabling
conditions but who are capable of performing the essential functions of a full duty
administrative position as determined by the Police Medical Director. Any employee
selected in accordance with the procedure as set forth herein to fill a posted vacancy
shall be permanently assigned to that vacancy immediately upon his/her selection
and may not be detailed to that vacancy.

Cc. INVOLUNTARY TRANSFERS

An involuntary transfer occurs when the Department permanently transfers an

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 30
employee (as distinguished from a detail) to another assignment and the employee objects
to the transfer. Such transfers must be made for legitimate business or operational
reasons, including but not limited to staffing needs and performance, and if done so, shall
be sufficient reason for the transfer. Employees who wish to contest such a transfer may
file a grievance under Article 6.

Should such a grievance go to arbitration, the Employer shall be required to articulate the
legitimate business or operational reason for the transfer.

ARTICLE 26
PROPERTY REIMBURSEMENT

A. If an employee's contact lens(es) is lost or damaged as a direct consequence of the
performance of law enforcement duties, he or she will receive a voucher for a replacement
lens(es) at a provider arranged for by the Department which can replace the lost or
damaged lens(es). This replacement will be available only once per employee during each
year(s) of this Memorandum.

B. The Department's Property Reimbursement Schedule shall be revised to provide as
follows:
Maximum Amount

Sunglasses 33.50
Hearing Aid 150.00
Watch 50.00
Watchband/Watch chain 15.00
Tie 9.00
Shirt 18.00
Trousers 50.00
Jacket 95.00
Sweater 30.00
Suit (Trousers & Jacket) 140.00
Shoes 40.00
Raincoat 55.00
Topcoat 100.00
Pager 50.00
Cellular Telephone 100.00
ARTICLE 27
MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY
PARTI
POLICY

A. Effective June 25, 1997, new employees of the Police Department shall accrue
medical leave at the rate of one (1) day for each month of completed service. Employees
must be in pay status at any time during the payroll period in which their anniversary date

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 31
occurs in order to accrue medical leave. Accrued medical leave may be used for non-line-
of-duty illnesses or injuries. Employees hired after June 25, 1997, shall be included in the
same medical leave program and policy for line-of-duty illnesses or injuries as those
employees hired prior to June 25, 1997.

Employees who accrue medical leave at the rate of one (1) day for each month of
completed service shall be permitted to utilize any accrued medical leave in accordance with
the Family and Medical Leave Act. Employees hired before June 25, 1997, shall continue to
use medical leave on an as needed basis.

B. In the event that an employee shall suffer a line-of-duty injury or illness, said
employee shall remain in paid status without being charged medical leave until such time as
a decision is made by the Department's designee as to whether or not the injury or illness
shall be classified as line-of-duty or non-line-of-duty. The employee shall be paid an amount
equal to sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 2/3) of his/her regular pay which may be
excluded from federal adjusted gross income and therefore is not subject to either federal
or state income tax (standard Workers Compensation benefit). In addition, the Employer
shall provide a supplement to the standard Worker's Compensation benefit so that the gross
pay of employees is equal to eighty-five percent (85%) of the employee's regular gross pay.
If it is determined that the injury is non-line-of-duty and the employee has been paid for
days in excess of his accrued leave days, he shall repay or be docked for such pay. An
employee may repay any amount owed by using medical leave, vacation or P and PL days
or by having his pay docked; provided, however, that in no instance shall the Department
dock an employee more than 25% of any paycheck.

PART II
NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS

A. Any employee who is unable to report to work because of medical leave must contact
his or her Unit of assignment not later than one (1) hour prior to the scheduled tour of duty
unless exigent circumstances exist.

B. An employee on medical leave will be required to call in only on the first day of any
absence, indicating the expected date of return, the reason for the absence, and the
address and telephone number where confined if different from that on file with the
Department. In cases where the employee does not return to work on the expected date, a
second call shall be made repeating the same information.

Cc. When an employee is home and on medical leave, the employee must notify his or
her Unit of assignment when leaving home and upon return. An employee is to remain at
home, except to go to a medical facility, pharmacy, polling place, place of worship, or retail
outlet which sells primarily food, or in the event of exigent circumstances. Employees may
not leave home for any other reason, except with the approval of their personal physician,
their Commanding Officer/designee or the Medical Section. The basis for the preceding is
to allow employees who are unable to work because of illness or injury to leave their home
for personal needs which are basic. Abuse of this procedure constitutes a violation of this

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 32
Policy and is subject to disciplinary action. In the event an employee receives approval
from the Medical Director for unrestricted medical leave at home, the notification of his or
her Unit of assignment when leaving and returning home shall be waived. There shall be
no home visits between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

PART III
MEDICAL CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS

A. A medical certification is required from all employees for all absences of three (3) or
more consecutive days, and must be submitted to the employee's Unit of assignment upon
returning to work.

B. A medical certification must contain the following information:

1. Date and time the employee was treated;

2. Address and phone number of the doctor or practitioner;

3. Date and doctor's authorized signature;

4. Nature of illness or injury complained of;

5. Diagnosis and treatment; and

6. Expected date of return to duty.
lon Any employee who is on medical leave shall not be required to report to any medical
facility for the purpose of determining that employee's fitness for duty between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. This provision shall not apply to employees in the medical abuse

program.

PART IV
MEDICAL LEAVE ABUSE CONTROL PROGRAM

A. Any employee who in a twelve (12) month period utilizes a total of eight (8)
uncertified medical days, or who reports on medical leave on four (4) separate uncertified
occasions, or who utilizes fifteen (15) or more medical days regardless of certification, may
be placed in the Medical Leave Abuse Control Program, hereafter known as "the Program,"
by his or her Commanding Officer after consultation with the Medical Section.

Nothing in this Policy shall be construed to prevent the Police Commissioner from
taking formal disciplinary action for violation of the policies of the Department. First
consideration, however, should be given to the application of the Program.

B. An uncertified medical day or occasion is the use of medical leave, regardless of
duration, for which no doctor's certificate (as outlined in Part II, Section B) is submitted to

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 33
the employee's immediate supervisor.

Cc. In addition, an employee who uses medical leave in a manner described below may
be placed in the Program:

1. Uncertified usage before or after regular days off (three (3) occasions);

2.  Uncertified usage on any specific tour of duty in the case of those employees
who rotate shifts (three (3) occasions);

3.  Uncertified usage on a specific day of the week (three (3) occasions); or
4. _ Usage of medical leave after being denied other leave (two (2) occasions).

D. Commanding Officers will retain the discretionary authority to exempt employees
meeting the above criteria, based on mitigating factors. Command will consult the Medical
Section prior to placing any employee in the Program.

E. Both the Department and the Lodge recognize that by its very nature police work
carries with it the risk of severe injury. For this reason, any employee who sustains a
significant injury in the performance of his or her duties during the twelve (12) month
period will be exempted for that period in all cases where his or her medical record would
not otherwise justify inclusion in the Program.

1. The exemption stated above will expire upon the earlier of:
(a) The passage of twelve (12) months from the date of injury; or

(b) | The employee reaching maximum benefit of medical treatment for this.
injury as determined by his or her treating physician and/or the Medical
Doctor.

2. The Medical Director shall make the determination in these matters.

F. An employee shall remain in the Medical Leave Abuse Control Program for one (1)
year from the date of being so designated. Continued absenteeism for medical reasons
may subject the employee to an extension in the Program and/or may constitute just cause
for disciplinary action.

G. Upon placement or extension in the Program, the employee shall be notified in
writing by his or her Commanding Officer within five (5) working days. This written
notification shall also include the date the employee is scheduled to return to normal status.

H. — An employee placed in the Program may appeal through the established grievance

procedure. For the purposes of this Program, in Step 4 of the grievance procedure, the
Director of the Personnel Division shall be the Police Commissioner's designee.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 34
L When an employee who has been placed in the Program is home on medical leave,
the employee must notify his or her Unit of assignment when leaving home and upon
return. An employee is to remain at home except to go to a medical facility, pharmacy,
polling place, place of worship, or retail outlet which sells primarily food, or in the event of
exigent circumstances. Employees may not leave home for any other reason, except with
the approval of their Commanding Officer/designee. Should the employee be refused
permission to leave home and should the employee feel that there is a medical necessity for
this request, said employee may appeal the denial to the Medical Director.

J. Any employee who utilizes less than eight (8) medical days and less than four (4)
separate occasions during the one (1) year period as designated will automatically return to
normal status.

Commanding Officers will retain the discretionary authority to return an employee to
normal status who exceeds the above guidelines in a case where he or she suffers a clear-
cut, bona fide, line-of-duty injury during the time frame in question.

K. The Lodge shall be notified on a quarterly basis of all bargaining unit employees
placed into the Medical Leave Abuse Control Program as well as those who have completed
the Program and are returning to regular status.

L. An employee who has been placed in the Medical Leave Abuse Control Program shall
be subject to the following sanctions:

1. The employee shall be required to obtain a doctor's certificate for all subsequent
uses of medical leave, regardless of duration, while in the Program. This certificate
must be submitted within two (2) working days after the employee returns to duty.

2. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Memorandum, secondary employment
privileges and participation in other overtime details shall be suspended while the
employee is in the Program.

3. No overtime compensation shall be awarded to the employee for the purpose of
obtaining medical certification.

PART V
PENALTIES

A. An employee accused of violating the provisions of the Medical Leave Abuse Control
Program is entitled to a hearing before any action may be taken as a result of this Section.
After a determination has been made that an employee has violated any of the provisions of
the Program, he or she shall in addition to loss of wages for the day(s) not worked be
disciplined in accordance with the following procedures:

1. One (1) day's suspension without pay for the first violation.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 35
2. Suspension without pay for three (3) days and forfeiture of secondary
employment opportunities for an additional twelve (12) months for the second
violation.

3. Trial Board with a view toward termination for the third violation.

B. This provision shall not apply to absences preceding an employee's placement in the
Medical Leave Abuse Control Program.

PART VI
INCENTIVE FOR NON-USE OF MEDICAL LEAVE

A. The Department will provide the following incentives for non-use of medical leave:

1. Effective July 1, 2002, and continuing thereafter, employees shall earn three
(3) days of paid leave for each six (6) months when medical leave is not used during
each of the periods from July 1 to December 31 and January 1 to June 30. Any
employee who completes an entire fiscal year without medical leave shall receive two
(2) additional paid leave days.

2. This accumulated paid leave will be converted to Vacation Leave the following
fiscal year to be used any time during that fiscal year.

3. The above incentive program shall apply only to those employees who worked
in a full duty status, with the exception of those employees who have not reached
maximum benefit of medical treatment for line-of-duty injuries and are in a restricted
duty status. The incentive program shall apply to those employees who are in a
restricted status and performing the essential functions of a full-duty position.

4. Any employee who was otherwise qualified to receive the benefits of this
Section, and who suffered an injury while performing his/her official duties may
appeal to the Medical Director for restoration of those benefits for a period of one
year from the date that employee returns to work from his/her line of duty injury.
Final determination in these matters shall rest with the Medical Director.

PART VII
VACATION LEAVE ACCRUAL DURING SICK TIME

A. Effective July 1, 1991, employees will not accrue Vacation Leave in any month during
which they were carried on sick leave for the entire period. Similarly, any employee who
temains on line-of-duty medical ("A" Time) for a period of six (6) months will cease to
accrue Vacation Leave during subsequent months in which he or she is on medical ("A"
Time) for the entire month. In case of severe line-of-duty injuries and upon written
request, the six (6) month provision shall be waived only upon recommendation of the
Medical Doctor.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 36
B. If an employee and/or the City successfully recovers monies for salary paid while on
medical leave as a result of third-party litigation, those days of medical leave repaid to the
City or Department shall be removed from the employee's medical leave totals. This would
apply to line-of-duty and non-line-of-duty injury cases.

In the event that such removal of medical leave days (a) would qualify the employee
for the benefits of Part V of this Article and/or (b) would not have resulted in the non-
accrual of Vacation Leave in Section A above, the employee shall receive all incentive days
for non-use of medical leave and Vacation Leave days to which he or she would otherwise
have been entitled under this Article.

ARTICLE 28
LAYOFFS

A. NOTICE OF LAYOFF

The Department shall give each affected employee not less than thirty (30) days'
advance notice that he or she will be laid off. The Notice shall advise the employee of the
expected period of layoff, if known, and that the employee's rights in the circumstances
may be found in the Memorandum of Understanding and applicable provisions of the Civil
Service Regulations. The Department agrees to furnish a copy of each Notice to the Lodge
and to meet with Lodge Representatives promptly to resolve any questions arising under
this Memorandum.

B. ORDER OF LAYOFF

There shall be no layoff in any rank so long as unfilled, funded positions are
budgeted and charged to the Department in that rank and approved for fill by the City
Finance Department. Recruits and probationary officers shall be laid off before any other
employee in the bargaining unit. The next order of layoff will be those employees rated
"unsatisfactory" or "needs improvement" on their last three (3) consecutive ratings.
Thereafter, employees shall be laid off in seniority order, the least senior employee being
laid off first; except that if the Department determines that operational reasons require
retention of an employee of the unit having an essential skill, such as a helicopter pilot or a
specialty requiring a state license or certification (other than MPTC), he or she may be
retained. Seniority means total length of Departmental Service. In the event two (2)
employees of the unit have equal seniority, the tie shall be broken on the basis of their last
written performance evaluation.

C. HIRING DURING LAYOFF

No employee may be hired to perform the duties normally performed by a bargaining
unit employee while he or she is in layoff status, except to meet operational needs of the
Department for employees having an essential skill, as defined in Paragraph B, or in
accordance with the "bumping" provisions of the Department's Memorandum of
Understanding with Unit II.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 37
D. RECALL RIGHTS

Laid-off bargaining unit employees shall enjoy the right to be reinstated within
eighteen (18) months from the effective date of the layoff to any vacant position for which
they are qualified. Reinstatement shall be in reverse order of layoff or reduction in rank
(i.e., by seniority). When the Department offers reinstatement to a laid-off employee, it
shall give him or her notice by registered mail, return receipt requested, and afford the
affected employee reasonable time, not to exceed twenty (20) days, within which to accept
reinstatement.

E. BENEFITS

While on layoff, an employee in the bargaining unit shall be entitled to maintain
eligibility for COBRA benefits by paying the costs in accordance with the provisions of
COBRA legislation.

ARTICLE 29
PERSONAL PRONOUNS

In all instances in this Memorandum in which the masculine form of the third person
pronoun is used, such pronoun shall refer to both male and female employees.

ARTICLE 30
PRESERVATION OF BENEFITS

All benefits presently enjoyed by employees covered by this Memorandum of
Understanding which are not specifically provided for or abridged in this Memorandum, such
as but not limited to holidays, uniforms, equipment, etc., are hereby included and protected
by this Memorandum.

ARTICLE 31
PRINTING OF MEMORANDUM

This Memorandum of Understanding shall be printed by the Lodge. The Department
shall reimburse the Lodge for fifty percent (50%) of the cost of such printing.

ARTICLE 32
SEVERABILITY

If any term or provision of this Memorandum is, at any time during the life of this
Memorandum, determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in conflict with any
applicable law, constitution, statute, or ordinance, such term or provision shall continue in
effect only to the extent permitted by law. If any term or provision is so held to be invalid
or unenforceable (or if the parties agree that it is), such invalidity or unenforceability shall
not affect or impair any other term or provision of this Memorandum.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 38
ARTICLE 33
DURATION

This Memorandum of Understanding shall become effective July 1, 2013, and remain
in full force and effect until June 30, 2016. It shall automatically be renewed from year to
year thereafter, unless either party shall give to the other party written notice of a desire to
terminate, modify or amend this Memorandum of Understanding. Such notice shall be
given to the other party in writing by certified mail no later than January 1° of the year
involved.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 39
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands and seals

, 2015 by their officers and agents duly authorized.

  

BALTIMORE CITY LODGE NO. 3
FOP UNIT I:

AL Xoflarey

Robert &. Cherry, Yr

Fe

 

 

Gene S. Ryan

 

Gk F, Moore- Jit

Rodriguez

Qttin A Crrisc—

Dea ere

 

 

  

 

 

inton M. Herbert wale Glazerman

e 7,

 

isa Riha

XliLuiuyi,
Herbert R. Weiner

APPROVED io LEGAL FORM AND
Y:

 

NOTED BY THE BOARD OF ESTIMATES:

Clerk JAN 21 2015 Date

Page 40 of Memorandum of Understanding (FY 2014 - 2016) by and between the Baltimore City
Police Department and Baltimore City Lodge No. 3, FOP, Inc, Unit I.

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 40
Bh bars sorr

ADDENDUM A
HEALTH & WELFARE BENEFITS

Honorable President and ] DaT@ctober 31, 2012
of the Board of Estimates

Dear Mr, President and Members:

ACTION REQUESTED OF THE BOARD OF ESTIMATES:

Authorization is requested from your Honorable Board to execute the attached negotiated
Health and Prescription Drug Plan Agreement between the Mayor and City of Baltimore,
Labor Comunissioner’s Office, Fraternal Order of Police, IAFE, Local 734 Fire

IAFF, Local 964 Fire Officers, City Union of Baltimore and AFSCME, Council 67 Locals 44,
558 and 2202. The City’s obligation to the Managerial and Professional Society is to “meet
and confer”, but MAPS was invited to participate in the discussions regarding the new
health plan structure,

AMOUNT AND SOURCE OF MONEY:
N/A

BACKGROUND AND EXPLANATION:

The Labor Comunissioner negotiated a new Health and Prescription Drug Plan Agreement
on behalf of the Mayor and City of Baltimore, The attached agreement, which was
drafted by attorneys representing the City of Baltimore and the Unions, reflects those terms
and conditions agreed to, Effective January 1, 2013, employees will participate in a new
health and prescription drug plan structure that offers various plan tiers.

MBE/WBE PARTICIPATION:
NIA

LTE DI
BCRF applicable __yes xno
Tfnot, why: x other (Health and Prescription Plan Agreement for City Employees)

BCRF Certification Statement completed and retumed to Agency __yes xno
LABOR COMMISSIONER:

sborah F. Moore-Carter
APPROVED BY THE BOARD OF ESTIMATES:

No
oe 7 2012 v7 2012

DFMC/lap/ Health DrugFlan
ce: Kimberly C. Washington

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 41

 

2409 +9 93
 

As aresult of negotiations between the City of Baltimore and the Unions which represent
employees in the City including CUB, AFSCME, FOP, MAPS! and the Fire Unions,” the parties
have reached agreement on the following terms related to the health and prescription drug plans
for active employees for FY 2013 and, with respect to certain related matters, beyond FY 2013:

L For the period July 1, 2012 through December 31, 2012, the health plans and
prescription drug plan, which have been in effect during FY 2012, shall remain in effect
unchnged. Employces shall continue to pay $7.00 per pay period which they were paying in FY
2012 and such payment shall cease as of December 31, 2012,

2. Effective January 1, 2013, the City shall continue to offer the same health plans
including certain HMOs, the Blue Cross PPN, United Health Care PPO/POS and Aetna PPO.

3. Employees electing an HMO: The benefits provided under any of the HMOs
shall remain as they were in FY 2012 (¢.g,, office visit charges, etc.). Employees who elect an
HMO shall pay 10% of the monthly premium for such coverage and the City shall pay 90%.
Employees shalt also pay 20% of the prescription drug premium.

4, Employees who elect & Preferred Provider Network (“PPN”) or Point of Service
Plan (“POS”), shall have the option of choosing one of two levels of benefits from among those
health insurance providers:

a Standard Plan: Employees who elect the Standard Plan shal! receive the
benefits set forth on the attached Standard Plan schedule of benefits (Attachment A). The
benefits shall be the same for all employees enrolled in the Standard Plan (and their
enrolled dependents); provided, however, there shall be two tiers of out of | ‘pocket
maximums under the Standard Plan based upon salary. The “out of pocket maximum”
under a Standard Plan is the maximum amount that an enrolled employee (and their
enrolled dependents) must pay to contribute to the actual cost of services and benefits
provided during a calendar year; provided, however, that the Office Visit fees shall be
separate and shall continue te apply after the out of pocket maximum is met? The out of
pocket maximum is in addition to the first dollar deductible, which also shall be charged
to enrolled employees (and their enrolled dependents) for the cost of services and benefits
provided during a plan year. The two tiers of out of pocket maximum, based on the
employee's total annual salary as of July 1, 2012 through December 31, 2015, shall be as
follows:

 

" The City’s obligation to MAPS is to “meet and confer,” but MAPS was invited to participate in the discussions
regarding the new health plan structure.

2 The Fire Unions each reached agreement on a new MOU for FY 2013 earlier in the year, with an understanding,
that they would be bound to the extent represented in their MOUs by the health plans agreed to by certain ather
Unions and that the Fire Unions" terms would not be fess favorable than the ather Unions. The Fire Unions
participated in the discussions resulting in this Agreement, but not as a formal party to the negotistions.

? There shall be one out of packet maximum for both medical and mental health ‘expenses.

14833665v.8

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 42
OOP Max.
Employees with a salary below $45,000 $1,000/82,000
Employees with a salary $45,000 or more $1500/$3,000
These differences in out of pocket maximum are reflected on Attachment A.

b. —_ High Option Plan: Employees who elect the High Option Plan shall
continue to receive benefits that are the same as the benefits which are presently being
provided (.¢,, the calendar year 2012 benefits) under the Bluc Cross PFN, United Health
Care PPO/POS and Aetna PPOs (Attachment B). Employees who elect the High Option
Plan shall pay the difference between 80% of the Standard Plan premium for the calendar
year for the same plan (/.2., the Employer's contribution to the Standard Plan) and the
premium charged by the provider or the City for the same calendar year for the same
provider's High Option Plan.

5. For the standard FPN and POS plans, the prescription drug benefit shall be as it
appears on Attachment A (e,g., $5, $30, and $50 for generic, preferred brand and non-preferred,
respectively) with a $50 per year per person deductible. For the High Option PPN and POS
plans, the prescription drug benefit shall be without a deductible, and copays shall remain as they
were for the City prescription drug plan in calendar 2012.

6. Beginning with calendar year 2013, the City shall annually provide a rate
schedule for each of the offered health insurance plans containing separate pricing for medical
coverage, prescription drug coverage, and medical and prescription drug combined. For calendar
year 2013, the bi-weekly employer/employce split in premium rates (medical and prescription)
for the offered plans are set forth on Attachment C. A schedule similar to that for calendar 2013
shall be distributed to participating employees for each subsequent calendar year.

7, Each calendar year, new rates shall be calculated for the various health insurance
plans and the prescription drug plan, on a plan to plan basis. Participating employees shall pay
20% of the premium for the prescription drug plan, end 10% of the premium for the HMOs. For
calendar year 2013, the premiums for the standard PPN and POS plans are set forth in
Attachment B. For subsequent plan years, i¢., calendar years 2014 and 2015, employees
participating in a standard PPN or POS plan shall pay 20% of the year over year premium
increase for that plan. For calendar year 2013, and for subsequent plan years, ie., calendar years
2014 and 2015, the High Option Plan premium shall be computed using the same method as in ]
4b, above (employces shall pay the difference between 80% of the Standard Plan (the
Employer's contribution and the full premium for the High Option Plan).

8 The City shall keep the structure of the Standard Plans (e.g., the $250 deductible,
office visit charges, 10% co-pay, out-of pocket maximums, etc.) and High Option Plans the same
for calendar years 2013, 2014 and 2015.

9. The City shall re-establish the City/Unions Health Insurance Committee (the

“HIC"), with equal Union and management representation, no later than November 1, 2012. As
the HIC, the City and the Unions will, no less frequently than one time each calendar quarter,

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 43
mest to discuss cost containment, efficiencies, wellness and other relevant issues and to review
date for each plan and all other pertinent information as raised or requested by the Unions or the
City. One of the aforementioned quarterly meetings shall be used to discuss each health
insurance providers’ annual report as set forth in { 10, a below, The HIC shall include
Tepresentatives appointed by each employee organization designated as an exclusive
representative under the Municipal Employee Relations Ordinance, one representative from the
Managerial and Professional Society of Baltimore, Inc., and at least one management
representative from the Office of the Labor Commissioner, City Human Resources, City
Benefits, City Finance and the Mayoral Administration. As they choase, the parties’
representatives may designate professional consultants to attend meetings of the HIC. Should
the Unions choase to have a consultant participate in these meetings, they shall choose @ joint
consultant.

10. Annual Provider Report and Meeting with Unions: No later than June 15, each
year, each health insurance plan provider engaged by the City shall provide the City with an
“Annual Provider Report” which shall include data relating to enrollment, claims, administrative
costs, usage trends, and other relevant information about the plan. The Annual Provider Report
shall also provide the premium rates which are being proposed for the next plan/calendar year
with data supporting those rates. The Annual Provider Report for each plan shall be provided to
the Unions. The HIC shall meet to discuss this information including any proposed premium
increases, It ig expected that the Annual Provider Reports shall be provided and this meeting
shall be held in the May or June preceding the next calendar/plan year. If requested, the City
shall arrange for its Health Plans consultant to confer with the similar consultant designated by
the Unions, and the two consultants may be required to attend the mesting(s) of the City and the
Unions concerning the Annual Provider Reports. .

ll. Audit process; The City shall audit its medical providers and/or administrators to
ensure reasonable accuracy in billings, claims paid and costs incurred, and to ensure that each
individual covered by the City’s benefits is eligible for such coverage (e.g., has not exceeded the
age Hmit, is an eligible spouse, family member, etc.). The City shall disclose its audit practices
to the Unions, and the Unions may request and be provided with the results of such audit reports,
and such when audit reports are received, it shall forward copies of the reports to the Unions
through the HIC,

12, Requests for Proposals; As appropriate and consistent with the City's Charter, the
City shall have the right to issue Requests for Proposals (RFPs) for cach plan year beginning
with calendar year 2014 through which the City may solicit proposals from existing and other
interested health insurance providers. The terms of the RFPs shall be consistent the plan
structures referred to in ] 8 of this Summary of Agreement. The City shall advise the Unions of
its intention to issue RFPs at least thirty (30) days before they are released, Should the City
decide that it wishes to add or eliminate a particular health insurance provider following the
issuance ofan RFP, the City shall advise the Unions end provide the reasons why it desires to
make a proposed provider change (e.g., because of premium increases, service to participants,
lack of participation in a given plan, efficiency through consolidation, etc.) at least 30 days
before such proposed action is presented to the Board of Estimates. The Unions shall have a
meaningful opportunity to discuss any such proposed changes within the Health Insurance

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 44
Committee, including a representative of the Mayoral Administration, and to provide input in
that manner before any change is finalized by action of the Board of Estimates.

13. Refunds from Self-Insured Pian: For each plan year, the provider shall prepare 4
year-end reconciliation, to account for premiums and payments charged to employees and
Participants and costs incurred to provide benefits. In the event that a refund results from the
difference between premiums and payments received from covered employees and participants
in excess of plan expenses, any year-end refund shall be retained to fund the City’s self-insured
health insurance plan, including maintaining proper reserves. Surplus funds may not be applied
by the City for any other purpose than the City's medical insurance plans.

14, This Summary of Agreement and referred to Attachments shall be included as an
Attachment to the various Unions MOUs,

MAYOR AND CITY BALTIMORE CITY LODGE NO. 3,
OF BALTIMORE FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, INC.

sy Dehooh Af. leu - Cid BY: 20 Poherey x
pare: etebe AT ADR DATE:_3-Y 2¢7 Jes2-

 

 

     

APSCME, LOCAL 44 AFSCME, LOCAL 2202

BY: BY:

DATE: DATE:

AFSCME, LOCAL 558 CITY UNION OF BALTIMORE

BM ee wD ttela Sen

DATE: DATE: 24) — <2 .¢ =25

WED AS TO F D LEGAL
APPROVED BY THE BOARD OF ESTIMATES: APPROVED §S. meggacpar ey
ale Vy
4
149936650,1

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 45
MANAGERIAL AND PROFESSIONAL IAFF, LOCAL 734
1F BALTIMORE, INC. (“M4APS")

BY: BY:
DATE:__£02 (a— DATE: jalrble~
TAPP LOCAL 964

  

APPRi“ED AS TO FORM, HD LEGAL

727- Cuff cy Tals,
BY: FO OF
pare, COfZ/pn

APPROVED BY THE BOARD OF ESIIMATES:

  

 

Dals NOV O 7 2012

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 46
Attachment A
of Standard Plan D

 

 

Agneal Out of Pocket Maximum)
Single

Family

‘anisal Out o ta
Heath & Sub Abust} (see Footuote ¢)
Singhe

 

Roam and Board

 

 

70% (60 days per year combined)

2a hour wurse line

1 The Anmal Out-oF Pocket Maximum for both Medkcal ond Mental Mech Sutsunce Abuse expenses art one and the same, endl
Partyepants caly have to mest one (1) ennua) Oul-of- Pocket maximum

 

 

 

FY 2014-16

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 47
Rovime Primary Care Office Visas-W
Cras

Visit i

 

 

 

 

iteai

‘Chiropractic Treatment (1
vtsite/mani er yr)
m1

cove over

THs up 53,000 limiiper | 706 up 155,000 lim pes hearing aid every 36

hearing aid every 36 mos"**
Hl = : ion tean ss ind

 

Mail Order $10 for Generies
(90-days supply) $60 far Formulary Brand
. ‘$100 for Brand & Speciatty

 

Annual Rx OOP init

 

PY 2014-16

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 48
*Pre- and Post-natal care - For services provided in the Physician's office, a Specialist
copayment will only epply to the initial office visit to determine pregnancy, then services
will be covered in full.

** Due to Federal Menta! Health Parity, MH/SA office visit copay must metch the Primary
Physician copay

***Pez Legal and Compliance, because of recent ADA amendments, our Hearing Aid Limit
is $5,000

Note: We will also be required to include the State mandates such as 1 VF; Medical Foods;
Surgical Morbid Obesity etc.

 

FY 2014-16

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 49
FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016

ATTACHMENT B
ih Oe

Fed
eps dts upes$ 1880. COP ies =
edrea supa (Represereed)

MAPS An SP80770

Ite
CareFes 107 vallec! beeshi

 

50
Loud
UHC 59 capsy thr minal vied te
eemmins ees ceive pegrany, tsa et oaoned

Bi
Cosine Sito debatble pet absisuen,
‘then plan pays 10% up 29 55,900 OOP
hel per sénasion (Ragresenied). ar
‘SOWTOSS1 300 Tear

Rostias Promury Care Difar Voor Asai it
MAPS Un S20
LHC $5 empay perc
refrit 510 copay

 

FY 2014-16

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 51
MARIA UHC 35 capay pe lst
UME Serpe Cucfist S10 hes Weal awed

 

Ca
APSAn 130 LHC ca prin Pa stoeek
a ee

Higa fH Une Ss sega ane
| ge |

Tiaod halV taveel ba tant Pray
Cpl frre Cet Paseo

 

,
ve wey nett cape Soom | LE Selena Seppe
saan nar snow Malden Sa ed

Greta. Teta ited ey
Roche ees Conn eth,

pasinipei ot OOP leper
MAPS‘ SIRETOPASLSIO

 

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 52
allower
benefit, $12,000 ri $12,000 rian

maximum lifetiree.
Pre-Authorizatlon Pre-Authorization Required
Required UHC — 100% Allowable
UHC ~ 10035 Allowable Benefits, $100,000 Lifetime
‘Changes, $100,000 Maximum, vp to 3 altempts
Lifetime maximum, opto3 | per Life binh

Hemnpls per Life birth

 

 

FY OI

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 53
 

Pre and Post-uatal care - For services provided in the Physician's office, a Specialist copayment will only apply to the initial office visit to
determine | pesrancy thet services will be covered in full,
redaral Met

“*Duew ntal Health Parity, MH/SA office visit copay must metch the Primary Physician copay
+Per Legal and Compliance, because of recent ADA amendments, out Hezring Ald Limit is $5,000

FY 2014-16

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 54
ATTACHMENT €
Clty of Baltimore Contract Pertod 1/1/2019 to 12/21/2013
2012 Vs. 2013 Active Rate Comparlacn

 

FY 2014-16

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 55
 

Fy mdié

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 56
ADDENDUM B

City of Baltimore
Baltimore Police Department
Salary Schedules - Unit I

Effective
7/1/13
Police Flight Flight
Service Officer Officer Officer Police Agent
Step EID EID
Grade 723 Grade 726 Grade 796 Grade 799

1 $ 43999 $0 $0 $ 43643
2 $ 44104 $0 $0 $ 44648
3 $ 44773 $0 $0 $ 45656
4 $ 52976 $0 $0 $ 54463
5 $ 56312 $ 63990 $ 65062 $ 57797
6 $ 59409 $ 68041 $ 69113 $ 60844
7 $ 60004 $ 68723 $ 69795 $ 61451
8 $ 60598 $ 69401 $ 70473 $ 62060
9 $ 61191 $ 70081 $ 71153 $ 62668
10 $ 61788 $ 70764 $ 71836 $ 63276
11 $ 62380 $ 71444 $ 72516 $ 63887
12 $ 62975 $ 72123 $ 73195 $ 64495
13 $ 63570 $ 72805 $ 73876 $ 65076
14 $ 64163 $ 73485 $74556 $ 65710
15 $ 64757 $ 74166 $ 75237 $ 66320
16 $ 65351 $ 74845 $ 75916 $ 66928
17 $ 65945 $ 75526 $ 76597 $ 67535
18 $ 66539 $ 76232 $ 77304 $ 68145
19 $ 67132 $ 76886 $ 77958 $ 68754
20 $ 67728 $ 77568 $ 78640 $ 69360
21 $ 68322 $ 78223 $ 79294 $ 69969
22 $ 68915 $ 78928 $ 80000 $ 70579
23 $ 69509 $ 79609 $ 80681 $ 71187
24 $ 70104 $ 80289 $81361 $ 71794
25 $ 70698 $ 80970 $ 82041 $ 72404
26 $ 71291 $ 81650 $ 82721 $ 73012

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 57
City of Baltimore
Baltimore Police Department
Salary Schedules - Unit I

Effective
714
Police Flight Flight
Service Officer Officer Officer Police Agent
Step EID EID
Grade 723 Grade 726 Grade 796 Grade 799
1 $ 46199 $0 $0 $ 45825
2 $ 46309 $0 $0 $ 46880
3 $ 47012 $0 $0 $ 47939
4 $ 55625 $0 $0 $ 57186
5 $ 59128 $ 67190 $ 68315 $ 60687
6 $ 62379 $ 71443 $ 72569 $ 63886
7 $ 63004 $ 72159 $ 73285 $ 64524
8 $ 65446 $ 74953 $ 76111 $ 67025
9 $ 66086 $ 75687 $ 76845 $ 67681
10 $ 66731 $ 76425 $ 77583 $ 68338
11 $ 67370 $ 77160 $ 78317 $ 68998
12 $ 68013 $ 77893 $ 79051 $ 69655
13 $ 68656 $ 78629 $ 79786 $ 70282
14 $ 69296 $ 79364 $ 80520 $ 70967
15 $ 69938 $ 80099 $ 81256 $ 71626
16 $ 72540 $ 83078 $ 84267 $ 74290
17 $ 73199 $ 83834 $ 85023. $ 74964
18 $ 73858 $ 84618 $ 85807 $ 75641
19 $ 74517 $ 85343 $ 86533 $ 76317
20 $ 75178 $ 86100 $ 87290 $ 76990
21 $ 75837 $ 86828 $ 88016 $ 77666
22 $ 76496 $ 87610 $ 88800: $ 78343
23 $ 77155 $ 88366 $ 89556. $ 79018
24 $ 77815 $ 89121 $ 90311 $ 79691
25 $ 78475 $ 89877 $ 91066 $ 80368
26 $ 79133 $ 90632 $ 91820 $ 81043

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 58
City of Baltimore
Baltimore Police Department
Salary Schedules - Unit I

Effective
TANS
Police Flight Flight
Service Officer Officer Officer Police Agent
Step EID EID
Grade 723 Grade 726 Grade 796 Grade 799
1 $ 48971 $0 $0 $ 48575
2 $ 49088 $0 $0 $ 49693
3 $ 49833 $0 $0 $ 50815
4 $ 58963 $0 $0 $ 60617
5 $ 62676 $ 71221 $ 72414 $ 64328
6 $ 66122 $ 75730 $ 76923 $ 67719
7 $ 66784 $ 76489 $ 77682 $ 68395
8 $ 69373 $ 79450 $ 80678 $ 71047
9 $ 70051 $ 80228 $ 81456 $ 71742
10 $ 70735 $ 81011 $ 82238 $ 72438
14 $ 71412 $ 81790 $ 83016 $ 73138
12 $ 72094 $ 82567 $ 83794 $ 73834
13 $ 72775 $ 83347 $ 84573 $ 74499
14 $ 73454 $ 84126 $ 85351 $ 75225
15 $ 74134 $ 84905 $ 86131 $ 75924
16 $ 76892 $ 88063 $ 89323 $ 78747
17 $ 77591 $ 88864 $ 90124 $ 79462
18 $ 78289 $ 89695 $ 90955 $ 80179
19 $ 78988 $ 90464 $ 91725 $ 80896
20 $ 79689 $ 91266 $ 92527 $ 81609
21 $ 80387 $ 92038 $ 93297 $ 82326
22 $ 81086 $ 92867 $ 94128 $ 83044
23 $ 81784 $ 93668 $ 94929 $ 83759
24 $ 82484 $ 94468 $ 95730 $ 84472
25 $ 83184 $ 95270 $ 96530 $ 85190
26 $ 83881 $ 96070 $ 97329 $ 85906

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 59
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT

 

STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE ADDENDUM C ANTHONY W. BATTS:
Mayor SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT Poliee,Somnmissioner
Lt. Gene S. Ryan, President January 14, 2015
Fraternal Order of Police
Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue
Baltimore, Maryland 21211

RE: Secondary Employment
Dear President Ryan:

This letter will affirm our agreement in principle, to allow members of FOP, Unit I and Unit II to
engage in secondary employment in uniform and armed with the issued service weapon within the
limits of Baltimore City. The Police Commissioner shall exercise sole authority to determine whether,
in all circumstances, each individual employment in which the uniform is to be worn should be
permitted, based upon, but not limited to, the type of work, the suitability of the employer, and the
number of scheduled hours the members will devote to the employment, in compliance with
department policy and other operational considerations. A member may work In approved secondary
employment not to exceed thirty-two (32) hours per week. No more than twenty (20) of those hours
shall be worked in assignments outside those administered by the Overtime Unit unless the
remaining 12 hours of City Secondary are not available, in which case the member may work up to
the 32 hour limit. The Police Commissioner may authorize other approved secondary not subject to
the twenty (20) hour limit such as hotels, hospitals, and schools,

During a week where the member is off five (5) or more leave days, other than medical leave, a
member shall not work more than forty (40) hours of approved secondary employment.

The Police Commissioner reserves the right to revoke permission previously granted at any time. The
decision of the Police Commissioner in these matters shall be final and not subject to grievance
procedures set forth in any collective bargaining agreements.

The guidelines set forth in General Order (GO Q-2) shall govern the terms of this policy, based on
recommendations of a committee comprised of my designees and members of the FOP, Lodge #3.

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police: incere

‘)

  

Anthony W. Batts

Gene S. Ryan, President Commissioner

  

cc: Jerry Rodriguez
Dean Palmere

c/o 242 W. 29th Street ¢ Baltimore, Maryland 21211
FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 60
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT

 

STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE ADDENDUM D ANTHONY W. BATTS.
Mayor ADMINISTRATIVELY CLOSED I.A.D. CASES Police Commissioner
Lt. Gene S. Ryan, President January 14, 2015

Fraternal Order of Police
Baltimore City Lodge #3
3920 Buena Vista Avenue
Baltimore, Maryland 21211

RE: Administratively Closed I.I.D. Cases
Dear President Ryan:

Effective July 1, 2003, in instances where the Legal Affairs Division makes a recommendation to
administratively close a sustained case, such case shall be brought before a Departmental Hearing
Board or other administrative process as determined appropriate by the Police Commissioner, and
dismissed as not viable for prosecution. Cases so dismissed will result in all related charges
Previously sustained by I.A.D. to revert to a non-sustained finding upon dismissal. The non-
sustained charges would then be subject to the expungement provisions of the Law Enforcement
Officers’ Bill of Rights (LEOBR).

Cases so closed within the five year period immediately preceding the effective date of this
Agreement, may be considered for dismissal pursuant to the above procedures provided the member
makes written application on a form provided by the Department. The Department will consider
requests to close cases beyond the five-year period on a case-by-case basis. The Police
Commissioner reserves the right to suspend this review process in the event the process creates an
administrative burden which impedes the effective operation of the Divisions, Sections, or Units
involved. In the event the process is suspended, the parties shall meet and confer to find a
reasonable solution to the administrative issues and resume the process as determined appropriate
by mutual agreement.

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police: it ly,
b—

Anthony W. Batts
Commissioner

    

Gene S. Ryan, President

cc: Jerry Rodriguez
Dean Palmere

c/o 242 W. 29th Street ¢ Baltimore, Maryland 21211
FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 61
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT

 

STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE ANTHONY W. BATTS
Mayor Police Commissioner
ADDENDUM E
REASONABLE SUSPICION FOR DRUG TESTING WHILE INVESTIGATING
CASES OF DEADLY FORCE
Lt. Gene S. Ryan, President January 14, 2015

Fraternal Order of Police
Baltimore City Lodge #3
3920 Buena Vista Avenue
Baltimore, Maryland 21211

RE: Reasonable Suspicion for Drug Testing While Investigating Cases
of Deadly Force

Dear President Ryan:

In the event that a member shall be investigated for an on-duty use of deadly force,
(including but not limited to discharging of a firearm), the member shall not be required to submit to
drug screening and/or alcohol testing unless there is reasonable suspicion to believe the member
acted under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol. Changes to this standard are reserved to the
Police Commissioner and may be changed at his discretion.

   

Anthony WI Batts
Commissioner

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

   

Gene S. Ryan, President

cc: Jerry Rodriguez
Dean Paimere

c/o 242 W. 29th Street * Baltimore, Maryland 21211
FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 62
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT

 

STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE ANTHONY W. BATTS

Mayor ADDENDUM F Police Commissioner
PAYMENT FOR COURT APPEARANCES
(RETIRED POLICE OFFICERS)

Lt. Gene S. Ryan, President January 14, 2015
Fraternal Order of Police

Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211

RE: Payment For Court Appearances (Retired Police Officers)

Dear President Ryan:

When a retired member is summoned by a court, within one (1) year from the member's retirement
date, to appear and give testimony in a matter arising within the scope of his employment while the

retiree was an active Baltimore Police Officer, such retiree shall be paid a flat rate of $50 as
compensation for all time spent. The retiree may be required to present proof of attendance

satisfactory to the Agency prior to payment.
(Neth

Anthony W.'Batts
Commissioner

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

    

Gene S. Ryan, President

cc: Jerry Rodriguez
Dean Palmere

c/o 242 W. 29th Street * Baltimore, Maryland 21211
FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 63
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT

 

STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE ADDENDUM G ANTHONY W. BATTS
Mayor Police Commissioner

LEAVE FOR LODGE REPRESENTATIVES

Lt. Gene S. Ryan, President January 14, 2015
Fraternal Order of Police

Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211

RE: Leave for Lodge Representatives
Dear President Ryan:

The purpose of this correspondence is to set forth the understanding reached between the Police
Department and the Fraternal Order of Police (FOP) with regard to leave for Lodge Representatives:

In addition to the provisions of Article 22, two members of Baltimore City Lodge #3 Fraternal Irder
of Police, Incorporated, as designated by the President shall be granted full time leaves of absence
from their duties for the Police Department, mandated in-service training excepted, but shall remain
on the payroll of the Police Department for the purpose of performing full-time duties on behalf of
the Lodge. During such leave, the members shall continue to accumulate seniority and shall receive
all benefits as if they were fully on duty including, but not limited to, pension accruals and fringe
benefits. This memorandum supersedes any other prior agreements, written or verbal, regarding full
time leave for Lodge Representatives.

I reserve the right to revoke the release of the two members upon a 30-day written notice to the
Lodge.

Please acknowledge your concurrence with this understanding by signing below and returning a
signed copy to me.

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

     

Anthony W. Batts
Commissioner

    

Gene S. Ryan, Preside
cc: Jerry Rodriguez
Dean Palmere

c/o 242 W. 29th Street « Baltimore, Maryland 21211
FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 64
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT

 

STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE ANTHONY W. BATTS.
Mayor Police Commissioner

ADDENDUM H
BREAKING TIES FOR PROMOTIONS

Lt. Gene S. Ryan, President January 14, 2015
Fraternal Order of Police

Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211

RE: Breaking Ties for Promotions
Dear President Ryan:
This will affirm our agreement that the Department will support an FOP’s initiative to change the

current system of breaking ties for promotions to a system where ties are resolved in favor of the
candidate with the greatest seniority.

Sincerely,

¢

Anthony W. Batts
Commissioner

Accept y the Fraternal Order,

Gene S. Ryan, President

 

cc: Jerry Rodriguez
Dean Palmere

c/o 242 W. 29th Street * Baltimore, Maryland 21211
FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 65
 
  

   
   
 
 

OFFICE OF THE LABOR COMMISSIONER

DEBORAH F. MOORE-CARTER, SPHR
Labor Commissioner

417 E, Fayette Street, Suite 1405
Baltimore, Maryland 21202

CITY OF BALTIMORE
STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE, Mayor

 
 

ADDENDUM I
Retiree Health Care Premiums

Lt. Gene S. Ryan, President January 14, 2015
Fraternal Order of Police

Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211

RE: RETIREE HEALTH CARE PREMIUMS
Dear President Ryan:
The Employer shall continue to assume 50% of the current retirees’ Blue Cross/Blue Shield
premiums, and it shall continue to assume 50% of the premiums for all members who retire after
twenty (20) or more years of credited service, or upon disability retirement from the Fire and Police
Retirement System.

Sincerely,

Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Labor Commissioner

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

      

Gene S. Ryan, President

cc: Anthony W. Batts
Jerry Rodriguez
Dean Palmere

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 66

® Printed on vecycled paper with environmentally friendly soy based ink.
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT

 

STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE ANTHONY W. BATTS
Mayor ADDENDUM J Police Commissioner
Neighborhood Patrol Bureau Schedule
Lt. Gene S. Ryan, President January 14, 2015
Fraternal Order of Police
Baltimore City Lodge #3
3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211
RE: BALTIMORE CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT - Patrol Schedule
Dear President Ryan:

The intent of this side letter is to memorialize the agreement reached between the City and
the FOP regarding the new schedule for employees assigned to the Neighborhood Patrol Bureau
as primary response units in sector assignments.

1, There will be four shifts in the Neighborhood Patrol Bureau for sector assignments.
Shifts A and D shall be permanent. Shifts B and C shall rotate on a twenty-eight (28)
day basis. When the scheduled twenty-eight (28) day shift change shift results in a
short change over, the shift rotation will be delayed by one day in order to avoid the
short change over. The subsequent shift change will then occur in twenty-seven (27)
days. The reporting times for said shifts shall be as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Shift Shift Report Time _ Shift End Time
Shift A 2200 0800
Shift B 0700 1700
Shift C Sun — Thurs 1600 Mon - Fri 0200
Fri-Sat 1700 Sat - Sun 0300
Shift D 1300 2300 |

 

A copy of the schedule for employees assigned to the Neighborhood Patrol Bureau is
attached to this Side Letter as Attachment 1.

2. There shall be four (4) leave groups from which H days shall be determined, and
parties have agreed upon a chart/schedule setting forth the various leave groups. A
copy of said chart is attached to this Side Letter as Attachment 2.

c/o 242 W. 29th Street * Baltimore, Maryland 21211
FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 67

 
The number of officers assigned to each shift shall be at the sole discretion of the Baltimore City
Police Department, through the authority of the Police Commissioner.

Please accept this Side Letter as compliance with our understanding.

Sincerely,

ony W. Batts
Police Commissioner

AWB:
ec: Jerry Rodriguez

Dean Palmere
Deborah F. Moore-Carter

ACCEPTED for Fraternal Order of Police

 

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 68
Attachment 1- Schedule

Permanent A shift -10 p.m. tgBam.

 

  
  

 

 

 

 

  

 

5 Tae ae] ta 7 = T= Bea] ee eo ET
a nea | aoe
CO a OE ony ton [isa (og [at ot pw tom [toa [toa | or fo ies io
c_[ ion Poa Samy wo] toa EN GG = wafew,
o_o [aon aout_[ 0 [ie Se ea [oa oe ee ee] ae ame | io | moe

 

 

 

aes ene

 

a ars

 
  
  

 

 

Tat

 

ee
yaaa fae | a

 

ia

 

  

ox S|

” | ied | roa | toe | oat
vor {or [as it
iba ee

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
    
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9

   

= Tape ee [ts a Fs
rT

a oa Poe [nw aoa [aoe TL We | n| toes | to

0 ean fw yea WN fn] toa [toa ioe
[Snap | toa | io Monpon | oa | son [aoa | ioe

a el Ce A

oo ioe [oven [ue | wes Fae

Fo a Fa a

a aoa [ iow [108 | 08 a a

Wo] toa [16a | ioe_[ ios a ET

ion [ina Se od 08 yon [oa np pn a] ter | ioe

Ta] poe [ee se wales [ie a Wee a oe

 

 

 

 

 

       

  

  

 

eee ee ter ee

CZ
pee iter erpertert tet oe

1008

i fone wes Lise
a a

  

 

 

 

 

ao

See eee eee ee i = a
a 3t

ie

 

 

  
   
    
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
    
  

 

 
 
  
  

 

 

 

 

   
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Et

z a Ta

i a

CO = EC
7 ES TS
ST
8 = T=

1 + 7
a
A =
Piet [oa SR wl eae ae ae fw fae [at Hof aoa [ toa [oe [ae [oof] |
opie oe to iat fae opp] toe [aoe | oe a a [ier [ios [iodo pp oe] tow [ao | to

z 7
= tou | me | toa [on [nf] tout | tn roa toa | oa | on [nT
= a a a
a Hoo] ioe ea [ior] oat 7 W]e ioe | io
° EE CS I po] ea | tor [eet
ae a
oh

x a I
= ST es I
= non | ea ie | oa ee toa | ao [a no] aioe eter toe
> yon [oa [tos ome] te | aos aoa | to) FT TT

[ee ens ea eee ee te ee

[ais ayaa ray | ee | nis ss as | eae ae ea ae a

bites fate Pies ace

ST toa ios 0c [ao

=
wea

= Tie Te ee he i waa Te me
A neg_[ soa | isa] aoa [on
* CT sea _[ oa | tote
3 Cs
a oon | ise [ae | soa

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016

 

69

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bee i [se] sm Mon The Se] wen | toes [ve
x as [ns [xs ono pewetow) xs [ns [os [ons ow tw pow] ms [ons [ons | ons [on
zs [os (Pu owe few | ns [os [os [ns Jew) wm pow) as [os | ns | as [ante
c a a 2s (Ewn[ea afoul ns | 15
2 wos [ons [as [ns Jensen] as [os [os [9s Jeu wpm oo xs ns
We [er | $5] Bes ‘wed [mie Fe [se tone [ees [wed ee
Tees ara | ae fame 2 eae | em] a wey a
a ao |e Pow pw pw se so Pe | oe Pe Pe Pe Po
2 Moje «2 | 2 | a2 [or [ow opew own se <o | ar [ounfawnpon 33 | sa
c won [sa Peo [oo wp owe ee [os | es [a (np wowed «2 [sa | se
2 2 [en er fee wl oz [ee [ae Cs es

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 ie Fa “ Th
wy ri ry
ER LT A a AH
z WoplA) 2 | we [ae | s3 [ow # we [ «2: | w | s3 [ow Hol Ww 2 [we | sa [ow Wopok| @ | 82 [2 | 3 fon
cf | se ee ae at [oa] oe] ae 2 [a2 (Saofow pow ae 2a? [ow wow) a [ar [sr | a [wom
o | we [eo [ownponpewn) ss | sa | we |e [oajeatiown ss] a] «2 |e Hofowe ss | ss | o [« (once penn| 33 | sa
z Fz 3
as
af weft ns [ons [ns ons Fon tw Pow | as [ons [ons [ons Pow] we Pwd ms | os [ons | ns [ow [we] ws [ns | as [7s ow
fw) rs [os [os | ns (Ewa M om] ms [os [as | os [ow wm owt ns [ns [x3] ns oun on Tow] xs [rs | as] 7s owt ow
25 [75 (Ow ofewofewo| as | ns | os [ms [Ew apouapownl ms | 7s | ns Hofowolowo ns | as | ns [ns MOJOMO 75 [as
(Cocca oe eT ee ee wos [8 [os [xs Ponpow od] Wola [os [us [os [ow ow Pow] as [es [8
Te % Ft Jy wea |

x a2 |e [oz | ar wd a | Pi Po oo ot et |e Po |e Po ee | oo | a | or
[2 [er (Ey cow own) so | so | ao [a [acon oow ay sa ot [| o2 [anfewoon 42 [92 [wO[OHDIDW Ol ss | ea
75 _[ Ee A A ON TO
° so [ier [ar Ces (Ew) wo) ee ee ss ee Pe ee es ee) ee | ee De Ps

EN A fe [se oe Te Sa osoe | wen tw ves] ae ae Steer [|
2 7 7a] 6 3778 z 7] may |e | z]
as | os wet ow Pow | os [ors [os [ons Pom we Dw ns Tons | ns es ns [ow fw fn) as | os
a aud 4 4 AS Ey 25 4 4 aS 2S ak 4 H H 2} ik Ey DS H wet a3 aS
¢_[Euajowel ns | as [15 | xs [ewnfew non as [ns [ng (Ew opow alow | ms | ns [ns | os (ownpo mop we) as | ns [os | ns [ow

2 7s [os [ons Pew ow] wos [os [as [7s (own pat ns | ms Drs [ns [own ow pow] as Ds | H
Ter] [om]
| [sa]

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016

70

 

cs a
ie
A few ws [os Tons [ns Twp wo fw ns [os [ons [os [ont on [ow | ms [ons [ons [os Pow pomp mw as | ms | ns | xs |W,
ol ewE as Tos [ns [ns (RWW Sa ns [ns [as [as [ww pw ss [xs (9s [ns np Ropow | ms [75 | as | xs [MDI On
cj ns [xs (nS SW SW 3s | ns [ons [ons [Wo] Wome ms | as | xs [xs [wmlwnfowl 25 | ms | ns [| ms [OWO[mNOpoMOl xs | ns
bo] 4a [HES] ns Ts [ns [ns Was [ons [as [ns Sw ow pW) es [ns | ns [ xs [owm) mM poW | as [as [7s
ra
A ney 2 [on | 2 fee [nam 2 | | ae | ow ow) se Pe Pa sz Pow wow | ae | at | ee | oz Pow ow
a | 42 [er (ana sa fsa | en [en nas 3 a2 [eo uw) 3 | a3 | ae [2 [ownfmnmpnel §3 | 53
cs GW ww a2 [sa ss (ae owns { sa [ea [2 (We) Wow) 2 [sa [ss | en [wow pow ee [ss [sa
0 (amwy e2 [ee eH 3 (EWSSWE ee [se se 3 we ae | ee er [ss [wow | 2 | a2 [ae | 33 [on
Men
a {os | ns Teena owe) as [ons [ons Ts [owt wpm as Tons [os. A
8 | an nnn xs [ons Ts [ns (now pw) 76 [ons [ons | xs [ewpow ow as Ss A
c 25 23 | ns [Ew alowal ow a5 [ns | ns [WSS w Sw ns [as [ons ns [Ewen pow) as | ns [ons [xs [iw
oa as [os fs Ts TS WT ns os as ns ws Tos (ns ns Gowen as fs [ms | os Powmlow
Sen [seu wea [tear ee ee son] Mor [Toe Tor sa Jose [sen | Toes || Wed [toe or
a as u as
ats [owe ws 3 | 2 [ow foe pw a | oss [ss |r Pow we ae se | | ae wt we | es Ts
8 EWE SWe | a2 a2 | ss (Ew SSS se | 2 Teo fs (wap w ae | a Tez Wofewnpowe| 2 | se Te 4
< [Woy sa Te Tee fe ee an a a ww og [er [er [er Je fo) er [oe [oo [ae #
pf 2 [se Sw ss [es |e Pe Spe es [es | a2 [a [owe ee 5
sae Toe Thee ee Mon [tor Wes [ae | Fa se | sm | ee] oe we | ee Se [seven | tore Wed | her |
a au 3, aun [or Pas AP 5
Alon zs | ns | ns [x5 [eae wwe ns [ons [ons | xs [wp aon xs Tos | ns | ns [owt ow ow) ns | ns | ons [xs [ow
3 |W as [as [ns Ts aw ewe) as [ons [ns [ns (wow ns [Uns [ns [ns Vole fowl xs Tons Tas Vs Tw pow
cc ) ns [og Tew ns [ns [ns [ns Twa alow ns [xs | ns (5 (Gunpewefow 4s | xs [7s [xs [nmlmwmfowl xs | ms
ot 2 es Ds ns ns ews [ons ns J es Vw pow pew as [ns (xs (xs Sow i i
Rotating C&B Shift- 4 p.m. to 2 a.m. &7 am.toS pm.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EEE ERC SEEGER EC PERREN CCEEREC CEREE ales] Sele) Bas elalal alal2] a3] PHBelsale
al=/alal [ia selelel leisalelsl-| jaalele al|alal Ble slal=| feistele|=|e| fetaial=lale alalal=) feel (=e) [aielsl= 9
ays] fale el = ele) Vat alld elalel=| is] A= 3]5/5] [esl 4212/5 a]s}=|8 =3)818) |e B=) [AS|s|5)=
Bla]s]=|=| Balel=/=2] Blal=\= sls] |BS=2/2/=| [Be els}-= BS)== o\} [Bal- ells fealels|=|- E lla} [Ba= el) [eaels|=(-
Ba sal] (eeleisael [eleleClels| Haselels| (getalelae sal=lacle| WBel-elel=| |e aslel-l- i alse facets] lala s|al-|2
=|5]3]=| /B15) 2) 2]=/=| sl=l=/3| =|=/212 = 8] g}= ie 3|=|=/3) [Ssi=|=|212 esl 3s) 3] (Sra) 212) |alal=|3) 5]=
ayay=|=\3]3} lalsy=elel=| [BS slel=|=| |ael=l=8 BREE ofa 3 2] Jase) (sles E aafs=| (alee) (alel=l=/3|3
=l=/5]8) [aval = 22>] [aie ala|=|= =|=|3)3| al=l=| [a elelsel =| 13/3 Is ]e)=|=) Bled S)=|=|2) ple) >) >) 83
clala| (esl=lelele] (Bstelslal=| (Batelel=le| (Selal=lal | aaa et {e|-le) fea|-(e'e| | alelal=| Baelz]-el [eal-3

2S 3]5]=|5] JAle 21> 212] (RR) =|5/5/5 ziee|= 3]3]=13| Pa}=/3|3)3 eleele slal=|s La =/3}5/8) /alaraz|2)=1 asl)
shel] fale el =|=)e) fale) =|-ls|s| |zal=lelel= ales alels/s] elelelels) [elelsl=|=| 1B =l=l3}5] \alal-le/e=| |eela|a)=-
8) sl cl=/=| (aslz/=|= 2) (aisl-l-lels| (Bet=ielel=| pals||-|= Ballets] (Hal=slel=| (Balsls|-|- a alsjala] [alee (ala ste|-\=
= 9/el=) [M8 ele)=|=| |e a|=|= 3 =|=|212 =|8]9}= Be s|=|= 3] 18 allele =|3]8 |= ls al=)=|3] |MS)=1)2)21 [Sie =|315]=
hd. = ales} (gaz aaals| als {s|=[=| (aelel-|-/¢| (aa-|-12] [aa fete] eis el-l-le) [alel=|-ll3
: : a) =|=| |Bale 2lalal els je}-|-| lele|=|=12) [ae -|-lel3| |e alel==] (ai elelelel Wales]
; : alale| (alstele|=le alslg lal alajal-| feletelel-ta) Jeletal-lall ls alalal=| femele|ae aq
E B lela] (Bglelelel=| (ila | s|l3| B= {ef5] \aelelelel+| (Big s|s|-|5] |e a sfe/3] JS eleel=| (ilelste|-1g
q z Fisls} [Bel=ielel=| |ielalal-|= os Beslael=| lgalalalsl:) Ee 235) (B= eal=| (BB slel-|-1
sfal=l=| Jalal slats] |ajal=lelel=) |plala|s|=\= is|=|-al3 alelel Jadtalelel= EE =las{a] |alel=12)2]=1 fale els] -|-

3 e{sl=| |alalelel= =| falee|2l\s] |lel-l=ielel [alata Be e|-1-5] (aa --|e) |Sel-|s|=) (ae atel=s} [gal=l=ee] (Ba -ls|sI-
2le/s}a} |Qel=/a}el=| [aiela|s|=|=| [elel=|=\2] |al-l= sls mle sfal-l=| (gel el=l=\e] |gale|=|s|s| sa sales) Melee) (RS =|=5\5I
49 Mal= elz|=| [ale alal=|=) |Melel=|-e) |wa-\-als elels|=|=| Jabatel=|=\2| falel=\-/ale E afal-|-| [alelel= te) (aa -|- ala
al=ala] jeal= lee] lela alelsl=) /elale/e|=(2 2) sla 3 5}5)=| (eelele|=|e| (Sielal= ale] |e slalal-} (BIS elz|-l2} Jelelel=l
false] (Balel-lael (Bel-lslels] [aiselelel=| Balslsl-s Bel=\sels| Balelelel=| (Batels|=ls asfels| (eleeel=| BBlslal=
Be) |S) =|=| |e) 2)=|=|2) |esl=|=/3]3| =/2/2|= 3] s}=|= s=|= 3/5) pe =|2/2|= etal aia = 33] (a= 8/2] (ee 313-1
asls)=|=| |eele|=\-12| (Ba)=|- ls] Jalet=ele|=| (a |a|=|= 2=\s]3) [Bie = ele|=| |aels|s|=|= =}/3}3) alel= 2\2\=| fale2)3)-|=
Ha=|3|3)-| |Sez|2)==| [Sals|-|-|3| |He-|= ele] Bal sls]= is |= \=\3] |Hel=|-\2\z2| |el=\s]s|= alae) |iea-e13] |al= 3/3)
Sal elzl=| (oe elel=|=| fas|=|= 2) (alel|-\s\z Ha e2l2-| /aes|=\-l2| [ag=(-|s|2 afe(=le] [Bel==21 [gle |-1ee]

BA / 44] [4-H Jaded ola Palate

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

71

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016
Permanent D Shift -1 p.m. to11 p.m.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 
  

      

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

E raed mea me as
2 fen ee [on [ont [at [nl ow wa [on [on Po | fn fon) tar was ie [as
2 ou Pan yun (Swot ok tow | wn [i [on | an [ow poe Ho) ten gat | sat [OW ook
pew ef as | ae it wo] fa on aa ow ou [a
FE OT TY i A TTT gas Daan
[tse [es see Soa [ees] toes [wed [tee | od] se Jose | en] oe |
[as | tow | [seas J nas | a fad mm
re a ba a
7 ges [as [ans [a ae [as Eu
$ave [tee owe eee eee Fs a oy
E aaa | we | ans | as [ao ve | ve fam | a rn
a en [on oe] kw fom | fom [oo Pow on | ot | om | a | ae an
ea ewe om en a a en em ww] ae [| fo Tait
¢_[ewafow] we [on [i am [owe ow | a nn Dam a (eww wat Dow at [ow
oO fowo) es et Pin [it oo ww os on en Pn [ow] on gu [an [nop ow
= To
4

Aen wep fm] at Pa Pas Dam | owe ow ow op os [om [oon [os tow [on fw | at ur [nt [one pone Powe) um | an | iat
a [eww] ae | oe ot a (Sep | tes | on Co a [om op we] at | ten Ca woof] en [on Dit [en [ow
fom] es Coe Cm [on (of ow Pow] ae [aes [ant 7 wo] es [oe [te aay wpe] an Con [on a po
Fe A TA) TT AT TT ET ya: Cr [oan oe gut |i Ci ew es [on

Son Sar Mon | Tue | Wes +4 a ao a Mon Xie
[eu SAS TA TET TT sai | ua ow 1
2 ow un [i [us [ow PN Wd at sax | sn [En fo vn {ui [wow it
£ rT dl 4 H H Axi Alt ” # # deat | gat bd H # 4 tenn | ut 32
CE A TT TD TT CS I TA TTY mat

 

 
 
 

[sos [mee [tye [wad Te Tor Tse J
ee ens ae Peo Tas (or ea |
Powe p sas [nn Ts Ts Fw]

 

   

 
   
 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[axis | +4 yun [a
te au Poa Pa
Ce [is | ou [owapew
Eat ioe [ae tz ieee [oe ee =
wa 7as | one 7 7
z on fo wf ae | ae | ae Fs a TTT a AT TT Rl TY
ten aon fone an eu few foe fmf as [ear [a i an Pasn [TTY
a SC LT AT TTT TTT
EC EST TTT TT TT AT
mI Foe te ae ae =e Ta
Fi ato ee a ; 28
Le ET TA TT TTT A AT TT TT ET TT TO TST TT TT
CC TT Tl TT A TT TT
CS TT PN PT A Tl
CN EO A ST EO Tl

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

oh fi
OL EP EET ET TERT A TEN ETA OT TT TT ET ETT ET TTT
oun on [eae ew) te fatten Cans eww fom] wa [sen | ot [a [ow] wofewol us | an [ten [o (owoo wpe wo] ant [om
can (Swf wm] wr Ptr Dt Tan fom Pompom] oa [oD fo | opow pow] wa Pon Dae [eww ow] em [oar fom
> Wolo | wu | mu [un 1: Towa Wot tar (ass [aes | nt [ow Wow] sar [aay [ns [in [Swen | tes fear Cia Den [ow
] i
x 2 Woy Wp r Wo sat fis [WoW | Wo] tet en fa ew gett |
fee ew ww et [a fant [en a [| an [ ot ew oo gar [oer [un Pn (ew fk nf ae [oe Poe
(eww ee Pe Ci un [woo gen [st How oe Pe in [an Pe pew owe Ps a [ns [ow
FL ET ETON TT CT aut [Woon Ko a) ew owe few] aes To a [an [eon

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a
we ez

a fe Pen [on Paap Poe es Pts [nt a eo te Pee Ps Pn Po | a gar [ar [ow

awe tee Cae Tn we fw) tas Tn [on au guar [aan en Can [Ew wp en [aes [us [as fw pow

c 2 Ce a a Ss a CT eM TT aus FE eww os ass fone Utes nw fom] aera | teat

oP En wets Cae tes Ca ww wf aes ot Dt wpa) tte [aes [ss Cas ew fwd tes Pty Ta

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016

 

 

 
‘Attachment 2- Leave Groups

Leave Group A

 

Leave Group B

 

 

 

 

 

H H H

 

Leave Group C

 

 

 

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 73
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT

 

STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE ADDENDUM K ANTHONY W. BATTS
Mayor Recruitment and Training Police Commissioner
Lt. Gene S. Ryan, President January 14, 2015
Fraternal Order of Police
Baltimore City Lodge #3
3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211
RE: BALTIMORE CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT — RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING
Dear President Ryan:

This side-letter will affirm our agreement that the Department will throughout the term of this
FY 2014-2016 MOU earmark specific funds for the purposes of training and recruiting. More
specifically, agency funds totaling $400,000 will be utilized for providing training to bargaining unit
members. In addition, agency funds totaling $150,000 will be utilized for recruitment.

Please accept this Side Letter as compliance with our understanding.

Sincerely,

Anthony W. Batts
Police Commissioner

AWB:
ce: Jerry Rodriguez

Dean Palmere
Deborah F. Moore-Carter

ACCEPTED for Fraternal Order of Police

 

c/o 242 W. 29th Street * Baltimore, Maryland 21211
FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 74
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT

 

ADDENDUM L
STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE Grievance and Arbitration and Discipline ANTHONY W. BATTS,
Mayor Police Commissioner
Lt. Gene S. Ryan, President January 14, 2015
Fraternal Order of Police
Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue
Baltimore, Maryland 21211

RE: BALTIMORE CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT — ARTICLES 6 AND 16
Dear President Ryan:

This letter will confirm the agreement reached by the City and the FOP regarding two provisions
in the new MOU:

1. Article 6 Grievance and Arbitration: It is agreed that should an employee or the Union desire
to file a grievance, it must be filed beginning at Step 1 and continuing if necessary through the
remaining Steps and only then to arbitration. The only exception to this requirement that all
grievance steps are mandatory shall be in cases of a group or class grievance which may be
instituted at Step 3 or where the parties mutually agree to skip one or more steps in the grievance
process.

2. Article 16, A.2_ The parties have agreed to interpret this section to mean that if an employee is
charged with a felony and suspended without pay pursuant to Article 16, Ai, he/she will be entitled
to reinstitution to pay status with all benefits, and lost pay back to the date on which pay was
stopped, effective when the felony charges are dismissed or the officer is found not guilty. The
employee shall be eligible for back pay under these circumstances even if there is a separate
misdemeanor which has not been dismissed or adjudicated as not guilty.

Please accept this Side Letter as compliance with our understanding.

Sincerely,

Q) shold Wotte- Cede

Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Labor Commissioner

DFMC:

cc: Anthony W. Batts
Jerry Rodriguez
Dean Palmere
Quinton M. Herbert
Yvette Brown

  

ine S. Ryan, President

  

c/o 242 W. 29th Street * Baltimore, Maryland 21211
FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 75
 
  

OFFICE OF THE LABOR COMMISSIONER

DEBORAH F. MOORE-CARTER, SPHR
Labor Commissioner

417 E. Fayette Street, Suite 1405
Baltimore, Maryland 21202

 
 
   
 
 

CITY OF BALTIMORE

STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE, Mayor

 
 

ADDENDUM M

Wage Reopener
Lt. Gene S. Ryan, President, President January 14, 2015
Fraternal Order of Police
Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue
Baltimore, Maryland 21211

RE: Wage Reopener
Dear President Ryan:
In the event that the Employer shall fail to pay any of the negotiated pay raises due the members of
Units I and II effective July 1, 2015, the Memorandum of Understanding covering Units I and II for
fiscal years 2014-2016 will be reopened for the sole purpose of negotiating wage increases.

Sincerely,

Delete F Mose Cer

Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Labor Commissioner

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

Gene S. Ryan, President Z;

DFMC:

cc: Anthony W. Batts
Jerry Rodriguez

FOP Unit 1 Fiscal Years 2014-2016 76

® printed on recycled paper with environmentally friendly soy based ink.
