BETWEEN AND FOR THE
CITY OF FRESNO
AND
FRESNO POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
(Non-Supervisory Police-Unit 4)

FISCAL YEARS
2009 - 2012
(Three Year Extension)
CHAPTER

Chapter 1.

Chapter 2.

Chapter 3.

Chapter 4.

Chapter 5.

Chapter 6.

Chapter 7.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
| SECTION | SUBSECTION PAGE

Ld nd ta)
1.1 PURPOSE...
1.2 DEFINITIONS
1.3. GOVERNING LAWS.

 
   

EMPLOYEE RIGHTS.
2.1 GENERAL - EMPLOYEE RIGHTS..
2.2 © EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITIES
2.3. NONDISCRIMINATION

 
 
 
 

CITY RIGHTS
3.1. GENERAI
3.2. SPECIFIC..

 

 

 

RECOGNITION ...
4.1 ASSOCIATI
4.2 | RECOGNITION OF UNIT DESCRIPTION
4.3. CITY RECOGNITION...
4.4 RECOGNITION OF MUTUAL OBLIGATIO
4.5 STRIKES... eee
4.6 UNILATERAL ACTION ...

   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

SCOPE OF REPRESENTATION
5.1 GENERAL.
5.2 REPRESENTATION.

DUES DEDUCTION
6.1 DUES CHECKOFF
6.2 | DUES DEDUCTION CHECK.
6.3. ASSOCIATION BUSINESS.

   
 
 
 
 
  
  

COMPENSATION AND BENEFIT:

7.1. GENERAL.
7.2 | SALARIES AND PENSION CONTRIBUTION.
7.3. OVERTIME AND COMPENSATORY TIME OFF (CTO)
7.4 PREMIUM PAY...

 

.01 ‘Police Specialist
02. = Specialized Assignments...
.03. Patrol Training Officer/Specialist/PTO Coordinator .
.04 Bomb Squad

 
 
 
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER / SECTION | SUBSECTION PAGE

7.5
7.6
7.7
7.8
7.9
7.10
7.11
7.12

7.13

105 Life INSUPANCE oe eee eee cere teee eee teeeeseeteeeeteeteseeenteeee
.06 Special Duty Pay
.07 Night Shift
.08 Motorcycle Duty Hazard Pay...
.09 Bilingual Certification Program ...
.10 Education Incentive Plan (EIP)
11 ~~ Post Certificate Pay

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  

 

FRESNO CITY EMPLOYEES' HEALTH AND WELFARE TRUST
SERVICE UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
WORKERS' COMPENSATION
COURT APPEARANCES ....
TAKE-HOME VEHICLES
WELLNESS PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE ..
TIME CHANGE.
LEAVES...

01 Sick Leave
.02 Retirement Attendance/Health Incentive
.03 Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA)
.04 Family Sick Leave..
05 ~Vacation Leave
.06 Holiday Leave
.07 Family Events...
.08 Guaranteed Leave .
.09 Vacation Leave Bidding
10 Requests for Leave of Absences .

HOURS AND WORK SCHEDULES, MATRIX ASSIGNMENTS,
DUTY OFFICE, NON-MINIMUM STAFFING, POLICE RESOURCE
OPTIMIZATION SYSTEM, AND ABSENT WITH SUBSTITUTE.............. 36

.01 Hours and Work Schedules ...
.02 — Patrol Work Schedule/Matrix..
.03 Patrol Schedule Exploratory Committee
104 = Duty OffICO oe eee eee eeeeereeeeeeeees
.05 ~=Non-Minimum Staffing-Flexing of Hours
.06 Staff Wizard/Corona Solutions..
.07 Absent with Substitute (AWS)
.08 Proximity Detail ...

 

  
 
 
  
CHAPTER

7.14

7.15

7.16

7.17

7.18

7.19

7.20

7.21

7.22

7.23

7.24

7.25

7.26

7.27

TABLE OF CONTENTS
| SECTION | SUBSECTION PAGE

ASSIGNMENTS, COVERAGE & HOURS - EXCEPTIONAL
PROVISIONS. ou... cccceccecssssceessseeseeesecaeeeeseseceeseeaceeseeacseseaaceuseeesseseseaaseuseaaenes 45

-01 = Patrol Matrix (SUPCrViSiON) 0.0... eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeteeeeteaeenetenee
.02 = Special Units - Flexing of Hours
.03 Traffic Bureau
04 = Canine Unit ..

 
 
 
 

.05 Airport Task Force Assignment no nsppnnunseunneseannseennnesrnennnene 50
FILLING SPECIAL ASSIGNMENTS uo... cece ceceeeeee seca eeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenaee 52
DURATION OF ASSIGNMENT - SPECIAL UNITS ONLY... 55
CAREER DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM ........eeceeseceseeeeseeeseeseseeeneeeneeeee 57
SENIORITY woe cece seca seca secs seseeseseeseeeseeeseaeeseseaseaeaseaeaseaeeeeseasegeaee 58

FEDERAL DRUG POLICY (Federal Omnibus Transportation
Employee Testing Act)... eceeessesscseeseeeeeeseeeeeeeesaeeeeseaeeeeeeesaeeseeeaeeeeteaee 60

GENERAL TESTING GUIDELINES FOR EMPLOYEES
NOT COVERED BY THE FEDERAL OMNIBUS TRANSPORTATION
EMPLOYEE TESTING...

 

ADMINISTRATION OF PERSONNEL ACTIONS .......ccscecsesseseeesteeeeeeeeee 62

SUCCESS PLAN and ATTACHMENTS .....ceeeceeeteeeee tees teeeeenneee 62

DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES

 

IN LIEU OF SUSPENSION ju... cccscescessssseeeeeseeeeeeeeeseeeessaeeeesseaseesneseaeeeeseaee 64
USE OF A HEARING OFFICER IN DISCIPLINARY ACTION

INITIATED BY CITY .....cccccccsscescssscseceessseeeeesseeseeseasseseessaecesseacsesneaeaeeeesaee 64
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURE .......ccsceccessesseesseseeeeseeeeeeeeaee 64
GRIEVANCES. ou... ccecscescesseseceessseeeeseaeceesssecseseesceesneacaesessaeesessaeseessaaeeeengaes 66

.01 Grievance Procedure...
.02 Informal Process
.03 Formal Process
.04 Formal Filing Procedure

 
 
 

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER / SECTION | SUBSECTION PAGE

Chapter 8. POLICING SPECIAL EVENTS AND CONTRACT LAW ENFORCEMENT
SERVICES......cccscescssseseessssseeseseseeeessaecesssecseseeaceesseacseseesssesessaeseeseaaeeeeaaes 71

B.1 GENERAL... ccc ececcccesecseeeeeeseeeeenseceeeneeceeeeessaesessaeesessaeseseaeeeesaaes
8.2 PROCEDURES
8.3. COMPENSATION..

 

 

Chapter 9. HEADINGS wo. cece ce ceeene cece seceseeseceseesaseseesaceseesaseseeseseeseeniaeee 74
Chapter 10. SAVING CLAUSE/FULL UNDERSTANDING .....cceeeccceeseteeeteseeeeeeees 75

10.1 SAVING CLAUSE
10.2 FULL UNDERSTANDING

 

 

Chapter 11. TERMINATION uu... ccc cece cece ceeeeseceseesaceeeeseceseeseaseseeseseesennaaeee 76
EXHIBITS

I SALARIES—Non-Supervisory Police—Unit 4
ll EIP Master List...
Ill Success Plan and Attachments
IV Performance Evaluation
Vv Agreement between City of Fresno and Employee Organizations

Representing City of Fresno Employees dated February 24, 2009..................92

  
 
 

 

SIDE LETTER AGREEMENTS INCORPORATED INTO MOU:

1. Airport Task Force Assignment dated February 23, 2007.

2. Premium Pay for Performing Chief Police Pilot Duties dated May 15, 2007.
3. Association Business dated September 25, 2007.

4. Filling Special Assignments dated October 12, 2007.

5. Proximity Detail dated November 2, 2007.

6. FY09 Compensation and Benefits Reopener wione year MOU Extension dated
July 1, 2008.
7. Retirement Enhancement Reopener - HRA/Sick Leave Incentive/Seniority dated

November 4, 2008.
TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER | SECTION | SUBSECTION

 

 

LEGEND

Officer(s) = member(s) where applicable

aK

[8 deleted]

old language deleted
section/subsection deleted

[88 deleted] = two or more
sections/subsections deleted

bold type =new language

 

 

PAGE
1.1

1.2

1.3

CHAPTER 1
PREAMBLE
PURPOSE

This Memorandum of Understanding, hereinafter MOU, entered into between the
City of Fresno, hereinafter referred to as the City, and the Fresno Police Officers
Association, hereinafter referred to as the Association, has as its purpose: to
establish wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment for
members of this Unit. This MOU is extended for a three year period of time
from June 30, 2009 to June 30, 2012. Effective July 1, 2009, other than the
modifications set forth herein, the parties agree that until this MOU
terminates on June 30, 2012, all economic benefits currently afforded to
affected members shall remain intact without modification unless
otherwise agreed to in writing by the parties.

1.1.01 Effective July 1, 2009 through June 30, 2011, the parties agree
there will be no demotions (excluding demotions for
disciplinary cause) of any member of this Unit for purposes of
economic or reorganizational purposes or enforcement of
involuntary furloughs.

DEFINITIONS

Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, and, except to
the extent that a particular word or phrase is otherwise specifically defined in this
MOU, the definitions and provisions contained in Article 3 of Chapter 3 * * * ,
Sections 3-101 * * *, 3-201 * * * , 3-301 * * *, and 3-603 * * * of the Fresno
Municipal Code, (hereinafter FMC), shall govern the construction, meaning, and
application of words and phrases used herein. The definition of each word or
phrase shall constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or
phrase which is derivative from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case
may be.

GOVERNING LAWS

The employer-employee relationship between the City and its employees and the
City and the Association is governed by Chapter 10 of Division 4 of Title | of the
Government Code (Section 3500 et seq., commonly known as the Meyers-Milias-
Brown Act), applicable provisions of the Public Employment Relations Board
(PERB), the Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights Act (POBR), as may
be amended from time to time, and Article 6 * * * of Chapter 3 * * * of the FMC.
In the event of any conflict between said laws and this MOU, or in the event of
conflicts in interpretation, said laws shall govern.

1
2.1

2.2

2.3

CHAPTER 2

EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

GENERAL - EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

Except as otherwise provided in this MOU, the rights of employees include those
set forth in FMC Section 3-604 * * *, and said section presently reads as follows:

“Employees shall have the right to form, join and participate in the
activities of employee organizations of their own choosing for the
purpose of representation on all matters of employer-employee
relations including, but not limited to, wages, hours, and other terms
and conditions of employment. Employees shall have the right to
refuse to join or participate in the activities of employee
organizations and shall have the right to represent themselves
individually in their employment relations with the City. No
employees shall be interfered with, intimidated, restrained, coerced,
or discriminated against by the City or by an employee or an
employee organization because of his exercise of any of these
rights. No management employee or confidential employee shall
act as a representative of any employee organization which
represents employees other than management employees or
confidential employees."

EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITIES

All employees in the Non-Supervisory Police Unit, hereinafter Unit, acknowledge
that the City shall consider the positions and proposals of the Association as the
meet and confer positions and proposals of all employees, individually and
collectively, in said Unit.

NONDISCRIMINATION

The provisions of this MOU shall apply equally to and be exercised by all
members of the Unit consistent with state and federal nondiscrimination statutes.

2.3.01 A member seeking to utilize the grievance procedure, claiming a
violation of Section 2.3, shall make an election of remedies between
arbitration, and any other remedy available at law, through local, state,
or federal law. The election of remedy shall take place at the step in
the grievance procedure leading to final and binding arbitration.
2.3.02

When a member seeks to go to arbitration claiming a violation of
Section 2.3, the member, the City, and the Association shall enter into
an agreement which provides that in exchange for the member's
commitment to voluntarily determine the matter through arbitration, the
member agrees to waive the member's right to pursue any other
remedy otherwise available through local, state, or federal law. Said
agreement shall comply with all statutory and judicial requirements,
and contain a provision that the member has been advised of the
member's right to consult an attorney and/or local, state, or federal
anti-discrimination agency regarding the member's discrimination claim
and that the member’s consent to the agreement is voluntary and
knowing.
3.1

3.2

GENERAL

CHAPTER 3

CITY RIGHTS

Except as otherwise provided in this MOU, the rights of the City include those
rights enumerated in FMC Section 3-605 * * *, as the same may be amended

from time to time.

SPECIFIC

3.2.01 The exclusive rights of the City include, but are not limited to, the right

to:

“a

(2)
(3)

(4)
(5)
(6)

(7)
(8)

(9)
(10)

(11)

determine the missions of its constituent departments,
divisions, commissions, and boards;

set standards of service and municipal fees and charges;

determine the procedures and standards of selection for
employment, assignment, transfer, and promotion;

direct its employees;
take disciplinary action;

relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for
other legitimate reasons;

maintain the efficiency of governmental operations;

determine the methods, means, and personnel by which
government operations are to be conducted;

determine the content of job classifications;
take all necessary actions to carry out its mission;

exercise complete control and discretion over its organization
and technology of performing its work."
3.2.02

3.2.03

3.2.04

3.2.05

The rights of the City include the determination of staffing levels,
including but not limited to, staffing by shift and class. Minimum
staffing levels, by shift, area, and day of the week, shall be established
by appropriate departmental order.

All other rights formerly or presently enjoyed by or vested in the City on
the effective date of this MOU and not mentioned in Section 3.2.01 are
retained by and reserved to the City.

Nothing in this MOU shall be construed as delegating to others the
authority conferred by law on the City, or in any way abridging or
reducing such authority.

This MOU is not intended to restrict consultation in good faith with the
Association regarding matters within the right of the City to determine.
41

4.2

43

CHAPTER 4

RECOGNITION

ASSOCIATION RECOGNITION

The City acknowledges the Association as the recognized employee organization
representing the Unit, and shall meet and confer in good faith promptly upon
request by the Association and continue for a reasonable period of time in order
to exchange freely information, opinions, and proposals, and to endeavor to
reach agreement on a successor MOU at least one (1) week prior to the last
regular City Council meeting at which the City budget must be adopted for the
ensuing fiscal year in order to meet the June 30 deadline specified in the City
Charter. In order that the meet and confer process includes adequate time for
full consideration of the proposals of both parties and for the resolution of
impasse, the City shall accept meet and confer process proposals from the
Association as early as February 1, * * * 2012, and will be prepared to commence
the actual meet and confer process no later than March 1, * * * 2012.

RECOGNITION OF UNIT DESCRIPTION

The Non-Supervisory Police Unit consists of all employees holding a permanent
position, as defined in FMC Section 3-202 (p)(4) * * *, in one of the following
classes (hereinafter collectively referred to as member unless otherwise
specified), as such Unit may be modified from time to time pursuant to the
provisions of the FMC:

Police Officer Recruit
Police Officer

Police Specialist
Police Sergeant

CITY RECOGNITION

The Association recognizes the City Manager of the City, or such other person as
may be designated in writing, as the designated representative of the City
pursuant to FMC Section 3-615 * * *, and shall meet and confer in good faith
promptly upon request by the City and continue for a reasonable period of time in
order to exchange freely information, opinions, and proposals, and to endeavor
to reach agreement on a successor MOU at least one (1) week prior to the last
regular City Council meeting at which the City budget must be adopted for the
ensuing fiscal year in order to meet the June 30 deadline specified in the City
Charter.
44

45

46

RECOGNITION OF MUTUAL OBLIGATION

The Association and the City recognize and acknowledge their mutual obligation
and responsibility to effectuate the purposes set forth in, and to adhere to the
conditions and clauses set forth in, this MOU.

STRIKES

No unlawful strikes of any kind shall be caused or sanctioned by the Association
during the term of this MOU.

UNILATERAL ACTION

In the event the meet and confer process for a successor MOU results in an
impasse, as defined in the FMC, the City shall not take unilateral action regarding
wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment prior to the
completion of the impasse procedures, including, but not limited to, mediation
and fact finding as outlined in the FMC.
5.1

5.2

CHAPTER 5

SCOPE OF REPRESENTATION

GENERAL

"Scope of representation" means all matters relating to employer-employee
relations, including, but not limited to, wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of employment. Employee rights, as set forth in FMC Section 3-604
** * and City rights as set forth in FMC Section 3-605 * * *, are excluded from
the scope of representation.

The Association is the exclusive representative of all employees holding a
permanent position (includes probationary employees) within those classes in the
Unit, as defined in FMC 3-202 (p) (4) * * *.

REPRESENTATION

The City will not interfere with, or discriminate in any way against, any employee
by reason of his or her membership in the Association.

The Association agrees to represent Unit members in a manner consistent with
the requirements of the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act, POBR, and applicable state
and federal regulations.
6.1

CHAPTER 6

DUES DEDUCTION

DUES CHECKOFF

Rules governing dues check-off are set forth in the FMC Section 3-620 * * *.

6.1.01

6.1.02

6.1.03

6.1.04

6.1.05

6.1.06

6.1.07

The Association member’s earnings must be sufficient after other legal
and required deductions are made to cover the amount of the dues
deduction authorized. When a member is in a non-pay status for an
entire pay period, no dues deduction shall be made from the future
earnings to cover that pay period, nor will the member be required to
deposit the amount which would have been deducted if the member
had been in a pay status during the pay period. In the case of a
member who is in a non-pay status during only a part of the pay period
and whose salary is insufficient to cover other legal and required
deductions, no dues deduction or deposit shall be made.

The City shall deduct the dues or benefit premiums, or both, upon
proper authorization by Association members in the Unit.

If a member in the Unit desires the City to deduct dues or benefit
premiums from the member's paycheck, a deduction authorization
shall be made upon a Dues Deduction Authorization card.

A Dues Deduction Authorization card may be revoked by a member in
the Unit, and the dues or benefit deduction canceled, only during the
months of November and December of any year.

If a member in the Unit desires to revoke prior dues deduction
authorization card, a dues deduction revocation shall be made upon a
Dues Deduction Revocation card.

Upon written authorization by a retired member of the Association, the
City shall deduct credit union payments and Association dues monthly
from the retirement check of such retired member and forward same to
the credit union or Association as designated in such authorization.

Dues Deduction Authorization and Revocation cards are available at
the Finance Department, Payroll Section, and Operations Division of
the Personnel Services Department.
6.2

6.3

DUES DEDUCTION CHECK

6.2.01

6.2.02

6.2.03

The dues deduction check covering all such deductions shall be
transmitted to the Fresno Police Officers Association.

The dues deduction check shall be made in favor of the Fresno Police
Officers Association.

A dues deduction check will be transmitted at least monthly.

ASSOCIATION BUSINESS

6.3.01

6.3.02

Association members shall have their monthly vacation leave accrual
levels (denoted in Section 7.12.05(1), vacation leave), reduced by
.583333 hours per month, which shall be placed in a time bank and
administered by the department for Association business use.
Members designated by the Association may, with the approval of the
department, attend to direct Association business, including such
activities as attendance at Association membership and Board
meetings, PORAC and other similar conferences, and direct
involvement in charitable Association activities. Time banked under this
provision may also be designated by the Association to cover
members who AWS for designated Association members who are
attending to Association business. The department is not required to
grant time off for Association business if it will require filling the position
on an overtime basis.

(Incorporated from Side Letter Agreement dated September 25,
2007):

The Association President and First Vice President may use the time
banked under this provision for Association business to a maximum of
40 hours per week each. In the event the President or First Vice
President of the Association is required by the FROA Board to commit
additional time beyond 40 hours per week to perform his/her duties as
President, he/she shall be permitted to draw additional hours up to an
amount not to exceed 40 hours per calendar month each. Any
Association leave hours utilized by the President or First Vice
President in excess of 40 hours per week shall be transferred to the
President's or First Vice President’s compensatory or holiday time
bank. In the event of an emergency requiring significant extraordinary
deployment of department personnel, the Association President and/or
First Vice President may be required to return to regular duty for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. An Association
President and/or First Vice President who leaves office shall be

10
6.3.03

returned to the previously held assignment, or other assignment as
mutually agreed to.

Any time spent by the Association President, First Vice President and
by members designated by the Association to be on such business,
shall be deducted from the Association's time banked balance. It is
further agreed by the parties that once accrued vacation leave is
donated to the Association, the City no longer has any obligation to
compensate, either in cash or in equivalent time off, such members.

11
7.1

7.2

GENERAL

CHAPTER 7

COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS

All economic benefits, provided by Council ordinance or formal Council resolution
and not otherwise clearly and explicitly modified or restricted in this MOU, shall
be continued without alteration during the term of this MOU.

SALARIES AND PENSION CONTRIBUTION

7.2.01

7.2.02

7.2.03

[§ deleted] Step Increases (FYO9) - The classes of Police
Officers, Specialists and Police Sergeants agree to defer until
July 1, 2010, the two percent (2%) salary increase previously
scheduled to be received on June 30, 2009.

[8 § deleted ]

(1)

(2)

Retirement/IDROP Between 6/30/09 and_7/1/10 - Effective
June 30, 2009, the deferred two percent (2%) salary
increase shall be included in any retirement benefit or
DROP calculation pursuant to the applicable FMC
sections for members who separate from City service by
service retirement or by disability retirement, or enter
DROP between June 30, 2009 and July 1, 2010.

EY09-DROP Members and Retirees - Effective June 30,
2009, adjustments to the monthly amount deposited
allowances for DROP members and monthly retirement
benefit allowances for retirees shall include the two
percent (2%) deferred salary increase from Section 7.2.01
and be calculated pursuant to FMC Sections 3-301 and
3-302.

[8 § deleted ]

Step Increase (FY11)

(1)

Effective July 1, 2010, salaries for the classes of Police
Officers, Specialists and Police Sergeants shall be
increased by two percent (2%) as reflected on Exhibit |,
Table Il.

12
Consistent with Section 7.2.02(2) above, DROP members
and retirees received an increase in their monthly DROP
amount deposited or retirement benefit allowances
related to the two percent (2%) deferred base salary
increase effective June 30, 2009. Therefore, DROP
members and retirees shall not have their monthly DROP
amount deposited or retirement benefit allowances
increased by the July 1, 2010, two percent (2%) base
salary increase as would have otherwise been calculated
pursuant to FMC Sections 3-3-1 and 3-302.

(2) Effective January 1, 2011, salaries for the classes of
Police Officers, Specialists and Police Sergeants shall be
increased by one percent (1%) as reflected on Exhibit |,

Table Ill.
7.2.04 [§ § deleted ]

Step Increase (FY12)

(1) Effective July 1, 2011, salaries for the classes of Police
Officers, Specialists and Police Sergeants shall be
increased by two percent (2%) as reflected on Exhibit |,
Table IV.

(2) Effective January 1, 2012, salaries for the classes of
Police Officers, Specialists and Police Sergeants shall be
increased by one percent (1%) as reflected on Exhibit |,
Table V.

[8 § deleted ]
7.2.05 RETIREMENT CALCULATION

Effective July 1, 2011, a Tier 1 member who is demoted for
economic or reorganization purposes and who separates from City
Service by service retirement or disability retirement without
entering into DROP shall have their retirement benefit calculated
using the member’s highest average monthly compensation
earnable by the member during any thirty-six (36) consecutive
month period of service instead of the average monthly
compensation earnable by the member during the last three (3)
years of employment with the City of Fresno Police Department.

13
7.3

7.2.06

7.2.07

7.2.08

7.2.09

7.2.10

7.2.11

7.2.12

7.2.13

[8 § deleted ]
[§ deleted ]
[§ deleted ]
[§ deleted ]

Employees hired into classes which have step increases will move
from Step “A” to Step “B” on the anniversary date which is twelve (12)
calendar months from the date the employee was permanently
appointed to the current class.

Upon successful completion of * * * one (1) year of service as a Police
Officer Recruit, Recruits shall be appointed as a Police Officer using
the rules applicable to flexible staffing, and shall be on probation for
* * * six (6) months as a Police Officer. All other Police Officer hires
shall serve a one (1) year probationary period.

A Police Officer and/or Police Specialist assigned to be an Acting
Sergeant under the provisions of FMC Section 3-260 * * *, shall be
paid for such assignment at whatever step is closest to, but not less
than, the Officer’s regular base salary. In no case shall an Officer be
paid at a rate higher than the highest Step for Sergeant. Acting
Sergeants shall continue to receive PTO premium pay.

Effective July 1, 2009, when a Police Officer or Police Specialist is
promoted to Police Sergeant, the promoted Officer shall be placed in
Step D * * * of the new salary range, or the step which provides at least
three and one-half percent (3 %2%) above base pay, whichever is
greater. Officers promoted to Sergeant on or after November 1,
2007, and prior to July 1, 2009, will retroactively be placed at Step
D, however, will maintain their current anniversary date for step
advancement.

OVERTIME AND COMPENSATORY TIME OFF (CTO)

7.3.01

The work day for members shall be eight (8) or ten (10) consecutive
hours (or the designated twelve (12) hour work shift for Proximity
Detail). Pursuant to Section 7(k) of the FLSA, the City has established
a twenty-eight (28) day work period for law enforcement personnel.
However, except as may be otherwise provided in this MOU, any time
worked in excess of the eight (8), ten (10) or a twelve (12) hour day,
or in excess of the forty (40) hour work week (or the designated thirty
[80] hour/fifty [50] hour work schedule for Canine Officers and Officers

14
7.3.02

7.3.03

7.3.04

7.3.05

7.3.06

7.3.07

7.3.08

assigned to patrol matrix and DCST units or the designated thirty-six
(36), forty (40) or forty-four (44) hour work schedule for Officers
assigned to Proximity Detail), including mandatory training whether
as a student/instructor, shall be compensated as overtime.

When a member is in transit outside the City to attend training, the
travel time will be compensated at the member’s base/straight time
rate of pay.

Overtime, whether in cash or CTO, shall be at one and one-half (1 1%)
times the base rate of pay.

Members on vacation leave may be permitted to work overtime by
notifying the department of their desire to work.

Call back shall be paid at a minimum of three (3) hours at the rate of
time and one-half (1 %). Any time worked prior to the beginning of a
shift or immediately following a shift shall not be considered as call
back and shall be compensated at the applicable hourly rate.

Contact with a member by telephone, at any time other than during the
member's regular shift, for the purpose of obtaining additional
information or clarifying work performed, shall be compensated at the
applicable hourly rate, to the nearest 1/10th of an hour, but in no event
shall the member be paid for such phone contact of less than six (6)
minutes.

A member who has worked more than eight (8) hours or ten (10) hours
on any one work day shall not be involuntarily required to adjust a
subsequent shift or work day in that same work week to avoid the
payment of overtime. The department is under no obligation to grant
CTO or vacation on the subsequent day.

Members may elect to accrue CTO in lieu of cash payment for
overtime hours worked. CTO is accumulated at the applicable
straight/base time, time and one-half, or double time rate for the time
worked. CTO is to be used for time off, and is subject to approval in
the same manner as vacation. In the event the department is unable
to approve a CTO time off request, the department shall compensate
the member in cash at the applicable straight/base time rate of pay for
the amount of CTO time off the member requested but was not
approved.

(1) * * * Members may accrue a CTO balance not to exceed 120
hours, except as otherwise provided herein. Members who

15
7.4

have reached the maximum accrual (120 hours) shall be given
cash payment for additional overtime hours worked until such
balance has been reduced below the maximum allowable
amount (120 hours).

(2) Members may request payment for any CTO leave balance.

(3) The parties will continue to meet and confer concerning the
manner in which CTO can be used. However, there shall be
no change to this subsection without mutual agreement of the
parties.

PREMIUM PAY

Premium pays provided in Sections 7.4.02, 7.4.03 and 7.4.05 shall not be
stacked. Monthly rates of premium pay will be paid on a biweekly basis.

7.4.01

7.4.02

Police Specialist - Any Officer assigned as a Police Specialist prior to
May 31, 1988 shall remain a Police Specialist thereafter during that
Officer's career, until the Officer retires, resigns, voluntarily demotes, is
promoted, or is involuntarily removed.

Specialized Assignments - Employees occupying the Police Officer
class, the terminal class of Police Specialist, and Police Sergeant in
assignments which require specialized tactical equipment and/or
specialized tactical training, and flexing of work hours without notice,
as determined solely by the Chief of Police or designee, shall receive
premium pay of $275 per month above the member's base rate of pay,
with the exception of Pilots and Flight Instructors assigned to Skywatch
who shall receive the premium pay amounts as set forth below. This
premium pay is compensable for retirement purposes. The list of units
currently determined by the Chief of Police or designee to qualify as
such an assignment are:

* HEAT * Skywatch

* MAGEC. ¢ Street Violence Bureau (SVB)

* Mounted Patrol * Tactical Teams

* Parole Apprehension Team _« District Crime Suppression Team
(PAT) (DCST)

* Neighborhood Traffic Unit —_ + Vice/Intelligence
(NTU)

The Chief of Police or designee shall provide in writing to the
Association any additions or deletions to this list.

16
7.4.03

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Patrol

Employees occupying the Police Officer class or Police
Sergeant class assigned to Skywatch who receive and
maintain a Commercial Pilot License issued by the Federal
Aviation Administration shall receive premium pay of $500 per
month above the employee's base rate of pay.

Employees occupying the Police Officer class or Police
Sergeant class assigned to Skywatch who receive and
maintain certification as a Flight Instructor issued by the
Federal Aviation Administration shall receive premium pay of
$750 per month above the employee's base rate of pay.

(Incorporated from Side Letter Agreement dated May 15,
2007):

Employees occupying the Police Officer class and who
are assigned the duties of a Chief Police Pilot in Skywatch
Unit shall receive a premium pay of twenty and one half
percent (20.5%) above the Officer’s base rate of pay.
While assigned the duties of a Chief Police Pilot, a Police
Officer will not be entitled to receive the $500 and $750
premiums under subsections (1) and (2), above. This
premium is compensable for retirement purposes.

Any Officer assigned to the Unit to perform the duties of a
Chief Police Pilot shall retain permanent status as a
Police Officer. The above premium pay received by an
Officer assigned to the Skywatch Unit will be terminated
upon transfer out of the Unit.

Any Officer who subsequently wishes to be removed from
the Skywatch Unit while performing the duties of a Chief
Police Pilot shall not be allowed to laterally transfer to
another supervisory position or to a different special unit
until meeting all standard procedures set forth in Section
7.15 of this MOU.

Any Officer assigned to the Skywatch Unit to perform the
duties of a Chief Police Pilot remains subject to all the
terms and conditions of this MOU, except as stated
above.

Training _Officer/Specialist/PTO Coordinator - Members

occupying the classes of Police Officer and Police Specialist assigned
full-time Patrol Training Officer (PTO) and full-time PTO Coordinator

17
7.4.04

7.4.05

7.4.06

7.4.07

functions will receive $500 per month in addition to their base rate of
pay. This premium pay is compensable for retirement purposes.
Those assigned to temporary Patrol Training Officer duties will be
compensated at the monthly premium pay, prorated for each full work
day they are assigned to train any department member. This premium
pay is compensable for retirement purposes.

Bomb Squad - Members who are members of the Bomb Squad shall
receive double their regular straight time rate for that time spent (from
call to completion) in dealing with explosives. Said double time shall
be the total compensation for such time spent, whether on regular duty
time or when called from off duty.

Life Insurance - The City will provide $250,000 in life insurance/death
benefit coverage to members assigned to bomb squad, helicopter pilot,
airplane pilot, or helicopter observer duties.

Special Duty Pay - Members occupying the classes of Sergeant, Police
Officer, and Police Specialist assigned full-time to the Police Training
Unit will receive special duty pay of $275 per month in addition to their
base rate of pay, effective July 1, 2006. Special duty pay is
compensable for retirement purposes. Sergeants and Police Officers
assigned to the Training Unit receiving special pay may be assigned
flexible hours of work to meet the needs of the department with forty-
eight (48) hours notice. Adjustments pursuant to this section may last
no longer than seven (7) consecutive calendar days, nor occur more
than once during any thirty (30) day period. The intent of special duty
pay is to maintain parity at the same rate as specialized assignment
pay as indicated in 7.4.02.

Night Shift - Officers not on probation and any Sergeants who are
regularly assigned/scheduled to work a “night shift” between the hours
of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., shall receive night shift premium pay in
addition to their base rate of pay. If one-half (4) or more of an officer
not on probation and Sergeants regularly scheduled shift hours fall
between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and midnight, the night shift premium
pay will be $160 per month. If one-half (2) or more of an officer not on
probation and Sergeants regularly scheduled shift hours fall between
the hours of midnight and 8:00 a.m., the night shift premium pay will be
$240 per month. This premium pay shall not apply to members
receiving premium pay pursuant to Sections 7.4.02, 7.4.02(1), and
7.4.02(2), above. This premium is compensable for retirement
purposes.

18
7.4.08

7.4.09

Motorcycle Duty Hazard Pay:

Members assigned to the Traffic Bureau whose primary duties involve
the riding of a police motorcycle during the course of their employment
shall receive a monthly motorcycle duty hazard pay added to their
base salary in the amount of $275 per month. This shall be over and
above any other premium pay received and shall be compensable for
retirement purposes.

Bilingual Certification Program - The bilingual certification program
consists of a City administered examination process whereby
members may apply for a bilingual examination, and if certified by the
examiner, receive bilingual premium pay for interpreting and
translating. Bilingual premium pay is not pensionable under the first or
second tier City Fire and Police Retirement System.

(1) A Bilingual certification examination will be conducted in
December of each year. During the examination noticing
period, examination applications will be available at the
Personnel Services Department, Operations Division and City
department personnel units.

In order to qualify for the December examination, the
application must be received by the Personnel Services
Department during the month of November, but no later than
the last regular business day of November.

Bilingual examination application deadlines are not appealable
or grievable.

(2) Bilingual certification examinations are conducted for
Cambodian, Hmong, Laotian, Sign, Spanish, Armenian and
Vietnamese languages.

(3) The bilingual premium pay rate for certified permanent
members is one-hundred dollars ($100) per month, regardless
of how many languages for which a member is certified.

Certified members may interpret/translate for departments/
divisions they are not assigned to, provided the requesting
department/division has a demonstrated customer service
related need, and has obtained approval from the certified
member's supervisor.

19
7.4.10

Certified members shall not refuse to interpret/translate while
on paid status. Refusal shall result in appropriate disciplinary
action. Certified members may be assigned to any incident or
investigation requiring their bilingual skills and may be
required to prepare written reports related to the incident or
investigation. The objective of this policy will be to utilize
department resources in the most efficient way possible.

Except in the event of an emergency, bilingual members who
are not certified shall not be required to interpret/translate.

Education Incentive Plan (EIP) - EIP will continue to apply solely to
those members listed on MOU Exhibit Il, which may be amended from
time to time as a result of promotion, retirement, resignation or
termination, provided the member meets the existing eligibility
requirements enumerated below.

(1)

(2)

EIP Premium Pay for Degrees Awarded:

Bachelors - each member who has been awarded a Bachelors
degree, in a field approved by the Chief of Police or designee
and the Chief Administrative Officer, from an accredited
institution of higher learning shall be paid three percent (3%)
above the member’s base rate of pay.

Masters or Doctorate - each member who has been awarded
a Masters or Doctorate degree, in a field approved by the
Chief of Police or designee and the Chief Administrative
Officer, from an accredited institution of higher learning shall
be paid five percent (5%) above the member's base rate of
pay.

EIP Premium Pay for Degrees Already Held:

To receive pay for degrees already held, a member listed on
MOU Exhibit Il must enroll in an accredited college or
university, and satisfactorily complete an additional 12
semester units in accordance with the requirements detailed
below. After completion of these requirements, the amount of
EIP premium pay for the applicable degree already held shall
be permanent (i.e., hard-coded), and be added to the
member's regular paycheck in accordance with subsection
7.4.10 (1) above.

20
7.4.11

(3)

Eligible members who satisfactorily complete three (3)
semester units of graduate or undergraduate level courses per
semester from an accredited college or university, in a field
approved by the Chief of Police or designee, shall be paid an
additional two percent (2%) above the member's base rate of
pay. Courses to which the City sends a member on City time,
and/or at City expense, shall not qualify nor shall classes
taken on "pass-fail", life experience, or non-alphabetic grading
system qualify, unless expressly approved prior to
commencement of the course. Compensation shall be in a
lump sum at completion of the semester's course work.

A member shall be considered to have satisfactorily completed
a course upon receipt of a "C" grade for each unit completed
prior to receipt of a Bachelors degree, and at least a "B" grade
for each unit completed after receipt of a Bachelors degree.

Upon verification of satisfactory completion of courses taken, a
member shall be eligible to receive the amount indicated in
this Subsection 7.4.10 (2) for a period equivalent to one (1)
semester. A semester shall be considered to be four (4)
calendar months or eight consecutive biweekly pay periods.

Any member who is receiving an education bonus pursuant to
the previously existing MOU effective July 1, 1984, shall not
have that bonus reduced as a result of participation in the EIP
provided by this MOU. Any premium pay for further
attendance at school, as provided herein, shall be in addition
to any bonus pay already received. Any EIP premium pay
applied for degrees held pursuant to Subsections 7.04.09(1)
and 7.04.09 (2) above shall be in lieu of any education bonus
pay previously received.

Post Certificate Pay - All compensation earned by a member pursuant
to this Section, 7.4.11, shall be in addition to any other incentive and/or
premium pays received and shall be compensable for retirement
purposes.

(1)

(2)

Members who have satisfactorily attained the intermediate
P.O.S.T. Certificate shall be compensated at a rate of two
percent (2%) above the member's base rate of pay.

Members who have satisfactorily attained the advanced

P.O.S.T. Certificate shall be compensated at a rate of four
percent (4%) above the member's base rate of pay.

21
7.5

7.6

(3) Members who have satisfactorily attained the intermediate
P.O.S.T. Certificate shall be compensated at a rate of four
percent (4%) above the member's base rate of pay.

(4) Members who have satisfactorily attained the advanced
P.O.S.T. Certificate shall be compensated at a rate of eight
percent (8%) above the member's base rate of pay.

FRESNO CITY EMPLOYEES' HEALTH AND WELFARE TRUST

The City and the Association agree that the Fresno City Employees Health and
Welfare Trust has the sole authority to determine the benefits that will be
provided during the term of this MOU. The sole responsibility of the City under
this clause is to provide a set dollar amount to be contributed to the Trust on
behalf of the members represented by the Association. The City’s contribution
will be eighty percent (80%) of the premium established by the Fresno City
Employees Health and Welfare Trust Board. Members may opt to contribute the
amount necessary to make up the difference through payroll deductions, or
accept a reduced coverage option.

The parties also agree to work collectively in conjunction with their Board
representatives to research and recommend potential cost-saving measures for
the Health & Welfare Trust, which may include a choice of health program
options based on individual need or preference, including a reduced option
equivalent to the City’s premium contribution, a separate rate for single
employees with no dependents, or other flex plan programs; mandatory generic
mail order drug maintenance for employees who require prescription drug
therapy for any period of 90 days or more; or other measures that may be
identified as this work progresses.

SERVICE UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

7.6.01 * * * Effective July 1, 2009, members shall receive an additional
$110 * * * for a total of * * * $1,200 * * *, as a service uniform purchase
and maintenance allowance, prorated and paid in semiannual
installments on the last pay date in December and June. The service
uniform allowance provided pursuant to this section shall be
considered as compensation for purposes of calculating * * * pension
benefits for a member.

7.6.02 Members assigned to Motorcycle duty shall be provided, at City
expense, the safety equipment described in Government Code Section
50081.1 (i.e., boots, riding breeches, leather jacket, leather gloves,
safety helmet, and protective glasses).

22
7.7

7.8

WORKERS' COMPENSATION

7.7.01

7.7.02

7.7.03

7.7.04

7.7.05

7.7.06

Notwithstanding the provisions of FMC Section 3-118 * * *, a member
in this Unit who suffers an injury or illness in the course and scope of
City employment shall receive eighty-five (85) percent of full wages or
salary from the City, beginning on the first calendar day of such
absence. Except for the provision of full pay (as modified herein), the
remaining provisions of FMC Section 3-118 * * * shall apply. Members
on “light duty" as a result of an injury or illness suffered in the course
and scope of employment shall receive their regular salary during the
period of light duty.

Partial days of absence due to injury or illness in the line of duty,
including the day of injury, shall be at full pay, however this time shall
be recorded as injury absence.

If a member is placed on sick leave, vacation, CTO or holiday pending
determination as to whether the injury or illness is industrial, and the
injury is determined to be industrial, sick leave, vacation, CTO or
holiday will be restored within 30 calendar days of such determination,
and the member placed on injury leave as provided herein.

Retirement benefits shall not be reduced as a result of compensation
at the eighty-five (85) percent rate.

Taxes shall not be withheld on compensation at the eighty-five (85)
percent rates which are not taxable due to injury in the line of duty.

lf a member is on leave pursuant to an accepted industrial injury, that
member shall continue to accrue sick leave, vacation leave, holiday
leave, and be afforded all health and welfare benefits that would have
been received had the member not been injured.

COURT APPEARANCES

Notwithstanding the provisions of FMC Section 3-117 * * *, the following rules
shall apply to court appearances. Members qualifying under Subsection 7.8.01
below are not eligible for qualifying under Subsection 7.8.02 below, and members
qualifying under Subsection 7.8.02 below are not eligible for qualifying under
Subsection 7.8.01.

7.8.01

lf a member receives a departmental notice or subpoena requiring a
court appearance on the member's regularly scheduled day off, or ona
vacation, or on a day off on CTO, or on a day off on holiday, which has
been approved prior to notice and/or the member’s receipt of a

23
departmental notice or subpoena, and the member has not been
released by the Court Liaison Office (CLO) by 0900 hours on the day
of the court appearance from such departmental notice or subpoena
vis-a-vis voice mail, the member shall be considered to be on court
appearance standby duty, and has the option of compensation under
either Subsection 7.8.01(1) or 7.8.01(2) below. Compensation for
members on “automatic go” appearance shall occur solely under
Subsection 7.8.01(3) below.

(1)

(2)

(3)

Premium pay for court appearance standby duty, as described
above, shall be $36 per day. Time spent on court appearance
standby duty (i.e., at home) shall not be considered hours
worked, and premium pay for court appearance standby duty
shall not be included in the calculation of a member’s base
rate of pay under the Fair Labor Standards Act.

In the event a member, who is on court appearance standby
duty at home, appears in court, the member shall also be
compensated for a minimum of two (2) hours at one and one-
half times (1 1%) the member's base rate of pay, or at one and
one-half times (1 %) the member's base rate of pay for the
actual time of the appearance, whichever is greater. This
compensable time starts from the time the member reports to
court at the directed appearance time through completion of
the appearance.

Report to and standby at the CLO, and be compensated for a
minimum of two (2) hours at one and one-half times (1 %)
times the member's base rate of pay. If the member is not
required to appear in court, the department may require the
member to perform assigned duties during this two (2) hour
minimum period. Members shall be released from CLO
standby duty when the subpoena or notice is cancelled, or
they are released by the court.

If a member's CLO standby duty extends beyond the two (2)
hour minimum, or the member appears in court beyond the
two (2) hour minimum, the member shall be compensated at
one and one-half times (1 %) the member's base rate of pay
for the actual time beyond the two (2) hour minimum.

Members on “automatic go” court appearance shall be
compensated for a minimum of three (3) hours at one and
one-half times (1 4%) the member's base rate of pay, or at one
and one-half times (1 %) the member's base rate of pay for

24
7.8.02

7.8.03

7.8.04

7.8.05

7.8.06

the actual time of the mandatory appearance, whichever is
greater. This compensable time starts from the time the
member reports to court at the directed “automatic go”
appearance time through completion of the appearance.

lf a member receives a departmental notice or subpoena requiring a
court appearance on a regular day of work which falls outside of
assigned work hours, the member shall have the option of:

(1) standing by at home, when legally permitted; or,

(2) appearing at the CLO, with a minimum of two (2) hours pay, at
one and one-half (1 %) times the rate of pay. During this two
(2) hour period, if the member is not required to appear in
court, the member may, at the option of the department, be
required to perform duties as assigned.

(3) If the court appearance starts within one-half (%) hour
immediately following a shift, the member shall receive a one
(1) hour minimum. If the court appearance falls during the
shift and continues beyond the end of the shift, the member
shall be paid at the applicable hourly rate for the actual time
spent in court.

Where a member’s appearance extends beyond the two (2) hour
minimum, the member shall be paid one and one-half times (1 1%) the
member's base rate of pay for the actual time of the appearance.

The provisions of Subsections 7.8.01 and 7.8.02 supra, shall also
apply to members required to appear in any judicial or administrative
proceeding as a witness pursuant to subpoena, court order, or request
of the District Attorney. This provision shall apply to all judicial
proceedings (civil, criminal, or administrative) and Civil Service
proceedings in which a member’s presence is ordered, directed, or
requested because of his or her employment as a Police Officer.

The department and Association will continue to meet as needed to
resolve concerns involving CLO program processes and applications.

In the event a member is off on a regular day of work as a result of
AWS, and is required to make a court appearance, the member shall
be compensated for court time in accordance with Section 7.8 for a
member required to make a court appearance on a regular day of
work. Conversely, in the event a member is substituting as a result of
AWS on a regularly scheduled day off/vacation/holiday/CTO, the

25
7.9

7.10

substituting member shall be compensated in accordance with
compensation afforded under Section 7.8 for a member required to
make a court appearance on his or her scheduled day off.

TAKE-HOME VEHICLES

7.9.01 Except as is otherwise specifically determined in this MOU, the Chief
of Police, shall have the authority to determine which members shall
be assigned take-home vehicles. For security purposes, all paperwork
in connection with said vehicle assignments shall remain in the office of
the Chief of Police, or designee within the department, except basic
identifying information (not to include home addresses or telephone
numbers).

7.9.02 | Members who are assigned vehicles for “take-home” purposes may
drive their assigned vehicles to their residences within fifteen (15)
miles of any point in the city limits for the City of Fresno. The Chief of
Police may allow members who reside more than fifteen (15) miles to
have take-home vehicles, at his sole discretion. Otherwise, members
who reside more than fifteen (15) miles from the city limits must leave
their assigned vehicles at an approved City facility.

7.9.03 Unless inconsistent with this MOU, Administrative Order 8-8 shall
apply with reference to the purpose and benefit of City “take-home”
vehicles.

WELLNESS PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

The Wellness Program Development Committee (WPDC) was created for the
purpose of developing a departmental Wellness Program (WP) for members, and
for providing all aspects of program and policy administration, oversight and
maintenance. The WPDC is composed of participants selected by the Chief of
Police or designee and the Association. The WP provides for a monetary
incentive for achieving goals and maintaining standards, voluntary participation;
the services of a health/fitness coordinator; individually tailored consultations and
screenings; educational components; sole responsibility on the part of any
contracted WP service provider for the maintenance and monitoring of
confidentiality of participant health, medical, and fitness information/records (i.e.,
such information shall not be provided to the City or any City department); and
the sharing solely of attendance and participation related information with the
City, on the part of any contracted WP service provider, to facilitate
administration and disbursement of WP incentives. The WP is outlined in a
departmental standing order, and implementation of any WP policy modifications
shall be at the discretion of the WPDC.

26
7.11

7.12

* * * Effective July 1, 2009, the sum of $500,000 * * * shall be utilized for
payments of monetary incentives and for services provided by the contracted WP
provider. * * * Effective July 1, 2010 and July 1, 2011, the City shall provide an
additional $25,000, for a total of $50,000. The City shall not be obligated to pay
in excess of * * * $500,000 in FY 10, * * * $525,000 in FY11 and * * * $550,000 in
FY12 for the WP. Should the total monetary incentive due to eligible members
exceed the FY’s allotted sum, payment to eligible members will be prorated and
paid as a percentage of the amount due to each member. Said percentage shall
equal the percentage figure obtained by dividing the remaining funds by the total
amount due. (For example: $300,000 + $400,000 [greater cash compensation
figure] = 75% [prorated percentage to be applied to the amount due each eligible
member].) WP monetary incentives shall be paid by separate check no later
than the last pay date in August of the subsequent fiscal year. In the event any
portion of the WP _ funding for a _ particular fiscal year remains
undistributed/unspent, the WPDC shall encumber the undistributed/unspent
funding prior to the end of the fiscal year for use for the WP in the subsequent
fiscal year.

Effective July 1, 2009, the benefits provided pursuant to this section shall
be considered as compensation for purposes of calculating pension
benefits for a member.

TIME CHANGE

This is to clarify and confirm City processes when a time change occurs. Any
member regularly scheduled to work, and who does work, an eight-hour or ten-
hour shift during which a change from Pacific Standard Time to Pacific Day-light
time, or vice versa, occurs, will be paid as follows:

When such shift occurs in the spring, the member shall receive the full eight or
ten hours pay. Any time worked in excess of the regular shift as scheduled shall
be at the applicable overtime rate.

When such shift occurs in the fall, the member shall receive the regular eight or
ten hours pay. Overtime at the applicable rate shall only be paid for work which
is performed immediately before the scheduled starting time and for work which
is performed after the scheduled end of the shift. No overtime, at any rate, shall
be paid when the actual number of hours worked during such scheduled shift is
nine or eleven hours because of the change from daylight savings to standard
time.

LEAVES

7.12.01 Sick Leave:

27
7.12.02

Members shall accrue sick leave at the rate of eight (8) hours for each
completed calendar month of employment, with unlimited
accumulation. Except for Administrative Orders 2-19, 2-19.1 and 2-20,
Standing Order 2.4.13, the FMC, City Administrative Orders, policies,
procedures, rules and regulations concerning sick leave usage and
leave administration shall continue to apply. In the event of any
conflict, Standing Order 2.4.13 shall apply.

RETIREMENT ATTENDANCE INCENTIVE AT THE TIME OF
ELECTION TO RETIRE OR ENTER THE DEFERRED RETIREMENT
OPTION PROGRAM (DROP) - A Tier | or Tier Il employee who meets
the criteria as outlined below, will receive only one of the following
benefits based on whether or not the employee enters the DROP
program before retiring from City employment.

 

 

(1) Election into DROP Program - For a Tier | or Tier Il employee
who has reached the minimum retirement age and has elected
to enter the DROP Program, the calculation of the member's
monthly DROP amount shall include an amount equal to 40%
of the member’s unused sick leave in excess of 120 hours as
if it were a one-time-payment at the hourly base rate of pay in
effect for the member as of the DROP entry date. Effective
July 1, 2009, the “in excess of 120 hours” will no longer
be in effect with all sick leave hours being included in the
computation. The member's pension contribution on this
amount will be calculated as of the date of DROP entry by
multiplying the lump sum described above in_ this
subparagraph by the member’s pension contribution rate, and
that amount will be deducted from the member’s DROP
account. The City will also be required to make a
corresponding pension contribution to the retirement system
based on the additional pensionable compensation created by
the Retirement Attendance Incentive.

(a) Tier Il Members Participating in DROP - For those
members who entered the DROP program prior to July 1,
2006, the DROP account balance and monthly deposit
amounts shall be recalculated to include an amount equal
to 40% of the member’s unused sick leave balance as of
the member's DROP date in excess of 120 hours times
his/her base rate of pay in effect at the date of entry into
DROP. Effective July 1, 2009, the “in excess of 120
hours” will no longer be in effect with all sick leave
hours being included in the computation.

28
7.12.03

(2)

(3)

(4)

Election Not to Enter DROP - For a Tier | or Tier Il member
who has reached the minimum retirement age and who retires
from the City for service or for disability without entering
DROP, an amount equal to 40% of the member’s unused sick
leave balance in excess of 120 hours shall be included in the
computation of the member’s retirement allowance as if it were
a one-time-payment at the hourly base rate of pay for the
employee in effect at the date of retirement. Effective July 1,
2009, the “in excess of 120 hours” will no longer be in
effect with all sick leave hours being included in the
computation. The member and the City will make a
corresponding pension contribution to the retirement system
based on the additional pensionable compensation created by
the Retirement Attendance Incentive. The member's
retirement contribution will be calculated as of the date of
retirement by multiplying the lump sum described above in this
subparagraph by the employee’s pension contribution rate and
the employee agrees to have this amount withheld from the
employee’s first retirement benefit payment from the
Retirement System as the employee's retirement contribution
for this additional amount of pensionable compensation.

This provision shall not apply to members who retire prior to
age 50 due to a disability or to former members that have
separated from City service prior to reaching the minimum
retirement age and have elected a Deferred Vested status in
the City of Fresno Fire & Police Retirement System.

Retirement_ Attendance/Health Incentive - At service
retirement or at a disability retirement of a Tier | or Tier Il
member who is otherwise eligible for service retirement, and
** * will be credited for * * * unused sick leave in accordance
with the provisions of * * * Section 7.12.03 below.

Hourly base rate shall be the equivalent of the monthly salary
for the employee as provided in Exhibit I, multiplied by twelve
(12) months then divided by 2,080 hours.

Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA\

The City currently maintains a Health Reimbursement Arrangement
(HRA) that qualifies as a "health reimbursement arrangement" as
described in Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Notice 2002-45 and other

29
guidance published by the IRS regarding HRAs. The City agrees to
maintain the HRA such that it will continue to qualify as a “health
reimbursement arrangement” for the term of the MOU.

At separation from permanent employment with the City of Fresno by
service retirement or at disability retirement if the * * * member is
otherwise eligible for service retirement, the value of the member's
accumulated sick leave shall be credited to an account for the
employee under the HRA such "value" shall be determined as follows:

. *** The number of accumulated sick leave hours in excess of
120 hours at the time of retirement multiplied by 50% of the
member's then current hourly base rate of pay.

(Incorporated from Side Letter Agreement dated November 4,
2008):

. * * * The number of accumulated sick leave hours at the
time of retirement in excess of 120 hours multiplied by
50% of the employee’s then current hourly base rate of
pay, except that an employee who retires within sixty (60)
calendar days of receipt by the City of Fresno Fire and
Police Retirement System of a retirement application by,
or on behalf of the employee, shall have accumulated sick
leave hours in excess of 120 hours upon retirement
multiplied by 80% of the employee’s then hourly rate of
pay.

. Effective July 1, 2009, all accumulated sick leave hours
multiplied by 50% of the employee’s then current hourly
base rate of pay at the time of retirement, except that an
employee who retires within sixty (60) calendar days of
receipt by the City of Fresno Fire & Police Retirement
System of a retirement application by, or on behalf of the
employee, shall have all accumulated sick leave hours
upon retirement multiplied by eighty (80%) of the
employee’s then hourly rate of pay.

. Effective July 1, 2009, the total number of all accumulated
holiday leave hours at the time of separation for
retirement purposes shall be paid at the member’s then
current hourly base rate of pay.

. The hourly base rate of pay shall be the equivalent of the
monthly salary for a member as reflected in Exhibit |,

30
7.12.04

7.12.05

multiplied by twelve (12) months then divided by 2,080 hours.

The HRA accounts shall be book accounts only — no actual trust
account shall be established for any member. Each HRA book account
shall be credited on a monthly basis with a rate of earnings equal to
the yield on the City's Investment Portfolio (provided that such yield is
positive).

The HRA accounts shall be used solely to pay premiums for medical
insurance (including COBRA premiums) covering the participant, the
participant's spouse (or surviving spouse in the event of the death of
the participant), and the participant's dependents. Once a participant's
account under the HRA has been reduced to $0, no further benefits
shall be payable by the HRA. If the participant, the participant's
spouse, and the participant's dependents die before the participant's
account under the HRA has been reduced to $0, no death benefit shall
be payable to any person by the HRA.

While this provision is in effect members shall not be allowed to cash
out any accumulated or accrued sick leave at retirement.

Upon each anniversary date of the MOU, the Association may amend
the HRA provisions of this MOU to include a provision requiring all
members of the Association to convert an agreed upon amount of
accrued vacation leave to the HRA.

Eamily Sick Leave:

Members shall be allowed up to forty-eight (48) hours of accrued sick
leave per fiscal year for Family Sick Leave. Family Sick Leave shall be
used only for those purposes defined in the California Labor Code.
Use of Family Sick Leave shall be authorized and recorded by a
department head or designee.

Vacation Leave:

(1) Members shall accrue vacation leave hours for each
completed calendar month of employment as reflected in the
table below. (Pursuant to Section 6.3.01, each Officer's
applicable accrual rate will be reduced monthly by .583333
hours for Association time bank purposes.) Members with less
than 15 years of continuous employment are allowed to
accrue 280 hours of vacation leave, and members with 15
years or more of continuous employment are allowed to
accrue 360 hours of vacation leave.

31
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Years of Accrual Rate Effective Effective
Continuous (hrs./mo.) 7/1110 7/1/11
Employment

Less than 5 8 8.5 9
More than 5 but 8.667 9.167 9.667
less than 10
More than 10 but 10 10.5 11
less than 15
More than 15 but 11.334 11.834 12.334
less than 20
More than 20 but 13.334 13.834 14.334
less than 25
More than 25 but 14.667 15.167 15.667
less than 30
More than 30 16.667 17.167 17.667
(2) No member's vacation accumulation shall cease due to refusal
by the City to grant vacation leave prior to the member
teaching the vacation accrual cap applicable to the member's
position and length of service. In the event a member
requests in writing vacation leave one month prior to the
month in which the cap would be reached, and such request is
refused, the Chief of Police or designee shall extend the
member's accrual cap for ninety (90) days, during which time
the member shall be scheduled for vacation leave sufficient to
reduce the member's balance below the accrual cap. Request
for extensions under this section may be denied if the member
failed to sign up for and take his/her maximum accrued annual
vacation leave during dates which were available for that
purpose.
(3) No member’s vacation accumulation shall cease due to

inability to use vacation time while off on Workers’
Compensation leave due to a work related injury or illness. A
member on such leave must notify the Chief or designee in
writing if this is likely to occur, and the Chief or designee will
extend the member's vacation accrual cap until the member
either returns to work, or separates from employment.

32
7.12.06

7.12.07

Holiday Leave:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Members shall accrue eight and two-thirds hours per month as
holiday leave in lieu of the Holidays recognized in FMC
Section 3-116. * * *

January 1.

The third Monday in January.

The third Monday in February.

The last Monday in May.

July 4.

The first Monday in September.

November 11.

Thanksgiving Day in November.

The Friday after Thanksgiving Day in November.
December 25.

Employee's Birthday.

Two Personal Business Days

Any day or part of a day declared by the Council, ordinance or
resolution, to be a holiday.

At separation, accumulated holiday leave shall be paid at the
member's base rate of pay in accordance with Section
7.12.03.

Effective July 1, 2009, all members agree to freeze Holiday
time pay downs through September 30, 2010. The cap for
accumulated holiday leave shall not exceed a monthly
amount of 230 hours. If prior to September 30, 2010, a
member exceeds the monthly 230 hour cap, holiday leave
shall be paid down automatically by the department * * * to
the 230 hour cap, * * * without the consent of the member.

* * * After September 30, 2010, members may request the
department to pay down the member’s Holiday Time up to
a maximum of ninety-six (96) hours, once per pay period.
The time bank cap shall remain at 230 hours.

Eamily Events:

In the event a member requests paid time off (vacation, CTO, or
holiday time) not less than two weeks in advance to attend a major
family or social event (wedding, birthday, etc.) and permission is

33
7.12.08

granted to attend such event, the permission for time off shall not be
cancelled, except in event of emergency. An emergency is defined as
circumstances beyond the control of the City and not having been
known 48 hours in advance of the circumstance creating the
emergency.

Guaranteed Leave:

(1)

(2)

Effective July 1, 2009, * * * four (4) * * * times during each
matrix semester period, personnel assigned to the patrol
matrix may submit a request for guaranteed leave, which
request will be honored, subject to the following conditions and
procedures:

No more than five (5), and effective July 1, 2010, no more
than eight (8) guaranteed leave requests will be honored for
any single date. This limit applies city-wide, and for all shifts
combined.

Guaranteed leave requests may not be submitted for
Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year's Eve, New Year's
Day, Thanksgiving Day and the day after Thanksgiving.

Requests must be submitted no less than thirty (30), and
effective July 1, 2010, no less than fifteen (15) calendar
days before the date requested to be off, but no more than
sixty (60) calendar days before the date requested to be off.

Requests are to be submitted to the Duty Office, to be date
and time stamped by Duty Office personnel when received.
Requests will be honored on a first-come, first-served basis, to
the above stated maximum of five.

Guaranteed leaves may be taken using vacation time only.

Guaranteed leaves may only be for one (1) work shift per
request.

Once submitted, guaranteed leave slots may not be
transferred from one member to another.

The Duty Office will be responsible for tracking members’
usage of guaranteed leave requests. Once a member submits
a guaranteed leave request, the member may cancel the time
off, but the request will still count as one of their allowable
requests during the matrix period. Conversely, when the Duty

34
7.12.09

Office prepares the pending duty schedules (approximately
two weeks ahead of time) and finds a member has a
guaranteed leave request for a date that the member would
otherwise have been allowed the time off without using
guaranteed leave, the Duty Office will so notice the affected
member, and the leave will be granted without it counting as
one of the member's two allowable guaranteed leave
requests.

(3) The department will establish a $100,000 fund for each
remaining fiscal year of this MOU, for payment of overtime
costs associated with the granting of guaranteed leave. The
$100,000 shall be split into two equal portions for July 1*
through December 31°, and for January 1°‘ through June 30",
for each fiscal year. Should overtime costs to backfill
guaranteed leave not consume the $50,000 in any semester of
a fiscal year, the excess will be carried over and added to the
fund for the following semester, and consideration will be
given to increasing the number of allowable requests during
following semesters. Any such increases must be with mutual
agreement of the department and Association.

(4) Should overtime costs to backfill guaranteed leave consume
the $50,000 during a semester, or the $50,000 and any carry-
overs during any subsequent semester, guaranteed leave
requests will not be accepted for the remainder of the affected
semester.

Vacation Leave Bidding:

Simultaneously with the bidding for shift assignments in the Patrol
Division, during the month of * * * December for each fiscal year
during the term of this * * * MOU * * * and at least fifteen (15) days
prior to January * * * 1 of each year, all covered members may bid to
schedule vacation, according to date of hire as a Police Officer, or in
the case of Sergeant, the date of promotion. A member may bid to
schedule vacation in an amount equal to the maximum vacation leave
time accrued by that member for the fiscal year * * *. At the time of
the bidding process, a member has the option to bid for a one
time use of the maximum vacation leave time accrued or may
choose to schedule two (2) separate vacation periods. If a
member chooses to schedule two separate vacation periods,
he/she may participate in a second bidding process to occur
following the completion of the initial bidding. This second
bidding process shall also be governed by seniority as stated

35
7.13

7.12.10

above and be limited to the remaining vacation leave time
accrued for that fiscal year. Said vacations shall be scheduled to be
taken between * * * February 1 immediately following the bidding
process and the next * * * January 31st and may be scheduled to
coincide with the member's regular days off.

Should the member later decide to schedule vacation in an amount in
excess of that accrued during that fiscal year, the decision to allow
such additional vacation time shall be at the discretion of the
department.

Requests for Leave of Absences:

Requests for leave of absence should be submitted at least 24 hours in
advance to increase the likelihood of being approved.

HOURS AND WORK SCHEDULES, MATRIX ASSIGNMENTS, DUTY OFFICE,
NON-MINIMUM STAFFING, POLICE RESOURCE OPTIMIZATION SYSTEM,
ABSENT WITH SUBSTITUTE AND PROXIMITY DETAIL

7.13.01

Hours and Work Schedules:

(1) All members will be assigned to an eight (8), ten (10), or
twelve (12) hour day as directed within this MOU. All
shifts will include a paid thirty (30) minute meal break. Ifa
member is unable to take their meal break due to work
load, the member may complete a scantron for thirty (30)
minutes of straight time from the Compensatory Time
account. Members must notify their supervisor for
scantron approval if they are unable to take a meal break.
If a member’s meal break is interrupted due to work load,
they may complete their meal break at a later time or
complete a scantron with supervisor approval. Meal
breaks may not be taken within the first and last hour of a
shift without supervisor approval.

The thirty (30) minute paid meal break will satisfy
compensation for donning and doffing.

(2) Unless specifically modified by the parties, a work week
consists of four (4) ten-hour work days, completed beginning
0001 hours on Monday and ending on 2400 hours the
following Sunday. Days off will be scheduled consecutively.

(3) The work day shall be ten (10) work hours unless specifically

36
(4)

modified by the parties. * * * Except as provided below for
Task Forces, and as provided in Section 7.14.03 for Traffic
Officers, uniformed personnel shall work a 10-hour work day.

wRK

Based on the needs of or significant benefit to the department,
the Chief of Police may apply a “5/8” schedule to specified
units outside of patrol matrix duties, either:

With the concurrence of the affected personnel, or

6)

(6)

With thirty (30) days notice to affected personnel, on the
condition that said affected personnel who wish to remain on a
4/10 schedule will be allowed to return to a patrol shift
consistent with their seniority. In addition, affected members
may be considered, at management's discretion, for transfer to
another special unit with a 4/10 schedule.

Members who are assigned to training may be assigned on a
5/8 basis, to accommodate the training schedule. The
department will make every effort not to schedule any member
to training which will conclude immediately prior to the
member's four or five-day work period.

* * * The department * * * has established a base work
schedule for members assigned to the District Crime
Suppression Team (DCST) * * * that consists of a work week
of five (5) ten-hour days followed by a week of three (3) ten
hour days or vice-versa, with a total of six (6) days off during
the two work weeks. * * * DCST Officers and Sergeants will
revert back to the 4/10 work week, * * * at the discretion of
the department. * * * The decision to discontinue this work
schedule and revert back to the 4/10 work week is not
appealable or grievable.

7.13.02 Patrol Work Schedule/Matrix:

(1)

A 4/10 work week will be in effect for personnel assigned to
day and swing shifts on patrol matrix duties. The base work
schedule for members assigned to the midnight shift on patrol
matrix duties will consist of a work week of five (5) ten-hour
days followed by a week of three (3) ten hour days or vice-
versa, with a total of six (6) days off during the two work
weeks. This schedule may be cancelled by the City following
sixty (60) days written notice to the Association, at which time

37
(2)

(3)

(4)

(6)

(6)

(7)

(8)

members would revert to the 4/10 work week. The decision to
discontinue this work schedule and revert back to the 4/10
work week is not appealable or grievable.

Subject to meet and confer, the implementation of the base
work schedule for members assigned to day and swing shifts
on patrol matrix duties may be changed to the same work
schedule of the midnight shift as set forth in Subsection (1)
above. Once implemented, the schedule may be cancelled by
the City as also set forth in Subsection (1), above.

Scheduling will consist of both fixed days on and off as well as
rotation of days on and off. No member shall be scheduled to
work for more than forty (40) hours in any work week.

A minimum of 20% of the available positions will be assigned
to fixed days on and off, and all other positions will have
rotating days on and off. Members with rotating days off will
be scheduled for four days on and four days off for three
weeks, followed by five days on and three days off, for four
weeks, etc.

Effective December 2008, Patrol Matrix sign-ups were
changed to December from the month of March. Every 12
months, all work assignment positions in the patrol matrix
shall be declared open for the purpose of bidding by
Sergeants, Specialists, and Officers according to date of hire
as a Police Officer, or in the case of Sergeant, the date of
promotion, for the district preference, shift assignment, and
days off and on. For the purpose of bidding, Sergeants will
precede Officers/Specialists.

Any member who is absent at the time of bidding is solely
responsible for obtaining and reviewing the matrix drafts and
instructions, and for securing a proxy to represent him/her
during the bidding process.

Personnel assigned to patrol who are on injury or other
absence status at the time of bidding will be allowed to
participate without any restriction based on that status, and will
assume the assignment chosen upon return to duty.

At the time of bidding, the department will create duplicate

details to ones taken by members not expected to return to
duty within thirty (30) days of the start of the matrix period.

38
(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

Members who subsequently bid for the newly created
duplicate details will remain on the shift chosen, but may be
moved to any other vacancy within that shift when the absent
member holding the original detail returns to duty, and may
continue to be moved within the shift as vacancies are filled by
returning personnel. The provisions of this sub-section will
apply to the matrix process * * * and may or may not be
extended to subsequent matrix processes, contingent upon
mutual agreement of the department and the Association.

Nothing in the preceding sub-sections precludes moving
probationary employees pursuant to paragraph (10), below.

Assignments as a result of the bidding process will begin on
the first Monday following January 1° * * * of each year.
During the 12-month assignment cycle, if a hardship exists, a
special request for a change in district and/or shift can be
submitted. Each member will be allowed one request during a
12-month assignment cycle. A response will be issued to the
member within 30 calendar days. Barring a training need,
approved requests will be honored once a vacant position that
addresses the hardship becomes available.

Probationary Police Officers or Recruits may not be permitted
to bid for positions but may instead be assigned to a district,
shift and detail. With a 28-day notice, these Officers may also
be subject to district and shift reassignment.

Police management reserves the right to designate specific
detail numbers for probationary Officers and Recruits to
prevent the concentration of probationary personnel on any
given shift in a given district. Any such allocation will apply
only to swing, lap, and/or midnight shifts, and will be
accomplished in such a manner as to ensure balance of
probationary employees between policing districts and shifts.
Subject to the aforementioned considerations, police
management may also designate certain detail numbers as
“not available for sign-up” based upon the anticipated
deployment of any Officers or Recruits in the Patrol Training
Program at the time of the matrix bidding.

Police management reserves the right to determine the
allocation, by shift and district, of PTO positions based upon
the needs of the department. Any PTO who elects not to
participate in the matrix as a result of these allocations shall

39
7.13.03

7.13.04

7.13.05

declare his/her intention in writing no later than two calendar
weeks prior to the matrix bidding process.

Patrol Schedule Exploratory Committee - There is created a Patrol
Schedule Exploratory Committee. The purpose of this committee will
be to research various patrol scheduling systems in an attempt to
develop a schedule that will allow for on-duty training of patrol
personnel while still meeting minimum staffing needs. This committee
will be composed of members selected by the Chief of Police or
designee and the Association. The recommendation of the committee
will be advisory to the Chief of Police.

Duty Office:

(1) Officers assigned to the Duty Office may be scheduled to work
a modified “3/12" schedule consisting of three (3) twelve (12)
hour work shifts one week, followed by three (3) twelve (12)
hour work shifts and one (1) eight (8) hour work shift the next,
or vice versa.

(2) Officers working in the Duty Office not scheduled on a “3/12"
basis will be scheduled on a “4/10" basis.

(3) Work schedules will contain specific hours and day off
patterns established and/or modified by agreement of Police
Department Management, acting on behalf of the City, and the
Association, acting on behalf of the affected members.

(4) Hours worked in excess of the scheduled eight (8), ten (10) or
twelve (12) hour work shift, or in excess of the scheduled
thirty-six (36), forty (40) or forty-four (44) work week, will be
compensated as overtime.

(5) Either the City or the Association may discontinue this section
with thirty (30) days written notice to the other party. The
decision to discontinue this agreement is not grievable or
appealable. Discontinuation of this section will result in the
reinstatement of all schedule and overtime provisions existing
in the current MOU.

Non-Minimum Staffing - Flexing of Hours:
To accommodate the personal needs of members and to create the

best working environment, given the context of a police department
whose primary goal is service to the community, members assigned to

40
7.13.06

non-minimum staffing units may request and be assigned flexible
hours of work. The member’s Supervisor may adjust hours of work
under the following conditions:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

6)

(6)

(7)

The operational needs of non-minimum staff unit shall be the
primary concern for a Supervisor when determining a request
for flexing of hours.

A Supervisor may grant a member’s request to flex hours up
to one (1) hour before or after the standard shift hours
beginning at 0700 and ending at 1730.

The occasional granting of a flex schedule pursuant to this
subsection will be only for specific qualified purposes as
determined by a Supervisor. Examples of a specific qualified
request by a member may include attending his or her child’s
baseball game, a doctor’s appointment, meeting someone
who is arriving at the airport, or some other qualified event.

Granting a long-term flex schedule shall require concurrence
of the Bureau Commander. Examples of the need for a long-
term flex schedule may include home nurse care for a spouse
and the need to relieve the care giver, circumstances involving
a “special needs” child, continuing education, or some other
qualified event.

A Supervisor may require the members to decide amongst
themselves who is to be granted a flex schedule. The
decision by the members shall be by mutual agreement. If the
members are unable or unwilling to make such decision, the
Supervisor shall have the discretion to make whatever
decision he or she deems appropriate.

With the concurrence of the Bureau Commander and in lieu of
granting a flex schedule, a Supervisor may offer to a member
the option of a fixed 5/8 schedule with the hours of 0730 to
1600, for a minimum of thirty (30) days.

In order to meet departmental operational and service needs,
a Supervisor may terminate, at any time, a member's flexed
schedule upon thirty (30) days written notice to the affected
member. The decision to discontinue a flex hour schedule is
not appealable or grievable.

* * * Staff Wizard/Corona Solutions:

41
7.13.07

The department may utilize * * * Staff Wizard/Corona Solutions in the
deployment of patrol personnel (policing districts). Deployment is
inclusive of the number and scheduling of shifts, the number and
configuration of policing districts, members assigned to each shift, and
the day off configuration and/or rotation of days off. Data used to
develop * * * Staff Wizard/Corona Solutions recommendations at the
beginning of each matrix period, and the resulting district and shift
minimum staffing levels will be based on the number of personnel
assigned to the patrol matrix who are not expected to be on injury or
other absence status longer than thirty (30) days into the matrix period.

* * * Staff Wizard/Corona Solutions recommendations can be
implemented up to a maximum of two (2) times in a fiscal year
provided that all affected members receive the change that will occur
at sign-ups. No shift shall start before 0600. Although * * * Staff
Wizard/Corona Solutions may recommend Summer/Winter base shift
hours, management reserves the right at any time to adjust those
hours with five (5) calendar days advance notice based on
operational/service needs.

The department reserves the right to determine initial minimum staffing
levels in patrol, by shift and district, at the beginning of the matrix
period. During the course of the matrix period, the department may
review and increase minimum staffing levels. The department may
subsequently reduce the increases, but, except as may be required by
budget reductions resulting in actual personnel reductions, may not go
below levels initially set for each shift and district at the beginning of
the matrix period. Such changes in minimum staffing levels may not
occur more often than monthly, and may not cause a cancellation of
previously approved time off, or previously approved on-duty training
time.

The Association will designate a representative who will participate in
the process of determining annual * * * Staff Wizard/Corona
Solutions recommendations.

Absent with Substitute (AWS):

(1) AWS with Trade - In accordance with Section 7 (p)(3) of the
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) as discussed in 29 CFR
553.31, the City agrees that members may substitute for one
another when staffing levels do not permit a member to take
time off. The substitution must be during scheduled work
hours, and in the performance of work in the same capacity.
The hours worked are excluded by the City in the calculation

42
(2)

(3)

(3)

(4)

of the hours for which the substitute member would otherwise
be entitled to overtime compensation under the FLSA and
under Section 7.3. When one member substitutes for another,
the member being substituted for will be credited as if he or
she had worked his or her normal schedule for that shift.

Probationary Officers - Officers on probation may utilize 40
hours of AWS to take time off during any calendar quarter with
no restriction on how many hours of AWS they can work
during any calendar quarter. Probationary Officers needing to
utilize more than 40 hours of AWS to take time off during a
calendar quarter may do so with district commander approval.

Non-Probationary Officers - Non-probationary Officers may
utilize 120 hours of AWS to take time off during any calendar
quarter with no restriction on how many hours of AWS they
can work during any calendar quarter. Non-probationary
Officers needing to utilize more than 120 hours of AWS to take
time off during a calendar quarter may do so with district
commander approval.

AWS with Compensation - When one member substitutes for
another, the member being substituted for will be credited as if
he or she had worked his or her normal schedule for that shift.
If the substituting member wishes to be compensated for the
substitute shift worked at the base/straight time rate of pay,
then the member being substituted for shall transfer the
applicable number of holiday leave, vacation or CTO hours to
the substituting member's “like” account. (Note: The member
being substituted for may only select one account from which
to take hours for transfer, and those hours shall only be
transferred to the volunteer substitute’s “like” account. If the
substituting member's selected account is at the maximum
allowable balance, the substituting member shall be
compensated at the base/straight time rate of pay from the
transferred hours. An internal processing form has been
established to accomplish this transfer.)

 

AWS Notification to Department - Members wishing to provide
a substitute must notify the department at least 24-hours in
advance of the substitution on a form provided for that
purpose. The substitute must be satisfactory to the
department. If the substitute is determined to not be a
satisfactory substitute, the commanding Officer shall provide
the reason(s) in writing within a reasonable amount of time.

43
 

7.13.08

Proximity Detail: (Incorporated from Side Letter Agreement dated
November 2, 2007)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) The Proximity Detail may be created by the Chief at his
discretion. Officers assigned to Proximity Detail may be
scheduled to work a modified “3/12” schedule consisting
of three (3) twelve (12) hour work shifts each week,
followed by three (3) twelve (12) hour work shifts and one
(1) eight (8) hour shift the next, or vice versa.

(2) Work schedules will be modeled according to the below
matrix, with specific hours and day off patterns
established and/or modified by agreement of Police
Department Management, acting on behalf of the City, and
the FPOA, acting on behalf of the affected Officers.

Model Schedule - Proximity Detail (Week 1)
MON TUE WED THU FRI SAT SUN
Officer | 0600- 0600- 0600- DO DO 0600- DO
#1 1800 1800 1800 1600
Officer DO DO 0600- 0600- 0600- DO DO
#2 1800 1800 1800
Model Schedule - Proximity Detail (Week 2)
MON TUE WED THU FRI SAT SUN
Officer | 0600- 0600- 0600- DO DO DO DO
#1 1800 1800 1800
Officer DO DO 0600- 0600- 0600- 0600- DO
#2 1800 1800 1800 1600

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

44

 

 

 

 

 

 
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Hours worked in excess of the scheduled eight (8), ten
(10), twelve (12) hour work shift or in excess of the
scheduled thirty-six (36), forty (40) or forty-four (44) hour
work week shall be compensated as overtime.

Either the City or the FPOA may discontinue this
agreement with thirty (30) days written notice to the other
party and to the Labor Relations Division. The decision to
discontinue this agreement is not grievable or appealable.
Discontinuation of this agreement will result in the
reinstatement of all schedule and overtime provisions
existing in the current MOU.

The parties agree that the adoption of the above
scheduling provisions for Proximity Officers does not
imply acceptance by either party of similar schedule
changes for any other unit or personnel within the
Department, and agree that this Agreement will not be
considered precedent setting in any regard.

Any Officer assigned to Proximity Detail shall be selected
in accordance with Chapter 7, Section 15.

7.14 ASSIGNMENTS, COVERAGE & HOURS - EXCEPTIONAL PROVISIONS

7.14.01 Patrol Matrix (Supervision):

(1)

In the event a Sergeant assigned on the matrix is absent from
duty, a position is vacant, or there is no Sergeant assigned to
duty, and any commander assigned to the affected district, or
the Duty Office determines that a replacement or additional
personnel are required, a Sergeant shall be hired back on
overtime to fill the vacancy, or, if no Sergeant is available, a
Police Specialist, Police Officer, or PTO may be assigned to
an acting position to perform the Sergeant’s duties. Any
Specialist or Officer so assigned for the majority of a shift shall
be compensated at the lowest step in the salary range of the
Police Sergeant class which is at least three and one-half
percent higher than the rate received in the employee's
current class. If such compensation requires a payment
greater than highest Step, then highest Step shall be paid.
PTO's assigned to be acting Sergeants shall continue to
receive PTO premium pay as provided in Section 7.4.3. This
subsection shall be in lieu of the “acting pay” provisions of
FMC Section 3-260 * * *.

45
7.14.02

(2) No additional compensation shall be paid to Police Specialists,
Police Officers or PTOs who are assisting in the day to day
administration performed by Sergeants nor for acting as a
patrol supervisor (Senior Officer available) when the Sergeant
is on-duty but unavailable.

Special Units - Flexing of Hours:

Sergeants, Specialists or Officers in non-patrol matrix assignments
may be assigned flexible hours of work to meet the needs of the
department. The Police Chief or designee may adjust hours of work
under the following conditions, without payment at the overtime rate:

(1) with the concurrence of the Sergeant, Specialist or Officer; or,

(2) in the event of emergency, which is defined as circumstances
beyond the control of the City and not having been known 48
hours in advance of the circumstance creating the emergency;
or,

(3) with forty-eight (48) hours notice to the Sergeant, Specialist or
Officer. Adjustments pursuant to this subsection may last no
longer than seven (7) consecutive calendar days, nor occur
more than once during any thirty (30) day period; or,

(4) where the adjustment has been made to cover a special event
and the special event is canceled with less than forty-eight 48
hours notice to the department, and the department then
promptly cancels the adjustment and returns the Specialist or
Officer to the regular schedule.

Overtime worked past the scheduled end of a shift shall not be
considered as a shift adjustment. An adjustment of hours prior to the
shift shall be considered as an adjustment.

 

Officers assigned to special units receiving “Flexible Hours” premium
pay are excluded from the forty-eight (48) hour notice requirement.
However, when practical, they will be given as much advance notice as
possible when hours are to be flexed. Flexing of these Officers is also
not limited to seven (7) days in duration, nor as to frequency.
However, when such adjustments exceed thirty (30) days, the
Association shall be provided with a plan for a return to regular
schedules.

46
7.14.03 Traffic Bureau:

(1)

Traffic Enforcement Unit (TEU):

Hours of Work: Except when necessary to police special
operations, including but not limited to traffic and/or DUI
enforcement, parades, holiday functions and fairground
related activities, the base work hours of the TEU shall be
between 0715 to 1800, with the exception that up to forty
percent (40%) of the TEU Officers may be worked on a “B”
shift. The “B” shift’s base work hours shall be between 0915
to 2000 from October 1 to March 31, and between 1115 to
2200 from April 1 to September 30.

Meal Period: TEU Officers agree to take a 45-minute unpaid
meal period between the second and eighth hour of the work
day. It will be the Officer's responsibility to notify the
supervisor if the Officer cannot schedule an unpaid meal
period during the specified time set aside for this purpose. An
unpaid meal period taken outside the specified hours requires
the approval of a supervisor. If work conditions do not allow
an Officer to take an unpaid meal period, the Officer will be
compensated at a rate of one and one-half times the base rate
of pay for the meal period missed. No more than one-half of
the Officers working a given district may take their meal period
at the same time, unless specifically approved by a supervisor.

Days Off: The days off for the base work hours of between
0715 to 1800 will be Friday, Saturday and Sunday or
Saturday, Sunday and Monday. The Officers working the “B”
shift may be required to work on Saturdays and Sundays.
Officers will receive three (3) consecutive days off during the
normal workweek of Monday through Sunday.

Flexing of Work Hours/Days Off: TEU Officers may be
assigned flexible hours of work to meet the needs of the
department pursuant to the provisions of Section 7.14.02.

Seniority: Department seniority shall be the recognized
selection method for work assignments within the TEU, unless

there is a clear preference for a specific assignment by the
appointing authority.

Vacations: TEU vacation sign-ups shall be done by

47
(2)

(3)

(4)

6)

department seniority during assignment sign-ups. No more
than fifteen percent (15%) of the entire unit may be allowed
annual vacation at once, without prior approval of the division
commander.

Neighborhood Traffic Unit (NTU

Base hours for the NTU will be between 1700-0300 hours.
Base hours may be adjusted periodically to meet the needs of
the department and/or to address weather and climate issues.
NTU Officers will also be subject to flexing of hours on a day-
to-day basis, and will accordingly receive premium pay
pursuant to Section 7.4.02. NTU Officers will work ten (10)
hour shifts. * * * While the primary focus of the NTU will be on
traffic and related issues, they may also be assigned to other
events, duties or projects, as necessary, to meet the needs of
the department.

Uniforms/Safety Equipment:

Traffic Bureau Officers assigned to motorcycle duty shall be
provided, at the City’s expense, the safety equipment
described in Government Code Section 50081.1. This shall
include, but not be limited to, one (1) pair of motorcycle riding
boots, three (3) pairs of riding pants, one (1) motorcycle
jacket, one (1) pair each of summer and winter gloves, one (1)
motorcycle safety helmet and one (1) pair of protective
glasses. The safety equipment shall be repaired at the City’s
expense. If an Officer assigned to motorcycle duty leaves the
Traffic Bureau for one (1) year or more and then returns, the
Officer will be equipped with new safety equipment, with the
exception of a new jacket. Jackets will be issued to returning
Officers as needed at the discretion of the bureau commander.

Take-home Vehicles:

Traffic Bureau Officers assigned to motorcycle duty, and
Officers assigned to the Collision Reconstruction Unit (CRU),
will be allowed to drive their assigned vehicles to their

residences, subject to the provisions of Section 7.9 (Take-
home Vehicles.)

Reductions/Reorganization:

48
In the event of reductions of personnel from the Traffic
Bureau, the TEU and NTU will be considered as separate
units for purposes of applying the “last in first out” rule.

7.14.04 Canine Unit - The following applies to Officers assigned to the Canine
Unit (includes Narcotics Canine):

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The City will install kennels at the home of the Officers
assigned canines, pay for veterinary care, food, and
miscellaneous supplies. Officers assigned canines will be
allowed to drive their assigned City vehicle to their place of
residence. Except as provided in Section 7.9, Canine Officers
who reside farther than fifteen (15) miles from the City limits
must leave their assigned vehicles at an approved City facility,
and provide approved secure transportation for the canine
from that point to their residences. Unless inconsistent with
this section, Administrative Order 8-8 shall apply with
teference to the purpose and benefit of City take-home
vehicles.

Canine Officers will not be permitted to voluntarily transfer to
other assignments during the service life of the Officer's
canine. Canine Officers are not precluded from competing for
promotional positions.

The canine and the kennel installed by the City at the Officers’
home are the property of the City. In the event an Officer is no
longer assigned to the canine unit, the City reserves the right
to maintain ownership of the canine or return the canine to the
original vendor or other designated party, as determined by
the Chief of Police or designee.

Canine Officers are subject to flexible hours of work as
described in Section 7.14.02. The base work schedule for
Officers assigned to the Canine Unit will consist of a work
week of five (5) ten-hour days followed by a work week of
three (3) ten hour days, with a total of six (6) days off during
the two work weeks, to include at least one weekend. This
schedule may be cancelled by the City following thirty (30)
days notice to the FPOA, at which time Canine Officers would
revert to the 4/10 weekly work schedule set forth in Section
7.13.01(1).

Police Management reserves the right to determine the
allocation of K-9 positions by shift, district and days off to

49
7.14.05

6)

(6)

(7)

ensure the optimal coverage of such units in the field. Bidding
for allocated positions will be done within the Canine Unit, by
department seniority, date of hire as a Police Officer. Canine
Unit schedules will be established annually to coincide with the
patrol matrix, but will not be included in the patrol matrix.
Canine units will not be counted to satisfy Watch II minimum
staffing requirements on a daily basis other than as may be
required to meet those minimum staffing levels established at
the beginning of the matrix period.

Compensation paid pursuant to Section 7.14.04 is overtime,
and is therefore not considered as compensation under the
first or second tier of the City's Fire and Police Retirement
System.

Time spent by the Officers for home care of the canine is
considered hours worked pursuant to the Fair Labor
Standards Act. The canine Officer will be compensated for
one (1) hour each day in the care of the canine. Officers may
spend more than one (1) hour a day with the canine, but any
time over one (1) hour a day shall be considered as normal
owner-related activities for the enjoyment of the individual and
the canine. Officers that spend more than one (1) hour a day
with the canine, and believe that this time is hours worked
shall turn in a time sheet no later than the next working day,
after the time spent with the canine, to the canine supervisor.

Compensation under Section 7.14.04 is not for the
performance of Police Officer duties and, therefore,
compensation for the home care of the canine will be
calculated at one-half the applicable overtime rate of pay for
“A" step of the Recruit class.

AIRPORT TASK FORCE ASSIGNMENT (Incorporated from Side
Letter Agreement dated February 23, 2007)

(1)

(2)

The Airport Task Force shall be a special unit as that term
is defined in this MOU pursuant to Section 7.15.

The work week for those assigned to the Airport Task
Force will consist of five (5) eight-hour days beginning
0001 hours on Monday and ending 2400 hours the
following Sunday. Scheduling will consist of rotation of
days on and off. No Officer/Specialist shall be scheduled
to work for more than forty (40) hours in any work week

50
(3)

(4)

(5)

and will receive days off consecutively. Alternate work
schedules such as a 4/10 or 3/12 can occur, but only with
mutual agreement between the Fresno Police Department
and the Fresno Police Officers Association.

Thirty (30) days prior to the opening of the patrol matrix,
Officers/Specialists qualified pursuant to Section 7.15.01,
and who are selected by the Department to serve on the
Airport Task Force will bid for shift assignments and
vacation according to seniority based on date of hire with
the Department. Vacant positions at the time of the Unit
sign-up, not filled by Officers/Specialists qualified
pursuant to Sections 7.15.01, will be filled by the least
senior non-probationary members during the Unit sign-up
according to seniority based on date of hire with the
Department, after the qualified Officers/Specialists have
signed up, and in accordance with Sections 7.15.05 and
7.15.06. Any Officer/Specialist absent at the time of the
bidding is solely responsible for obtaining and reviewing
the matrix drafts and instructions, and for securing a
proxy to represent him/her during the bidding process.
Should a vacancy arise after the Unit sign-up, the
department shall fill the vacancy, and follow the MOU,
under Sections 7.15.01 (1) through (4) and 7.15.02 through
7.15.06, and absent any qualified members, shall revert
back to Section 7.16.02.

Officers/Specialists assigned to the Airport Task Force
are eligible to utilize the Absent with Substitution (AWS)
system in accordance with this MOU under Section
7.13.07. Officers/Specialists wishing to participate in
AWS with Officers/Specialists assigned to the Airport
Task Force must first obtain an airport security badge.
There will be no cost to the Officer/Specialist to attend
airport security training, or to obtain the security badge,
nor shall the City incur any overtime cost.

Officers/Specialists assigned to the Airport Task Force
are eligible to utilize four (4) “Guaranteed Leave” days per
each matrix semester out of the guaranteed leave time
bank established pursuant to this MOU under Section
7.12.08. Officers/Specialists will comply with the same
list of conditions and procedures outlined in this MOU
under Section 7.12.08, except that no more than one

51
(6)

(7)

guaranteed leave request will be honored for any single
date for al shift assignments of the Airport Task Force,
and Airport Task Force Officers/Specialists requests for
guaranteed leave do not count as one of the five patrol
matrix requests. Officers/Specialists utilized to fill Airport
Task Force positions under guaranteed leave time off
must possess an airport security badge.

Officers/Specialists assigned to the Airport Task Force
will be supervised by Airport Public Safety Supervisors
pursuant to the provisions set forth in the pending
“Agreement for Services Between the City of Fresno
Department of Airports an the Fresno Police Department,”
an with the agreement from the Fresno Police Officers
Association.

Officers/Specialists assigned to the Airport Task Force
will be provided with an assigned locker at a dressing
station located on the airport property.

7.15 FILLING SPECIAL ASSIGNMENTS

Definition: Special units (positions) are defined as all units (positions) outside of
patrol matrix duties.

7.15.01 At least once each calendar year the department will administer a
written test to qualify Officers/Specialists for assignment to special unit
positions. The test will be designed to certify competency in law,
policy, procedures and whatever other areas of skill or knowledge the
department deems appropriate. The notification of, and minimum
qualifications for, the approaching test will be announced by voice mail,
and will be posted in work areas, no less than seven (7) days before
the date of the test.

(1)

(2)

Prior to each test the department will determine and announce
the “passing” score for the test. While it may be set higher,
the passing score will not be lower than 70% correct.

Subsequent to each test, the department will establish a non-
ranked list of Officers who have passed the test, and are
thereby “qualified” for assignment to special unit positions.
Said lists will remain in effect three (3) years after which
Officers who have not been chosen for a special unit will have
to re-qualify to remain eligible.

52
7.15.02

(3) Officers must have two (2) years of experience in patrol matrix
duties to take the test. Except as provided below, Officers
must pass the test and have three (3) years of experience in
patrol matrix duties at the time of assignment to a special unit.

Any current or temporary PTO will be considered “qualified” for
assignment to a special unit position.

Any Officer who has successfully passed the PTO exam within
the last three (3) years shall also be considered “qualified” for
assignment to a special unit position.

Any Officer who is on the “top 25" current Sergeant's
promotional list shall also be considered “qualified” for
assignment to a special unit.

(4) Officers currently assigned to a special unit will not be required
to test, nor meet patrol experience requirements to remain in
their existing positions or to move to another special unit
position. If an Officer currently assigned to a special unit, or
who is assigned to a special unit pursuant to these provisions
returns to patrol matrix duties, he/she shall be deemed
qualified under this section for one (1) year from the date of
leaving the special unit. Should an Officer who has returned
to patrol matrix duties not be returned to a special unit during
that year, he/she must then qualify pursuant to this section
before another assignment to a special unit. Said qualification
is to include both the testing and minimum patrol time
components.

(5) Effective July 1, 2011, Sergeants who have been demoted
for economic or reorganizational issues remain qualified
for PTO and Special Unit assignments.

Officers - Officers who have qualified per the above may submit a
Request for Consideration (RFC) for future openings in special units.
This request shall be in a form and format developed by the
department, shall specifically state the position desired, and shall be
directed to the Division Commander over the division in which the
position falls. While Officers may submit multiple requests for a variety
of positions, each request must be specific to one position. Division
Commanders will forward RFCs to the appropriate bureau or Section
Commanders where they will remain on file for one year.

Officers are responsible for monitoring the expiration of RFCs they

53
7.15.03

7.15.04

have submitted, and for re-submission thereof as necessary if they
wish to continue to be considered for vacancies as they occur.

(Incorporated from Side Letter Agreement dated October 12,
2007):

Sergeants - Sergeants interested in special unit assignments may
submit an RFC for future openings in special units. This request
shall be in a form and format developed by the department, shall
specifically state the position desired, and shall be directed to the
division commander over the division in which the position falls.
While Sergeants may submit multiple requests for a variety of
positions, each request must be specific to one position. Division
Commanders will forward RFCs to the appropriate bureau or
Section Commanders where they will remain on file for one year.

Sergeants are responsible for monitoring the expiration of RFCs
they have submitted and re-submission thereof as necessary if
they wish to continue to be considered for vacancies as they
occur.

As Sergeant openings occur Commanding Officers will notify all
who have applied for consideration during the preceding year,
and request a Memo of Interests and whatever additional
documents they deem appropriate for an initial review of the
candidates. From this review, Commanding Officers will narrow
the field to no less than three (3) candidates for the first opening,
plus one (1) more for each additional opening, if there are multiple
openings available. Commanding Officers, or designee, will then
interview each of these candidates before a selection is made.

AS openings occur, Commanding Officers will notify all who have
applied for consideration during the preceding year, and request a
Memo of Interests and whatever additional documents they deem
appropriate for an initial review of the candidates. From this review,
Commanding Officers will narrow the field to no less than three
candidates for the first opening, plus one more for each additional
opening, if there are multiple openings available. Commanding
Officers, or designee, will then interview each of these candidates
before a selection is made. Commanding Officers may involve unit
supervisors at any point in the selection process.

The above qualifying and selection process will apply equally to all
special unit positions, including Training & Development (T&D)
positions. This process will not, however, apply to PTO selections.

54
7.16

7.15.05

7.15.06

The department retains the right to assign any Officer to any special
unit position, outside of the above process, when the assignment is
made for a specific purpose based on specific need that the Officer
assigned can best address. The department will, upon request,
verbally identify the specific skill set and the needs to be addressed as
well as the time sensitive needs of the department. However, such
assignments may be made for no more than one (1) year after which
the Officer must have met the above qualifications and process to
remain in that or any other special unit position.

Chief's Exemption - The Chief may select up to five (5) sworn
Officers to serve in a special unit assignment without time
limitations. Officers assigned under 7.15.05 are eligible for
assignment under this sub-section. The selected Officer must
have successfully completed probation and shall sign an
acknowledgment of Section 7.15.01 (1) through (4) and section
7.15.05. The department and the association will maintain a copy
of the acknowledgment. Once the selected Officer leaves this
special unit assignment, the Officer must meet the above
qualifications and process to be eligible for any other special unit
position as outlined in Section 7.15.01 (1) through (4).

Should there be insufficient candidates qualified through the above
process to fill the positions available, the department may assign any
Officer off of probationary status to open positions as necessary to fill
special units. Such assignments may be for no more than one (1) year
for any Officer so assigned, unless the Officer has subsequently met
the qualifications as described above.

DURATION OF ASSIGNMENT - SPECIAL UNITS ONLY

7.16.01 Special Units (positions) are defined as all units (positions) outside of

7.16.02

the patrol matrix.

Officers and Sergeants assigned to special unit positions shall
generally be assigned for a minimum of two (2) years. Movement
subsequent to assignment to a special unit is at the discretion of the
Chief of Police for the good of the department, and may be
accomplished either:

With the concurrence of the affected Officer or Sergeant, or with thirty
(30) days notice to the affected Officer or Sergeant, except that those
Officers/Sergeants assigned to investigative units and responsible for
investigating felony crimes shall be provided sixty (60) days notice.

55
Effective July 1, 2009, the notification shall not occur between
November 1° and February 28".

7.16.03 Normal movement under this Section (i.e., 7.16 ) is not appealable.

7.16.04 Training & Development (T&D) Positions: T&D positions will be
designed to enhance the abilities and skills of Officers to improve the
experience base of potential future supervisors, and to allow the
department to assess personnel for future regular special unit
assignments.

(1) Within three (3) years of the implementation of this MOU, the
department will create and identify T&D positions which will
number a minimum of five percent (5%) of the total number of
special unit positions department-wide.

(2) T&D positions will generally be one-year assignments.
However, in order to coincide with patrol matrix sign-ups, at
the discretion of the department, T&D assignments may be as
short as six (6) months or as long as eighteen (18) months.

(3) Upon completion of a T&D assignment, Officers may be
moved to another T&D position, to a regular special unit
assignment or returned to patrol.

(4) To ensure availability of T&D positions for those seeking them,
Officers will be limited to a total of three (3) such assignments.
Similarly, Officers may not be assigned to a T&D position in
any unit they have been previously assigned.

(5) The department has the discretion to determine where the
T&D positions will be located, and may change those
determinations as positions vacate and are refilled. However,
the department will endeavor to spread the T&D positions as
widely as possible, without negatively affecting workflow and
productivity to provide the broadest possible experience base
for Officers moving through these positions.

(6) Should there be insufficient qualified applicants to fill the
number of positions dictated by the five percent (5%) minimum
the department may reduce that number to coincide with the
number of qualified applicants.

7.17 CAREER DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

56
7.18

There is created a Career Development Program Exploratory Committee. The
purpose of this committee will be to research and develop a recommendation for
a program designed to prepare and assist members seeking advancement within
the department to recognize and utilize existing skills and abilities, and to provide
pathways for attaining specialized career assignments within the department.
Areas for exploration may include evaluation of educational opportunities,
lateral and promotional movement, training plans, job steps and the need for
a rank between Officer and Sergeant, * * * and/or between Sergeant and
Lieutenant. * * *

Effective July 1, 2009, the committee will be composed of no less than two (2)
department representatives and two (2) representatives of * * * the
Association. The recommendation of the committee will be advisory to the Chief
of Police, and no program will be implemented without agreement between the
Association, the department and the City.

[8 deleted ]
(1) The committee shall schedule and meet quarterly. * * *
(2) * * * The committee shall issue a proposed career development

program by June 30, 2012, which * * * include a joint * * *
recommendation.

(3) The proposed career development program * * * shall be submitted
to the Chief of Police, City Manager, Director of Personnel Services
and the Association.

(4) Within forty-five (45) days of the issuance of the proposed career
development program, * * * either the City or the Association may
request that formal negotiations commence to negotiate an agreement
to adopt some or all of the recommendations of the committee. Any
recommendations or proposal must be agreed to by both the
Association and the City.

(5) The parties may modify any provision of this section by mutual
agreement.

SENIORITY (Incorporated from Side Letter Agreement dated November 6,
2008)

7.18.01 Definitions: Seniority within rank and class shall begin upon the date on
which an Officer receives a permanent appointment to a position in the
class. A permanent demotion from a promotional position shall result
in loss of accrued seniority in * * * the higher rank. A temporary

57
7.18.02

7.18.03

demotion from a higher rank shall not result in loss of accrued
seniority in the higher rank, but seniority in the higher rank will
not accrue during the term of the demotion. A temporary
demotion is defined as a demotion wherein the employee may be
reappointed to the higher rank without a competitive process.
The seniority of Police Officer/Police Officer Recruit who is hired on the
same date shall be as follows:

(1) Placement on a promulgated eligible list by score will be the
order of seniority.

(2) In cases where Officers/Recruits are hired from Entry Level
Lists promulgated on different dates, those hired from the list
promulgated first shall have seniority.

(3) Seniority for Police Cadet shall begin on the date they are
sworn-in as Police Officer Recruit.

(4) When hired on the same day from a Lateral Police Officer List
and Entry Level Police Officer List, the Lateral Police Officer
will have seniority.

(5) When two (2) or more Officers have the same date of hire and
no Police Officer promulgated list exists to determine seniority,
the most senior will be determined by the Officer’s permanent
full-time date of hire as a City employee, and if not applicable,
seniority will be determined by lottery. The results of the
lottery shall be used to determine present and future seniority.

Vacation Selection: Vacation selection by division, section, district or
shift, as determined by the department, shall be based upon, and
determined by, seniority within the class.

Shift/Detail Assignments: The primary consideration in making shift or
detail assignments shall be the needs of the department subject to the
seniority provisions below.

(1) Patrol Matrix Assignments: Except as otherwise provided
below and in Section 7.13.02 (Matrix Schedules), patrol matrix
assignments shall be filled by seniority. Seniority for all work
assignments subject to bid in the patrol matrix by Police
Officer/Police Specialists shall be by date of hire as a Police
Officer or, in the case of a Sergeant, the date of promotion.
Any subsequent changes in patrol matrix assignments shall be

58
(2)

accomplished as vacancies occur and not by "bumping" or
changing of previously existing assignments.

Exception: An Officer or Sergeant reassigned to the patrol
matrix by the department without the consent of the Officer or
Sergeant shall be assigned to a shift according to his or her
seniority in that class.

Department___ Reorganization/Personnel__ Reductions-Special
Units: In the event of a departmental reorganization, or a
reduction of personnel due to budget restrictions, which
reorganization or personnel reduction causes the movement of
special units, the movement shall be accomplished as follows:

If there are no volunteers to move, the “last in first out” rule
shall apply within any affected unit. For purposes of this
section, a “unit” will generally be defined as a specialized work
group under the control of a supervisor. In the case of like
work groups each under the control of different supervisors,
including but not limited to DCST, Traffic and Narcotics, said
units will be considered as one unit for purposes of applying
the “last in first out” rule.

Subject to the special provisions listed below, personnel
displaced pursuant to these provisions may be offered
placement in other existing special unit vacant positions.
Should no such vacancies exist, or be offered, and the
movement will result in a return of personnel to patrol matrix
duties, displaced personnel shall be allowed to “bump” the
Officer/Sergeant most recently assigned from patrol matrix
duties to a special unit, and assume that Officer/Sergeant’s
position. Ties in assignment date seniority shall be broken by
department seniority, with the least senior being the one
“bumped.”

Exception: There shall be no bumping from the Canine,
Skywatch or Mounted Units.

Premium Pay Positions: Whenever possible, personnel

displaced from premium pay positions shall be considered for
placement in other vacant premium pay positions.

Placement: The department is not obligated to offer all
existing vacancies to displaced personnel, but shall, whenever

59
possible, consider placements that will maintain shift and day
off schedules for the affected member.

Should the affected Officer/Sergeant accept an alternate
assignment pursuant to these provisions, and later request
reassignment to patrol, the Officer/Sergeant may not bump a
less senior Officer/Sergeant in patrol.

7.19 FEDERAL DRUG POLICY (Federal Omnibus Transportation Employee
Testing Act - “ACT”)

Policy:

7.19.01

7.19.02

7.19.03

7.19.04

The City maintains two separate policies to distinguish those
procedures required by the Federal Transit Administration and the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, entitled:

“Controlled Substances and Alcohol Testing Regulations, Fresno Area
Express”, adopted by the City Council on March 14, 2006, which may
be amended from time to time, after compliance with applicable
collective bargaining laws.

“Controlled Substances and Alcohol Testing Regulations, Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration”, which may be amended from
time to time after compliance with applicable collective bargaining laws.

The parties agree that each policy sufficiently summarizes the current
federal regulations required by the ACT. Both policies will be
distributed to every affected member of the Fresno Police Officers
Association Non-Supervisory Police Unit upon implementation or
amendment of the policies, and at the time of training and orientation.

The parties acknowledge that there currently exists a list of positions
subject to the provisions of the two policies: “(a) Controlled Substances
and Alcohol Testing Regulations, Fresno Area Express, (b) Controlled
Substances and Alcohol Testing Regulations, Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration’, and should these positions be changed or
modified, the parties agree to establish a new list of positions which
are subject to these two policies pursuant to the ACT and the
Department of Transportation. As personnel changes within these
positions, the parties agree that the Department will give notice to the
Association and the Risk Management Division of such changes.

The Risk/Safety Manager will be responsible for receiving all
information related to the implementation of this policy and directing

60
7.20

7.19.05

7.19.06

the applicable disciplinary action in coordination with the Labor
Relations Manager.

The parties agree to abide by the federal regulations set forth in each
policy. Employees who are members of the Association will also be
subject to the provisions of any applicable Department Standing Order,
policy or procedure.

Last Chance Agreements do not apply to members of the Association.
As required by federal law, employees who have tested positive and
who have returned to work, will still be subject to random selection for
testing and will be subject to six additional tests for drugs and alcohol
during the subsequent year.

GENERAL TESTING GUIDELINES FOR EMPLOYEES NOT COVERED BY
THE FEDERAL OMNIBUS TRANSPORTATION EMPLOYEE TESTING

General Requirements

Drug and substance tests may also be required under Departmental Standing
Order 2.4.12, as the same may be modified following consultation with the
Association pursuant to FMC 3-607.

7.20.01

7.20.02

7.20.03

Whenever a member is assigned to a special unit engaging in drug,
narcotic or vice enforcement, such member shall execute a written
agreement and release stating full consent, and would be required to
take a drug test.

In the event the City provides an annual scheduled physical, all
members would be required to submit to a drug test.

Sworn members while assigned to any special unit engaging in drug,
narcotic or vice enforcement shall be required to periodic unannounced
drug tests. Subject to the following conditions:

A member shall execute a written agreement and release stating full
consent to such periodic unannounced drug tests.

At the request of the Commander of the Management Support Bureau,
the City of Fresno Risk/Safety Manager shall select and schedule the
date and time when each member will be tested. Such test may be
administered no more than once a year.

Under this subsection, any random testing without notice will be in
compliance with applicable court decisions.

61
7.21

7.22

7.20.04 All drug testing noted above will be performed in accordance with the
Federal Omnibus Transportation Act, except in those instances where
members are unable to provide a urine sample such members may
elect to provide a blood sample. It is understood that if a member
cannot provide a sufficient sample or, in the alternative, refuses to
provide a blood sample, the test shall be considered to be positive.

In addition to any testing requirements contained in this MOU
provision, all members are subject to the “Identification and Consent
Procedures” outlined in Administrative Order 2-25, along with its
corresponding testing procedures.

ADMINISTRATION OF PERSONNEL ACTIONS

During the term of this MOU, the Chief of Police or designee shall administer
personnel actions, including but not limited to, the areas of grievances,
administrative hearings, Skelly hearings and discipline.

SUCCESS PLAN

Attached as Exhibit Ill * * * are the documents regarding the Police
Department’s Employee Success Plan and Inventory of Choices/Goals by
which Success Plans can be Drafted.

Any appeal of comments set forth in a performance evaluation, including, but not
limited to references to a “Success Plan” shall be as follows:

7.22.01 In the first instance, the member shall initiate the appeal of any
comments with his/her immediate supervisor. The member shall
initiate the appeal in writing and within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
evaluation.

7.22.02 In the event that the appeal cannot be resolved with the immediate
supervisor, the Association member may advance the appeal in writing
through his/her chain of command. Any such appeal shall be
submitted within ten (10) days of receipt of the decision.

7.22.03 Each member of the command staff considering the appeal shall issue
a written decision on the appeal within ten (10) days of receipt.

7.22.04 The final step of the appeal shall be to the Deputy Chief in the chain of
command of the appealing member. The written decision of the
Deputy Chief shall be provided to the member within thirty (30) days of
receipt of the appeal, or the date of hearing, whichever is later.

62
7.23

7.22.05 The member shall have the option of requesting a meeting/hearing
with each member of the command staff hearing the appeal(s).

7.22.06 The command staff member hearing the appeal shall have the
authority to modify all or part of the evaluation.

7.22.07. The member may submit a written response to any decision of a
command staff member. Any such written response shall be inserted
into the member's personnel file.

7.22.08 The manner in which an employee has carried out his/her
“Success Plan” may be referenced/discussed only in the
“Performance of Duties” section of the evaluation form.

DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES (Incorporated from Side Letter Agreement
dated September 16, 2008)

Standing Order 2.4.10, as well as the FMC, City Administrative Orders, policies,
procedures, operation manuals, rules and regulations, all as the foregoing exist
during the term * * * of this MOU, concerning disciplinary procedures will apply.
However, any permanent member receiving a Final Order of Disciplinary
Action resulting in a termination, demotion or suspension of one hundred-
twenty hours (120) or more may, in lieu of submitting an appeal through
established means per their respective procedures, within fifteen (15)
calendar days of service of the Final Order of Disciplinary Action request
binding arbitration. If a request for binding arbitration is submitted by a
member or their representative, the member or their representative shall be
required to provide a written waiver of their right to bring the matter
through any other established means, including an appeal to the Civil
Service Board. The arbitrator shall regulate the conduct of the hearing
process. The arbitrator shall set the date, time and place of the hearing,
which please shall be on City premises, and shall, by certified United
States mail, postage prepaid, give not less than ten (10) days notice of
such date, time and place to the appellant, or the appellant’s designed
representative and the appointing authority. The hearing shall be recorded
by a court reporter or electronic process. Oral evidence may be heard only
on oath or affirmation. The arbitrator’s decision shall be final and binding,
any may be challenged only pursuant to the California Arbitration Act,
Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1280 et seq.

The fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be paid half by the City and
half by the Association.

The parties shall endeavor to prepare a mutually agreed panel of seven (7)

63
7.24

7.25

7.26

arbitrators to be utilized for the purposes of discipline arbitrations. In the
event that the parties fail to identify a panel of agreed upon arbitrators, the
arbitrator shall be selected from a list of seven (7) arbitrators provided by
the California State Mediation and Conciliation Service. If the parties
cannot agree on an arbitrator from the list of seven, the parties shall
alternatively strike names until a single arbitrator’s name remains.

IN LIEU OF SUSPENSION

By mutual agreement between the Chief or designee and the affected member, a
member suspended from duty without pay may forfeit accumulated holiday, CTO,
and/or vacation credits equal to the number of hours of suspension in lieu of the
suspension. If the suspension is reduced or reversed at the conclusion of the
appeal process, the City shall reinstate the appropriate amount of forfeited
credits. This provision is not subject to the grievance procedure.

USE OF A HEARING OFFICER IN DISCIPLINARY ACTION INITIATED BY
CITY

Members may elect the alternate appeal procedure before a Hearing Officer
instead of a hearing before the Civil Service Board, as provided in FMC Section
3-283. * * *

ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURE

It is the purpose and intent of the City and the Association to provide for an
administrative appeal procedure for a member to appeal "punitive action” which
is proposed to be taken against him/her for which an appeal is not otherwise
provided under the Charter or the Civil Service Rules. For purposes of this
section "punitive actions" are defined as written reprimands, reduction or loss of
base salary, and transfer/reassignment, when it results in a loss of base salary or
is used as punishment. This section is not subject to the grievance procedure.

7.26.01 Where the department proposes “punitive action" (as defined above),
the affected member shall be advised, in writing, of the department's
proposed action no less than ten (10) calendar days before the
proposed effective date of the action.

7.26.02 Any dispute between the parties as to whether the action is "punitive"
shall be presented to the Chief of Police or designee. If the Chief is
directly involved in the action it shall be presented to the Administrative
Hearing Committee as defined in 7.26.04, below. The Chief or
designee or the Committee shall rule on the dispute before proceeding
with a hearing. If the Chief or designee or the Committee find no
punitive action then the member shall not be entitled to a hearing.

64
7.26.03

7.26.04

7.26.05

7.26.06

The member shall have ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the
notice to respond, either orally or in writing, to the appropriate division
commander. An appeal from a member shall suspend the proposed
punitive action until the conclusion of this procedure.

The division commander has ten (10) calendar days to respond. If he
or she upholds the proposal or modifies it in a manner unacceptable to
the member or fails to respond within the specified time period the
member shall have ten (10) calendar days to appeal, either orally or in
writing, to the Chief of Police or designee.

The Chief or designee is disqualified from hearing the appeal if the
Chief or designee has been directly involved in the disputed action. If
the Chief or designee is disqualified, it will be heard by an
administrative Hearing Committee. The Committee will be comprised
of one representative from the Association and one from the City. A
third member from the department will be selected and mutually
agreed upon by both parties and will act as Chairperson.

The Chief or designee (or the Administrative Hearing Committee) shall
hear the appeal within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the notice of
appeal. When the action is heard by the Committee, the Committee
will make a recommendation to the Chief or designee within three (3)
calendar days. The Chief or designee shall render a written decision
to affirm, reject, or modify the Committee's decision within ten (10)
calendar days after the hearing. The written decision shall set forth the
basis for the decision, the action to be imposed and the effective date
thereof. The decision of the Chief or designee shall be final.

The time limits above may be mutually waived by the parties.

65
7.27. GRIEVANCES

7.27.01 Grievance Procedure

7.27.02

7.27.03

A grievance is a dispute concerning the interpretation or application of
any existing City policy, practice, written rule or regulation governing
personnel practices or working conditions, including this MOU. The
grievance procedure relates only to existing rights or duties, not to the
establishment or abolition of a right or duty. This procedure shall not
apply to any dispute for which there is another established resolution
procedure, including but not limited to, appeal to the Civil Service
Board, or Retirement Board. A grievance can be initiated by any
grieved employee or group of grieved employees, or by the
Association on behalf of a grieved employee or group of grieved
employees. Grievances should be settled as near as possible to their
source and in as informal a setting as possible.

Informal Process

The grievant (this term includes the Association) must first attempt to
resolve the grievance on an informal basis through discussions with
the immediate supervisor without undue delay. The informal process
must be completed within twenty (20) calendar days after the
occurrence of the alleged incident giving rise to the grievance, or when
the grievant knew or should have reasonably become aware of the
facts giving rise to the grievance.

If the grievance is not resolved at the immediate supervisor level, the
grievant may attempt to resolve the grievance on an informal basis
through discussions with the next levels of supervision, following the
chain of command up to the Deputy Chief of Police.

Every effort shall be made to find an acceptable solution to the
grievance through this informal process. Once the informal process
has been exhausted, the grievant may invoke the formal process.

Formal Process
A written grievance must set forth the specific rule, regulation, policy,
practice, or MOU provision claimed to have been violated, describe the

specific incident or circumstances of the alleged violation, and specify
the remedy sought.

66
7.27.04

Formal Filing Procedure

The procedure and sequence in filing and processing a grievance shall
be as follows:

(1)

(2)

(3)

Step One - Filing the Grievance:

The grievant or representative may file the formal grievance
within ten (10) calendar days from the last day of the informal
process through the grieving’s immediate supervisor to the
Chief of Police or designee. The grievance shall summarize
the results of the informal process. If the Association has not
previously been involved, a copy of the grievance shall be
submitted to the Association. The grievant or the Association
may request to have a meeting regarding the grievance with
the Chief of Police or designee in an attempt to resolve the
concerns at this level. If no request for a meeting is made,
and upon receipt of the written grievance, the Chief of Police
or designee shall give the grievant a written reply within
fourteen (14) calendar days.

Step Two - Request for Arbitration:

If the grievant is not satisfied with the decision of the Police
Chief or designee, only the Association may within ten (10)
calendar days after receipt of the written reply, file a request
for arbitration utilizing the written grievance and submitting it to
the Labor Relations Manager. The Association shall be limited
to two (2) such requests for arbitration per fiscal year on a
grievance that involves a dispute concerning the interpretation
or application of an existing City policy, practice, written rule or
regulation. There shall be no limitation on requests for
arbitration dealing with MOU interpretation or application. Any
request for arbitration that does not meet the requirements of
this subsection shall not be processed, and such grievance
concludes at Step One above.

Step Three -Arbitration and Immediate Arbitration:

 

Within five (5) calendar days from the receipt of the arbitration
request, either party may request the State Mediation and
Conciliation Service to submit a list of five (5) neutrals. These
neutrals will be statewide experts in the field of labor relations.

67
Within five (5) calendar days upon receiving the list, the Labor
Relations Manager and the Association shall alternatively
strike a name from the list, and the last name remaining shall
be designated as the neutral arbitrator.

The arbitrator selected shall submit the earliest date(s) in
which the arbitrator can hold the hearing, of which the
Association and the Labor Relations Manager can mutually
select a date.

The arbitrator shall hold a hearing on the issue or issues
submitted, or as determined by the arbitrator if the parties
have not mutually agreed upon the issue, or issues, and
render a written decision and reasons for the opinion within
thirty (30) calendar days following the closing of the hearing,
unless the period has been mutually extended in writing by all
parties. The decision shall be sent to the City Labor Relations
Manager and to the Association.

The arbitrator’s decision shall be final and binding, and may be
challenged only pursuant to the California Arbitration Act,
C.C.P. Sections 1280, et sequentes.

Immediate Arbitration - Either party (City or the Association)
may waive the grievance procedure time limits specified in this
subsection (i.e., .04) and proceed to immediate arbitration in
any case where the party alleges that the other is threatening
to take an action in violation of the MOU in so short a period of
time as to disallow the party from proceeding within the time
limits of this subsection (i.e., .04). To put it another way,
immediate arbitration may be sought by either party where
there is “no adequate remedy at law,” or where normally a
party would be entitled to seek injunctive relief. However, the
method of proceeding to immediate arbitration must be done
consistent with the following provisions.

The arbitration shall take place no earlier than the fifteenth
(15") day following the request by the grieving party for such
“immediate arbitration,” unless otherwise mutually agreed.
During the two-week period (14 calendar days) immediately
following the request for immediate arbitration, the responding
party shall have the opportunity to attempt to resolve the
dispute.

68
If the City is the responding party, the Chief of Police and
Director of Personnel Services, or their designated
representatives, jointly, shall have the opportunity to meet with
or otherwise communicate with appropriate Association
representatives, in an attempt to resolve the dispute.

Once the request for immediate arbitration is filed, the parties
shall (even though dispute resolution discussions are going on
during the two-week period) attempt to agree upon a neutral
arbitrator and to obtain a date for arbitration hearing as soon
as possible immediately following the two-week period.

The parties will attempt to have a standing list of available
“immediate arbitrators,” but if no agreement on same is
reached, the parties will obtain five arbitrators, by telephone, if
possible, from the State Mediation and Conciliation Service.
The first arbitrator available to hear the matter following the
two-week period shall be selected as arbitrator. The order of
contacting the potential arbitrators shall be determined by lot
unless mutually agreed to otherwise. The parties are free to
mutually agree upon an immediate arbitrator through any other
process or agreement.

In any case, the arbitrator selected to decide the grievance
shall have the full and equitable power to frame a decision,
including an order to the party initiating the grievance to abide
by the time limits provided in the grievance procedure, or a
restraining order against the party threatening the action, or
any other form of arbitration order that would resolve the
matter in an equitable and just manner. However, the
arbitrator may not add to, subtract from, change or modify any
provision of this MOU and shall be authorized only to apply
existing provisions of this MOU to the specific facts involved
and to interpret only applicable provisions of this MOU.

Unless the parties agree otherwise, closing argument shall be
presented orally and there shall be a “bench” decision.

The parties shall attempt to have the arbitration proceedings

completed as quickly as possible, including by meeting nights
and weekends, if at all feasible.

69
(4)

General Arbitration/Immediate Arbitration Provisions:

 

An arbitrator shall have, in the arbitrator’s discretion, the ability
to hear evidence on both arbitrability and on the merits at the
same hearing, holding for a later ruling on the issue of
arbitrability.

Time limits set forth in the formal process may be modified by
mutual agreement of the grievant or representative and the
department or City. Failure of the grievant to file an appeal
within the specified time limit for any but the first step of the
procedure shall constitute an abandonment of the grievance.

The cost of making a stenographic record of the arbitration
hearing shall be borne by the party requesting such records.
There shall be no post-hearing briefs, except by mutual
agreement.

The fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be paid half by
the City and half by the grievant; however, the arbitrator may
order that the City or the grievant pay the total of such fees
and expenses should the arbitrator find that, but for the
unreasonableness of a party's posture, the convening for
arbitration would not have been necessary.

Witnesses who are employees and on duty at the time of the
scheduled appearance shall be released from duty without
loss of compensation for the time required to testify. No
overtime payments shall be made because of scheduled
appearances.

Individual grievants shall be released from duty without loss of
pay for the time of the arbitration hearing. A representative
shall be permitted to be present without loss of compensation
on behalf of the grievant.

Arrangements for release time for grievant's witnesses shall
be made with the Labor Relations Manager, who shall issue all
appearance notices no later than 24 hours in advance of the
scheduled hearing.

No employee shall be discriminated against, harassed,

coerced, or suffer any reprisal because of filing or processing
of a grievance or participating in a grievance procedure.

70
CHAPTER 8

POLICING SPECIAL EVENTS AND
CONTRACT LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES

This MOU chapter sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties regarding
policing special events and contract law enforcement services.

8.1

8.2

GENERAL

The Fresno Police Department, at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police, may
allow private parties and public agencies to contract with the City for additional
police service, at a special detail assignment level pursuant to 29 U.S.C. 207
(p)(1), (p)(2) and (p)(3), and 29 C.F.R. 553.227 et sequentes. The special detail
assignment(s) performed by Police Officer/Police Specialist/Police Sergeant
classes (hereinafter member[s]), shall consist of, but not be limited to, providing
uniformed foot/vehicle patrol to a special events/contract law enforcement
services event at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

PROCEDURES

8.2.01 Members assigned to special events/contract law enforcement
services shall be volunteers selected from a special events and
contract law enforcement services assignment list. The number and
rank of the members assigned shall be determined by the Chief of
Police, or designated representative. The Chief of Police may restrict
a member from working extra duty for the good of the department.

(1) Members who desire to be placed on the assignment list must
have completed their probation. Members on sick leave,
industrial injury leave, “temporary light duty,” or leave of
absence shall not be eligible.

(2) The assignment list shall be the basis for all member
assignments. Members who desire to be placed on the
assignment list shall notify the Chief's designated
representative. All Members on the assignment list shall be
notified by voice mail when policing special events and/or
contract law enforcement services positions are available.
Positions shall be filled using the following process.

The Chief's designated representative will sequentially number
the calls, starting with the first member responding from the
assignment list, and so on. The designated representative will
then use computer spreadsheet software programmed to

71
8.2.02

8.2.03

8.2.04

select a random number drawn from the sequential numbers
assigned to the responding members. The random number
selected will be the starting point for making assignments, and
for filling the positions. If the positions are not filled after going
through the entire list of numbers, the designated
representative will continue through the list again, and so on,
until all positions are assigned or a subsequent notification is
issued.

Any member who fails to appear for assignment or fails to notify the
designated representative of his/her inability to work the assignment,
24-hours prior to the beginning of the assignment schedule, shall be
removed from the assignment list. Any member who is removed from
the assignment list shall not be eligible for reinstatement to the
assignment list for a period of six (6) months. Removal from the
assignment list shall not be deemed a disciplinary action pursuant to
Civil Service Board rules or a punitive action pursuant to Government
Code Section 3303 (h), and is not appealable or grievable.

Members performing special events/contract law enforcement services
assignments shall be subject to all rules, orders, and procedures of the
Police Department.

In no event shall a member performing special events/contract law
enforcement services work be assigned to a job site where a labor
union picket line has been established.

Once a Contract for Law Enforcement Services has been formally
executed, Reserve Officers shall not be used to replace sworn
members for policing special events and contract law enforcement
services. In the event a Fresno Municipal Code ordinance concerning
policing special events/contract law enforcement services is amended
by Council, the parties agree to reopen meet and confer on this
subsection (8.2.03) at the request of either the City or the Association.
Requests for special events policing and/or contract law enforcement
services will first be filled by volunteer members available through the
assignment list. If no volunteer members are available, the vacancies
may be filled by Reserve Officers.

Generally, calls for service within the special events and contract law
enforcement services policing areas may be handled by regularly
assigned FOD area patrol units. However, members performing
special events and contract law enforcement services may be
assigned to handle calls for service that are consistent with the duties
requested by the contracting party.

72
8.2.05

Officer working conditions for the Big Fresno Fair shall be established
by mutual agreement between the Big Fresno Fair, City of Fresno and
the Association, and shall be reflected in a corresponding agreement
between the parties.

8.3. COMPENSATION

8.3.01

8.3.02

8.3.03

8.3.04

8.3.05

The rate of pay for members occupying Police Officer/Police Specialist
classes who are working special events and contract law enforcement
services assignments shall be at the time and one-half rate for “A” Step
Police Officer. The rate of pay for members occupying the Police
Sergeant class who are working special events and contract law
enforcement services assignments shall be at the time and one-half
rate for “A” Step Police Sergeant. Compensation _ for
Officers/Sergeants for all special events detail assignments worked at
the Big Fresno Fair shall be by separate check no later than the last
pay period in November of the year the Big Fresno Fair special events
detail assignment is worked.

The hours worked, and pay received for special events and contract
law enforcement services assignments, shall not be credited toward
years of service for retirement benefits or regular overtime.
Educational incentives shall not apply to the special events and
contract law enforcement services assignment rate of pay.

The parties agree that for the purpose of FLSA regulations,
compensation paid for working special events and contract law
enforcement assignments is at the applicable overtime rate, and shall
not be considered compensation for pension plan benefits calculations.

A member reporting to an assignment site shall receive a minimum of
four (4) hours pay regardless of actual time worked. Employment of
more than four (4) hours shall be paid to the nearest tenth of an hour
for the actual time worked.

Any accident, illness or injury which arises out of or occurs in the
course of employment in a policing special events and contract law
enforcement services assignment shall be covered under the city’s
workers’ compensation plan pursuant to Section 7.7.

73
CHAPTER 9

HEADINGS
MOU chapter, provision, and paragraph headings (includes exhibits, addendums,
attachments and side letters) contained herein are solely for the purpose of

convenience, and shall not affect the construction or interpretation of any of the
language of this MOU.

74
CHAPTER 10

SAVING CLAUSE/FULL UNDERSTANDING

10.1 SAVING CLAUSE

10.2

In the event any chapter, section or portion of this MOU should be held invalid
and unenforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
apply only to the specific chapter, section or portion thereof specified in the
court's decision, and upon issuance of such a decision, the City and the
Association agree to immediately meet and confer upon a substitute for the
invalidated chapter, section, or portion thereof.

FULL UNDERSTANDING

It is intended that this MOU sets forth the full and entire understanding of the
parties, and any previous understanding or agreement by the parties regarding
all such matters are hereby superseded and terminated in their entirety.

With respect to side letter agreements, any not attached to this MOU are hereby
terminated in their entirety. Those side letter agreements attached to this MOU
shall continue in force subject to the terms and conditions set forth within each
side letter. In the absence of any specified term in any such side letter, they shall
terminate upon the expiration of this MOU. Any new side letter agreement
entered into during the term of this MOU shall continue in force and effect subject
to the terms and conditions described in the side letter. In the absence of any
term in such new side letters, they, too, shall terminate upon the expiration of this
MOU. This paragraph is not intended to prevent either party from relying on
discussions which occurred during the meet and confer process for the purpose
of clarifying the meaning of this MOU.

15
CHAPTER 11

TERMINATION

The provisions in this MOU shall be in full force and effect extended from * * * June 30,
2009 to June 30, 2012, subject to the Sections (.1, .2 and .3) below:

11.1

11.2

11.3

This MOU shall become effective only after ratification by the members of the
Association, followed by City Council approval and the expiration of the waiting
period for the Mayor's action provided in Charter Sections 605 and 609, and shall
remain in full force and effective through June 30, 2012.

During the life of this MOU should either party desire to modify its terms or to
meet and confer with the other party as to matters within the scope of
representation which are not addressed in this MOU, the party requesting any
change shall request in writing to meet and confer on the item(s), which item(s)
shall be specified in writing.

During the term of the MOU, either party may refuse any request by the other to
meet and confer without explanation if (1) the item is directly considered and
specifically addressed herein; or (2) is directly considered and specifically
addressed in any FMC section, charter section or provision, or resolution section,
which section specifically establishes wages, hours, or other terms and
conditions of employment; or (3) the specific item was included in an initial
written proposal from the party making the request during the meet and confer
process which led to this agreement. No unilateral action on any such refused
proposal may be taken by the requesting party after such a refusal by the other.

It is further agreed, however, that this section shall not prohibit the City from
requesting to meet and confer on changes to federal or state statutes referred to
or cited in this MOU, and which impacts the implementation of this MOU, in
which case the request to meet and confer shall not be refused.

76
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands this Te day

of__Tuwy , 2009.

  
   

FOR THE FRESNO POLICE FOR THE CITY 0.
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION:

   
  

 

KENNETH G. PHILLIPS
Labor Relations Manager

Vice President/
Police Specialist

 

PAUL PRESTON
Executive Board Member/
Police Sergeant

 

 

Executive Board Member/

Retired Police Officer

  

  

APPROVED AS TO FORM
ATTORNEY’S OFFICE

  

 

77
EXHIBIT |

 

TABLE |
NON-SUPERVISORY POLICE — UNIT 4
SALARIES - EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2008

(2% increase)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

STEP A B Cc D E E
Police Officer Recruit 4220 4431 : : :

Police Officer 4875 5119 5375 5644 5927 6223
Police Specialist 4875 5119 5375 5644 5927 6223
Police Sergeant 5877 6170 6480 6805 7144 7503,

 

 

FABLE DEFERRED TO 7/01/10

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2% increase}
STEP. A B S BD E FE
Police-Officer Recruit 4305, 4520 - : -
Police-Officer 4973 5222 5483 S787 6046 6348
Police-Specialist 4973 S222 3483, SSF 6046 6348
Police-Sergeant 5995, 6294 6610 6942 4287 4653,
TABLE II

NON-SUPERVISORY POLICE — UNIT 4
SALARIES - EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2010
(2% increase)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

STEP A B Cc D E EF

Police Officer Recruit 4305 4520 : : -

Police Officer 4973 5222 5483 5757 6046 6348

Police Specialist 4973 5222 5483 5757 6046 6348

Police Sergeant 5995 6294 6610 6942 7287 7653
FABLEHH

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4% increase}
STEP A B & BD E F
Police-Officer Recruit 4349, 4566 - : - -
Police-Officer 5023 S275 5538 5815, 6107 6442
Police-Specialist 5023 5275 5538, 5815, 6107 6442
Police-Sergeant 6055, 6357 6677 7042 7369 7739
FABLEIY

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2% increase}
STEP. A B Sc DB = FE
Police-Officer Recruit 4436 4658 - : - -
Police-Officer $424 5384 5649 $932 6230 6544
Police-Specialist 5424 5384 5649, 5932 6230 6844
Police-Sergeant 6177 6485, 6844 #153, #508, 4885,

78

 
EXHIBIT |

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4% increase}
ISFER A B & BD E F
Police-Officer Recruit 4484 4705, - : - -
Police-Officer 56 8435, 5406 5992 6293 6607
Police-Specialist 56 5435, 5706 5992 6293 6607
Police-Sergeant 6239 6550 6880 7225 7584 7964
TABLE VI
NON-SUPERVISORY POLICE — UNIT 4
SALARIES - EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2014
(2% increase - 1% deferred form 1/1/11 and 1% deferred from 7/1/11)
STEP A B Cc D E E
Police Officer Recruit 4391 4611 : : : :
Police Officer 5073 5327 5594 5874 6168 6477
Police Specialist 5073 5327 5594 5874 6168 6477
Police Sergeant 6115 6421 6743 7081 7436 7808
TABLE VII
NON-SUPERVISORY POLICE — UNIT 4
SALARIES — EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2015
(2% increase - 1% deferred from 7/1/11 and 1% deferred from 1/1/12)

STEP A B Cc D E EF
Police Officer Recruit 4479 4703 : : : :
Police Officer 5175 5434 5706 5992 6292 6607
Police Specialist 5175 5434 5706 5992 6292 6607
Police Sergeant 6238 6550 6878 7222 7584 7964

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

79

 
EXH

BIT Il

Non-Supervisory Police - Unit 4
EIP Master List*

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

01319 071673 Hard-coded NA|__5.0%
03443 071675 Hard-coded NA] 2.5%
01941 101675 Hard-coded NA] 2.5%
01506 jAttkisson,Craig A 020184 Hard-coded NA} 3.0%
01301 |Ball,Dennis M 081669 Hard-coded NA} 5.0%
01628 |Ballesteroz,Guy D 071675 Hard-coded NA} 2.5%
03677 081689 Hard-coded NA] 2.5%
02473 092793 Enrolled 010197

01412 121686 Enrolled 010197

01736 |Bryant,Dale J 080475 Hard-coded 070992} 2.5%
00316 }|Cardenas, Eppie 101686 Tuition reimbursement 110995

02956 |Cavallero,Michael J 040177 Hard-coded NA} 5.0%
02640 |Chamalbide,Gerardo C 052695 Hard-coded 010197} 3.0%
03773 |Chandler, Sheila 021690 Enrolled 070196}

02000 010187 Enrolled 010197

02792 070184 Hard-coded NA} 5.0%
00964 avid H 070184 Hard-coded 012792| 3.0%
00006 jan,Stephen F 010187 Hard-coded 070191) 3.0%
02995 051679 Hard-coded NA] 2.5%
03433 110191 Enrolled 041096}

03601 }|Dellone,Daryl J 111673 Hard-coded NA} 2.5%
03434 |Dingler,Eddie D 010179 Hard-coded NA} 5.0%
03525 |D 9! y 060176 Hard-coded NA} 2.5%
03857 060190 Hard-coded 072893] 3.0%
03610 |Edwards, Dan 121394 Enrolled 010197

02425 |Ei 070175 Hard-coded NA] 2.5%
00030 {Fleischmann Jr,Nicholas 060696 Hard-coded 010197] 3.0%
00514 |Flores,Sherree L 050179 Hard-coded 062894] 3.0%
04103 |Franks, Chris 022093 Tuition reimbursement 013197

01520 |Galvan, John 041686 Enrolled 010193

01254 |Garner,Robert C 092793 Hard-coded 010197| 5.0%
02308 |Godwin, Thomas A 081669 Hard-coded NA} 2.5%
04072 |Goertzen,Douglas S 092793 Hard-coded 010197] 3.0%
02149 |Gomez,Joseph V 070186 Hard-coded 010197} 3.0%
01676 |Gomez,Michael A 010187 Hard-coded NA} 3.0%
01994 051679 Hard-coded NA} 5.0%
02335 090173 Hard-coded NA[__2.5%
03649 121693 Eligible NA

00802 }Hahn, Timothy P 121693 Hard-coded 122895| 3.0%
04102 100186 Hard-coded NA] 5.0%
03828 070577 Hard-coded NAT 2.5%
01739 |Hartman,Bruce 051676 Tuition reimbursement 081888

00214 |Heinzman,Pamela J 041690 Hard-coded NA} 3.0%
01597 020195 Eligible NA

01413 121693 Eligible NA

01562 |Hudson, Mark 070189 Tuition reimbursement 012496]

03813 }|Hustedde,Larry N 052893 Hard-coded 010197) 3.0%
01964 |Jackson,Patrick G 101670 Hard-coded NA} 5.0%
01030 |Jacobo Jr,Henry 060176 Hard-coded NA} 5.0%

 

 

 

80

 
EXH

BIT Il

Non-Supervisory Police - Unit 4
EIP Master List*

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

03009 100184 Tuition reimbursement NA

04163 081489 Enrolled 010192

00613 122774 Hard-coded NAT 2.5%
03484 |Laband,Thomas | 100186 Hard-coded NA} 5.0%
00518 081685 Hard-coded 010194] 3.0%
01583 122774 Hard-coded NA[__2.5%
02261 |Lewis,James W 050186 Hard-coded 070193} 3.0%
01932 |Lincoln, Robert W 010590 Enrolled 010197

03701 }Luna,Judy L 100184 Hard-coded 010191} 3.0%
00575 |Lyon,Shannon M 121693 Hard-coded NA} 3.0%
02317 090177 Hard-coded NA[__2.5%
02795 070173 Hard-coded NA] 5.0%
00532 070896 Hard-coded 081597| 3.0%
01734 |Mendoza,Richard A 110171 Hard-coded NA} 5.0%
02229 |Mercado, Andy 011882 Enrolled 010193

02599 |Mitchell,Donald A 060673 Hard-coded NA} 2.5%
01627 |Monreal,Henry M 100174 Hard-coded 012291} 2.5%
02593 |Montevecchi,Daniel J 100174 Hard-coded NA} 2.5%
02444 |Nabors, Thomas H 022095 Enrolled 010197} 3.0%
00983 102279 Hard-coded NA| 3.0%
00804 101794 Hard-coded 010197| 3.0%
03829 081673 Hard-coded NA] 2.5%
03727 110171 Hard-coded NA] 2.5%
01789 011688 Hard-coded 062894] 3.0%
03574 090177 Hard-coded NA] 2.5%
01815 091688 Hard-coded NA| 3.0%
02629 101684 Hard-coded NA] 3.0%
01682 |Potts, Michael 101794 Tuition reimbursement 071196

01012 |Ramsey,David L 121895 Enrolled 010197} 3.0%
03872 |Reese,Douglas G 010187 Tuition reimbursement 021095} 3.0%
02869 }Reinhardt,Bryan R 120174 Hard-coded NA} 2.5%
03519 |Reynolds, Lori 092793 Enrolled 010197

01045 |Reynold: 101794 Enrolled 010197

01001 {Robinson,David F 020184 Hard-coded NA} 3.0%
04185 122774 Hard-coded NA[__2.5%
00902 121693 Tuition reimbursement 013197

01879 |Rogers, Brian 070189 Enrolled 070191

01229 030173 Hard-coded NA[__2.5%
01111 021694 Hard-coded 010197] 3.0%
01552 |Salazar,Mark J 060696 Hard-coded 010197} 3.0%
00877 102281 Hard-coded 012792] 3.0%
00616 |Sears,Robert F 110177 Hard-coded NA} 2.5%
04054 |Smith, Clayton 102279 Enrolled 070192

03280 |Snow,Garry 070167 Hard-coded NA} 5.0%
00969 |Stanfill James R 070579 Hard-coded 012291} 5.0%
02046 |Stevens,Bradley W 012582 Hard-coded 010197] 3.0%
00615 {St 060186 Hard-coded NA] 3.0%
02439 060186 Hard-coded 061591} 3.0%
00939 }|Vasquez,Dennis L 122774 Hard-coded NA} 2.5%

81

 
EXHIBIT II
Non-Supervisory Police - Unit 4
EIP Master List*

03482 010187 Hard-coded 013192] _5.0%|
02974 [Williamson,Dean A 070175 Hard-coded
02050

Wilson Jr,George H Hard-coded
03361 |Yang, Seng (“Steve"

Eligible

 

82
City of Fresno
Police Department Employee Success Plan
Coaching a Culture of Excellence

Employee:

Intent

The intent of this Success Plan document is to reflect the City’s shared vision, values,
and key objectives with all City employees. The intent is to improve communication at
all levels of our City organization, provide employees an opportunity to be involved in the
decisions that affect their workplace, and to build trust and support through clear and
concise communication. This document is not intended to replace an annual employee
evaluation, and is not intended to be used as a punitive process to discipline employees.
Success Plans are not to be reviewed for the purposes of consideration for special
assignments, promotional opportunities, or tied directly to an employee’s salary or
benefits.

City Vision
“A culture of excellence where people get the best everyday”
City Values

Accountability — We take personal responsibility for our actions.

Compassion — We care about and respect others.

Trust — We believe in each other.

Innovation — We seek new and creative ways to improve the way we do business.
Teamwork — We work together to achieve our mutual goals

City Key Objectives

Customer Satisfaction
Employee Satisfaction
Financial Management

Key Elements

In order to effectively achieve the positive outcomes that we envision, it is vital that this
information is communicated to all team members. Below is a list of tactics being
implemented in FY06 by the Department. These tactics, listed below, are written in a
manner that is positive, result oriented, observable, and measurable.

e Proactive engagement towards common goals.

e Using the three key objectives of customer satisfaction, employee satisfaction, and
financial management as the basis in which decisions will be made.

e Consistent communications and positive reinforcement.

e ACTIT based values and behavior (see Section III above).

Page 1 of 2
Vi.

Vil.

Individual Goals and Objectives

Now that you have reviewed the list of goals and objectives within your chain of
command and your specific work group, along with any other goals and objectives from
the Chief, Deputy Chief, Captain, Lieutenant and/or Sergeant in your chain of command,
take some time to discuss with your supervisor how you can personally contribute to
these efforts. If there is not mutual agreement between a supervisor and a subordinate
about the contents of the Success Plan, the plan must be reasonable in terms of the
employee’s workload, and the like.

An inventory of generic goals is attached to this document. Please choose appropriate
items from this inventory and make them specific to your situation in order to complete
this section of the Success Plan. With the exception of Deputy Chiefs, the plan should
not include percentages or numerical increases or decreases that do not involve your
own personal acts. For example, a plan may indicate that an employee hold an
increased number of meetings with citizens on a particular beat but may not utilize the
number of times citizens on the beat report crimes or suspicious persons or
developments. Furthermore, for all levels of employees represented by FPOA, there
can be no numerical goals involving “confrontational” interactions with citizens such as
arrests, traffic citations, field interrogations, or the like. This does not preclude a
supervisor from discussing productivity issues with an employee.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Coaching and Communication

Clear and concise communication is a vital part of this effort and is needed in order for
our organization to successfully achieve the outcomes outlined in each of the City’s Key
Result Areas. Therefore, we will meet at least monthly to coach performance and
positive outcomes.

 

Supervisor Date

Page 2 of 2
Attachment to FPOA Success Plans

“INVENTORY” OF CHOICES / GOALS BY WHICH SUCCESS PLANS CAN BE DRAFTED

The following “inventory” is a generic description of goals, only some (and often few) of which
would be used in any given employee’s Success Plan. Individual plans should have goals that
would fit within the following examples. Except for Deputy Chiefs, the Success Plan will not
utilize percentages or numerical increases or decreases that do not involve the employee’s own
personal acts. For example, a plan may indicate that an employee hold an increased number of
meetings with citizens on a particular beat but may not utilize the number of times citizens on
the beat report crimes or suspicious persons or developments. Furthermore, for all levels of
employees represented by FPOA, there can be no numerical goals involving “confrontational”
interactions with citizens such as arrests, traffic citations, field interrogations, or the like.

If there is no mutual agreement between a supervisor and a subordinate about the contents of
the plan, the plan must be reasonable in terms of the employee’s workload, and the like.

The inventory is as follows:

1. Achieve certain contracts or agreements by [target date], assuming reasonable availability
and parties with whom / which to deal.

2. Build, buy or accomplish certain things — again assuming reasonable resource availability

— by [target date].

Draft tactical and / or strategic plans.

Train / educate others by [target date].

Train / educate self by [target date].

Attend and / or create meetings / conferences.

Be “xX” places “Y” amount of time periodically.

Review numbers, statistics, etc. (crimes, accidents and the like) in an area, for a time

period, and so on.

9. Otherwise obtain information.

10. Meetings with subordinates or superiors periodically.

11. Meetings with citizens, “customers” in the broadest sense, or others affected by the work
of the department.”

12. Take certain minimum steps concerning investigations or other law enforcement activities.

13. Be on time.

14. Maintain appropriate professional appearance.

15. Achieve appropriate continuous POST-approved training / standards — e.g., the range.

Any goals that do not fit the above generic inventory that arise from discussions between a
supervisor and their subordinate must be referred to the City and the FPOA for mutual approval.

R:\Forms\FPOA Success Plan Attach.doc
FRESNO POLICE DEPARTMENT REPORT OF PERFORMANCE

FOR SWORN EMPLOYEES

 

Month Probationary Evaluation
Annual Evaluation Prepared by:
Exit Evaluation

 

 

 

DATE: EMPLOYEE:
EVALUATION PERIOD RANK:
FROM TO ASSIGNMENT:

 

 

Ratings: (1) Unacceptable, (2) Needs Improvement, (3) Meets Standards, (4) Exceeds Standards, (5) Outstanding
Key Objectives:

 

 

Criteria 1 2 3 4 5

 

 

Customer Satisfaction: Works well with the public and with
relationship with other agencies and organizations.

 

Employee Satisfaction: Cooperates with co-workers, supervisors.

 

Financial Management: Uses available resources, technology
and equipment effectively.

 

 

 

 

 

Values (ACT IT)

Accountability: By this we mean that we take personal responsibility for our actions.
Compassion: We care about and respect people.

Trust: ‘We mean we believe in each other.

Innovation: Seek new and creative ways to improve our business.

Teamwork: We work together to achieve our Vision.

 

 

Job Knowledge, Skills & Proficiency: Consider the employee’s
knowledge of department procedures and regulations, understanding of
the scope of assigned duties and the ability to perform those duties as
directed.

 

Quality and Accuracy of Work: Consider the accuracy, neatness
and thoroughness of work produced, and the oral and written expression
of assigned duties.

 

Decision Making/Problem Solving: Consider the employee’s
ability to identify problems, develop and implement solutions to impact
the problems, and the achievement of desired results.

 

Acceptance of Responsibility: Consider the employee’s motivation
to seek and complete assignments without undue supervision.

 

Appearance:
Consider the employee’s professional appearance and image, proper
grooming, and cleanliness of duty attire.

 

Attendance:
Consider the employee’s attendance and punctuality.

 

Compliance with Regulations:
Consider the employee’s compliance with department procedures and
policies and willingness to follow instructions.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
FRESNO POLICE DEPARTMENT REPORT OF PERFORMANCE

FOR SWORN EMPLOYEES

 

Month Probationary Evaluation
Annual Evaluation Prepared by:
Exit Evaluation

 

 

 

 

DATE: EMPLOYEE:
EVALUATION PERIOD RANK:
FROM TO ASSIGNMENT:

 

 

 

 

 

Performance of Duties:

Accepts assignments and follows through in a timely, effective,
efficient and appropriate manner to meet deadlines with minimum
supervision. Demonstrates productive use of time, promptness in
completing assignments, and daily planning to achieve results.

 

Initiative:
Consider the employee’s performance in new situations, performance in
emergencies, and officer safety.

 

Supervisory Performance (when applicable):

Consider the supervisor’s leadership skills, ability to complete
assignments, assisting in employee development, maintaining proper
discipline, making sound decisions, communication skills, and
commitment to organizational goals.

 

OVERALL VALUES RATING:
This employee’s overall (Key Objectives and Values) rating is:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OVERALL REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE:

RECOMMENDATIONS:

ATTACHMENTS:

 

 

 

 

 

 
FRESNO POLICE DEPARTMENT REPORT OF PERFORMANCE

FOR SWORN EMPLOYEES

 

Month Probationary Evaluation
Annual Evaluation Prepared by:
Exit Evaluation

 

 

DATE: EMPLOYEE:
EVALUATION PERIOD RANK:
FROM TO ASSIGNMENT:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

FRESNO POLICE DEPARTMENT REPORT OF PERFORMANCE
FOR SWORN EMPLOYEES

Month Probationary Evaluation

Annual Evaluation Prepared by:

Exit Evaluation

 

 

 

DATE: EMPLOYEE:
EVALUATION PERIOD RANK:
FROM TO ASSIGNMENT:

 

 

 

 

EMPLOYEE’S COMMENT:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Driver’s License No: Expires On:

Pursuant to Government code 3306, a public safety officer shall have 30 calendar days within which to
file a written response to any comment entered in his/her personnel file. Such written response shall
be attached to, and shall accompany, this evaluation.

 

 

 

Employee’s Signature Date
Supervisor’s Signature Date
Operations Commander’s Signature Date

 

District Commander’s Signature Date

 

 

 

 

 

 
Agreement between
City of Fresno

and

Employee Organizations Representing City of Fresno Employees

This agreement was reached in an effort to lower the current cost of the monthly health
contribution rates between March 1, 2009 and June 30, 2010 as set by the Fresno City
Employees Health and Welfare Trust (Trust) thereby assisting to ameliorate fiscal
developments faced by the City of Fresno (City). The agreement also provides short term
guarantees by the City for the unencumbered reserve of the Trust while setting a long
term minimum of four (4) months for the Trust unencumbered reserve. This agreement
sets forth the full and entire understanding of the City and Bargaining Units whose
representatives have signed this agreement regarding these matters. This Agreement is
effective March 1, 2009 and will remain in force so long as the Trust agrees to maintain a
health contribution rate that is calculated to maintain a minimum of a four (4) month
unencumbered reserve as calculated by the actuary selected by the Trust (actuary).

1. This agreement will be effective only if the provisions below affecting the Trust are
approved by a majority of affected represented bargaining units and the City
Council and if the Trust sets a monthly health contribution rate of seven hundred
twenty-nine dollars ($729) effective March 1, 2009 through June 30, 2010.

2. The parties agree that, for the period March 1, 2009 through June 30, 2010, if the
Trust unencumbered reserve falls below a four (4) month unencumbered reserve
as calculated by the actuary selected by the Trust for two (2) consecutive months,
the City will pay to the Trust an amount sufficient to restore the level of the Trust
unencumbered reserve to four (4) months.

3. The restoration to a four (4) month unencumbered reserve must occur within 30
days notice to the City by the Trust’s third party administrator. This payment by the
City shall not be utilized in the calculation of the amounts due by the City and
employees for established Trust health contribution rates.

4. Effective June 30, 2010 if the Trust unencumbered reserve is calculated by the
actuary selected by the Trust to be less than a four (4) month unencumbered
reserve, the City will pay an amount to the Trust sufficient to restore the level of
the unencumbered reserve to four (4) months. This payment by the City shall not
be utilized in the calculation of the amounts due by the City and employees for
established Trust health contribution rates.

5. The parties agree that, for the monthly health contribution rate effective July 1,
2010 and for all subsequent monthly health contribution rates, the Trust will set a
monthly health contribution rate not less than the rate calculated by the actuary
Page 2

Agreement re: Health & Welfare Trust Reserve

Employee Organizations representing City of Fresno Employees

selected by the Trust necessary to maintain a minimum unencumbered reserve of

four (4) months.

6. The parties will support amendments to the Trust necessary to implement this

agreement.

FOR THE FRESNO CITY
EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION:

Original Signed

FOR THE INTERNATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF FIREFIGHTERS,
LOCAL 753, BASIC UNIT:

Original Signed
FOR THE INTERNATIONAL
BROTHERHOOD OF ELECTRICAL
WORKERS, LOCAL 100:

Original Signed
FOR THE INTERNATIONAL

ASSOCIATION OF FIREFIGHTERS,
LOCAL 753, MANAGEMENT UNIT:

Original Signed

FOR THE CITY OF FRESNO
MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEES
ASSOCIATION:

Original Signed

FOR THE AMALGAMATED TRANSIT
UNION, LOCAL 1027:

Original Signed

FOR THE FRESNO POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION, BASIC UNIT:

Original Signed

FOR THE FRESNO POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION, MANAGEMENT UNIT:

Original Signed
FOR THE CITY OF FRESNO

PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYEES
ASSOCIATION:

FOR THE FRESNO AIRPORT PUBLIC
SAFETY SUPERVISORS:

Original Signed
Page 3
Agreement re: Health & Welfare Trust Reserve
Employee Organizations representing City of Fresno Employees

FOR THE CITY OF FRESNO:

Original Signed

Date: February 24, 2009

 

 

APPROVED AS TO FORM
CITY ATTORNEY'S OFFICE

BY:

 

Deputy City Attorney

 

 

 

 

 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
CITY OF FRESNO
AND THE
FRESNO POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
POLICE BASIC, UNIT 4

Modification of Chapter 7, 7.13.02 (7) Patrol Work Schedule/Matrix

This agreement sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties regarding the
patrol work schedule/matrix. Any other previous understandings, side letters of
agreement, Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) provisions, or agreements by the
parties regarding patrol work schedule/matrix are hereby superseded and terminated in
their entirety. This agreement is self governing and independent of any current or
expired agreements between the parties, and is governed by the terms and conditions
contained herein. This agreement shall be effective December 1, 2010, and shall be
concurrent through the term of the successor MOU, anticipated to be effective July 1,
2012.

The parties agree to the following amendment/modification to the current MOU,
Chapter 7, 7.13.02 (7) Patrol Work Schedule/Matrix.

CHAPTER 7
COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS

7.13.02 Patrol Work Schedule/Matrix:

(1) | A 4/10 work week will be in effect for personnel assigned to day and swing shifts
on patrol matrix duties. The base work schedule for members assigned to the
midnight shift on patrol matrix duties will consist of a work week of five (5) ten-
hour days followed by a week of three (3) ten hour days or vice-versa, with a total
of six (6) days off during the two work weeks. This schedule may be cancelled by
the City following sixty (60) days written notice to the Association, at which time
members would revert to the 4/10 work week. The decision to discontinue this
work schedule and revert back to the 4/10 work week is not appealable or
grievable.

(2) Subject to meet and confer, the implementation of the base work schedule for
members assigned to day and swing shifts on patrol matrix duties may be
changed to the same work schedule of the midnight shift as set forth in
Subsection (1) above. Once implemented, the schedule may be cancelled by the
City as also set forth in Subsection (1), above.

(3) Scheduling will consist of both fixed days on and off as well as rotation of days
on and off. No member shall be scheduled to work for more than forty (40) hours
in any work week.
Page 2
Side Letter Agreement re: Patrol Work Schedule/Matrix
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit 4

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

A minimum of 20% of the available positions will be assigned to fixed days on
and off, and all other positions will have rotating days on and off. Members with
rotating days off will be scheduled for four days on and four days off for three
weeks, followed by five days on and three days off, for four weeks, etc.

Effective December 2008, Patrol Matrix sign-ups were changed to December
from the month of March. Every 12 months, all work assignment positions in the
patrol matrix shall be declared open for the purpose of bidding by Sergeants,
Specialists, and Officers according to date of hire as a Police Officer, or in the
case of Sergeant, the date of promotion, for the district preference, shift
assignment, and days off and on. For the purpose of bidding, Sergeants will
precede Officers/Specialists.

Any member who is absent at the time of bidding is solely responsible for
obtaining and reviewing the matrix drafts and instructions, and for securing a
proxy to represent him/her during the bidding process.

Personnel assigned to patrol who are on injury or other absence status at the
time of bidding will not be allowed to bid for duplicate details, however they
may participate without any other restriction based on that status, and will
assume the assignment chosen upon return to duty.

At the time of bidding, the department will create duplicate details to ones taken
by members not expected to return to duty within thirty (30) days of the start of
the matrix period. Members who subsequently bid for the newly created
duplicate details will remain on the shift chosen, but may be moved to any other
vacancy within that shift when the absent member holding the original detail
returns to duty, and may continue to be moved within the shift as vacancies are
filled by returning personnel. The provisions of this sub-section will apply to the
matrix process * * * and may or may not be extended to subsequent matrix
processes, contingent upon mutual agreement of the department and the
Association.

Nothing in the preceding sub-sections precludes moving probationary employees
pursuant to paragraph (10), below.

Assignments as a result of the bidding process will begin on the first Monday
following January 1st* * * of each year. During the 12-month assignment cycle, if
a hardship exists, a special request for a change in district and/or shift can be
submitted. Each member will be allowed one request during a 12-month
assignment cycle. A response will be issued to the member within 30 calendar
days. Barring a training need, approved requests will be honored once a vacant
position that addresses the hardship becomes available.

Probationary Police Officers or Recruits may not be permitted to bid for positions
but may instead be assigned to a district, shift and detail. With a 28-day notice,
these Officers may also be subject to district and shift reassignment.
Page 3
Side Letter Agreement re: Patrol Work Schedule/Matrix
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit 4

(12) Police management reserves the right to designate specific detail numbers for
probationary Officers and Recruits to prevent the concentration of probationary
personnel on any given shift in a given district. Any such allocation will apply only
to swing, lap, and/or midnight shifts, and will be accomplished in such a manner
as to ensure balance of probationary employees between policing districts and
shifts. Subject to the aforementioned considerations, police management may
also designate certain detail numbers as “not available for sign-up” based upon
the anticipated deployment of any Officers or Recruits in the Patrol Training
Program at the time of the matrix bidding.

(13) Police management reserves the right to determine the allocation, by shift and
district, of PTO positions based upon the needs of the department. Any PTO who
elects not to participate in the matrix as a result of these allocations shall declare
his/her intention in writing no later than two calendar weeks prior to the matrix
bidding process.

FOR THE CITY OF FRESNO, FOR THE FRESNO POLICE

POLICE DEPARTMENT: OFFICERS ASSOCIATION:
Original Signed Original Signed

Jerry Dyer, Chief of Police Jacky Parks, President

FOR THE CITY OF FRESNO:

Original Signed
Ken G. Phillips

Labor Relations Manager

Date: __ September 30, 2010

 

 

 

APPROVED AS TO FORM
CITY ATTORNEY'S OFFICE

BY:

 

 

 

 

 

Deputy City Attorney

 

 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
CITY OF FRESNO
AND
FRESNO POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
(Non-Supervisory Police — Unit 4)

COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS RE-OPENER

This agreement sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties regarding
Compensation and Benefits for a re-opener for Fiscal Years 2011, 2012 and 2013. Any
other previous understandings, side letters of agreement, Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) provisions or agreements by the parties regarding the below
Compensation and Benefits are hereby superseded and terminated in their entirety.
This agreement is self-governing and independent of any current or expired agreements
between the parties, and is governed by the terms and conditions contained herein.
This agreement shall be effective upon City approval and shall extend the term of the
current MOU for one year period of time from June 30, 2012, and terminate on June 30,
2013. Other than the modifications to the existing MOU as set forth herein, the parties
agree that until this Agreement terminates on June 30, 2013, all economic benefits
currently afforded to affected members shall remain intact without modification unless
otherwise agreed to in writing by the parties.

The parties agree to the following amendment/modification to the current MOU, to
portions of Chapter 1, Preamble; Chapter 7, Compensation and Benefits and
Chapter 11, Termination:

CHAPTER 1
PREAMBLE
1.1 PURPOSE

This Memorandum of Understanding, hereinafter MOU, entered into between the
City of Fresno, hereinafter referred to as the City, and the Fresno Police Officers
Association, hereinafter referred to as the Association, has as its purpose: to
establish wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment for
members of this Unit. This MOU is extended for a * * * one year period of time
from * * * June 30, 2012 to June 30, 2013. * * * Upon approval by the City,
other than the modifications set forth herein, the parties agree that until this MOU
terminates on * * * June 30, 2013, all economic benefits currently afforded to
affected members shall remain intact without modification unless otherwise
agreed to in writing by the parties.

1.1.01 Effective July 1, 2009 through * * * June 30, 2012, the parties
agree there will be no demotions (excluding demotions for
Page 2
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

disciplinary cause) of any member of this Unit for purposes of
economic or reorganizational purposes or enforcement of
involuntary furloughs.

CHAPTER 7
COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS

7.2. SALARIES AND PENSION CONTRIBUTION

7.2.01 ** * Step Increase (Deferred) * * * The classes of Police Officer,

Specialist and Police Sergeant previously agreed to defer until
July 1, 2010, a two percent (2%) salary increase * * * scheduled to
be received on June 30, 2009.

Step Increases (FY11 and FY12)

(1) Effective July 1, 2010, salaries for the classes of Police Officer,
Specialist and Police Sergeant * * * shall be increased by two
percent (2%) as reflected on Exhibit |, Table |.

Consistent with Section 7.2.02(4), * * * below, DROP members
and retirees received an increase in their monthly DROP
amount deposited or retirement benefit allowances related to
the two percent (2%) deferred base salary increase effective
June 30, 2009. Therefore, DROP and retirees shall not have
their monthly DROP amount deposited or retirement benefit
allowances increased by the July 1, 2010, two percent (2%)
base salary increase as would have otherwise been calculated
pursuant to FMC Section 3-301 and 302.

(2) Effective January 1, 2011, salaries for the classes of Police
Officer, Specialist and Police Sergeant shall be increased by
one percent (1%) as reflected on Exhibit |, Table II.

(3) Effective July 1, 2011, salaries for the classes of Police Officer,
Specialist and Police Sergeant shall be increased by two
percent (2%) as reflected on Exhibit |, Table Ill.

(4) Effective January 1, 2012, salaries for the classes of Police
Officer, Specialist and Police Sergeant shall be increased by
one percent (1%) as reflected on Exhibit |, Table IV.
Page 3
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

7.2.03

7.2.04

7.2.02

(5) There shall be no salary increases for the classes of Police
Officer, Specialist and Police Sergeant for Fiscal Year 2013.

Pension Contribution * * * — Effective July 1, 2006, the City shall
contribute one percent (1%) toward a Police Officer/Specialist and
Police Sergeant's share of his/her pension contribution. The City
will continue to pay one percent (1%) toward these members’ share
of his/her pension contribution, such adjustment to be permanent
until the member retires or separates from City service. The
contribution towards member pension obligations shall be included
as compensation for purposes of pension calculations.

(1) Applicability to Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP)
Members — Effective July 1, 2006, in lieu of the one percent
(1%) pension contribution set forth in 7.2.02, above, the City will
pay members who have entered the DROP program a one
percent (1%) supplemental payment. This supplemental
payment will be calculated by multiplying one percent (1%)
times the member's base rate of pay as reflected in Exhibit |,
Tables |, Il, Ill and IV, and payment shall be included in the
employee’s biweekly paycheck. The supplemental payment
shall not be considered part of the member’s base pay.

(2) Applicability to Retirees — Effective July 1, 2006, adjustments to
the monthly allowance for retirees shall be calculated pursuant
to FMC Sections 2-1701 and 2-1701.1 utilizing both the three
percent (3%) salary increase and one percent (1%) pension
contribution for a total increase of four percent (4%).

[§ re-numbered)

Retirement/DROP Between 6/30/09 and 7/1/10 — Effective June 30, 2009,
the deferred two percent (2%) salary increase shall be included in any
retirement benefit or DROP calculations pursuant to the applicable FMC
sections for members who separate from City service by service
retirement or by disability retirement, or enter DROP between June 30,
2009 and July 1, 2010.

 

[§ re-numbered)

FY09-DROP Members and _ Retirees -— Effective July 30, 2009,
adjustments to the monthly amount deposited allowances for DROP
members and monthly retirement benefit allowances for retirees shall
include the two percent (2%) deferred salary increase from Section 7.2.01
and be calculated pursuant to FMC Sections 3-301 and 3-302.
Page 4

Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

7.6

7.12.06

SERVICE UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

Effective July 1, 2009, members shall receive an additional $110 for a total
of $1,200 as a service uniform purchase and maintenance allowance,
prorated and paid in semiannual installments on the last pay date in
December and June. The service uniform allowance provided pursuant to
this section shall be considered as compensation for purposes of
calculating pension benefits for a member. Effective upon approval of
this Agreement by the City, the members agree to a suspension of
service uniform allowance during fiscal year 2011. However, the
suspended $1,200 amount will remain pensionable when a member
enters DROP or separates from City service at retirement age during
fiscal year 2011. Effective July 1, 2011, payment of uniform service
allowance will resume as set forth above.

Holiday Leave:
(1) Members shall accrue eight and two-thirds hours per month as
holiday leave in lieu of the Holidays recognized in FMC Section 3-
116.
January 1.
The third Monday in January.
The third Monday in February.
The last Monday in May.
July 4.
The first Monday in September.
November 11.
Thanksgiving Day in November.
The Friday after Thanksgiving Day in November.
December 25.
Employee’s Birthday.

Two Personal Business Days.
Page 5

Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Any day or part of a day declared by the Council, ordinance or
resolution, to be a holiday.

At separation, accumulated holiday leave shall be paid at the
member's base rate of pay in accordance with Section 7.12.03, or
cashed at separation if not eligible for participation in the
Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA).

Effective October 1, 2010, the cap for accumulated monthly
holiday leave shall increase from 230 hours to 308 hours
through the term of this Agreement/MOU. ** *

* * * Effective upon approval of this agreement by the City, all
members agree to an extension to freeze Holiday Time pay downs
from September 30, 2010 through June 30, 2011. If prior to * * *
June 30, 2011, a member exceeds the monthly * * * 308 hour cap,
holiday leave shall be paid down automatically by the department to
the * * * 308 hour cap without the consent of the member.

If a member retires between October 1, 2010 and June 30,
2011, the member is allowed to cash out one-hundred (100)
hours of holiday time prior to retirement papers being filed,
with the remaining balance to deposited into their HRA
account.

For the period July 1, 2011 through June 30, 2012, employees
who do not pay down more than 8.67 hours of holiday time per
month, whether voluntarily or involuntarily (as a result of
reaching the accrual limit) will receive an incentive. At the
member’s option, the incentive will be a one-time addition of
sixteen (16) hours to the member’s Holiday, Vacation or
Compensatory Time Off bank or a one-time, non-pensionable
payment of $650.00 payable July 1, 2012, by separate check.

* * * Effective July 1, 2011 through the term of this
Agreement/MOU, members may request the department to pay
down the member’s Holiday Time up to a maximum of ninety-six
hours * * * per month; however, the member will not be eligible
for the incentive pursuant to subparagraph (6), above. * * *
Page 6
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

CHAPTER 11
TERMINATION

The provisions in this Agreement/MOU shall be in full force and effect extended from
June 30, 2012 to June 30, 2013, upon approval by the City, subject to Sections 11.1,
11.2 and 11.3, below.

11.1. This Agreement/MOU shall become effective only after ratification by the
members of the Association followed by City * * * approval and the expiration of
the waiting period for the Mayor’s action provided in Charter Sections 605 and
609, and shall remain in full force and effect through June 30, 2013. * * *

The City and the Association agree that during the term of this agreement, the
Mayor shall appoint one (1) police officer, as defined in Fresno Municipal Code
(“FMC”) Section 3-301 (p) (3) from a City management position and one (1)
firefighter as defined in FMC Section 3-301 (f) from a City management position
as voting members to the Fresno Fire and Police Retirement Board under the
authority as described in Section 3-305 (a) (1) of the FMC. These appointments
shall occur within twenty (20) business days of City approval of this agreement
and are subject to Council approval. In the event any individual(s) so appointed
fails to qualify, resigns, retires, or no longer qualifies to serve on the Board, the
Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council shall appoint a replacement
under the terms and provisions of this agreement within twenty (20) business
days. If a decision is approved by the Fire and Police Retirement Board to
separate the commingled investments of the Fresno Fire and Police Retirement
System and the Fresno Employees Retirement System, this agreement on
Mayoral appointments to the Fire and Police Retirement Board shall immediately
become null and void and the appointment provisions contained in FMC Section
3-305 shall apply.

FOR THE CITY OF FRESNO: FOR THE FRESNO POLICE
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION:
Original Signed Original Signed
Kenneth G. Phillips Jacky Parks
Labor Relations Manager President, FROA

Original Signed
Jerry Dyer
Chief of Police
Page 7
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Date: __ September 30, 2010

 

APPROVED AS TO FORM
CITY ATTORNEY’S OFFICE

BY: _ Original Signed
Deputy City Attorney

 

 

 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
CITY OF FRESNO
AND
FRESNO POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
(Non-Supervisory Police — Unit 4)

COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS ADDENDUM

This agreement sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties regarding
Compensation and Benefits for Fiscal Years 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015. Any
other previous understandings, side letters of agreement, Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) provisions or agreements by the parties regarding the
Compensation and Benefits below are hereby superseded and terminated in their
entirety. This agreement is self-governing and independent of any current or expired
agreements between the parties, and is governed by the terms and conditions
contained herein. This agreement shall be effective upon City approval and shall
extend the term of the current MOU for a two year period of time from June 30, 2013,
and terminate on June 30, 2015. Other than the modifications to the existing MOU as
set forth herein, the parties agree that until this Agreement terminates on June 30,
2015, all economic benefits currently afforded to affected members shall remain intact
without modification unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties.

The parties agree to the following amendment/modification to the current MOU, to
portions of Chapter 1, Preamble; Chapter 7, Compensation and Benefits; Chapter 8,
Policing Special Events and Contract Law Enforcement Services; and, Chapter 11,
Termination:

CHAPTER 1
PREAMBLE
1.4. PURPOSE

This Memorandum of Understanding, hereinafter MOU, entered into between the
City of Fresno, hereinafter referred to as the City, and the Fresno Police Officers
Association, hereinafter referred to as the Association, has as its purpose: to
establish wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment for
members of this Unit. This MOU is extended for a * * * two year period of time
from * * * June 30, 2013 to June 30, 2015. = * * * Upon approval by the city,
other than the modifications set forth herein, the parties agree that until this MOU
terminates on * * * June 30, 2015, all economic benefits currently afforded to
affected members shall remain intact without modification unless otherwise
agreed to in writing by the parties.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 2

1.1.01

Effective July 1, 2009 through * * * June 30, 2014, the parties agree
there will be no demotions (excluding demotions for disciplinary cause)
of any member of this Unit for purposes of economic or reorganizational
purposes or enforcement of involuntary furloughs. Through June 30,
2014, reductions to staffing levels shall only occur through
attrition.

CHAPTER 7

COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS

7.2. SALARIES AND PENSION CONTRIBUTION

7.2.01

7.2.02

* * * Step Increase (Deferred) * * * The classes of Police Officers,

Specialists and Police Sergeants agree to defer * * * a one percent (1%)
salary increase scheduled to be received January 1, 2011; a two
percent (2%) salary increase scheduled to be received July 1, 2011,
and a one percent (1%) salary increase scheduled to be received
January 1, 2012, as follows:

(1) Effective July 1, 2014, two percent (2%) salary increase, as
reflected on Exhibit I, Table VI; and,

(2) Effective January 1, 2015, two percent (2%) salary increase, as
reflected on Exhibit I, Table VII.

(Incorporated from Side Letter Agreement Re: Compensation and
Benefits Re-Opener dated September 30, 2010.)

Pension Contribution — Effective July 1, 2006, the City shall contribute
one percent (1%) toward a Police Officer/Specialist and Police
Sergeant’s share of his/her pension contribution. The City will continue
to pay one percent (1%) toward these members’ share of his/her
pension contribution, such adjustment to be permanent until the member
retires or separates from City service. The contribution towards member
pension obligations shall be included as compensation for purposes of
pension calculations.

(1) Applicability to Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP)
Members — Effective July 1, 2006, in lieu of the one percent (1%)
pension contribution set forth in 7.2.02, above, the City will pay
members who have entered the DROP program a one percent
(1%) supplemental payment. This supplemental payment will be
calculated by multiplying one percent (1%) times the member's

 
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 3

7.2.03

(2)

base rate of pay as reflected in Exhibit |, Table 1, and payment shall
be included in the employee’s biweekly paycheck. The
supplemental payment shall not be considered part of the
member's base pay.

Applicability to Retirees — Effective * * * January 1, 2011,
adjustments to the monthly allowance for retirees shall be
calculated pursuant to FMC Sections 3-301 * * * and 3-302 * * *
utilizing both the deferred * * * salary increases and one percent
(1%) pension contribution. ***.

[§ re-numbered]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Retirement/DROP * * * - * * * Effective January 1, 2011, the
deferred *** one percent * * * (1%) salary increase shall be
included in any retirement benefit or DROP calculations pursuant to
the applicable FMC sections for members who separate from City
service by service retirement or by disability retirement, or enter
DROP.

Retirement/DROP - Effective July 1, 2011, the deferred two
percent (2%) salary increase shall be included in any
retirement benefit or DROP calculations pursuant to the
applicable FMC sections for members who separate from City
service by service retirement or by disability retirement, or
enter DROP.

Retirement/DROP - Effective January 1, 2012, the deferred one
percent (1%) salary increase shall be included in any
retirement benefit or DROP calculations pursuant to the
applicable FMC sections for members who separate from City
service by service retirement or by disability retirement, or
enter DROP.

With respect to Section 7.2.03 (1), (2) and (3), members who
retire or enter DROP and receive the January 1, 2011, July 1,
2011 and January 1, 2012 deferred salary increases in their
retirement benefit or DROP calculation shall not be entitled to
also add the July 1, 2014 and January 1, 2015, salary increases
to their retirement benefit or DROP calculation.

Members who retire or enter DROP and receive the January 1,
2011, July 1, 2011 and January 1, 2012, deferred salary
increases in their retirement benefit or DROP calculation shall
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 4

7.5

not be entitled to also add the July 1, 2014 and January 1,
2015, salary increases to their retirement benefit or DROP
calculation.

7.2.04 [§ re-numbered]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

* * * DROP * * * Participants and Retirees (Tier I) - Effective * * *
January 1, 2011, adjustments to the monthly amount deposited
allowances for DROP * * * participants and monthly retirement
benefit allowances for retirees shall include * * * all deferred salary
increases from Section 7.2.01 and be calculated pursuant to FMC
Sections 3-301 and 3-302.

 

DROP Participants and Retirees (Tier_l) who receive the
January 1, 2011, July 1, 2011 and January 1, 2012, deferred
salary increases as adjustments to their monthly retirement
allowance, shall not be entitled to also add the July 1, 2014
and January 1, 2015, salary increases as adjustments to their
monthly retirement allowances.

DROP Participants and Retirees (Tier Il) - In accordance with
FMC Sections 3-411 and 3-424, should the CPI percentage for

the more recent full calendar year decrease below the CPI
percentage for the full calendar year immediately prior, that
percentage decrease shall not be used to reduce retirement
allowances or deposits to the members’ DROP account. It
shall instead be used to reduce any previously banked cost of
living increases. Any decreases in excess of the
members’/retirees’ cost of living banks shall be accumulated
in the bank and offset by future cost of living increases as
occurring in succeeding years.

 

(Tier _1) — An actuarial study will be conducted on amending
FMC Sections 3-302 (g) and 3-301 (a) (9) for Tier | members.
Upon completion of the actuarial study, there will be a limited
reopener of the MOU to negotiate solely on amending those
provisions with respect to retirement calculations. The cost of
the actuarial study will be shared equally by the City and the
Association.

FRESNO CITY EMPLOYEES HEALTH AND WELFARE TRUST

The City and the Association agree that the Fresno City Employees Health and
Welfare Trust has the sole authority to determine the benefits that will be
provided during the term of this MOU. The sole responsibility of the City under
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum

Fresno
Page 5

7.6

Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

this clause is to provide a set dollar amount to be contributed to the Trust on
behalf of the members represented by the Association. The City’s contribution
will be eighty percent (80%) of the premium established by the Fresno City
Employees Health and Welfare Trust board. Members may opt to contribute the
amount necessary to make up the difference through payroll deductions, or
accept a reduced coverage option.

The parties also agree to work collectively in conjunction with their Board
representatives to research and recommend potential cost-saving measures for
the Health & Welfare Trust, which may include a choice of health program
options based on individual need or preference, including a reduced option
equivalent to the City’s premium contribution, a separate rate for single
employees with no dependents, or other flex plan programs; mandatory generic
mail order drug maintenance for employees who require prescription drug
therapy for any period of 90 days or more; or other measures that may be
identified as this work progresses.

The FPOA and the City of Fresno agree to a limited MOU reopener
regarding health care premiums if all City bargaining units other than the
FPOA are subject to a different formula for determining health care
contributions. Meet and confer sessions shall start no earlier than
January 1, 2013, and any modifications resulting from the reopener shall
take effect no earlier than July 1, 2013.

SERVICE UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

Effective July 1, 2009, members shall receive an additional $110 for a total of
$1,200 as a service uniform purchase and maintenance allowance, prorated and
paid in semiannual installments on the last pay date in December and June. The
service uniform allowance provided pursuant to this section shall be considered
as compensation for purposes of calculating pension benefits for a member. * * *
Pursuant to the Side Letter Agreement Re: Compensation and Benefits Re-
Opener dated September 30, 2010, the members agreed to relinquish and
give up their * * * service uniform allowance during fiscal year 2011. However,
** * when an employee * * * enters DROP or separates from City service at
retirement age, the uniform allowance shall be included in the calculation of
the member’s DROP deposit or retirement benefits * * *. Effective July 1,
2011, payment of uniform service allowance will resume as set forth above.

(It is the intent of this agreement to hold retirees and DROP participants
harmless on the relinquished FY11 service uniform allowance.)
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 6

7.7

WORKERS’ COMPENSATION

7.7.01

7.7.02

7.7.03

7.7.04

7.7.05

7.7.06

Notwithstanding the provisions of FMC Section 3-118, a member in this
Unit who suffers an injury or illness in the course and scope of City
employment shall receive eighty-five (85) percent of full wages or salary
from the City.

Notwithstanding the provisions of FMC Section 3-118, a member of
this Unit who suffers an injury or illness in the course and scope of
City employment on or after January 1, 2010 shall become entitled,
regardless of his or her period of service with the City, to a leave of
absence while so disabled without loss of salary in lieu of
temporary disability payments as provided by California Labor
Code Section 4850. The remaining provisions of FMC Section 3-118
shall apply. Employees on “light duty” as a result of an injury or illness
suffered in the course and scope of employment shall receive their
regular salary during the period of light duty.

Partial days of absence due to injury or illness in the line of duty,
including the day of injury, shall be at full pay; however, this time shall be
recorded as injury absence.

If a member is placed on sick leave, vacation, CTO or holiday pending
determination as to whether the injury or illness is industrial, and the
injury is determined to be industrial, sick leave, vacation, CTO or holiday
will be restored within thirty (30) calendar days of such determination,
and the member placed on injury leave as provided herein.

Retirement benefits shall not be reduced as a result of a member
receiving Workers’ Compensation benefits. * * *

Taxes shall not be withheld on compensation * * * due to injury in the line
of duty.

If a member is on leave pursuant to an accepted industrial injury, that
member shall continue to accrue sick leave, vacation leave, holiday
leave, and be afforded all health and welfare benefits that would have
been received had the member not been injured.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 7

7.12 LEAVES

7.12.06 Holiday Leave:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Members shall accrue eight and two-thirds hours per month as
holiday leave in lieu of the Holidays recognized in FMC Section 3-
116.

January 1.

The third Monday in January.

The third Monday in February.

The last Monday in May.

July 4.

The first Monday in September.

November 11.

Thanksgiving Day in November.

The Friday after Thanksgiving Day in November.

December 25.

Employee’s Birthday.

Two Personal Business Days.

Any day or part of a day declared by the Council, ordinance or
resolution, to be a holiday.

At separation, accumulated holiday leave shall be paid at the
member's base rate of pay in accordance with Section 7.12.03, or
cashed at separation if not eligible for participation in the Health
Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA).

* * * Effective upon approval of this agreement by the City, all
members agree to continue an extension to freeze voluntary
Holiday Time pay downs from * * * July 1, 2011 through * * *
June 30, 2012. ***

*** The cap for accumulated monthly holiday leave shall remain at
* * * 308 hours through June 30, 2011.*** If a member exceeds
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 8

(5)

(6)

(7)

the monthly 308 hour cap, holiday leave shall be paid down
automatically by the department to the 308 hour cap without the
consent of the member.

Effective July 1, 2011, the cap for accumulated monthly
holiday leave shall revert to 96 hours. Holiday hours in excess
of 96 will be placed in a “Special Holiday Leave Bank” as set
forth in paragraph (7) below.

Once regular holiday leave banks are reduced to the 96 hour
cap, members who are at the 96 hour cap will receive an
automatic pay down of any hours exceeding the cap effective
July 1, 2011.

In accordance with subparagraph (5) above, effective July 1,
2011, all holiday leave balances in excess of 96 hours shall be
placed as a one-time deposit in a “Special Holiday Leave
Bank”, which hours may be used as follows:

Special Holiday Leave Bank

(a) Approved leave;

(b) Absent With Substitute (AWS) agreements transferred
only to the substituting employee’s regular holiday
bank;

(c) Voluntary cash-out of forty-three (43) hours each FY
beginning in FY14 through FY18; and,

(d) Voluntary cash-out of one-hundred (100) hours
immediately prior to separation and prior to the
employee filing retirement paperwork.

After the one-time deposit, employees may not place any
additional hours in the Special Holiday Leave Bank.

At separation from City service, all remaining hours in the
Special Holiday Leave Bank shall be credited to an HRA
account for the employee if eligible for service retirement as
set forth in Section 7.12.03, or cashed out at separation if not
eligible to participate in the HRA.

Cash-outs of Special Holiday Leave Bank hours are
pensionable for Tier Il members.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 9

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

The one-time, non-pensionable payment of $650.00 agreed to
in the Side Letter Agreement Re: Compensation and Benefits
Re-Opener dated September 30, 2010, shall be paid to all
members by separate check as follows:

(a) $325.00 per employee payable on December 1, 2011,
and,

(b) $325.00 per employee payable on December 1, 2012.

Effective July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2015, members may
voluntarily request the department to pay down the member’s
Holiday Time up to a maximum of ninety-six (96) hours per
fiscal year.

Effective July 1, 2015, members may voluntarily request the
department to pay down the member’s Holiday Time up to a
maximum of ninety-six (96) hours per month.

A Tier Il member who has reached the minimum retirement age
and elects to enter DROP or retire (not having entered DROP),
shall have amounts equal to the member’s unused holiday
leave balance and Special Holiday Leave balance (at the DROP
effective date or retirement date, not having entered DROP)
multiplied by the member’s current hourly base rate of pay
included in the computation of the member’s final average
salary as if it were a one-time payment. Based on the
additional pensionable compensation, the member and the
City will make corresponding pension contributions to the
retirement system. The employee agrees to have this pension
contribution amount withheld from the employee’s DROP
account, if entering DROP, or from the employee’s final
paycheck (not having entered DROP.)

7.13. HOURS AND WORK SCHEDULES, MATRIX ASSIGNMENTS, DUTY OFFICE,

(10)

NON-MINIMUM STAFFING, POLICE RESOURCE OPTIMIZATION SYSTEM,
ABSENT WITH SUBSTITUTE AND PROXIMITY DETAIL

7.13.02 Patrol Work Schedule/Matrix:

Assignments as a result of the bidding process will begin on the
first Monday following January 1°' of each year. During the 12-
month assignment cycle, if a hardship exists, a special request for
a change in district and/or shift can be submitted. * * * A member
*** may submit one request during a twelve (12) month * * *
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 10

cycle. The request will be considered based on the needs of
the department. A response will be issued to the member within
thirty (30) calendar days. Barring a training need, approved
requests may * * * be honored once a vacant position that
addresses the hardship becomes available.

7.14 ASSIGNMENTS, COVERAGE & HOURS — EXCEPTIONAL PROVISIONS

7.14.02 Special Units — Flexing of Hours
Sergeants, Specialists or Officers in non-patrol matrix assignments may
be assigned flexible hours of work to meet the needs of the department.
The Police Chief or designee may adjust hours of work under the
following conditions, without payment at the overtime rate:

(1)
(2)

(3)

(4)

with the concurrence of the Sergeant, Specialist or Officer; or,

in the event of emergency, which is defined as circumstances
beyond the control of the City and not having been known 48 hours
in advance of the circumstance creating the emergency; or,

with forty-eight (48) hours notice to the Sergeant, Specialist or
Officer. Adjustments pursuant to this subsection may last no longer
than seven (7) consecutive calendar days, nor occur more than
once during any thirty (30) day period; or,

where the adjustment has been made to cover a special event and
the special event is canceled with less than forty-eight 48 hours
notice to the department, and the department then promptly
cancels the adjustment and returns the Specialist or Officer to the
regular schedule.

Overtime worked past the scheduled end of a shift shall not be
considered as a shift adjustment. An adjustment of hours prior to
the shift shall be considered as an adjustment.

Officers assigned to special units receiving “Flexible Hours”
premium pay are excluded from the forty-eight (48) hour notice
requirement. However, when practical, they will be given as much
advance notice as possible when hours are to be flexed. Flexing of
these Officers is also not limited to seven (7) days in duration, nor
as to frequency. However, when such adjustments exceed thirty
(30) days, the Association shall be provided with a plan for a return
to regular schedules.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 11

The current practice of temporary weekend duty will cease.
This does not prohibit the department from flexing officers
under other provisions of the MOU.

7.14.05 AIRPORT TASK FORCE ASSIGNMENT

(6)

Officers/Specialists assigned to the Airport Task Force will be
supervised by Airport Public Safety Supervisors pursuant to the
provisions set forth in the pending “Agreement for Services
Between the City of Fresno Department of Airports and the Fresno
Police Department,” and with the agreement from the Fresno Police
Officers Association. The FPOA and the City agree to
appropriately modify and/or enforce this provision no later
than July 1, 2011.

7.15 FILLING SPECIAL ASSIGNMENTS

7.15.01 (3)

(6)

Officers must have two (2) years of experience in patrol matrix
duties to take the test. Except as provided below, Officers must
pass the test and have three (3) years of experience in patrol matrix
duties at the time of assignment to a special unit.

Any current or temporary PTO will be considered “qualified” for
assignment to a special unit position.

Any Officer who has successfully passed the PTO exam within the
last three (3) years shall also be considered “qualified” for
assignment to a special unit position.

Any Officer who is on the “top 25” current Sergeant’s promotional
list shall also be considered “qualified” for assignment to a special
unit.

For purposes of this section any Officer with two (2) or more
years of experience in a sworn law enforcement agency
accredited by California POST may substitute their prior
experience for up to one (1) year of the three (3) year
experience in the patrol matrix.

Officers assigned under this section and who do not volunteer
for the assignment will be allowed to count this time toward
their patrol matrix time.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 12
CHAPTER 8
POLICING SPECIAL EVENTS AND
CONTRACT LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES
8.2. PROCEDURES
8.2.01 Members assigned to special events/contract law enforcement services

will be volunteers selected from a special events and contract law
enforcement services assignment list. The number and rank of the
members assigned shall be determined by the Chief of Police, or
designated representative. The Chief of Police may restrict a member
from working extra duty for the good of the department.

(1)

(2)

(3)

Members who desire to be placed on the assignment list must have
completed their probation. Members on sick leave, industrial injury
leave, “temporary light duty,” or leave of absence shall not be
eligible.

The assignment list shall be the basis for all member assignments.
Members who desire to be placed on the assignment list shall notify
the Chief's designated representative. All Members on the
assignment list shall be notified by City e-mail and may include
one optional personal e-mail account * * * when policing special
events and/or contract law enforcement services positions are
available. The member shall have seventy-two (72) hours to
respond to the Chief’s designated representative, via City
e-mail only, listing desired assignment(s) in order of
preference. ***

Positions shall be filled using the following process. The Chief's
designated representative will sequentially number the * * *
e-mails, starting with the first member responding from the
assignment list, and so on. The designated representative will then
use computer spreadsheet software programmed to select a
random number drawn from the sequential numbers assigned to
the responding members. The random number selected will be the
starting point for making assignments, and for filling the positions.
If the positions are not filled after through the entire list of numbers,
the designated representative will continue through the list again,
and so on, until all positions are assigned or a subsequent
notification is issued.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 13

8.2.02

8.2.03

(4) Members who receive an _ assignment for _ special
events/contract law enforcement services shall receive an
e-mail notification containing: the date of the contract, the
hours, the location, and the unit detail for the special
events/contract law enforcement services event, any
additional officer(s) assigned to the same event, contact
information for the event, and vehicle information. Any
member who submits a request to work a contract assignment
and is subsequently awarded a contract assignment shall not
cancel their contract assignment to voluntarily work a
department overtime assignment or AWS assignment that is
awarded after the contract assignment.

Any member who fails to appear for assignment or fails to notify the
designated representative of his/her inability to work the assignment,
24-hours prior to the beginning of the assignment schedule, shall be
removed from the assignment list. Any member who is removed from the
assignment list shall not be eligible for reinstatement to the assignment
list for a period of six (6) months. Removal from the assignment list shall
not be deemed a disciplinary action pursuant to Civil Service Board rules
or a punitive action pursuant to Government Code Section 3303 (h), and
is not appealable or grievable.

Members performing special events/contract law enforcement services
assignments shall be subject to all rules, orders, and procedures of the
Police Department.

In no event shall a member performing special events/contract law
enforcement services work be assigned to a job site where a labor union
picket line has been established.

Once a Contract for Law Enforcement Services has been formally
executed, Reserve Officers shall not be used to replace sworn members
for policing special events and contract law enforcement services. In the
event a Fresno Municipal Code ordinance concerning policing special
events/contract law enforcement services is amended by Council, the
parties agree to reopen meet and confer on this subsection (8.2.03) at
the request of either the City or the Association. Requests for special
events policing and/or contract law enforcement services will first be
filled by volunteer members available through the assignment list. If no
volunteer members are available, the vacancies may be filled by
Reserve Officers.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 14

8.2.04

8.2.05

Generally, calls for service within the special events and contract law
enforcement services policing areas may be handled by regularly
assigned FOD area patrol units. However, members performing special
events and contract law enforcement services may be assigned to
handle calls for service that are consistent with the duties requested by
the contracting party.

Officer working conditions for the Big Fresno Fair shall be established by
mutual agreement between the Big Fresno Fair, City of Fresno and the
Association, and shall be reflected in a corresponding agreement
between the parties.

8.3. COMPENSATION

8.3.01

8.3.02

8.3.03

8.3.04

The rate of pay for members occupying Police Officer/Police Specialist
classes who are working special events and contract law enforcement
services assignments shall be at the time and one-half rate for * * * “B”
Step Police Officer. The rate of pay for members occupying the Police
Sergeant class who are working special events and contract law
enforcement services assignments shall be at the time and one-half rate
for * ** “B” Step Police Sergeant. Compensation for Officers/Sergeants
for all special events detail assignments worked at the Big Fresno Fair
shall be by separate check no later than the last pay period in November
of the year the Big Fresno Fair special events detail assignment is
worked.

The hours worked, and pay received for special events and contract law
enforcement services assignments, shall not be credited toward years of
service for retirement benefits or regular overtime. Educational
incentives shall not apply to the special events and contract law
enforcement services assignment rate of pay. When a vehicle has
been requested, one half (1/2) hour of time shall be added to the
beginning time of the contract to allow for vehicle check out/in.

The parties agree that for the purpose of FLSA _ regulations,
compensation paid for working special events and contract law
enforcement assignments is at the applicable overtime rate, and shall
not be considered compensation for pension plan benefits calculations.

A member reporting to an assignment site shall receive a minimum of
four (4) hours pay regardless of actual time worked. Employment of
more than four (4) hours shall be paid to the nearest tenth of an hour for
the actual time worked.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 15

8.3.05 Any accident, illness or injury which arises out of or occurs in the course

of employment in a policing special events and contract law enforcement
services assignment shall be covered under the city’s workers’
compensation plan pursuant to Section 7.7.

CHAPTER 11
TERMINATION

The provisions in this Agreement/MOU shall be in full force and effect extended from
June 30, 2013 to June 30, 2015, upon approval by the City, subject to Section 11.1,

below.

11.1

This Agreement/MOU shall become effective only after ratification by
the members of the Association followed by City * * * approval and the
expiration of the waiting period for the Mayor’s action provided in Charter
Sections 605 and 609, and shall remain in full force and effect through
June 30, 2015. ***

(Incorporated from 9/30/10 Side Letter Agreement Re:
Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener.) The City and the
Association previously agreed that * * * the Mayor shall appoint one (1)
police officer, as defined in Fresno Municipal Code (“FMC”) Section
3-301 (p) (3) from a City management position and one (1) firefighter as
defined in FMC Section 3-301 (f) from a City management position as
voting members to the Fresno Fire and Police Retirement Board under
the authority as described in Section 3-305 (a) (1) of the FMC. * * * In the
event any individual(s) so appointed fails to qualify, resigns, retires, or no
longer qualifies to serve on the Board, the Mayor subject to the approval
of the City Council shall appoint a replacement under the terms and
provisions of this agreement within twenty (20) business days. If a
decision is approved by the Fire and Police Retirement Board to
separate the commingled investments of the Fresno Fire and Police
Retirement System and the Fresno Employees Retirement System, this
agreement on Mayoral appointments to the Fire and Police Retirement
Board shall immediately become null and void and the appointment
provisions contained in FMC Section 3-305 shall apply.

During the life of this Agreement/MOU should either party desire to
modify its terms or to meet and confer with the other party as to matters
within the scope of representation which are not addressed in this MOU,
the party requesting any change shall request in writing to meet and
confer on the item(s), which item(s) shall be specified in writing.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Addendum
Fresno Police Officers Association, Basic Unit

Page 16

11.3

During the term of this Agreement/MOU, either party may refuse any
request by the other to meet and confer without explanation if (1) the
item is directly considered and specifically addressed herein; or (2) is
directly considered and specifically addressed in any FMC section,
charter section or provision, or resolution section, which section
specifically establishes wages, hours, or other terms and conditions of
employment; or (3) the specific item was included in an initial written
proposal from the party making the request during the meet and confer
process which led to this agreement. No unilateral action on any such
refused proposal may be taken by the requesting party after such a
refusal by the other.

It is further agreed, however, that this section shall now prohibit the City
from requesting to meet and confer on changes to federal or state
statutes referred to or cited in this Agreement/MOU, and which impacts
the implementation of this Agreement/MOU, in which case the request
to meet and confer shall not be refused.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands this _28th_ day of

 

 

March , 2011.
FOR THE CITY OF FRESNO: FOR THE FRESNO POLICE
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION:

Original Signed Original Signed
Kenneth G. Phillips Jacky Parks
Labor Relations Manager President, FROA

Original Signed
Jerry Dyer
Chief of Police

Date: March 28, 2011
APPROVED AS TO FORM

CITY ATTORNEY’S OFFICE

BY:
Deputy City Attorney

 

 

 
