BETWEEN AND FOR THE
CITY OF FRESNO
AND

FRESNO POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
(Police Management-Unit 9)

Fiscal Years
2009 — 2012
(Three Year Extension)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE | - PREAMBLE... eee cece ecce seca seceeseee sees seeeseaeeseaeaseseaseseaseaeaseeeaseeaeeneaee 1
A. Purpose ...

B. Definitions
Cc. Governing Laws

  
 

ARTICLE Il - EMPLOYEE RIGHTS .......ccccccssssseesscseceessseeeeseseceseeecseeeessaeeeeseaeeseseeseeeeeeaegs 2

A. General - Employee Rights .........eeeeeceeseeseceeeeseeeeeeaeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeaeeneeeaee 2
B. Employee Responsibilities
Cc. Nondiscrimination

  

ARTICLE Ill - CITY RIGHTS..

 

A. GOMETAl cece cece ceeeeee cece seeceeeeseeseseeseceseeseseseessasesceseeseaseseeseseesaseseeseate 3
ARTICLE IV - RECOGNITION ooo... eee cece se cee ecceeeeeeseee sees seaeescseeseseeseeeesneeaseeaeenegee 5

Recognition Of Unit DESCTIPtION..... eee lees eeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeaeeeeteaeeeetenees
Association Recognition.
City Recognition
Recognition of Mutual Obligation
Strikes
Unilateral Action

 
  
 
 
 
 

mmoOm>

ARTICLE V - SCOPE OF REPRESENTATION .

 

 
 

A. General
B. Representation .

ARTICLE VI - DEDUCTIONS AND ASSOCIATION BUSINESS 2... eee eeseeeeeeeeee 8
A. Dues Checkoff/Deductions

B. Exceptions to Dues Deduction Authorization Card .
Cc. Dues Deduction Check
D.

  
 
 

 

ASSOCIAtION BUSINESS ..... cece cceceeee cece seeseeceseesesceseesesceseeseseeseeseaseseesaaese
ARTICLE VII - COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS... cece eete cess eeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaee 10
A. GOMEFAl oe. cee cesses sseceseesseseseeseceseeseeteseeseesaseseesaseseesateseeseate 10

B. Salaries, Employee Performance Evaluations, Bonus Pay, Deferred
Compensation, Pension Contribution, Health Reimbursement
Arrangement (HRA), Benefit Payoffs and Promotion..........eeeeeeeseeeeee 10
TABLE OF CONTENTS (Cont.)

Salaries..
Employee Performance Evaluation
Bonus Pay uo... eee
Deferred Compensation...
Pension Contribution
Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA)
Benefit Payoffs
Promotion
Post Certificate Pay

  
  
 
  
 

WOHNOATRWNER

 

Service Uniform Allowance..

Fresno City Employees Health and Welfare Trust... eeeeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeee 20
Wellness Program .00......cceccecssceeceeseeeeeeneeeeeeseeseeeeeeseeeeeeaeeeeeeaeeeeeeaeeeeenees 21
Life Insurance and Long Term Disability Benefits... eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 22

 

1. Life Insurance
2. Long Term Disability .

 

Sick Leave Benefit at the Time of Election to Enter the
Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP) or at Retirement............. 22

 
  
 
 
 

Leaves...
1. Sick Leave...

2. Vacation Leave
3. Holiday Leave .
4. Administrative Leave.

Workers’ COMPeNSALION........eceeceeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeaeeaeeeaeeaeeeaeeaeeeeteaeeeeteaee 25

Assignments, Rotation, and Work Schedules
1. Assignments
2. Rotation
3. 4/10 Work Week for Field Commanders..

 
  
 

 

Deputy Police Chief Status ..
Consolidation Of ServiCeS 0... ccc eccseecee cece eeeceeeseeceeeeseeteseeseeteeseseenaaeee 28

GI@VANCES.. eee eee cece ceceeececeseececessesieceseeseeseseesiasessessaceseeseaseseeseaes 28
TABLE OF CONTENTS (Cont.)

 

N. Drug Testing

 

oO. Disciplinary Procedures.
ARTICLE VIII - HEADINGS wooo. ccc ee ecreeeceeseee sees seaeeseeesnaeeseeeeseaeaseaeaseeeseaeaegee 33
ARTICLE IX - SAVING CLAUSE AND FULL UNDERSTANDING 1... cece cece eeee eee 34
A. Saving Clause

 

 

B. Full Understanding..

ARTICLE X - TERMINATION Q.....cccccesssssceessssceeseseceeeesecseeeeseaecesesecseseaacseseaseseeessseeeeseaee 35

EXHIBIT | - SALARY TABLES ue eee eeeeeseeeseeeseeeseeeseeeseeeseeeneeanee 37
ATTACHMENT “A” (For Purposes of Determining Retroactivity)
FRESNO POLICY DEPARTMENT REPORT OF PERFORMANCE

Side Letter Agreements Incorporated into MOU:

 

1. FY09 Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener wione year MOU Extension,
dated September 10, 2008.

2. Completion of Retirement Enhancement Reopener Health Reimbursement
Arrangement (HRA) Sick Leave/Health Incentive, dated November 6, 2008.

 

LEGEND

xe = deleted old language
[S deleted] = section/subsection deleted/moved
[88 deleted] = two or more

sections/subsections deleted/moved
bold type =new language

 

 

 
ARTICLE |

PREAMBLE

PURPOSE

This Memorandum of Understanding, hereinafter MOU, entered into between the
City of Fresno, hereinafter referred to as the City, and the Fresno Police Officers
Association, Police Management Unit, hereinafter referred to as the Association or
Unit, has as its purpose to establish wages, hours, and other terms and conditions
of employment for members of this Unit. This MOU is extended for a three (3)
year period of time from June 30, 2009 to June 30, 2012. Effective July 1,
2009, other than the modifications set forth herein, the parties agree that until
this MOU terminates on June 30, 2012, all economic benefits currently
afforded to affected members shall remain intact without modification unless
otherwise agreed to in writing by the parties.

Effective July 1, 2009 through June 30, 2011, the parties agree there will be no
demotions (excluding demotions for disciplinary cause) of any member of this
Unit for economic or reorganizational purposes or for the enforcement of
involuntary furloughs.

DEFINITIONS

Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, and, except to the
extent that a particular word or phrase is otherwise specifically defined in this MOU,
the definitions and provisions contained in Article 3 of Chapter 1, Sections 3-101
*** 3-201 * * *, 3-301 * * *, 3-301 * * * and 3-603 * * * of the Fresno Municipal
Code, hereinafter FMC, shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of
words and phrases used herein. The definition of each word or phrase shall
constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or phrase which is
derivative from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be.

GOVERNING LAWS

The employer-employee relationship between the City and its employees and the
City and the Association is governed by Chapter 10 of Division 4 of Title | of the
Government Code (Section 3500 et seq. commonly known as_ the
Meyers-Milias-Brown Act), applicable provisions of the Public Employment Relations
Board (PERB), and the Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights Act (POBOR)
as may be amended from time to time, and Article 19 of Chapter 2 of the FMC. In
the event of any conflict between said laws and this MOU, or in the event of conflicts
in interpretation, said laws shall govern.
ARTICLE II

EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

A. GENERAL - EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

The rights of employees are set forth in FMC Section 3-604 * * * and said Section
presently reads as follows:

“Employees shall have the right to form, join and participate in the activities of
employee organizations of their own choosing for the purpose of
representation on all matters of employer-employee relations including, but
not limited to, wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment.
Employees shall have the right to refuse to join or participate in the activities
of employee organizations and shall have the right to represent themselves
individually in their employment relations with the City. No employees shall
be interfered with, intimidated, restrained, coerced, or discriminated against
by the City or by an employee or an employee organization because of his
exercise of any of these rights. No management employee or confidential
employee shall act as a representative of any employee organization which
represents employees other than management employees or confidential
employees."

B. EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITIES
All employees in the Police Management Unit acknowledge that the City shall
consider the positions and proposals of the Association as the meet and confer
positions and proposals of all employees, individually and collectively, in said Unit.

Cc. NONDISCRIMINATION

The provisions of this MOU shall apply equally to and be exercised by all employees
of the Unit consistent with state and federal nondiscrimination statutes.
A. GENERAL

ARTICLE III

CITY RIGHTS

1. The rights of the City include those rights enumerated in FMC Section 3-605
** * as the same may be amended from time to time. Specifically:

‘@

2. The rig

The exclusive rights of the City include, but are not limited to, the right

to

1)

2)

©)

4)
5)

6)

)

8)

9)

10)

11)

 

determine the missions of its constituent departments,
divisions, commissions, and boards;

set standards of service and municipal fees and charges;

determine the procedures and standards of selection for
employment, assignment, transfer, and promotion;

direct its employees;
take disciplinary action;

relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for
other legitimate reasons;

maintain the efficiency of governmental operations;

determine the methods, means, and personnel by which
government operations are to be conducted;

determine the content of job classifications;

take all necessary actions to carry out its mission in
emergencies;

exercise complete control and discretion over its organization
and the technology of performing its work."

hts of the City include the determination of staffing levels, including but

not limited to, staffing by shift and class. Minimum staffing levels, by shift,
area, and day of the week, shall be established by appropriate departmental

order.
All other rights formerly or presently enjoyed by or vested in the City on the
effective date of this MOU and not mentioned in Section 1. (a) are retained
by and reserved to the City.

Nothing in this MOU shall be construed as delegating to others the authority
conferred by law on the City, or in any way abridging or reducing such
authority.

This MOU is not intended to restrict consultation in good faith with the
Association regarding matters within the right of the City to determine.
ARTICLE IV
RECOGNITION
RECOGNITION OF UNIT DESCRIPTION

The Police Management Unit consists of all employees holding a permanent
position, as defined in FMC Section 3-202 (p)(4) * * *, in one of the following
classes (hereinafter collectively referred to as employee unless otherwise specified),
provided that such Unit may be modified from time to time in the manner designated
in the FMC:

Police Lieutenant
Police Captain
Deputy Police Chief

ASSOCIATION RECOGNITION

The City acknowledges the Association as the recognized employee organization
representing the Unit, and therefore, shall meet and confer in good faith promptly
upon request by the Association and continue for a reasonable period of time in
order to exchange freely information, opinions, and proposals, and to endeavor to
reach agreement on a successor MOU at least one (1) week prior to the last regular
City Council meeting at which the City budget must be adopted for the ensuing fiscal
year in order to meet the June 30 deadline specified in the City Charter. In order
that the meet and confer process includes adequate time for the resolution of any
impasse, the City shall accept meet and confer process proposals from the
Association as early as March 1, * * * 2012.

CITY RECOGNITION

The Association recognizes the City Manager of the City, or such other person as
may be designated in writing, as the designated representative of the City, pursuant
to FMC Section 3-615, * * * and shall meet and confer in good faith promptly upon
request by the City and continue for a reasonable period of time in order to
exchange freely information, opinions, and proposals, and to endeavor to reach
agreement on a successor MOU at least one (1) week prior to the last regular City
Council meeting at which the City budget must be adopted for the ensuing fiscal
year in order to meet the June 30 deadline specified in the City Charter.

RECOGNITION OF MUTUAL OBLIGATION
The Association and the City recognize and acknowledge their mutual obligation and

responsibility to effectuate the purposes set forth in, and to adhere to the conditions
and clauses set forth in this MOU.
STRIKES

No unlawful strikes of any kind shall be caused or sanctioned by the Association
during the term of this MOU.

UNILATERAL ACTION

In the event the meet and confer process for a successor MOU results in an
impasse, as defined in the FMC, the City shall not take unilateral action regarding
wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment prior to completion of
the impasse procedures outlined in the FMC.
ARTICLE V

SCOPE OF REPRESENTATION

GENERAL

"Scope of representation" shall be as defined in FMC Section 3-603(w), * * * as the
same may be amended from time to time. Said Section presently reads as follows:

“Scope of representation” means all matters relating to employer-employee
relations, including, but not limited to, wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of employment. Employee rights, as set forth in Section 3-604,
* * * and City rights as set forth in Section 3-605(a), * * * are excluded from
the scope of representation.

REPRESENTATION

1. The City will not interfere with, or discriminate in any way against, any
employee by reason of his or her membership in the Association.

2. The Association agrees to represent Unit employees in a manner consistent
with the requirements of the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act, POBOR, and
applicable state and federal regulations.
ARTICLE VI
DEDUCTIONS AND ASSOCIATION BUSINESS
DUES CHECKOFF/DEDUCTIONS

Rules governing dues check-off are set forth in FMC Section 3-620, as the same
may be amended from time to time. The procedures governing dues deductions,
agency shop, hold harmless obligations, religious and conscientious objections, and
financial reporting requirements, shall be as provided in Government Code Section
3502.5.

1. The City shall deduct the dues or benefit premiums, or both, upon proper
authorization by Association members in the Unit.

2. If a member in the Unit desires the City to deduct dues or benefit premiums
from the member’s paycheck, a deduction authorization shall be made upon
a Dues Deduction Authorization card in the form specified in FMC Section
3-620, * * * as the same may be amended from time to time.

3. A Dues Deduction Authorization card may be revoked by a member in the
Unit, and the dues or benefit deduction canceled, only during the months of
November and December of any year.

4. If a member in the Unit desires to revoke prior dues deduction authorization
card, a dues deduction revocation shall be made upon a Dues Deduction
Revocation card in the form specified in FMC Section 3-620, * * * as the
same may be amended from time to time.

5. Upon written authorization by a retired member of the Association, the City
shall deduct credit union payments and Association dues monthly from the
retirement check of such retired member and forward same to the credit
union or Association as designated in such authorization.

6. Dues Deduction Authorization and Revocation cards are available at the
Finance Department, Payroll Section, and Human Resources Division of the
Personnel Services Department.

EXCEPTIONS TO DUES DEDUCTION AUTHORIZATION CARD

The earnings of employees who opt to join the Association must be sufficient after
other legal and required deductions are made to cover the amount of the dues
deduction authorized. When an employee is in a non-pay status for an entire pay
period, no dues deduction shall be made from future earnings to cover that pay
period, nor will the employee be allowed to deposit with the City Controller the
amount which would have been deducted if the member had been in a pay status
during the pay period. Whenever the member's salary is not sufficient to cover other
legal and required deductions, no dues deduction or deposit shall be made.

DUES DEDUCTION CHECK

1.

3.

The dues deduction check covering all such deductions shall be transmitted
to the Fresno Police Officers Association.

The dues deduction check shall be made in favor of the Fresno Police
Officers Association.

A dues deduction check will be transmitted at least monthly.

ASSOCIATION BUSINESS

1.

Employees occupying classes represented by the Association shall have
their monthly vacation leave accrual levels (denoted in MOU Article VII,
Section H. 2., vacation leave), reduced by .583333 hours per month, which
shall be placed in a time bank and administered by the department for
Association business use. Officers designated by the Association may, with
the approval of the department, attend Association business, including such
activities as attendance at Association membership and Board meetings,
PORAC and other similar conferences, and direct involvement in charitable
Association activities. Time banked under this provision may also be
designated by the Association to cover members who Absent with Substitute
(AWS) for designated Association members who are attending to Association
business. The department is not required to grant time off for Association
business if it will require filling the position on an overtime basis.

The Association Chairman may use the time banked under this provision for
Association business in eight (8) hour increments to a maximum of 24 hours
per week.

Any time spent by the Association Chairman, and by members designated by
the Association to be on such business, shall be deducted from the
Association's time banked balance. It is further agreed by the parties that
once accrued vacation leave is donated to the Association, the City no longer
has any obligation to compensate, either in cash or in equivalent time off,
such members.
ARTICLE VII

COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS

GENERAL

All economic benefits, provided by Council ordinance or formal Council resolution
and not otherwise clearly and explicitly modified or restricted in this MOU, shall be
continued without alteration during the term of this MOU.

SALARIES, EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS, BONUS PAY,
DEFERRED COMPENSATION, PENSION CONTRIBUTION, HEALTH
REIMBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENT (HRA), BENEFIT PAYOFFS AND
PROMOTION.

1. Salaries - (Incorporated from September 10, 2008, Compensation and
Benefits Re-Opener Side Letter of Agreement)

a. Police Lieutenants and Police Captains (FY08):

 

i. [§ deleted]
ii. [§ deleted]
b. Deputy Police Chiefs (FY08):
i. [§ deleted]
ii. [§ deleted]
c. Police Lieutenants, Police Captains and Deputy Police Chiefs (FY09):
i. [§ deleted]
ii. [§ deleted]
iii. Effective January 1. 2009, salaries for Police Lieutenants
and Police Captains shall be increased by one and a half
percent (1.5%) as reflected on Exhibit I, Table I.
iv. Effective January 1, 2009, the upper end of the salary range
for Deputy Police Chiefs shall be increased by one and half

percent (1.5%) from $11,516 to $11,748 as reflected on
Exhibit I, Table I.

10
vi.

vii.

Effective June 30, 2009, the one and a half percent (1.5%)
salary increase for Lieutenants, Captains and for Deputy
Chiefs as noted in subsections iii and iv above, shall be
retroactive to July 1, 2008, subject to verification of a six
hundred thousand dollar ($600,000) savings in overtime
expenses or other agreed upon ongoing expenses in the
Police Department’s budget for Fiscal Year 2009.

The parties agree that retroactivity of the one and a half
percent (1.5%) increase is subject to review of the Police
Department’s budget to determine the amount of actual
savings and from what sources the savings occurred. Any
such review and verification will occur no later than July
31, 2009.

Effective June 30, 2009, salaries for Police Lieutenants and
Police Captains shall be increased by one half percent
(0.5%) as reflected on Exhibit I, Table Il.

Effective June 30, 2009, the upper end of the salary range
for Deputy Police Chiefs shall be increased by one half
percent (0.5%) from $11,748 to $11,807 as reflected on
Exhibit I, Table Il.

Police Lieutenants, Police Captains and Deputy Police Chiefs
EY10) — Deferred Salaries Pursuant to Agreement on Re-Opener

and Extension of Current MOU:

** * Effective June 30, 2009, Police Lieutenants and Police
Captains agree to defer the one percent (1%) salary
increase previously scheduled to be received on July 1,
2009.

*** Effective June 30, 2009, Deputy Police Chiefs agree to
defer the one percent (1%) salary increase to the upper
end of the salary range from $11,807 to $11,926 previously
scheduled to be received on July 1, 2009.

** * Effective June 30, 2009, Police Lieutenants and Police
Captains agree to defer the one percent (1%) salary
increase previously scheduled to be received on June 30,
2010.

*** Effective June 30, 2009, Deputy Police Chiefs agree to
11
defer the one percent (1%) salary increase to the upper
end of the salary range from $11,926 to $12,046 previously
scheduled to be received on June 30, 2010.

Applicability to Retirees:

[§ deleted]

Retroactivity:

Applicable * * * adjustments to monthly retirement
allowances for retires will be retroactive to July 1, 2008, if
the six hundred thousand dollar ($600,000) savings in
overtime expenses or other agreed upon ongoing
expenses in the Police Department’s budget are realized
and a determination is made as to the sources where the
savings occurred, as set forth * * * in Section 1.c.v. above.

Adjustments to the monthly retirement allowances for
retirees shall be calculated pursuant to FMC Section * * *
3-301 and * * * 3-302, utilizing the one and a half percent
(1.5%) salary increase effective January 1, 2009.

Police Lieutenants, Police Captains and Deputy Police Chiefs
(FY11) -— SALARIES PURSUANT TO AGREEMENT ON RE-
OPENER AND EXTENSION OF CURRENT MOU:

Effective July 1, 2010, salaries for Police Lieutenants and
Police Captains shall be increased by two percent (2%) as
reflected on Exhibit I, Table III.

Effective July 1, 2010, the upper end of the salary range for
Deputy Police Chiefs shall be increased by two percent
(2%) from $11,807 to $12,044 as reflected on Exhibit |,
Table Ill.

Effective July 1, 2010, salaries for Deputy Police Chiefs
shall be increased by two percent (2%).

Effective January 1, 2011, salaries for Police Lieutenants
and Police Captains shall be increased by one percent
(1%) as reflected on Exhibit |, Table IV.

Effective January 1, 2011, the upper end of the salary
range for Deputy Police Chiefs shall be increased by one

12
vi.

percent (1%) from $12,044 to $12,165 as reflected on
Exhibit I, Table IV.

Effective January 1, 2011, salaries for Deputy Police Chiefs
shall be increased by one percent (1%).

Police Lieutenants, Police Captains and Deputy Police Chiefs

 

(FY12) — SALARIES PURSUANT TO AGREEMENT ON RE-
OPENER AND EXTENSION OF CURRENT MOU:

vi.

Effective July 1, 2011, salaries for Police Lieutenants and
Police Captains shall be increased by two percent (2%) as
reflected on Exhibit I, Table V.

Effective July 1, 2011, the upper end of the salary range for
Deputy Police Chiefs shall be increased by two percent
(2%) from $12,165 to $12,409 as reflected on Exhibit |,
Table V.

Effective July 1, 2011, salaries for Deputy Police Chiefs
shall be increased by two percent (2%).

Effective January 1, 2012, salaries for Police Lieutenants
and Police Captains shall be increased by one percent
(1%) as reflected on Exhibit |, Table VI.

Effective January 1, 2012, the upper end of the salary
range for Deputy Police Chiefs shall be increased by one
percent (1%) from $12,409 to $12,534 as reflected on
Exhibit I, Table VI.

Effective January 1, 2012, salaries for Deputy Police Chiefs
shall be increased by one percent (1%).

Retirement/DROP Between June 30, 2009 and July 1, 2012:

Effective June 30, 2009, the deferred two percent (2%) base
salary increase shall be treated as if it had been paid and used in
retirement allowance calculations pursuant to the applicable
FMC Sections for members who retire and separate from City
Service or enter DROP between June 30, 2009 and July 1, 2012,
will have salaries, for the purposes of retirement, calculated on
the basis of the following:

13
e The final results of the potential retroactive increase for
July 1, 2008 through December 31, 2008.

e The 0.5% salary increase to be received on June 30, 2009.

e A one percent (1%) salary increase as if instituted on
July 1, 2009.

e Aone percent (1%) retirement pick-up (to be calculated as
if it were a one percent (1%) salary increase for the unit) as
if instituted on July 1, 2009.

e A one percent (1%) salary increase as of July 1, 2010
(instead of the two percent (2%) to be instituted).

e Any other salary increases received subsequent to July 1,
2010, but not the one percent (1%) retirement contribution
pick-up.

The intent of this language is to capture deferred salary and
pension increases for the purpose of retirement calculations.

Retirement Calculation:

Effective July 1, 2011, a Tier 1 member who is demoted for
economic or reorganization purposes and who separates from
City Service by service retirement or disability retirement without
entering into DROP shall have their retirement calculated using
the member’s highest average monthly compensation earnable
by the member during any thirty-six (36) consecutive-month
period of service instead of the average monthly compensation
earnable by the member during the last three (3) years of
employment with the City of Fresno Police Department.

2. Employee Performance Evaluations:

a.

Effective January 1 of each year during the term of this MOU, salary
increases for employees in this Unit occupying the class of Deputy
Police Chief shall be based upon annual performance evaluations
using the following graduated performance-based merit plan table.

Effective June 30, 2009, Deputy Police Chiefs shall continue to be

evaluated and receive Annual Performance Evaluations,
however, salary increases will apply as set forth in Section 1. c.,

14
d., g. and h, above through January 1, 2012.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Unsatisfactory/Needs | Zero Percent (0%)
Improvement
Average Zero Percent (0%)
Above Average Three Percent (3%)
Superior Four Percent (4%)
Outstanding Five Percent (5%)

b. The annual rating under this performance-based merit plan

shall cover

the period of January 1°‘ through December 31“ of each year during

 

the term of this MOU. An “outstanding” rating must include justification
to the City Manager or designee in the comments section of the

Performance Evaluation form.

c. The City and the Association agree to meet and confer prior to the
implementation of any modifications to the current performance

 

evaluation process.

Bonus Pay:

Employees in this Unit occupying the class of Deputy Police Chief are also

eligible to receive annual Incentive Compensation Bonuses ba:

sed on the

same criteria and awarded in the same manner as Department and Deputy
Directors pursuant to the Plan Provisions of the City of Fresno Performance
Pay Plan. However, Deputy Police Chiefs shall not be subject to any form of
fine or charge if an employee’s performance does not meet the Chief's
expectations. Instead, Deputy Police Chiefs will be subject to the provisions

of Article Vil, Section K of this MOU or any other applicable
permitted by POBOR.

15

actions as
4.

Deferred Compensation:

The City will contribute to the City’s Deferred Compensation Plan fifty-five
dollars and thirty-nine cents ($55.39) per pay period on behalf of each
employee of this Unit. To receive this benefit, employees shall be enrolled in
the Deferred Compensation Plan. If necessary, Unit employees shall be
responsible for adjusting their personal contribution to stay within the
maximum allowable contribution amount. This contribution by the City shall
not be pensionable compensation and shall not be included in the calculation
of retirement benefits.

Pension Contribution:

The following applies to an employee's pension contribution:

a. Pension Contribution (FY08 & FY09) — The City will pay one percent
(1%) toward the employee’s share of his/her pension contribution,
including those employees who have entered DROP, such adjustment
to be permanent until the employee retires or separates from City
service. This contribution will be pensionable, but shall not be used to
calculate benefit payoffs.

b. Pension Contribution (FY10) — Effective * * * June 30, 2009, all
employees agree to defer the * * * City’s * * * contribution of an
additional one percent (1%) for a total of two percent (2%) toward the
employee's share of his/her pension contribution until FY12. * * *

c. Applicability to DROP Members — Effective * * * June 30, 2009, * * *
the parties agree that the existing one percent (1%) pension
contribution set forth in 5.a. above * * * will continue to be paid by the
City as salary to employees who have entered the Deferred
Retirement Option Program (DROP). The parties further agree
that effective June 30, 2009, the * * * additional one percent (1%)
supplemental payment for a total of two percent (2%), scheduled for
July 1, 2009,shall be deferred until FY12. When paid, the
supplemental payment will be calculated by multiplying the
appropriate percentage times the employee’s base rate of pay as
reflected in Exhibit I, Tables I, IA, IIA and IIIA and payment shall be
included in the employee’s biweekly paycheck. The supplemental
payment shall not be considered part of the employee’s base pay.
The employee’s DROP amount will not be affected by these
supplemental salary payments.

d. Applicability to Retirees (FY10 and FY11) - Adjustments to the

monthly retirement allowances for retirees shall be calculated

16
pursuant to FMC Sections 3-301 and 3-302 utilizing the one
percent (1%) City pension contribution as compensation.

Pension Contribution (FY12) - Effective June 30, 2012, the City
shall contribute an additional one percent (1%) for a total of two
percent (2%) toward the employee’s share of his/her pension
contribution, such adjustment to be permanent until the
employee retires or separates from City service. The
contribution towards member pension obligations shall be
included as compensation for purposes of pension calculations,
but shall not be used to calculate benefit payoffs.

Applicability to DROP Members - Effective June 30, 2012, in lieu
of the existing one percent (1%) pension contribution set forth in
5.a. above, the City will continue to pay employees who have
entered the Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP) the
deferred additional one percent (1%) supplemental payment
for a total of two percent (2%). The supplemental payment will be
calculated by multiplying two percent (2%) times the employee’s
base rate of pay as reflected in Exhibit I, Tables |, I, Ill, IV, and V,
and payment shall be included in the employee’s biweekly
paycheck. The supplemental payment’ shall not be
considered part of the employee’s base pay. The employee’s
DROP amount will not be affected by these supplemental salary
payments.

Applicability to Retirees - * * *Adjustments to the monthly retirement
allowances for retirees shall * * * be calculated pursuant to FMC

Sections * * * 3-301 and * * * 3-302 utilizing the two percent (2%) City
pension contribution payment as compensation.

Retroactivity:
i. [8 deleted]

ii. [8 deleted]

[8 deleted]

Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) (Incorporated from Side
Letter Agreement dated November 6, 2008)

At separation from permanent employment with the City of Fresno by service
retirement or at disability retirement if the employee is otherwise eligible for
service retirement, the value of the employee’s accumulated sick leave and

17
cashable vacation leave shall be credited to an account for the employee
under the Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA).

*** July 1, 2008, the number of accumulated sick leave hours in
excess of 120 hours at the time of retirement multiplied by 50%
of the employee’s then hourly rate of pay.

* * * November 3, 2008, the number of accumulated sick leave
hours at the time of retirement in excess of 120 hours multiplied
by 50% of the employee’s then current hourly base rate of pay,
except that an employee who retires within sixty (60) calendar
days of receipt by the City of Fresno Fire & Police Retirement
System of a retirement application by, or on behalf of the
employee, shall have accumulated sick leave hours upon
retirement in excess of 120 hours upon retirement multiplied by
eighty percent (80%) of the employee’s then current hourly base
rate of pay.

Effective July 1, 2009, the total number of all accumulated sick
leave hours at the time of retirement, multiplied by 50% of the
employee’s then current hourly base rate of pay, except that an
employee who retires within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt
by the City of Fresno Fire & Police Retirement System of a
retirement application by, or on behalf of the employee, shall
have all accumulated sick leave hours upon retirement in excess
of 120 hours upon retirement multiplied by eighty percent (80%)
of the employee’s then current hourly base rate of pay.

All payments noted above are dependent upon the employee’s
eligibility requirement as set forth in the Retirement/Attendance Health
Incentive provision in Section H., paragraph 1.a, below, and

The number of accumulated cashable vacation leave hours at the time
of retirement multiplied by the employee’s then current hourly base
rate of pay.

Effective August 1, 2009, the total number of all accumulated
holiday leave hours at the time of separation for retirement
purposes paid at the member’s then current hourly base rate of

pay.
The hourly base rate of pay shall be the equivalent of the monthly

salary for an employee as reflected in Exhibit I, multiplied by twelve
(12) months then divided by 2,080 hours.

18
The HRA accounts shall be book accounts only — no actual trust account
shall be established for any employee. Each HRA book account shall be
credited on a monthly basis with a rate of earnings equal to the yield on
the City’s Investment Portfolio (provided that such yield is positive).

The HRA accounts shall be used solely to pay premiums for medical
insurance (including COBRA premiums) covering the participant, the
participant’s spouse (or surviving spouse in the event of the death of the
participant), and the participant's dependents. Once a participant's
account under the HRA has been reduced to $0, no further benefits shall
be payable by the HRA. If the participant, the participant's spouse, and
the participant’s dependents die before the participant’s account under
the HRA has been reduced to $0, no death benefit shall be payable to
any person by the HRA.

*** After July 1, 2008, the requirement in the first paragraph of this
Section that an employee use less than eighty (80) hours of sick
leave in the preceding 24 months shall be eliminated and no such
requirement shall be made for an employee otherwise eligible for
this benefit.

Benefit Payoffs

Benefit payoffs (e.g. holiday, administrative leave) shall be at the employee’s
applicable base rate of pay, as reflected in Exhibit |, Tables |, Il, III, IV, and V
at the time of payment. However, employees shall not be allowed to cash
out any accumulated hours of sick and/or vacation leave pursuant to the HRA
set forth in Section B., paragraph 6., above.

Promotion

a.

For classes which have step increases (Police Lieutenant and Police
Captain), movement to the next higher step will be at the discretion of
the Chief of Police, based on the employee’s last Annual Performance
Evaluation which demonstrates that the individual meets the job
standards for that class. Lieutenants and Captains promoted after
July 1, 2009, will be placed at Step D of the class promoted to.

The value of education incident plan (EIP) premium pay held in the
FPOA Unit 4 class at the time of portion to a FPOA Unit 9 class shall
be considered in the calculations for determining step placement shall
not be less than the “C” step level. This value consideration
calculation is applicable solely to the promotional step placement
determination described in this Subsection.

Post Certificate Pay — All compensation earned by a member pursuant to this

19
sub-section shall be in addition to any other incentive and/or premium pays
received and shall be compensable for retirement purposes.

[§ deleted]

a. Members who have satisfactorily attained the Supervisory P.O.S.T.
Certificate shall be compensated at a rate of four percent (4%) above
the member's base rate of pay.

b. Effective July 1, 2009, members who have satisfactorily attained the
Management P.O.S.T. Certificate shall be compensated an
additional one percent (1%) for a total * * * of nine percent (9%)
above the member’s base rate of pay.

SERVICE UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

* * * Employees shall receive * * * $1,090 per year as a service uniform purchase
and maintenance allowance, prorated and paid on a pay period-by-pay period basis.
The service uniform allowance provided pursuant to this section shall be considered
as compensation for purposes of calculating a member’s pension benefits.

FRESNO CITY EMPLOYEES HEALTH AND WELFARE TRUST

The City and the Association agree that the Fresno City Employees Health and
Welfare Trust has the sole authority to determine the benefits that will be provided
during the term of this MOU. The sole responsibility of the City under this clause is
to provide a set dollar amount to be contributed to the Trust on behalf of the
employees represented by the Association. The City’s contribution will be eighty
percent (80%) of the premium established by the Fresno City Employees Health and
Welfare Trust Board, per month, per employee. Members may opt to contribute
the amount necessary to make up the difference through payroll deductions,
or accept a reduced coverage option.

The parties also agree to work collectively in conjunction with their Board
representatives to research and recommend potential cost-saving measures for the
Health & Welfare Trust, which may include a choice of health program options
based on individual need or preference, including a reduced option equivalent to the
City’s premium contribution, a separate rate for single employees with no
dependents, or other flex plan programs; mandatory generic mail order drug
maintenance for employees who require prescription drug therapy for any period of
90 days or more; or other measures that may be identified as this work progresses.

20
WELLNESS PROGRAM

1. Wellness Program Development Committee

Through the Police Basic (Unit 4) MOU, a Wellness Program Development
Committee (WPDC) was created for the purpose of developing a departmental
Wellness Program (WP) for Unit 4 members, and for providing all aspects of
program and policy administration, oversight and maintenance. The WPDC is
composed of participants selected by the Chief of Police or designee and the
Association. The WP provides for a monetary incentive for achieving goals and
maintaining standards, voluntary participation; the services of a health/fitness
coordinator; individually tailored consultations and screenings; educational
components; sole responsibility on the part of any contracted WP service provider
for the maintenance and monitoring of confidentiality of participant health, medical,
and fitness information/records (i.e., such information shall not be provided to the
City or any City department); and the sharing solely of attendance and participation
related information with the City, on the part of any contracted WP service provider,
to facilitate administration and disbursement of WP incentives. The WP is outlined
in a departmental Standing Order, and implementation of any WP policy
modifications shall be at the discretion of the WPDC. This Committee will also serve
members of the Police Management, Unit 9.

Members of this Unit, and the Chief of Police, shall be eligible to voluntarily
participate in the Fresno Police Department Wellness Program. * * * Effective
July 1, 2009, the sum of $40,000 * * * shall be utilized for payments of monetary
incentives and for services provided by the contracted WP provider. * * * Effective
July 1, 2010 and July 1, 2011, the City shall provide an additional $5,000, for a
total of $10,000. The City shall not be obligated to pay in excess of * * * $45,000 in
FY 11 and $50,000 in FY12 to the WP on behalf of the members of this Unit, and
the Chief of Police. Should the total monetary incentive due to eligible members
exceed the fiscal year’s allotted sum, payment to eligible members will be prorated
and calculated base on an hourly rate. Said hourly rate shall be established by
dividing the remaining funds by the total hours earned by the eligible WP participant
to establish the amount due. (For example: $425,000 — money available minus
$80,000 — service fees = $345,000 — money to pay participants) if 550 participants
earned 20,000 hours. Divided $345,000 by 20,000 = $17.25 an hour. Multiply
$17.25 x 56 hours = $966). WP monetary incentives shall be paid by separate
check no later than the last pay date in August of the subsequent fiscal year. In the
event any portion of the WP funding for a particular fiscal year remains
undistributed/unspent, the WPDC shall encumber the undistributed/unspent funding
prior to the end of the fiscal year for use for the WP in the subsequent fiscal year.

kK

Effective July 1, 2009, the benefits provided pursuant to this section shall be
considered as compensation for purposes of calculating pension benefits for
a member.

21
LIFE INSURANCE AND LONG TERM DISABILITY BENEFITS

1.

Life Insurance:

The Life Insurance benefit up to the active employee's 70" birthday is 100%
of annual earnings, rounding up to the next $1,000, with a maximum of
$150,000. In addition, employees assigned to the bomb squad shall have
accidental death, dismemberment and paralysis insurance coverage in the
amount of $250,000.

Long Term Disability:

An employee is eligible for long term disability insurance after 30 days from
the date of the disability or after all sick leave is exhausted, whichever is
greater. The benefit amount is 66 2/3% of salary up to age 65. The
maximum benefit period differs after age 61. For more specific information,
refer to the insurance certificate.

SICK LEAVE BENEFIT AT THE TIME OF ELECTION TO ENTER THE
DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PROGRAM (DROP) OR AT RETIREMENT.

An employee who meets the criteria as outlined below, will receive only one of the
following benefits based on whether or not the employee enters the DROP program
before retiring from City employment.

1.

For an employee who has reached the minimum retirement age and who has
elected to enter the DROP Program, the calculation of the employee’s
monthly DROP amount shall include an amount equal to fifty percent (50%)
of the employee’s unused sick leave balance as of the DROP entry date, with
the sum calculated by multiplying fifty percent (50%) of the hours of unused
sick leave by the hourly base rate of pay for the employee in effect as of the
DROP entry date. The employee’s pension contribution on this amount will
be calculated as of the date of DROP entry by multiplying the lump sum
described above in this subparagraph 1. by the employee’s pension
contribution rate and that amount will be deducted from the employee's
DROP account. The City will also be required to make a corresponding
pension contribution to the retirement system based on the additional
pensionable compensation created by the Sick Leave Benefit.

For the employee who has reached the minimum retirement age and retires
from the City without entering DROP, an amount equal to fifty percent (50%)
of the employee’s unused sick leave balance shall be included in the
computation of the employee's retirement allowance as if it were a one-time
payment at the hourly base rate of pay for the employee in effect at the date
of retirement. The employee and the City will make a corresponding pension

22
contribution to the retirement system based on the additional pensionable
compensation created by the Sick Leave Benefit. The employee's retirement
contribution will be calculated as of the date of retirement by multiplying the
lump sum described above in this subparagraph 2. by the employee’s
pension contribution rate and the employee agrees to have this amount
withheld from the employee's first retirement benefit payment from the
Retirement System as the employee's retirement contribution for this
additional amount of pensionable compensation. This provision shall not
apply to employees who retire prior to age 50 due to a disability or to former
employees that have separated from City service prior to reaching the
minimum retirement age and have elected a Deferred Vested status in the
City of Fresno Fire & Police Retirement System.

Hourly base rate shall be the equivalent of the monthly salary for an
employee s provided in Exhibit | multiplied by twelve (12) months then
divided by 2,080 hours.

H. LEAVES

1.

2.

Sick Leave:

Employees shall accrue sick leave at the rate of eight (8) hours for each
completed calendar month of employment, with unlimited accumulation. The
FMC, City administrative orders, departmental policies, procedures, rules and
regulations concerning sick leave usage and administration will continue to
apply. Administrative Order 2-19.1, Attendance Policy, shall no longer apply
to members of this Unit. The attendance/health incentive component
detailed below will also continue to apply.

a. Retirement Attendance/Health Incentive — At service retirement or ata
disability retirement if the employee is otherwise eligible for service
retirement, the employee will be credited for all unused sick leave in
excess of 120 hours, and effective July 1, 2009, will be credited for all
unused hours, at 50% or 80% of the employee’s then current base
rate of pay, to be used solely to pay premiums for medical insurance
(including COBRA premiums), pursuant to the City’s Health
Reimbursement Arrangement as set forth in Section B., paragraph 6.,
above. ***

Vacation Leave:
a. Employees shall accrue 16.667 vacation leave hours for each
completed calendar month of employment. Effective July 1, 2010,

the accrual rate shall increase to 17.167 and effective July 1,
2011, the accrual rate shall increase to 17.667. (Pursuant to MOU

23
Article VI, Section D., Subsection 1. each employee's applicable
accrual rate will be reduced monthly by .583333 hours for Association
time bank purposes.) Employees are allowed to accrue 500 hours of
vacation leave. Upon separation from the City, the balance of
accrued vacation leave shall be:

(1) Credited to the City’s Health Reimbursement Arrangement
(HRA) as set forth in Section B., paragraph 6, above, or;

(2) If not eligible for participation in the HRA, the balance of
accrued vacation leave shall be cashed out.

No employee’s vacation accumulation shall cease due to refusal by
the City to grant vacation leave prior to the employee’s reaching the
vacation accumulation limit applicable to the employee's position and
length of service. In the event an employee requests in writing
vacation leave one month prior to the month in which the limit would
be reached, and such request is refused, the Chief of Police or
designee shall extend the employee’s accumulation limit for ninety
(90) days, during which time the employee shall be scheduled for
vacation leave sufficient to reduce the employee’s balance below the
accumulation limit.

3. Holiday Leave:

a.

Employees shall accumulate 8 2/3 hours of holiday leave for each
completed calendar month of employment.

Effective July 1, 2009, all employees agree to freeze Holiday time
pay downs through September 30, 2010. The cap for accumulated
holiday leave shall not exceed a monthly amount of 350 hours. If
prior to September 30, 2010, an employee exceeds the monthly
350 hour cap, holiday leave shall be paid down automatically by
the department to * * * 350 hours (in accordance with the FMC)
without the consent of the employee.

After September 30, 2010, employees may request * * * the
department to pay down the member’s Holiday Time up to a
maximum of ninety-six (96) hours, once per pay period. The time
bank cap shall remain at 350 hours.

Effective July 1, 2009, at separation for retirement purposes,

the employees’ accumulated holiday leave hours shall be at the
member’s then current hourly base rate of pay into the Health

24
Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) pursuant to Article VII,
Section B. 6.

Administrative Leave:

a.

Employees shall receive sixty (60) hours of administrative leave each
fiscal year. The Police Chief or designee may grant up to an
additional thirty-two (32) hours administrative leave each fiscal year to
employees. This additional administrative leave will be based on
above average or higher job performance and merit as determined by
the Chief or designee. The decision by the Police Chief or designee to
grant such additional leave shall be made during July and is effective
July 1° of the fiscal year in which it may be taken. Any such additional
administrative leave cannot be cashed in by employees. Employees
may receive payment for up to sixty (60) hours of Administrative leave
not taken during the fiscal year. Any administrative leave not taken or
compensated for shall not be added to the leave credited in the next
fiscal year.

Effective July 1, 2009 and July 1, 2010, the sixty (60) hours of
administrative leave received by employees for each of those
fiscal years, shall be automatically moved into the employee’s
Holiday time bank and shall be compensable for retirement
purposes.

Effective July 1, 2011, the provisions contained in subparagraph
a., above shall apply.

WORKERS’ COMPENSATION

1.

Notwithstanding the provisions of FMC Section 3-118 * * *, an employee
in this Unit who suffers an injury or illness in the course and scope of City
employment shall receive eighty-five (85) percent of full wages or salary
from the City. Employees on “light duty" as a result of an injury or illness
suffered in the course and scope of employment shall receive their
regular salary during the period of light duty.

Compensation for an accepted claim of a work related injury or illness
shall begin following the first three (3) days after the employee leaves
work as a result of the injury or illness. However, this three (3) day
waiting period shall be waived and compensation shall begin on the first
day of a work related injury or illness only if:

a. the employee is hospitalized as an inpatient for at least twenty-
four (24) hours; or,

25
b. the employee is absent from work fourteen (14) days or more; or,

c. the employee is placed on light duty at any time during the first
three (3) days.

Partial days of absence due to a work related injury or illness, including
the day of injury or illness, shall be at fully pay and shall not count toward
the three (3) days-exclusion period; however, this time shall be recorded
as work related injury/illness absence.

At the employee’s option, in the event work related injury/illness pay is not
provided during the first three (3) days of absence due to the work related
injury or illness, the employee may, at the employee’s option, take sick
leave, vacation or holiday leave for that period.

If the employee opts to use sick leave, vacation or holiday for the first
three (3) days and it is later determined that work related injury/illness pay
under paragraph 1. above, beginning on the first day of a work related
injury is appropriate, the leave time shall be restored to the employee and
the employee's pay or leave balance will be adjusted accordingly.

If the employee has been on leave without pay for the first three (3) days
and it is later determined that pay is applicable from the first day, the
employee shall be paid therefore.

If the employee is placed on sick leave, vacation or holiday pending
determination as to whether the injury or illness is industrial, and the
injury is determined to be industrial, sick leave, vacation or holiday shall
be restored within thirty (30) calendar days of such determination, and the
employee placed on work related injury/illness leave as provided herein.

Retirement benefits shall not be reduced as a result of the level of
compensation at the eighty-five (85) percent rate.

Taxes shall not be withheld on compensation at the eighty-five (85)
percent rates which are not taxable due to injury in the line of duty.

ASSIGNMENTS, ROTATION AND WORK SCHEDULES

1.

Assignments:
Assignments are determined by the Police Chief or designee based on

the needs of the Police Department.
Rotation:

26
It is the prerogative of the Police Chief or designee to rotate Police
Management personnel as necessary for the good of the service.

3. 4/10 Work Week for Field Commanders:

a. Police Lieutenants designated as Field Commanders of a Patrol
Bureau in the Field Operations Division are assigned to a 4/10
work schedule. It is the prerogative of the Police Chief or
designee to reassign employees to another schedule other than
a 4/10 as necessary for the good of the service.

b. A 4/10 work schedule consists of four (4) ten (10) hour work
days. The work week begins 0011 hours on Monday and ends
on 2400 hours the following Sunday. Each 4/10 schedule within
the work week consists of a total of forty (40) scheduled hours of
actual work time.

c. An employee assigned to a 4/10 schedule who is off on a holiday
which is a regular work day shall utilize leave balances accrued
in the holiday hours bank, administrative leave bank, or vacation

bank.

d. Employees shall accumulate eight (8) hours of sick leave per
month, and receive sick leave pay for the actual number of hours
absent.

e. Employees on a 4/10 plan shall accumulate the same number of

hours of vacation per month under a 5/8 plan. Vacation leave
will be granted for the actual number of hours absent.

DEPUTY POLICE CHIEF STATUS

An employee holding the position of Deputy Police Chief who is removed for
reasons other than malfeasance or misconduct may return to a position in the
previous class held. For example, if the Deputy Police Chief has previously held
stats as a Police Captain, the employee has return rights to a position in the class of
Police Captain. The Police Chief or designee has the prerogative of assigning the
former Deputy Police Chief as necessary for the good of the service. Time spent in
the Deputy Police Chief position will be considered in determining seniority in the
last previous job class held. No other employee in this Unit shall be demoted
(bumped) to a position in a lower class as a result of this action.

27
CONSOLIDATION OF SERVICES

The City recognizes its obligation to meet and confer with the Association regarding
consolidation of Police services with Fresno County, to the extent it affects wages,
hours and other terms and conditions of employment for members of this Unit.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article X, Termination, mention of this issue herein
shall not preclude action by the City regarding consolidation after conclusion of the
meet and confer process.

GRIEVANCES

1.

3.

A grievance is a dispute concerning the interpretation or application of any
existing City policy, practice, written rule or regulation governing personnel
practices or working conditions, including this MOU. The grievance
procedure relates only to existing rights or duties, not to the establishment or
abolition of a right or duty. This procedure shall not apply to any dispute for
which there is another established resolution procedure including, but not
limited to, appeal to the Civil Service Board, Retirement Board or unfair
employer-employee relations charge fact finding procedure.

A written grievance must set forth the specific rule, regulation or policy
claimed to have been violated, describe the specific incident or
circumstances of the alleged violation, and specify the remedy sought. Any
dispute between the parties as to the grievability of an issue or as to whether
the requirements of this procedure have been met shall be presented to the
Grievance Advisory Committee. The Committee shall rule on the dispute
before proceeding with the hearing.

The procedure and sequence in filing and processing a grievance shall be as
follows:

a. The grievant or grievant's rerepresentative shall discuss the grievance
with the grievant’s immediate supervisor before a written grievance
may be filed. Grievances should be settled as near as possible to
their source and in as informal setting as possible. The parties agree
that every effort shall be made to find an acceptable solution through
this informal process before a written grievance is filed.

(1) _ If the grievance is not settled through the informal process, a
written grievance may be filed with the grievant's immediate
supervisor. A written grievance must be filed within twenty-one
(21) calendar days from the time the grievant becomes aware,
or should have become aware of, the issue or incident giving
rise to the problem. The grievance shall summarize the results
of the informal process.

28
(2) Upon receipt of a written grievance, the immediate supervisor
shall given the grievant a written reply within seven (7)
calendar days.

Should the grievant not be satisfied with the answer received from the
immediate supervisor, the grievant may, within seven (7) calendar days,
file an appeal with the Police Chief or designee. The Police Chief or
designee shall have fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt of the
appeal to review the matter, investigate and provide a written answer to
the appeal, explaining clearly the decision or proposed action and
reasons thereof. The Police Chief or designee may confer with the
grievant and appropriate supervisors in an attempt to bring about a
harmonious solution.

If the grievant is not satisfied with the decision of the Police Chief or
designee, the grievant may within seven (7) calendar days after receipt
of the written reply, file a request for a review of the Police Chief or
designee’s decision to the Grievance Advisory Committee. The
grievance shall be reviewed by the Association before it is referred to
the Grievance Advisory Committee.

(1) From the date a grievance otherwise meeting all criteria for the
filing and processing of a grievance reaches the Labor Relations
Division, the Grievance Advisory Committee shall be convened
within twenty-eight (28) calendar days in order to hear the
grievance.

(2) All time limits herein may be extended by mutual agreement of
the parties.

(3) The Grievance Advisory Committee shall talk to the grievant and
the supervisor involved to set forth in writing the facts of the
particular situation as objectively as possible and recommend a
solution to the City Manager within fourteen (14) calendar days
of their last meeting.

The City Manager shall review the decision of the Police Chief or
designee, recommendations of the Grievance Advisory Committee and
shall then render a written decision to the employee within fourteen (14)
calendar days after receipt from the Grievance Advisory Committee.

Failure of the grievant to file an appeal within the specified time limit of
the procedure beginning within subsection 3. b. shall constitute an
abandonment of the grievance. Failure of the responsible supervisor or
official of the City to render a decision within the specified time limit

29
established by this procedure shall automatically move the grievance to
the next higher level for action, without action required of the grievant.

The Grievance Advisory Committee shall be comprised of one employee
selected by the Association, one employee selected by the City and a
third individual to be mutually agreed upon by the City and the
Association who shall serve as the Chairperson.

Employees and Association Representatives shall be allowed reasonable
time off without loss of pay to present grievances under this procedure.

DRUG TESTING

The members of this Unit agree to participate in a random drug testing process
following the below guidelines:

1.

All members of this Unit shall execute a written release stating full consent to
periodic unannounced drug testing.

All drug testing will be performed in accordance with the “Controlled
Substances and Alcohol Testing Regulations, Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration” (FMCSA), except as noted in paragraph 8, below.

Under this subsection, any random testing without notice will be in
compliance with applicable court decisions.

The FMCSA may be amended from time to time which may result in a
necessary revision to this provision. However, the City will first forward a
copy of the revised provision to the FPOA Unit Representative with an offer
to meet and confer regarding any potential impact to the members of this
Unit.

At the request of the Police Chief or designee, the City of Fresno Risk/Safety
Manager shall select and schedule the date and time when each member will
be tested. Such test may be administered no more that twice each fiscal year.

The City of Fresno Risk/Safety Manager shall notify the Police Chief or
designee of the selected employees that they have been chosen for random
testing. Selected employees for testing shall be subject to testing from the
time the employee begins to work until the end of his/her shift.

Up to twenty percent (20%) of the members of this Unit can be randomly
tested as set forth in subsection 5. above.

In those instances where members of this Unit are unable to provide a urine

30
10.

11.

12.

13.

sample, such members may elect to provide a blood sample. Failure to
provide a sufficient urine sample for testing, or a blood sample as an
alternative, shall be considered to be a positive test.

Members who have a positive sample shall be allowed to appeal this finding
in accordance with the Federal Regulations.

The City of Fresno Risk/Safety Manager shall place a copy of the completed
drug testing report into each corresponding file for that specific date of
testing.

The City of Fresno Risk/Safety Manager shall place a copy of the completed
drug testing report into each corresponding file for that specific date of
testing.

In addition to testing requirements contained in this MOU provision, all
members of this Unit are subject to Administrative Order 2-25.

Any drug testing policy negotiated subsequently with the Basic Unit (Unit 4),
in its successor MOU negotiations will apply to members of this Unit and will
supersede this provision.

DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES (Incorporated from Side Letter Agreement
dated September 10, 2008)

Standing Order 2.4.10, as well as the FMC, City Administrative Orders,
policies, procedures, operation manuals, rules and regulations
concerning disciplinary procedures will apply. However, any
permanent employee receiving a Final Order of Disciplinary Action
resulting in a termination, demotion or suspension of one hundred-
twenty hours (120) or more may, in lieu of submitting an appeal through
established means per their respective procedures, within fifteen (15)
calendar days of service of the Final Order of Disciplinary Action
request binding arbitration. If a request for binding arbitration is
submitted by an employee, the employee or their representative shall
be required to provide a written waiver of their right to bring the matter
through any other established means, including an appeal to the Civil
Service board. The arbitrator shall set the date, time and place of the
hearing, which place shall be on City premises, and shall, by certified
United States mail, postage prepaid, give not less than ten (10) days
notice of such date, time and place to the appellant, or the appellant’s
designated representative and the appointing authority. The hearing
shall be recorded by a court reporter or electronic process. Oral
evidence may be heard only on oath or affirmation. The arbitrator’s
decision shall be final and binding, and may be challenged only

31
pursuant to the California Arbitration Act, Code of Civil Procedure
Section s 1280, et seq.

The fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be paid half by the City
and half by the Association.

The parties shall endeavor to prepare a mutually agreed panel of seven
(7) arbitrators to be utilized for the purposes of discipline arbitrations.
In the event that the parties fail to identify a panel of agreed upon
arbitrators, the arbitrator shall be selected from a list of seven (7)
arbitrators provided by the California State Mediation and Conciliation
Service. If the parties cannot agree on an arbitrator from the list of
seven, the parties shall alternatively strike the names until a single
arbitrator’s name remains.

32
ARTICLE VIII
HEADINGS
MOU article, provision, section, and paragraph headings (includes exhibits, addendums,

attachments, agreements and side letters) contained herein are solely for the purpose of
convenience, and shall not affect the construction or interpretation of any of the language of

this MOU.

33
ARTICLE IX

SAVING CLAUSE/FULL UNDERSTANDING

SAVING CLAUSE

In the event any article, section or portion of this MOU should be held invalid and
unenforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall apply only
to the specific article, section or portion thereof specified in the court's decision, and
upon issuance of such a decision, the City and the Association agree to immediately
meet and confer upon a substitute for the invalidated article, section, or portion
thereof.

FULL UNDERSTANDING

This MOU sets forth the full understanding and agreement of the parties, and any
previous understanding or agreements by the parties, whether formal or informal,
regarding all such matters are hereby superseded and terminated in their entirety.

With respect to side letter agreements, any not attached to this MOU are hereby
terminated in their entirety. Those side letter agreements attached to this MOU shall
continue in force and shall continue subject to the term(s) set forth herein, or in the
absence of any specified term, the side letter agreements shall terminate upon the
expiration of this MOU. Any new side letter agreement entered into during the term
of this MOU shall continue in force and effect subject to the terms and conditions
described in the side letter. In the absence of any term in such new side letters,
they, too, shall terminate upon the expiration of this MOU. This paragraph is not
intended to prevent either party from relying on discussions which occurred during
the meet and confer process for the purpose of clarifying the meaning of this MOU.

34
ARTICLE X

TERMINATION

The provisions in this MOU shall be in full force and effect extended from * * * June 30,
2009 to June 30, 2012, subject to the Sections (.1, .2 and .3) below:

A.

This MOU shall become effective only after ratification by the members of the
Association, followed by City Council approval and the expiration of the waiting
period for the Mayor's action provided in Charter Sections 605 and 609, and shall
remain in full force and effective through June 30, 2012.

During the life of this MOU should either party desire to modify its terms or to meet
and confer with the other party as to matters within the scope of representation not
addressed in this MOU, the party requesting any change shall request in writing to
meet and confer on the item(s), which item(s) shall be specified in writing.

During the term of the MOU, either party may refuse any request by the other to
meet and confer without explanation if (1) the item is directly considered and
specifically addressed herein; or (2) is directly considered and specifically addressed
in any FMC section, charter section or provision, or resolution section, which section
specifically establishes wages, hours, or other terms and conditions of employment;
or (3) the specific item was included in an initial written proposal from the party
making the request during the meet and confer process which led to this agreement.
Either party shall also have the right to refuse a request on any matter falling within
the scope of representation and which would the basis of a proper refusal under (1)
— (3) supra, if the proposal, if accepted or implemented, would only become effective
after the expiration of this MOU. No unilateral action on any such refused proposal
may be taken by the requesting party after such a refusal by the other.

It is further agreed, however, that this section shall not prohibit the City from
requesting to meet and confer on changes to federal or state statutes.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands this day of

35
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands this 7 jay

of , 2009.
FOR THE POLICE OFFICERS FOR THE CITY SNO
ASSOCIATION ,

    
    

  
   

 

 

KENNETH G. PHILLIPS
President Labor Relations Manager

DIA CARRASCO

Police Captain Analyst

 

 

36
EXHIBIT | TO SLA - COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS

 

TABLE |

Police Management - Unit 9

SALARIES EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2010 (Deferred from 7/1/09)

(2% increase for Lts and Captains and to upper end of DC range, maintaning 5% between steps
and 3.35% between E and F}

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLASS TITLE A B Cc D E FE
Police Lieutenant 7414 7785 8175 8584 9014 9316
Police Captain 8538 8965 9414 9885 10,380 10,728
Deputy Police Chief 4163 : 12,044

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* No salary increases for FY13

 
EXHIBIT | TO SLA - COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS

 

TABLE V

Police Management - Unit 9

SALARIES EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2014 (1% deferred from 1/1/11 and 1% deferred from 7/1/11)
(2% increase for Lts and Captains and to upper end of DC range, maintaning 5% between steps

and 3.35% between E and F}

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLASS TITLE A B Cc D E FE
Police Lieutenant 7563 7942 8340 8757 9195 9504
Police Captain 8709 9145 9603 10,084 10,589 10,944
Deputy Police Chief 4163 : 12,285

TABLE VI

Police Management - Unit 9

SALARIES EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2015 (1% deferred from 7/1/11 and 1% deferred from 1/1/12)
(2% increase for Lts and Captains and to upper end of DC range, maintaning 5% between steps

and 3.35% between E and F)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLASS TITLE A B Cc D E FE
Police Lieutenant 7715 8101 8507 8933 9380 9695
Police Captain 8884 9329 9796 10,286 10,801 11,163
Deputy Police Chief 4163 - 12,531

 

 
ATTACHMENT "A"

General Fund Budget Overview

The chart below depicts a summary of the FY 2006 Actual, FY 2007 Amended Budget as of March 31, 2007, FY 2007
Budget estimates as of May 1, 2007 and the FY 2008 Proposed Budget respectively. The revenue is depicted in two
main categories, one-time resources and operating revenue. One-time resources for FY 2008 consist of an estimated
carryover of $16.1 million from FY 2007, which is 6.5 percent of the General Fund. Operating revenues net of
contractually obligated transfers is $235 million while ongoing operating expenditures are budgeted at $246 million.
This budget is balanced using a portion of the one-time carryover funds. However, to use the entire carryover will
create a structural imbalance of over $8 million as early as FY 2009. Therefore, this budget proposes to hold $5
million of the one-time funds in a contingency reserve account for FY 2009. The chart on the following page outlines
the necessity for this strategic plan.

FY 2006 FY 2007 FY 2007 FY 2008.
(numbers in 000’s) Actual Amended Estimated Proposed
Resources
One-Time Resources
Carryover $ 9,380 $ 14150 $

  

Operating Revenue

Sales Tax $ 72,265 $ 75,812 $ 79,400 $ 83,672
MRZ Incentive Credit 0 (500) 0 (500)
Prop 172 Sales Tax 2,672 2,541 2,753 2,890
Property Tax* 51,966 59,385 67,594 65,859
Motor Vehicle In-Lieu 40,293 33,862 35,180 36,565
Business Tax 15,549 15,938 15,938 16,462
Franchise Tax 5,601 5,880 5,900 6,359
Room Tax 9,926 9,087 10,500 10,912
Real Estate Transfer Tax 2,288 2,392 1,892 2,100
Card Room Receipts 1,478 1,332 1,357 1,399
Charges for Current Services 17,516 19,476 18,569 19,476
Enterprise In-Lieu Fees (783) 225 322 322
Intergovernmental Revenues 2,248 5,051 6,263 2,959
Intragovernmental Revenues 3,243 3,970 3,829 4,865
Bond Sale Proceeds 479 1,158 491 757

  
 
 

 

354
areas

684
Bs

$ (17,562) $ (24,970) $ (24,597) $ (19,745)

 

Expenditures

Operating Expenditures
Employee Services $ 133,538 $ 146,160 $ 145,770 $ 162,500
Retirement Contribution** 2,000 4,000 4,000 6,866
Pension Obligation Bonds 12,613 12,522 12,522 12,600
Operations & Maintenance 21,329 23,793 23,634 22,592
Interdepartmental Charges 30,851 34,264 33,744 37,417
Bond Capital 479 1,158 491 757
Minor Capital 2,165 3,783 3,872 3,348
Performance Pay 0 106 72 0
FY 2009 Budget Protection Plan 0 oO 0 5,000

Accrual Adjustments

   
 

FY 2006 Amended Property Tax reduced $4.7 million to reflect second year of ERAF shift per Prop 1A agreement.

‘The FY 2006 Retirement Contribution of $2.0 million is a prepayment transfer. The FY 2007 & FY 2008 Proposed Retirement
Contributions are reflected as a Retirement contribution expense.

 

ac
FRESNO POLICE DEPARTMENT REPORT OF PERFORMANCE

FOR SWORN EMPLOYEES

 

Month Probationary Evaluation
Annual Evaluation Prepared by:
Exit Evaluation

 

 

 

DATE: EMPLOYEE:
EVALUATION PERIOD RANK:
FROM TO ASSIGNMENT:

 

 

Ratings: (1) Unsatisfactory, (2) Average, (3) Above Average, (4) Superior, (5) Outstanding
Key Objectives:

 

 

Criteria 1 2 3 4 5

 

 

Customer Satisfaction: Works well with the public; establishes
effective working relationships with other agencies and organizations.

 

‘Employee Satisfaction: Works well with subordinates, peers.

 

Financial Management: Uses available resources, technology and
equipment effectively.

 

 

 

 

 

Values (ACT IT)

Accountability: By this we mean that we take personal responsibility for our actions.
Compassion: We care about and respect people.

Trust: ‘We mean we believe in each other.

Innovation: Seek new and creative ways to improve our business.

Teamwork: We work together to achieve our Vision.

 

 

Job Knowledge, Skills & Proficiency: Consider the employee’s
knowledge of department procedures and regulations, understanding of
the scope of assigned duties and the ability to perform those duties as
directed.

 

Quality and Accuracy of Work: Consider the accuracy, neatness
and thoroughness of work produced, and the oral and written expression
of assigned duties.

 

Decision Making/Problem Solving: Consider the employee’s
ability to identify problems, develop and implement solutions to impact
the problems, and the achievement of desired results.

 

Acceptance of Responsibility: Consider the employee’s motivation
to seek and complete assignments without undue supervision.

 

Appearance:
Consider the employee’s professional appearance and image, proper
grooming, and cleanliness of duty attire.

 

Attendance:
Consider the employee’s attendance and punctuality.

 

Compliance with Regulations:
Consider the employee’s compliance with department procedures and
policies and willingness to follow instructions.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
FRESNO POLICE DEPARTMENT REPORT OF PERFORMANCE

FOR SWORN EMPLOYEES

 

Month Probationary Evaluation
Annual Evaluation Prepared by:
Exit Evaluation

 

 

 

 

DATE: EMPLOYEE:
EVALUATION PERIOD RANK:
FROM TO ASSIGNMENT:

 

 

 

 

 

Performance of Duties:

Accepts assignments and follows through in a timely, effective,
efficient and appropriate manner to meet deadlines with minimum
supervision. Demonstrates productive use of time, promptness in
completing assignments, and daily planning to achieve results.

 

Initiative:
Consider the employee’s performance in new situations, performance in
emergencies, and officer safety.

 

Supervisory Performance:

Consider the supervisor’s leadership skills, ability to complete
assignments, assisting in employee development, maintaining proper
discipline, making sound decisions, communication skills, and
commitment to organizational goals.

 

OVERALL VALUES RATING:
This employee’s overall (Key Objectives and Values) rating is:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OVERALL REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE:

RECOMMENDATIONS:

ATTACHMENTS:

 

 

 

 

 

 
FRESNO POLICE DEPARTMENT

REPORT OF PERFORMANCE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FOR SWORN EMPLOYEES
Month Probationary Evaluation
Annual Evaluation Prepared by:
Exit Evaluation
DATE: EMPLOYEE:
EVALUATION PERIOD RANK:
FROM ASSIGNMENT:
Definitions
Unsatisfactory Needs to improve performance to demonstrate consistent satisfactory
performance or is an unsatisfactory performer that will be given short notice to
dramatically improve or face termination. A person with three or more
“unsatisfactory” ratings would be in this category. The number and severity of
ratings would be used in determining the level of “notice.”
Average Fulfills the performance requirements/expectations of the position. This person

may have one or two correctable “unsatisfactory” ratings on his/her evaluation
that would be reassessed after six months.

 

Above Average

Usually exceeds job standards in fulfilling performance requirements with
above average performance.

 

 

 

Superior Consistently exceeds job standards and often demonstrates excellence in
fulfilling performance requirements.
Outstanding Always exceeds job standards and consistently demonstrates excellence and

 

outstanding ability in fulfilling performance requirements.

 

 

 
 

FRESNO POLICE DEPARTMENT REPORT OF PERFORMANCE
FOR SWORN EMPLOYEES

Month Probationary Evaluation

Annual Evaluation Prepared by:

Exit Evaluation

 

 

 

DATE: EMPLOYEE:
EVALUATION PERIOD RANK:
FROM TO ASSIGNMENT:

 

 

 

 

EMPLOYEE’S COMMENT:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Driver’s License No: Expires On:

Pursuant to Government code 3306, a public safety officer shall have 30 calendar days within which to
file a written response to any comment entered in his/her personnel file. Such written response shall
be attached to, and shall accompany, this evaluation.

 

Employee’s Signature Date

 

Supervisor’s Signature Date

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Agreement between
City of Fresno

and

Employee Organizations Representing City of Fresno Employees

This agreement was reached in an effort to lower the current cost of the monthly health
contribution rates between March 1, 2009 and June 30, 2010 as set by the Fresno City
Employees Health and Welfare Trust (Trust) thereby assisting to ameliorate fiscal
developments faced by the City of Fresno (City). The agreement also provides short term
guarantees by the City for the unencumbered reserve of the Trust while setting a long
term minimum of four (4) months for the Trust unencumbered reserve. This agreement
sets forth the full and entire understanding of the City and Bargaining Units whose
representatives have signed this agreement regarding these matters. This Agreement is
effective March 1, 2009 and will remain in force so long as the Trust agrees to maintain a
health contribution rate that is calculated to maintain a minimum of a four (4) month
unencumbered reserve as calculated by the actuary selected by the Trust (actuary).

1. This agreement will be effective only if the provisions below affecting the Trust are
approved by a majority of affected represented bargaining units and the City
Council and if the Trust sets a monthly health contribution rate of seven hundred
twenty-nine dollars ($729) effective March 1, 2009 through June 30, 2010.

2. The parties agree that, for the period March 1, 2009 through June 30, 2010, if the
Trust unencumbered reserve fails below a four (4) month unencumbered reserve
as calculated by the actuary selected by the Trust for two (2) consecutive months,
the City will pay to the Trust an amount sufficient to restore the level of the Trust
unencumbered reserve to four (4) months.

3. The restoration to a four (4) month unencumbered reserve must occur within 30
days notice to the City by the Trust’s third party administrator. This payment by the
City shall not be utilized in the calculation of the amounts due by the City and
employees for established Trust health contribution rates.

4. Effective June 30, 2010 if the Trust unencumbered reserve is calculated by the
actuary selected by the Trust to be less than a four (4) month unencumbered
reserve, the City will pay an amount to the Trust sufficient to restore the level of
the unencumbered reserve to four (4) months. This payment by the City shall not
be utilized in the calculation of the amounts due by the City and employees for
established Trust health contribution rates.

5. The parties agree that, for the monthly health contribution rate effective July 1,
2010 and for all subsequent monthly health contribution rates, the Trust will set a
monthly health contribution rate not less than the rate calculated by the actuary
Page 2

Agreement re: Health & Welfare Trust Reserve

Employee Organizations representing City of Fresno Employees

selected by the Trust necessary to maintain a minimum unencumbered reserve of

four (4) months.

6. The parties will support amendments to the Trust necessary to implement this

agreement.

FOR THE FRESNO CITY
EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION:

FOR THE AMALGAMATED TRANSIT
UNION, LOCAL 1027

 

Me l=

FOR THE INTERNATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF FIREFIGHTERS,
LOCAL 753, BASIC UNIT:

Aull tt fA

FOR THE INTERNATIONAL
BROTHERHOOD OF ELECTRICAL
WORKERS, LOCAL 100:

FOR THE FRESNO POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION, BASIC UNIT:

fo

FOR THE FRESNO POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION, MANAGEMENT UNIT:

 

a Saf

FOR THE INTERNATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF FIREFIGHTERS,
LOCAL 753, MANAGEMENT UNIT:

Ljlade Coleal |

FOR THE CITY OF FRESNO
MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEES
ASSOCIATION:

Ait
SHE CITY OF FRESNO

PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYEES
ASSOCIATION:

FOR THE FRESNO AIRPORT PUBLIC
SAFETY SUPERVISORS:

 

beh
Page 3
Agreement re: Health & Welfare Trust Reserve
Employee Organizations representing City of Fresno Employees

FOR THE CITY OF FRESNO:

 

Date: Ase 2Y 29

 

 

 

 

APPROVED AS TO FORM

CITY ATTORNEY'S OFFICE
BY: ie
Deputy City Attorn

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
CITY OF FRESNO
AND
FRESNO POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
(Police Management — Unit 9)

COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS RE-OPENER

This agreement sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties regarding
Compensation and Benefits for a re-opener for Fiscal Years 2011, 2012 and 2013. Any
other previous understandings, side letters of agreement, Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) provisions or agreements by the parties regarding the below
Compensation and Benefits are hereby superseded and terminated in their entirety.
This agreement is self-governing and independent of any current or expired agreements
between the parties, and is governed by the terms and conditions contained herein.
This agreement shall be effective upon City approval and shall extend the term of the
current MOU for one year period of time from June 30, 2012, and terminate on June 30,
2013. Other than the modifications to the existing MOU as set forth herein, the parties
agree that until this Agreement terminates on June 30, 2013, all economic benefits
currently afforded to affected members shall remain intact without modification unless
otherwise agreed to in writing by the parties.

The parties agree to the following amendment/modification to the current MOU, to
portions of Article |, Preamble; Article Vil, Compensation and Benefits and Article X,
Termination:

ARTICLE 1
PREAMBLE
A. PURPOSE

This Memorandum of Understanding, hereinafter MOU, entered into between the
City of Fresno, hereinafter referred to as the City, and the Fresno Police Officers
Association, Police Management Unit, hereinafter referred to as the Association,
has as its purpose: to establish wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of
employment for members of this Unit. This MOU is extended for a * * * one year
period of time from * * * June 30, 2012 to June 30, 2013. * * * Upon approval
by the City, other than the modifications set forth herein, the parties agree that
until this MOU terminates on * * * June 30, 2013, all economic benefits currently
afforded to affected members shall remain intact without modification unless
otherwise agreed to in writing by the parties.

Effective July 1, 2009 through * * * June 30, 2012, the parties agree there will be
no demotions (excluding demotions for disciplinary cause) of any member of this
Unit for purposes of economic or reorganizational purposes or enforcement of
involuntary furloughs.
Page 2

Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

A. GENERAL

All economic

ARTICLE VII

COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS

benefits, provided by Council ordinance or formal Council resolution

and not otherwise clearly an explicitly modified or restricted in this MOU, shall be
continued without alteration during the term of the MOU.

B. SALARIES,

EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS, BONUS PAY,

DEFERRED COMPENSATION, PENSION CONTRIBUTION, HEALTH
REIMBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENT (HRA), BENEFIT PAYOFFS AND
PROMOTION.
1. Salaries - * **

KKK

a. Police Lieutenant, Police Captain and Deputy Police Chief (FY10 -

 

Deferred Salary Increase)

b. Police

* * * Police Lieutenants and Police Captains previously agreed to
defer * * * until July 1, 2010, a one percent (1%) salary increase * *
* scheduled to be received on July 1, 2009.

* * * Deputy Police Chiefs previously agreed to defer * * * until
July 1, 2010, a one percent (1%) salary increase to the upper end
of the salary range from $11,926 to $12,046 * * * scheduled to be
received on July 1, 2009.

Lieutenant, Police Captain and Deputy Police Chief (FY11)

Effective July 1, 2010, salaries for Police Lieutenants and Police
Captains shall be increased by two percent (2%) salary increase as
reflected on Exhibit I, Table |.

Effective July 1, 2010, the upper end of the salary range for Deputy
Police Chiefs shall be increased by two percent (2%) from $11,807
to $12,044 as reflected on Exhibit |, Table |.

Effective July 1, 2010, salaries for Deputy Chiefs shall be increased
by two percent (2%).
Page 3

Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

vi.

c. Police

Effective January 1, 2011, salaries for Police Lieutenants and
Police Captains shall be increased by one percent (1%) as
reflected on Exhibit I, Table II.

Effective January 1, 2011, the upper end of the salary range for
Deputy Police Chiefs shall be increased by one percent (1%) from
$12,044 to $12,165 as reflected on Exhibit |, Table II.

Effective January 1, 2011, salaries for Deputy Police Chiefs shall
be increased by one percent (1%).

Lieutenant, Police Captain and Deputy Police Chief (FY12)

 

vi.

Effective July 1, 2011, salaries for Police Lieutenants and Police
Captains shall be increased by two percent (2%) salary increase as
reflected on Exhibit I, Table Ill.

Effective July 1, 2011, the upper end of the salary range for Deputy
Police Chiefs shall be increased by two percent (2%) from $12,165
to $12,409, as reflected on Exhibit I, Table III.

Effective July 1, 2011, salaries for Deputy Police Chiefs shall be
increased by two percent (2%).

Effective January 1, 2012, salaries for Police Lieutenants and
Police Captains shall be increased by one percent (1%) as
reflected on Exhibit |, Table IV.

Effective January 1, 2012, the upper end of the salary range for
Deputy Police Chiefs shall be increased by one percent (1%) from
$12,409 to $12,534 as reflected on Exhibit I, Table IV.

 

Effective January 1, 2012, salaries for Deputy Police Chiefs shall
be increased by one percent (1%).

d. Police Lieutenants, Police Captains and Deputy Police Chiefs (FY13)

There shall be no salary increases for Police Lieutenant, Police
Captain and Deputy Police Chief for Fiscal Year 2013.

4. Deferred Compensation

The City will contribute to the City’s Deferred Compensation Plan fifty-five
dollars and thirty-nine cents ($55.39) per employee per pay period * * * to
the City’s Deferred Compensation Plan. * * * In order for employees
Page 4
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

to receive this benefit, the employees * * * must personally enroll in the
Deferred Compensation Plan by contacting the deferred compensation
administrator (Fidelity) and the Police Department’s payroll clerk and
authorize a contribution of at least fifty-five dollars and thirty-nine
cents ($55.39) per pay period. *** This contribution by the City shall
not be pensionable compensation; * * * shall not be included in the
calculation of retirement benefits; and payment will be prospective from
the point of enrollment.

6. Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) * * *

At separation from permanent employment with the City of Fresno by
service retirement or at disability retirement if the employee is otherwise
eligible for service retirement, the value of the employee’s accumulated
sick leave and cashable vacation leave shall be credited to an account for
the employee under the Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA).

e July 1, 2008, the number of accumulated sick leave hours in excess
of 120 hours at the time of retirement multiplied by 50% of the
employee’s then hourly rate of pay.

e November 3, 2008, the number of accumulated sick leave hours at
the time of retirement in excess of 120 hours multiplied by 50% of
the employee’s then current hourly base rate of pay, except that an
employee who retires within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt by
the City of Fresno Fire & Police Retirement System of a retirement
application by, or on behalf of the employee, shall have
accumulated sick leave hours upon retirement in excess of 120
hours upon retirement multiplied by eighty percent (80%) of the
employee’s then current hourly base rate of pay.

e *** July 1, 2009, the total number of all accumulated sick leave
hours at the time of retirement, multiplied by 50% of the employee’s
then current hourly base rate of pay, except that an employee who
retires within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt by the City of
Fresno Fire & Police Retirement System of a retirement application
by, or on behalf of the employee, shall have all accumulated sick
leave hours upon retirement * * * multiplied by eighty percent (80%)
of the employee’s then current hourly base rate of pay.

All payments noted above are dependent upon the employee’s eligibility
requirement as set forth in the Retirement/Attendance Health Incentive
provision in Section H., paragraph 1.a, below, and

e The number of accumulated cashable vacation leave hours at the
Page 5
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

time of retirement multiplied by the employee’s then current hourly
base rate of pay.

e Effective August 1, 2009, the total number of all accumulated
holiday leave hours at the time of separation for retirement
purposes paid at the member's then current hourly base rate of

pay.

e The hourly base rate of pay shall be the equivalent of the monthly
salary for an employee as reflected in Exhibit |, multiplied by twelve
(12) months then divided by 2,080 hours.

The HRA accounts shall be book accounts only — no actual trust
account shall be established for any employee. Each HRA book
account shall be credited on a monthly basis with a rate of earnings
equal to the yield on the City’s Investment Portfolio (provided that such
yield is positive).

The HRA accounts shall be used solely to pay premiums for medical
insurance (including COBRA premiums) covering the participant, the
participant’s spouse (or surviving spouse in the event of the death of
the participant), and the participant’s dependents. Once a participant's
account under the HRA has been reduced to $0, no further benefits
shall be payable by the HRA. If the participant, the participant's
spouse, and the participant's dependents die before the participant's
account under the HRA has been reduced to $0, no death benefit shall
be payable to any person by the HRA.

After July 1, 2008, the requirement in the first paragraph of this Section
that an employee use less than eighty (80) hours of sick leave in the
preceding 24 months shall be eliminated and no such requirement
shall be made for an employee otherwise eligible for this benefit.

Cc. SERVICE UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

Effective July 1, 2009, employees shall receive an additional $110 for a total
of $1,200 as a service uniform purchase and maintenance allowance, prorated
and paid on a pay period-by-pay period basis. The service uniform allowance
provided pursuant to this section shall be considered as compensation for
purposes of calculating pension benefits for a member. Effective upon
approval of this Agreement by the City, the employees agree to a
suspension of service uniform allowance during fiscal year 2011. However,
the suspended $1,200 amount will remain pensionable when an employee
enters DROP or separates from City service at retirement age during fiscal
Page 6
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

year 2011. Effective July 1, 2011, payment of uniform service allowance
will resume as set forth above.

H. LEAVES

3. Holiday Leave:

a. Employees shall accumulate 8 2/3 hours of holiday leave for each
completed calendar month of employment.

b. Effective upon approval of this agreement by the City, all
employees agree to an extension to freeze Holiday time pay
downs from September 30, 2010 through June 30, 2011.
Effective October 1, 2010, the cap for accumulated holiday leave
shall increase * * * from 350 hours to 488 hours through the
term of this Agreement/MOU. If prior to * * * June 30, 2011, an
employee exceeds the monthly * * * 488 hour cap, holiday leave
shall be paid down automatically by the department to * * * 488
hour cap without the consent of the employee.

c. For the period July 1, 2011 through June 30, 2012, employees
who do not pay down more than 8.67 hours of holiday time per
month, whether voluntarily or involuntarily (as a result of
reaching the accrual limit) will receive an incentive. At the
employee’s option, the incentive will be a one-time addition of
sixteen (16) hours to the employee’s Holiday or Vacation bank
or a one-time, non-pensionable payment of $650.00 payable
July 1, 2012, by separate check.

d. * * * Effective July 1, 2011 through the term of this
AgreementiMOU, employees may request the department to pay
down the member’s Holiday Time up to a maximum of ninety-six
hours * * * per month; however, the member will not be eligible
for the incentive pursuant to subparagraph c., above. * * *

e. If an employee retires between October 1, 2010 and June 30,
2011, the member is allowed to cash out one-hundred (100)
hours of holiday time prior to retirement papers being filed,
with the remaining balance to deposited into their Health
Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) account.

f. Effective July 1, 2009, at separation for retirement purposes, the
employees’ accumulated holiday leave hours shall be paid at the
member’s then current hourly base rate of pay * * * in accordance
with Article Vil, Section B. 6, or cashed at separation if not
eligible for the HRA. * * *
Page 7
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

4. Administrative Leave:

a. Employees shall receive sixty (60) hours of administrative leave each
fiscal year. The Police Chief or designee may grant up to an additional
thirty-two (32) hours administrative leave each fiscal year to employees.
This additional administrative leave will be based on above average or
higher job performance and merit as determined by the Chief or designee.
The decision by the Police Chief or designee to grant such additional
leave shall be made during * * * June and is effective July 1“ of the fiscal
year in which it may be taken. Any such additional administrative leave
cannot be cashed in by employees. Employees may receive payment for
up to sixty (60) hours of Administrative leave not taken during the fiscal
year. Any administrative leave not taken or compensated for shall not be
added to the leave credited in the next fiscal year.

b. Effective * * * July 1, 2010 and July 1, 2011, the sixty (60) hours of
administrative leave received by employees for each of those fiscal years
shall be automatically moved into the employee’s Holiday time bank and
shall be compensable for retirement purposes.

c. Effective July 1, 2012 * * *, the provisions contained in subparagraph a.,
above, shall apply.

ARTICLE X
TERMINATION

The provisions in this Agreement/MOU shall be in full force and effect extended from
*** June 30, 2012 to June 30, 2013, upon approval by the City, subject to Sections
(A., B. and C.) below:

A. This Agreement/MOU shall become effective only after ratification by the
members of the Association followed by City * * * approval and the expiration of
the waiting period for the Mayor’s action provided in Charter Sections 605 and
609, and shall remain in full force and effect through June 30, 2013. * * *

The City and the Association agree that during the term of this agreement, the
Mayor shall appoint one (1) police officer, as defined in Fresno Municipal Code
(“FMC”) Section 3-301 (p) (3) from a City management position and one (1)
firefighter as defined in FMC Section 3-301 (f) from a City management position
as voting members to the Fresno Fire and Police Retirement Board under the
authority as described in Section 3-305 (a) (1) of the FMC. These appointments
shall occur within twenty (20) business days of City approval of this agreement
and are subject to Council approval. In the event any individual(s) so appointed
Page 8
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

fails to qualify, resigns, retires, or no longer qualifies to serve on the Board, the
Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council shall appoint a replacement
under the terms and provisions of this agreement within twenty (20) business
days. If a decision is approved by the Fire and Police Retirement Board to
separate the commingled investments of the Fresno Fire and Police Retirement
System and the Fresno Employees Retirement System, this agreement on
Mayoral appointments to the Fire and Police Retirement Board shall immediately
become null and void and the appointment provisions contained in FMC Section
3-305 shall apply.

FOR THE CITY OF FRESNO: FOR THE FRESNO POLICE
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION:

Original Signed Original Signed
Kenneth G. Phillips Jacky Parks
Labor Relations Manager President, FROA

Original Signed
Jerry Dyer
Chief of Police

Date: __ September 30, 2010

 

APPROVED AS TO FORM
CITY ATTORNEY’S OFFICE

BY: Original Signed _
Deputy City Attorney

 

 

 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
CITY OF FRESNO
AND
FRESNO POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
(Police Management — Unit 9)

COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS ADDENDUM

This agreement sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties regarding
Compensation and Benefits for Fiscal Years 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015. Any
other previous understandings, side letters of agreement, Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) provisions or agreements by the parties regarding the
Compensation and Benefits below are hereby superseded and terminated in their
entirety. This agreement is self-governing and independent of any current or expired
agreements between the parties, and is governed by the terms and conditions
contained herein. This agreement shall be effective upon City approval and shall
extend the term of the current MOU for a two year period of time from June 30, 2013,
and terminate on June 30, 2015. Other than the modifications to the existing MOU as
set forth herein, the parties agree that until this Agreement terminates on June 30,
2015, all economic benefits currently afforded to affected members shall remain intact
without modification unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties.

The parties agree to the following amendment/modification to the current MOU, to
portions of Article 1, Preamble; Article Vil, Compensation and Benefits; and, Article X,
Termination:

ARTICLE |
PREAMBLE
A. PURPOSE

This Memorandum of Understanding, hereinafter MOU, entered into between the
City of Fresno, hereinafter referred to as the City, and the Fresno Police Officers
Association, hereinafter referred to as the Association, has as its purpose: to
establish wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment for
members of this Unit. This MOU is extended for a * * * two year period of time
from * * * June 30, 2013 to June 30, 2015. = _* * * Upon approval by the city,
other than the modifications set forth herein, the parties agree that until this MOU
terminates on * * * June 30, 2015, all economic benefits currently afforded to
affected members shall remain intact without modification unless otherwise
agreed to in writing by the parties.

Effective July 1, 2009 through * * * June 30, 2014, the parties agree there will be
no demotions (excluding demotions for disciplinary cause) of any member of this
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener

Fresno
Page 2

Police Officers Association, Management Unit

Unit for purposes of economic or reorganizational purposes or enforcement of
involuntary furloughs. Through June 30, 2014, reductions to staffing levels
shall only occur through attrition.

ARTICLE VII

COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS
GENERAL

All economic benefits, provided by Council ordinance or formal Council resolution
and not otherwise clearly and explicitly modified or restricted in this MOU, shall
be continued without alteration during the term of the MOU.

SALARIES, EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS, BONUS PAY,
DEFERRED COMPENSATION, PENSION CONTRIBUTION, HEALTH
REIMBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENT (HRA), BENEFIT PAYOFFS AND
PROMOTION.

1. Salaries

wee

a. Police Lieutenants and Police Captains * * * — Deferred Salaries)
** * Police Lieutenants and Police Captains * * * agree to defer * * *
a one percent (1%) salary increase scheduled to be received
January 1, 2011; a two percent (2%) salary increase scheduled
to be received July 1, 2011, and a one percent (1%) salary
increase scheduled to be received January 1, 2012, as follows:

 

i. Effective July 1, 2014, a two percent (2%) salary
increase, as reflected on Exhibit I, Table V; and,

ii. Effective January 1, 2015, a two percent (2%) salary
increase, as reflected on Exhibit I, Table VI.

b. * * * Deputy Police Chiefs — Deferred Salaries) Deputy Police
Chiefs agree to defer a one percent (1%) salary increase
scheduled to be received January 1, 2011; a two percent (2%)
salary increase scheduled to be received July 1, 2011, and a
one percent (1%) salary increase scheduled to be received
January 1, 2012, as follows:

 
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

Page 3

[§ deleted]

Cc.

i. Effective July 1, 2014, the upper end of the salary range
for Deputy Police Chiefs shall be increased by two
percent (2%), as reflected on Exhibit I, Table V;

ii. Effective July 1, 2014, salaries for Deputy Police Chiefs
shall be increased by two percent (2%);

iii. Effective January 1, 2015, the upper end of the salary
range for Deputy Police Chiefs shall be increased by two
percent (2%), as reflected on Exhibit I, Table VI; and,

iv. Effective January 1, 2015, salaries for Deputy Police
Chiefs shall be increased by two percent.

Retirement/DROP * * * - * * * Effective January 1, 2011, the
deferred * * * one percent * * * (1%) salary increase shall be
included in any retirement benefit or DROP calculations pursuant to
the applicable FMC sections for members who separate from City
service by service retirement or by disability retirement, or enter
DROP. * **

Retirement/DROP - Effective July 1, 2011, the deferred two
percent (2%) salary increase shall be included in any
retirement benefit or DROP calculations pursuant to the
applicable FMC sections for members who separate from City
service by service retirement or by disability retirement, or
enter DROP.

Retirement/DROP - Effective January 1, 2012, the deferred one
percent (1%) salary increase shall be included in any
retirement benefit or DROP calculations pursuant to the
applicable FMC sections for members who separate from City
service by service retirement or by disability retirement, or
enter DROP.

With respect to Sections B.1. c., d. and e., members who retire
or enter DROP and receive the January 1, 2011, July 1, 2011

and January 1, 2012, deferred salary increases in their
retirement benefit or DROP calculation shall not be entitled to
also add the July 1, 2014 and January 1, 2015, salary increases
to their retirement benefit or DROP calculation.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

Page 4

g. DROP Participants and Retirees (Tier 1) - Effective January 1,
2011, adjustments to the monthly amount deposited
allowances for DROP participants and monthly retirement
benefit allowances for retirees shall include all deferred salary
increases from Section 7.2.01 and be calculated pursuant to
FMC Sections 3-301 and 3-302.

h. DROP Participants_and_ Retirees (Tier I) who receive the
January 1, 2011, July 1, 2011 and January 1, 2012, deferred

salary increases as adjustments to their monthly retirement
allowance shall not be entitled to also add the July 1, 2014 and
January 1, 2015, salary increases as adjustments to their
monthly retirement allowances.

i. DROP Participants and Retirees (Tier Il) — In accordance with
FMC Sections 3-411 and 3-424, should the CPI percentage for

the more recent full calendar year decrease below the CPI
percentage for the full calendar year immediately prior, that
percentage decrease shall not be used to reduce retirement
allowances or deposits to the members’ DROP account. It
shall instead be used to reduce any previously banked cost of
living increases. Any decrease in excess of the
members’/retirees’ cost of living bank shall be accumulated in
the bank and offset by future cost of living increases as
occurring in succeeding years.

j. (Tier 1) — An actuarial study will be conducted on amending
FMC Sections 3-302 (g) and 3-301 (a) (9) for Tier | members.
Upon completion of the actuarial study, there will be a limited
reopener of the MOU to negotiate solely on amending these
provisions with respect to retirement calculations. The cost of
the actuarial study will be shared equally by the City and the
Association.

Deferred Compensation (Incorporated from 9/30/10 Side Letter
Agreement Re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener.)

The city will contribute to the City’s Deferred Compensation Plan fifty-five
dollars and thirty-nine cents ($55.39) per employee per pay period to the
City’s Deferred Compensation Plan. In order for employees to receive this
benefit, the employees must personally enroll in the Deferred
Compensation Plan by contacting the deferred compensation
administrator (Fidelity) and the Police Department's payroll clerk and
authorize a contribution of at least fifty-five dollars and thirty-nine cents
($55.39) per pay period. This contribution by the City shall not be
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

Page 5

pensionable compensation; shall not be included in the calculation of
retirement benefits; and payment will be prospective from the point of
enrollment.

Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) (Incorporated from 9/30/10

Side Letter Agreement Re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener.)

At separation from permanent employment with the City of Fresno by
service retirement or at disability retirement if the employee is otherwise
eligible for service retirement, the value of the employee’s accumulated
sick leave and cashable vacation leave shall be credited to an account for
the employee under the Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA).

° July 1, 2008, the number of accumulated sick leave hours in excess
of 120 hours at the time of retirement multiplied by 50% of the
employee’s then hourly rate of pay.

° November 3, 2008, the number of accumulated sick leave hours at
the time of retirement in excess of 120 hours multiplied by 50% of
the employee’s then current hourly base rate of pay, except that an
employee who retires within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt by
the City of Fresno Fire & Police Retirement System of a retirement
application by, or on behalf of the employee, shall have
accumulated sick leave hours upon retirement in excess of 120
hours upon retirement multiplied by eighty percent (80%) of the
employee’s then current hourly base rate of pay.

° July 1, 2009, the total number of all accumulated sick leave hours
at the time of retirement, multiplied by 50% of the employee’s then
current hourly base rate of pay, except that an employee who
retires within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt by the City of
Fresno Fire & Police Retirement System of a retirement application
by, or on behalf of the employee, shall have all accumulated sick
leave hours upon retirement multiplied by eighty percent (80%) of
the employee’s then current hourly base rate of pay.

All payments noted above are dependent upon the employee’s eligibility
requirement as set forth in the Retirement/Attendance Health Incentive
provision in Section H., paragraph 1.a, below, and

. The number of accumulated cashable vacation leave hours at the
time of retirement multiplied by the employee’s then current hourly
base rate of pay.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener

Fresno
Page 6

Police Officers Association, Management Unit

° Effective August 1, 2009, the total number of all accumulated
holiday leave hours at the time of separation for retirement
purposes paid at the member's then current hourly base rate of
Pay.

. The hourly base rate of pay shall be the equivalent of the monthly
salary for an employee as reflected in Exhibit |, multiplied by twelve
(12) months then divided by 2,080 hours.

The HRA accounts shall be book accounts only — no actual trust account
shall be established for any employee. Each HRA book account shall be
credited on a monthly basis with a rate of earnings equal to the yield on
the City’s Investment Portfolio (provided that such yield is positive).

The HRA accounts shall be used solely to pay premiums for medical
insurance (including COBRA premiums) covering the participant, the
participant's spouse (or surviving spouse in the event of the death of the
participant), and the participant's dependents. Once a participant's
account under the HRA has been reduced to $0, no further benefits shall
be payable by the HRA. If the participant, the participant's spouse, and
the participant’s dependents die before the participant’s account under the
HRA has been reduced to $0, no death benefit shall be payable to any
person by the HRA.

After July 1, 2008, the requirement in the first paragraph of this Section
that an employee use less than eighty (80) hours of sick leave in the
preceding 24 months shall be eliminated and no such requirement shall be
made for an employee otherwise eligible for this benefit.

SERVICE UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

Effective July 1, 2009, employees * * * received an additional $110.00 for a total
of $1,200 as a service uniform purchase and maintenance allowance, prorated
and to be paid in a separate check on a pay period-by-pay period basis. The
service uniform allowance provided pursuant to this section shall be considered
as compensation for purposes of calculating pension benefits for a member. * * *
Pursuant to the Side Letter Agreement Re: Compensation and Benefits
Re-Opener dated September 30, 2010, the employees agreed to relinquish
and give up their * * * service uniform allowance during fiscal year 2011.
However, * * * when an employee enters DROP or separates from City service at
retirement age * * * the uniform allowance shall be included in the
calculation of the member’s DROP or retirement benefits. Effective July 1,
2011, payment of uniform allowance will resume as set forth above.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener

Fresno
Page 7

Police Officers Association, Management Unit

(It is the intent of this agreement to hold retirees and DROP participants
harmless on the relinquished FY11 service uniform allowance.)

FRESNO CITY EMPLOYEES HEALTH AND WELFARE TRUST

The City and the Association agree that the Fresno City Employees Health and
Welfare Trust has the sole authority to determine the benefits that will be
provided during the term of this MOU. The sole responsibility of the City under
this clause is to provide a set dollar amount to be contributed to the Trust on
behalf of the members represented by the Association. The City’s contribution
will be eighty percent (80%) of the premium established by the Fresno City
Employees Health and Welfare Trust board. Members may opt to contribute the
amount necessary to make up the difference through payroll deductions, or
accept a reduced coverage option.

The parties also agree to work collectively in conjunction with their Board
representatives to research and recommend potential cost-saving measures for
the Health & Welfare Trust, which may include a choice of health program
options based on individual need or preference, including a reduced option
equivalent to the City’s premium contribution, a separate rate for single
employees with no dependents, or other flex plan programs; mandatory generic
mail order drug maintenance for employees who require prescription drug
therapy for any period of 90 days or more; or other measures that may be
identified as this work progresses.

The FPOA and the City of Fresno agree to a limited MOU reopener
regarding health care premiums if all City bargaining units other than the
FPOA are subject to a different formula for determining health care
contributions. Meet and confer sessions shall start no earlier than
January 1, 2013, and any modifications resulting from the reopener shall
take effect no earlier than July 1, 2013.

LEAVES

3. Holiday Leave:

a. Employees shall accumulate eight and two-thirds (8 2/3) hours of
holiday leave for each completed calendar month of employment.

b. * * * Effective October 1, 2010, the cap for accumulated holiday
leave *** increased * * * to 488 hours. * * * If * * * an employee
exceeds the monthly 488 hour cap, holiday leave shall be paid
down automatically by the department to the 488 hour cap without
the consent of the employee. The cap for accumulated monthly
holiday leave shall remain at 488 hours through June 30, 2011.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

Page 8

*** Effective July 1, 2011, the cap for accumulated monthly
holiday leave shall revert to 96 hours. Holiday hours in excess
of 96 will be placed in a “Special Holiday Leave Bank” as set
forth in paragraph (f) below.

*** Once regular holiday leave banks are reduced to the 96
hour cap, employees who are at the 96 hour cap will receive an
automatic pay down of any hours exceeding the cap effective
July 1, 2011.

wee

Effective upon approval of this agreement by the City, all members
agree to continue an extension to freeze voluntary Holiday time
pay downs from * * * July 1, 2011 through * * * June 30, 2012.

wee

In accordance with subparagraph (c) above, effective July 1,
2011, all holiday leave balances in excess of 96 hours shall be
placed as a one-time deposit in a “Special Holiday Leave
Bank”, which hours may be used as follows:

Special Holiday Leave Bank

i. Approved leave;

ii. Absent With Substitute (AWS) agreements transferred
only to the substituting employee’s regular holiday
bank;

iii. Voluntary cash-out of forty-three (43) hours each FY
beginning in FY14 through FY18; and,

iv. Voluntary cash-out of one-hundred (100) hours
immediately prior to separation or prior to the employee
filing retirement paperwork.

After the one-time deposit, employees may not place any
additional hours in the Special Holiday Leave Bank.

At separation from City service, all remaining hours in the
Special Holiday Leave Bank shall be credited to an HRA
account for the employee if eligible for service retirement as
set forth in Article Vil, Section B. 6, or cashed out at separation
if not eligible to participate in the HRA.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

Page 9

The one-time, non-pensionable payment of $650.00 agreed to
in the Side Letter Agreement Re: Compensation and Benefits
Re-Opener dated September 30, 2010, shall be paid to all
members by separate check as follows:

i. $325.00 per employee payable on December 1, 2011,
and,

ii. $325.00 per employee payable on December 1, 2012.

Effective July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2015, members may
voluntarily request the department to pay down the member’s
Holiday Time up to a maximum of ninety-six (96) hours per
fiscal year.

Effective July 1, 2015, members may voluntarily request the
department to pay down the member’s Holiday Time up to a
maximum of ninety-six (96) hours per month.

* * * At separation, for retirement purposes, the employees’
accumulated regular holiday leave hours shall be paid at the
member’s then current hourly base rate of pay in accordance with
Article VII, Section B. 6, or cashed at separation if not eligible for
the HRA.

A Tier Il member who has reached the minimum retirement age
and elects to enter DROP or retire (not having entered DROP),
shall have amounts equal to the member’s unused holiday
leave balance and Special Holiday Leave balance (at the DROP
effective date or retirement date, not having entered DROP)
multiplied by the member’s current hourly base rate of pay
included in the computation of the member’s final average
salary as if it were a one-time payment. Based on the
additional pensionable compensation, the member and the
City will make corresponding pension contributions to the
retirement system. The employee agrees to have this pension
contribution amount withheld from the employee’s DROP
account, if entering DROP, or from the employee’s final
paycheck (not having entered DROP).

Administrative Leave: (Incorporated from 9/30/10 Side Letter
Agreement Re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener.)

Employees shall receive sixty (60) hours of administrative leave
each fiscal year. The Police Chief or designee may grant up to an
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

Page 10

additional thirty-two (32) hours administrative leave each fiscal year
to employees. This additional administrative leave will be based on
above average or higher job performance and merit as determined
by the Chief or designee. The decision by the Police Chief or
designee to grant such additional leave shall be made during June
and is effective July 1° of the fiscal year in which it may be taken.
Any such additional administrative leave cannot be cashed in by
employees. Employees may receive payment for up to sixty (60)
hours of Administrative leave not taken during the fiscal year. Any
Administrative leave not taken or compensated for shall not be
added to the leave credited in the next fiscal year.

b. Effective July 1, 2010 and July 1, 2011, the sixty (60) hours of
administrative leave received by employees for each of those fiscal
years shall be automatically moved into the employee’s Holiday
time bank and shall be compensable for retirement purposes.

c. Effective July 1, 2012, the provisions contained in subparagraph a.,
above, shall apply.

WORKERS’ COMPENSATION

Notwithstanding the provisions of FMC Section 3-118, an employee in this
Unit who suffers an injury or illness in the course and scope of City
employment shall receive eighty-five (85) percent of full wages or salary
from the City.

Notwithstanding the provisions of FMC Section 3-118, an employee
who suffers an injury or illness in the course and scope of City
employment on or after January 1, 2010 shall become entitled,
regardless of his or her period of service with the City, to a leave of
absence while so disabled without loss of salary in lieu of temporary
disability payments as provided by California Labor Code Section
4850. The remaining provisions of FMC Section 3-118 shall apply.

Employees on “light duty” as a result of an injury or illness suffered in the
course and scope of employment shall receive their regular salary during
the period of light duty.

Compensation for an accepted claim of a work related injury or illness
shall begin following the first three (3) days after the employee leaves
work as a result of the injury or illness. However, this three (3) day waiting
period shall be waived and compensation shall begin on the first day of a
work related injury or illness only if:
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

Page 11

a. the employee is hospitalized as an inpatient for at least twenty-four
(24) hours; or,

b. the employee is absent from work fourteen (14) days or more; or,

c. the employee is placed on light duty at any time during the first
three (3) days.

Partial days of absence due to a work related injury or illness, including
the day of injury or illness, shall be at full pay and shall not count toward
the three (3) day-exclusion period; however, this time shall be recorded as
work related injury/illness absence.

At the employee’s option, in the event the work related injury/illness is not
provided during the first three (3) days of absence due to the work related
injury or illness, the employee, may at the employee’s option, take sick
leave vacation or holiday leave for that period.

If the employee opts to use sick leave, vacation or holiday for the first
three (3) days and it is later determined that the work related injury/illness
pay under paragraph 1. Above, beginning on the first day of a work related
injury is appropriate, the leave time shall be restored to the employee and
the employee’s pay or leave balance will be adjusted accordingly.

If the employee has been on leave without pay for the first three (3) days
and it is later determined that pay is applicable from the first day, the
employee shall be paid therefore.

If the employee is placed on sick leave, vacation or holiday pending
determination as to whether the injury or illness is industrial, and the injury
is determined to be industrial, sick leave, vacation or holiday shall be
restored within thirty (30) calendar days of such determination, and the
employee placed on work related injury/illness leave as provided herein.

Retirement benefits shall not be reduced as a result of a member
receiving Workers’ Compensation benefits. * * *

Taxes shall not be withheld on compensation * * * due to injury in the line
of duty.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit
Page 12

J.

ASSIGNMENTS, ROTATION AND WORK SCHEDULES

1.

Assignments:

Assignments are determined by the Police Chief or designee based on the
needs of the Police Department.

Rotation:

It is the prerogative of the Police Chief or designee to rotate Police
Management personnel as necessary for the good of the service.

Schedules:

It is the prerogative of the Police Chief or designee to assign
employees to a 5/8, 9/80 or 4/10 schedule as necessary for the good
of the service.

* * * Work Week for Field Commanders

a.

Newly promoted Police Lieutenants will be assigned to the
patrol division for a minimum of six (6) months before they are
eligible for non-patrol assignments.

Chief's Exemption: The Police Chief may select up to two (2)
newly promoted Police Lieutenants to serve in non-patrol
assignments without time limitations. The department and the
association will maintain a copy of the acknowledgment. Once
the selected Police Lieutenant leaves this non-patrol
assignment, the Police Lieutenant must be assigned to the
patrol division for a minimum of six (6) months before they are
eligible for any non-patrol assignment.

Police Lieutenants designated as Field Commanders of a Patrol
Bureau in the Field Operations Division are assigned to a 4/10 work
schedule. It is the prerogative of the Police Chief or designee to
reassign employees to another schedule other than a 4/10 as
necessary for the good of the service.

A 4/10 work schedule consists of four (4) ten (10) hour work days.
The work week begins 0011 hours on Monday and ends on 2400
hours the following Sunday. Each 4/10 schedule within the work
week consists of a total of forty (40) scheduled hours of actual work
time.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

Page 13

Effective September 1, 2009, Police Lieutenants designated as
Field Commanders of a Patrol Bureau in the Field Operations
Division may be scheduled to work a modified “3/12” schedule
as agreed upon by the Department and FPOA.

An employee assigned to a 4/10 or 3/12 schedule who is off ona
holiday which is a regular work day shall utilize leave balances
accrued in the holiday work bank, administrative leave bank, or
vacation bank.

Each 9/80 work schedule will consist of eight 9-hour shifts,
one 8-hour shift and one day off in addition to regular days off,
per 14-day period broken down into two 40-hour per week Fair
Labor Standards Act (FLSA) work weeks. All employees
working a 9/80 work schedule shall have an FLSA work week
which begins four (4) hours after the start time of the day of
the week which constitutes the employee’s alternating day off.
This shall be an 8-hour shift. The work week shall end exactly
168 hours later. The workweek for each such position will be
defined in writing. The original document will be maintained
by the Department and a copy filed the Personnel
Services Department and the Payroll Division of the Finance
Department.

 
 

Employees shall accumulate eight (8) hours of sick leave per
month, and receive sick leave pay for the actual number of hours
absent.

Employees on a 4/10 or 3/12 plan shall accumulate the same
number of hours of vacation per month under a 5/8 plan. Vacation
leave will be granted for the actual number of hours absent.

Absent _with Substitute (AWS) — Police Lieutenants assigned

as Field Commanders may utilize AWS to find a replacement.
Any Police Lieutenant may work as a Field Commander
replacement as outlined below.

(1) AWS with Trade - In accordance with Section 7(p)(3) of
the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) as discussed in 29
CFR 553.31, the City agrees that members may
substitute for one another when staffing levels do not
permit a member to take time off. The substitution must
be during scheduled work hours, and in_ the
performance of work in the same capacity. When one
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit
Page 14

member substitutes for another, the member being
substituted for will be credited as if he or she had
worked his or normal schedule for that shift.

(2) AWS __with Compensation - When one member
substitutes for another, the member being substituted
for will be credited as if he or she had worked his or her
normal schedule for that shift. If the substituting
member wishes to be compensated for the substitute
shift worked at the base/straight time rate of pay, then
the member being substituted for shall transfer the
applicable number of holiday leave, vacation or
administrative leave hours to the substituting member’s
“like” account. (Note: The member being substituted
for may only select one account from which to take
hours for transfer, and those hours shall only be
transferred to the volunteer substitutes “like” account.
If the substituting member’s selected account is at the
maximum allowable balance, the substituting member
shall be compensated at the base/straight time rate of
pay from the transferred hours. An internal processing
form has been established to accomplish this transfer.)

 

(3) AWS Notification to Department - Members wishing to
provide a substitute must notify the Department using

the internal processing form. The substitute must be
satisfactory to the Department. If the substitute is
determined to not be a satisfactory substitute, the
commanding officer shall provide the reason(s) in
writhing within a reasonable amount of time.

N. FEDERAL DRUG * * * POLICY (Federal Omnibus Transportation Employee
Testing Act- “ACT”)

[88 deleted]

Policy:

1. The City maintains two separate policies to distinguish those
procedures required by the Federal Transit Administration and the

Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, entitled:

“Controlled Substances and Alcohol Testing Regulations, Fresno
Area Express”, adopted by the City Council on March 14, 2006, which
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit

Page 15

may be amended from time to time, after compliance with applicable
collective bargaining laws.

“Controlled Substances and Alcohol Testing Regulations, Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration”, which may be amended from
time to time after compliance with applicable collective bargaining
laws.

The parties agree that each policy sufficiently summarizes the
current federal regulations required by the ACT. Both policies will be
distributed to every affected member of the Fresno Police Officers
Association Non-Supervisory Police Unit upon implementation or
amendment of the policies, and at the time of training and
orientation.

The parties acknowledge that there currently exists a list of positions
subject to the provisions of the two policies: ‘“(a) Controlled
Substances and Alcohol Testing Regulations, Fresno Area Express,
(b) Controlled Substances and Alcohol Testing Regulations, Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration”, and should these positions be
changed or modified, the parties agree to establish a new list of
positions which are subject to these two policies pursuant to the
ACT and the Department of Transportation. As personnel changes
within these positions, the parties agree that the Department will give
notice to the Association and the Risk Management Division of such
changes.

The Risk/Safety Manager will be responsible for receiving all
information related to the implementation of this policy and directing
the applicable disciplinary action in coordination with the Labor
Relations Manger.

The parties agree to abide by the Federal Regulations set forth in
each policy. Employees who are members of the Association will
also be subject to the provisions of any applicable Department
Standing Order, policy or procedure.

Last Chance Agreements do not apply to members of the
Association. As required by federal law, employees who have tested
positive and who have returned to work, will still be subject to
random selection for testing and will be subject to six additional
tests for drugs and alcohol during the subsequent year.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit
Page 16

oO.

GENERAL TESTING GUIDELINES FOR EMPLOYEES NOT COVERED BY
THE FEDERAL OMNIBUS TRANSPORTATION EMPLOYEE TESTING

General Requirements

Drug and substance tests may also be required under Departmental
Standing Order 2.4.12, as the same may be modified following consultation
with the Association pursuant to FMC Section 3-607.

1.

Whenever a member is assigned to a special unit engaging in drug,
narcotic or vice enforcement, such member shall execute a written
agreement and release stating full consent, and would be required to
take a drug test.

In the event the City provides an annual scheduled physical, all
members would be required to submit to a drug test.

Sworn members while assigned to any special unit engaging in drug,
narcotic or vice enforcement shall be required to periodic
unannounced drug tests subject to the following conditions:

A member * * * shall execute a written agreement and release stating full
consent to such periodic unannounced drug tests.

At the request of the Commander of the Management Support
Bureau, the City of Fresno Risk/Safety Manager shall select and schedule
the date and time when each member will be tested. Such test may be
administered no more than * * * once a * * * year.

Under this subsection, any random testing without notice will be in
compliance with applicable court decisions.

All drug testing noted above will be performed in accordance with the
Federal Omnibus Transportation Act, except in those instances where
the members * * * are unable to provide a urine sample such members
may elect to provide a blood sample. * * * It is understood that if a
member cannot provide a sufficient sample or, in the alternative,
refuses to provide a blood sample, the test shall be considered to be
positive.

In addition to any testing requirements contained in this MOU provision,
all members are subject to the “Identification and Consent
Procedures” outlined in * * * Administrative Order 2-25, along with its
corresponding testing procedures.
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit
Page 17

ARTICLE X

TERMINATION

The provisions in this Agreement/MOU shall be in full force and effect extended from
* * * June 30, 2013 to * * * June 30, 2015, upon approval by the City, subject to
Sections (A.B. and C.), below.

A.

This Agreement/MOU shall become effective only after ratification by the
members of the Association followed by City approval and the expiration of the
waiting period for the Mayor's action provided in Charter Sections 605 and 609,
and shall remain in full force and effect through June 30, 2015. * * *

(Incorporated from 9/30/10 Side Letter Agreement Re: Compensation and
Benefits Re-Opener.) The City and the Association previously agreed that * * *
the Mayor shall appoint one (1) police officer, as defined in Fresno Municipal
Code (“FMC”) Section 3-301 (p) (3) from a City management position and one (1)
firefighter as defined in FMC Section 3-301 (f) from a City management position
as voting members to the Fresno Fire and Police Retirement Board under the
authority as described in Section 3-305 (a) (1) of the FMC. * * * In the event any
individual(s) so appointed fails to qualify, resigns, retires, or no longer qualifies to
serve on the Board, the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council shall
appoint a replacement under the terms and provisions of this agreement within
twenty (20) business days. If a decision is approved by the Fire and Police
Retirement Board to separate the commingled investments of the Fresno Fire
and Police Retirement System and the Fresno Employees Retirement System,
this agreement on Mayoral appointments to the Fire and Police Retirement Board
shall immediately become null and void and the appointment provisions
contained in FMC Section 3-305 shall apply.

During the life of this Agreement/MOU should either party desire to modify its
terms or to meet and confer with the other party as to matters within the scope of
representation not addressed in this MOU, the party requesting any change shall
request in writing to meet and confer on the item(s), which item(s) shall be
specified in writing.

During the term of this Agreement/MOU, either party may refuse any request by
the other to meet and confer without explanation if (1) the item is directly
considered and specifically addressed herein; or (2) is directly considered and
specifically addressed in any FMC section, charter section or provision, or
resolution section, which section specifically establishes wages, hours, or other
terms and conditions of employment; or (3) the specific item was included in an
initial written proposal from the party making the request during the meet and
confer process which led to this agreement. Either party shall also have the right
to refuse a request on any matter falling within the scope of representation and
Agreement re: Compensation and Benefits Re-Opener
Fresno Police Officers Association, Management Unit
Page 18

which would the basis of a proper refusal under (1) — (3) supra, if the proposal, if
accepted or implemented, would only become effective after the expiration of this
MOU. No unilateral action on any such refused proposal may be taken by the
requesting party after such a refusal by the other.

It is further agreed, however, that this section shall not prohibit the City from

requesting to meet and confer on changes to federal or state statutes.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands this _28 day of
March __, 2011.

FOR THE CITY OF FRESNO: FOR THE FRESNO POLICE
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION:

Original Signed Original Signed
Kenneth G. Phillips Jacky Parks
Labor Relations Manager President, FPOA Basic Unit
Original Signed Original Signed
Jerry Dyer Andrew Hall
Chief of Police President, FROA Management Unit
Date: March 28, 2011

 

 

APPROVED AS TO FORM
CITY ATTORNEY’S OFFICE

BY:

 

 

Deputy City Attorney

 
