 

 

AUSTIN POLICE ASSOCIATION

AGREEMENT

BETWEEN

THE CITY OF AUSTIN

AND

THE AUSTIN POLICE ASSOCIATION

Term of contract begins October 1, 2013
and ends September 30, 2017

 

 

 
AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE CITY OF AUSTIN
AND
THE AUSTIN POLICE ASSOCIATION

EFFECTIVE October 1, 2013
TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

Article 1 — Preamble ..

 

Article 2 — Definitions ..

Article 3 — Recognition...

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Article 4 — Management Rights .
Article 5 — Non-Discrimination .
Article 6 — Union Dues, Check Off .
Article 7 — Wages and Benefits ...
Article 8 — Overtime, On-Call, Court Time, and Call Back...

Article 9 — Special Leave Provisions

 

Article 10 — Holidays, Vacation, and Sick Leave.....

Article 11 — Association Business Leave...

 

Article 12 — Association Communication...

 

Article 13 — Promotions...

Article 14 — Hiring Process...

 

Article 15 — Drug Testing.....

 

Article 16 — Citizen Oversight of the Austin Police Department .....
Article 17 — Protected Rights of Officers ....

 

Article 18 — Disciplinary Actions, Demotions and Appeal

 
 

Article 19 — Assignment Change:

 

Article 20 — Agreement Grievance Procedure...

 

Article 21 — Term of Agreement...

 

Article 22 — Notices ....

 

Article 23 — Entire Agreement...

 

Article 24 — Savings Clause...
Article 25 — Consolidation of Public Safety Officers into APD...
Appendix A-1. Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Pay Schedule .
Appendix A-2. Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Pay Schedule .
Appendix A-3. Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Pay Schedule .
Appendix A-4. Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Pay Schedule .

 

 
ARTICLE 1
PREAMBLE

As authorized by Chapter 143 of the Texas Local Government Code, the City of Austin,
Texas (hereinafter referred to as the “CITY”) and the Austin Police Association (hereinafter
referred to as the “ASSOCIATION”) reached a Meet and Confer Agreement effective October 1,
2013 (hereinafter referred to as the “AGREEMENT”). The AGREEMENT was ratified by the
City Council and the Association prior to the effective date.

Section 1. Date of Agreement

This AGREEMENT was made, entered into, and first effective this Ist day of October 2013
(unless specific provisions or Exhibit terms set forth a later effective date) by and between the
CITY and the ASSOCIATION, and its terms shall be effective only until the expiration date of
the Agreement, or as stipulated in this Agreement.

Section 2. Purpose of Agreement

WHEREAS, the CITY has voluntarily endorsed the practices and procedures of the statutory
meet and confer process as an orderly way of conducting its relations with its police officers,
insofar as such practices and procedures are appropriate to the functions and obligations of the
CITY to retain the rights to operate the CITY government effectively in a responsible and
efficient manner; and

WHEREAS, the ASSOCIATION has pledged to support the service and mission of the
Austin Police Department and to abide by the statutorily imposed no strike or work slowdown
obligations placed upon it; and

WHEREAS, it is the intent and purpose of the parties to set forth herein their entire
Agreement;

NOW, THEREFORE, IN CONSIDERATION OF THE mutual covenants and agreements
herein contained, the parties mutually agree as follows:
ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS

The following definitions apply to terms used in this Agreement, unless a different definition
is required by the context in which the term is used.

1. “ASSOCIATION” means the Austin Police Association, and its officers and agents
authorized to act on its behalf.

2. “Chief” means the Chief of Police of the Austin Police Department or his designee.
45
46

3. “Employer” or “CITY” means the City of Austin, Texas, the Austin Police Department
and its officers, agents, managers, and others authorized to act on the CITY's behalf.

4. “HRD” means the City of Austin's Human Resources Department.

5, “Officer” means, all police officers, as the term is currently defined in Texas Local
Government Code, Section 143,003 (5), and those hired under the provisions of this
Agreement in the Austin Police Department, except the Head of the Department and,
unless otherwise specified, Assistant Department Heads in the rank or classification
immediately below that of the Department Head. The term also excludes cadets, civilian
employees, retirees, reserve officers, and any other employees specifically exempted by
the terms of this Agreement, Probationary officers are excluded from the coverage of
Article 18 and cannot file grievances pursuant to Article 20 regarding disciplinary
actions.

6. “Meet and Confer Statute” means Subchapter I of Chapter 143 of the Texas Local
Government Code, Sections 143.301-143.313.

7. “Chapter 143" means Chapter 143 of the Texas Local Government Code.

8. “Authorized ASSOCIATION Representative” means a representative of the ASSOCIA-
TION authorized by the ASSOCIATION's executive board to conduct business on behalf
of the ASSOCIATION.

9. “Civil Service Commission” means the three (3) member Civil Service Commission
appointed by the City Manager, pursuant to Section 143.006 of the Texas Local
Government Code.

10. “Business day” means a day on which the City conducts normal business. In addition,
the day of the act, event or default after which a period of time begins to run is not
included. The last day of the period is included unless it is a weekend or City observed
holiday.

11, “Reserve Officer” means an honorably retired Austin Police Officer who meets the
minimum standards as determined by the Department. This definition may be amended
by agreement of the ASSOCIATION President and the City Manager.

12, “Department” means the Austin Police Department,

ARTICLE 3
RECOGNITION

The City recognizes the ASSOCIATION as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for all

covered Police Officers, pursuant to Subchapter I of Chapter 143, excluding the Police Chief, the
Assistant Police Chiefs, and all civilian employees of the Police Department.
ARTICLE 4
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Section 1. Retained Rights - General

The CITY retains all inherent rights to manage the Police Department and its work force
which it presently enjoys, subject to applicable federal and state statutes and local ordinances,
resolutions, and rules, except as specifically provided in this Agreement, These rights include,
but are not limited to: direction of the work force, including but not limited to, the right to hire;
the right to discipline or discharge; the right to decide job qualifications for hiring; the right to
lay-off or abolish positions; the right to make rules and regulations governing conduct and
safety; the right to determine schedules of work together with the right to determine the methods,
processes and manner of performing work; the determination of the size of the work force, and
the assignment of work to officers within the department, including the right to transfer officers;
the determination of policy affecting the selection of new officers; the right to establish the
services and programs provided by the department, including the nature and level of such
services and programs, as well as the type and quantity of resources allocated; the right to
establish work performance measurement and. standards; and the right to implement programs to
increase the cost effectiveness of departmental operations

Section 2, Retained Right of Independent Investigation

The Chief of Police and the City Manager fully retain their rights to independently
investigate police conduct.

Section 3. Public Release of Information

a) The provisions of Section 143,089(g) of the Texas Local Government Code are expressly
modified to the extent necessary to permit public release of information to the extent and in the
manner authorized by this AGREEMENT.

b) This Section shall apply to any authorized Independent Investigation whether completed
prior to or after the effective date of this AGREEMENT. This section shall also apply to any
authorized Citizen Review Panel report or recommendation issued after the effective date of this
AGREEMENT. The public release of Panel reports or recommendations issued prior to the
effective date of this AGREEMENT are governed by the provisions of the 2008 AGREEMENT,
as amended in 2009.

ARTICLE 5
NON-DISCRIMINATION
Section 1. Discrimination Prohibited

Neither the CITY nor the ASSOCIATION shall discriminate with regard to the
3
implementation of any term or condition of this contract, or against any officer covered by this
AGREEMENT, in a manner that would violate any applicable federal or state law or any CITY
ordinances prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race, creed, color, national origin, religion,
age, sex, sexual orientation, or disability.

Section 2. Association Membership or Act

 

a) Neither the CITY nor the ASSOCIATION shall interfere with the right of Officers
covered by this AGREEMENT to become or not become members of the ASSOCIATION, and
there shail be no discrimination or retaliation against such Officers because of lawful
ASSOCIATION membership or non-membership activity or status.

b) The CITY will not retaliate against Officers for seeking ASSOCIATION assistance with
regard to employment matters, nor will it take actions to discourage them from doing so. The
parties agree that this subsection does not provide the basis for a dispute, claim or complaint
under Article 20 unless there is a pattern of retaliation that has not been appropriately addressed
by APD management.

Section 3. Association Fair Representation

The ASSOCIATION recognizes its responsibility as the exclusive representative under the
Meet and Confer Statute and agrees to fairly represent all Officers in the Department covered by
this AGREEMENT.

ARTICLE 6
UNION DUES, CHECK OFF

Section 1, Payroll Deductions and Union Dues

a) Upon receipt of a signed authorization from an Officer on a form supplied by the CITY, the
dues and assessments that existed on the date of this AGREEMENT, including but not necessarily
limited to: APA dues, telephones, PAC, and dues for Austin Police Women's Association, Amigos
en Azul, Texas Peace Officers’ Association, Combined Law Enforcement Associations of Texas,
Police Officers Memorial Fund, Spectrum Advisory Group, LLC, ASSOCIATION members’ dues
for the “100” Club, and contributions by Officers to the ASSOCIATION’ charitable organization,
Austin Cops for Charities, shall be deducted from such Officer's pay. Officers who are already
having dues deducted as of the execution date of this AGREEMENT are not required to submit a
new dues deduction form, During the term of this AGREEMENT, should the CITY determine to
stop offering short term disability insurance to its employees, as an automatic benefit, the CITY
shall notify the APA and will cease deducting the premiums for Spectrum Advisory Group, LLC,
by the last pay period of the calendar year in which the CITY made such determination,

b) The CITY agrees to deduct, for those Officers who provide a signed authorization form
supplied by the CITY, premiums for other ASSOCIATION - preferred providers if approved by the
CITY. Dues deductions for such premiums will begin no later than the third pay period after the
Officer submits a properly completed dues deduction form authorizing such deductions. Any such
deductions will be discontinued if requested by the ASSOCIATION,

c) The dues deductions shall be remitted promptly to the treasurer of the ASSOCIATION. The
ASSOCIATION agrees to deftay the actual cost of making such deductions, except deductions for
Austin Cops for Charities, not to exceed the per deduction amount paid by other employee
associations. The City agrees to provide a list of those members for whom deductions are made
each month. The ASSOCIATION may change the amount of the deduction for those employees
who have authorized payroll deductions by providing the City with a letter, at least thirty (30)
calendar days in advance of the change, from the ASSOCIATION President advising the City that
the amount has changed pursuant to the requirements of the ASSOCIATION’s Constitution and
Bylaws, The ASSOCIATION will promptly refund to the CITY any amount paid to the
ASSOCIATION in error on account of this dues deduction provision. Additional assessments may
be deducted by mutual agreement of the partes,

d) The CITY understands that the ASSOCIATION may prohibit affiliate organizations from
activities that impair or interfere with its role as the exclusive bargaining agent.

Section 2. Other Payroll Deductions

The CITY agrees that it will not authorize payroll deduction of dues or fees for any
organization that purports to represent Austin police officers in employment matters, that is not
currently authorized to have payroll deduction of dues. This requirement shall not apply to
organizations specifically listed in this Article or organizations that enjoyed dues check off as of
the date the Austin City Council recognized the ASSOCIATION as the sole and exclusive
bargaining representative of officers in the Department, including the ASSOCIATION and the
Combined Law Enforcement Association of Texas.

Section 3. Deductions for Death of Officer

Whenever an Officer dies, and the CITY is notified by the ASSOCIATION of its intent
to invoke this provision, the CITY will deduct $10 or $20 dollars, as directed by the
ASSOCIATION, from each ASSOCIATION member’s pay one time during the month
immediately following the Officer’s death. In the case of multiple applicable deaths in a month,
the ASSOCIATION may have the deductions spread over consecutive pay periods upon
reasonable notice to the CITY. As with other deductions, said amount will be forwarded directly
to the ASSOCIATION. The ASSOCIATION shall provide, by intemal policy, all other details,
such as designation of beneficiaries, reimbursement to members, eligibility for benefits, and
distribution of funds.

Section 4. Effect of Contract Expiration
The provisions of this Article shall remain in full force and effect after expiration of this

AGREEMENT until a successor AGREEMENT has been reached, or for twelve (12) months
after expiration of this AGREEMENT, if no subsequent agreement is ratified.
ARTICLE 7
WAGES AND BENEFITS

Section 1. Base Wages
a) For Fiscal Year 2013-2014

Effective with the first pay period of Fiscal Year 2013-2014, the pay scale attached
hereto as Appendix A-I shall apply to all Officers covered by this AGREEMENT. The pay
scale reflects a 1.5% increase to base wages.

b) For Fiscal Year 2014-2015

Effective with the first pay period of Fiscal Year 2014-2015, the pay scale attached
hereto as Appendix A-2 shall apply to all Officers covered by this AGREEMENT. The pay
scale reflects a 1.0% increase to base wages.

c) For Fiscal Year 2015-2016

Effective with the first pay period of Fiscal Year 2015-2016, the pay scale attached
hereto as Appendix A-3 shall apply to all Officers covered by this AGREEMENT. The pay
scale reflects a 1.0% increase in base wages.

d) For Fiscal Year 2016-2017

Effective with the first pay period of Fiscal Year 2016-2017, the pay scale attached
hereto as Appendix A-4 shall apply to all Officers covered by this AGREEMENT, The pay scale
reflects a 2.0% increase to base wages.

Section 2. Longevity Pay

Beginning with Fiscal Year 2013-2014 longevity pay in the amount of one hundred and
seven dollars ($107.00) per year of service, up to a maximum of 25 years, shall be paid in a lump
sum in the first regularly scheduled pay period afier the Officer's anniversary date, which is the
annual anniversary of the Officer's most recent commission date. This change in payment of
longevity does not affect the treatment of longevity for retirement and overtime purposes, and
the CITY and the Officers shall continue making contributions for longevity payments.

Section 3. Field Training Officer Pay

Field training Officer (FTO) pay shall be paid at the effective rate of one hundred and
seventy five ($175.00) per month to each Officer assigned in the FTO program, as selected
according to criteria established by the Chief. This payment shall not be made to Officers
assigned to the Training Division, or to the FTO Program Coordinator. Officers authorized to
train probationary patrol officers during their probationary period, and not a part of the FTO
program, will be compensated for the actual hours spent training.
Section 4. Mental Health Certification Pay

Mental Health Certification Pay shall be paid at the effective rate of one hundred and seventy
five dollars ($175.00) per month to each Officer assigned to a Patrol Shift, and serving as a
Mental Health Officer as selected and approved according to criteria established by the Chief.
This payment shall not be made to the Officers assigned to the Crisis Intervention Team

Section 5. Bilingual Pay

Bilingual pay will be paid at the rate of one hundred and seventy five dollars ($175.00) per
month for Officers certified under standards established by the Chief and assigned to the
bilingual program. The bilingual program shall include German, Spanish, French/Haitian, Farsi,
Arabic, Asian (Vietnamese, Cantonese, Thai, Korean, Japanese, and Malaysian), Russian,
Ukrainian, and sign language for the deaf. Officers will not be paid cumulatively if they are
certified in more than one language.

Section 6. Compensation for Lieutenants and Commanders

a) Lieutenants and Commanders shall be compensated on a salary basis and are exempt
employees for purposes of overtime compensation under applicable federal law. The parties
further agree that the Lieutenants and Commanders accept their salaries as inclusive of any and
all overtime compensation.

b) Lieutenants permanently assigned to an evening or night shift in Patrol shall be paid an
additional stipend of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month, Lieutenants assigned to a Patrol
‘Area Command who are assigned to an evening or night shift for a twenty eight (28) calendar
day cycle, when the shift begins at or after 2:00 p.m., shall be entitled to three hundred dollars
($300.00) per month,

Section 7. Assistant Chiefs

The Chief of Police has the right to set wages and benefits for the Assistant Chiefs, subject to
the approval of the City Council as a part of the budget. The Chief may designate one Assistant
Chief as the Executive Assistant or Chief of Staff, whose pay and benefits may be different than
the other Assistant Chiefs, Additional performance pay may be awarded in the Chief's
discretion.

Section 8. Clothing Allowance

During the term of this AGREEMENT, the clothing allowance shall be five hundred dollars
($500.00) per year for all Officers deemed eligible by the Chief, with a payment schedule to be
determined by the Chief.

Section 9. Education and Certificate Pay
An Officer shall be entitled to either Certificate pay or Education pay, at the highest
qualifying rate, but shall not be entitled to both. Education pay shall only be payable for degrees
or college credit from an accredited college or university. An accredited college or university is
an institution of higher education that is accredited or authorized by the Southem Association of
Colleges and Schools, the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, the New England
Association of Schools and Colleges, the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, the
Northwest Association of Schools and Colleges, or the Wester Association of Schools and
Colleges (Reference: TCLEOSE Rule 211.1(a)(3), as modified by the Commission from time to
time).

a) Certificate Pay

(1) Each Officer holding an Intermediate TCLEOSE Certificate shall be paid fifty
dollars ($50.00) per month, Each Officer holding an Advanced TCLEOSE Certificate shall be
paid one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month, Each Officer holding a Master TCLEOSE
Certificate shall be paid one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month.

(2) No Officer hired after March 25, 2001, will be eligible for Intermediate or
Advanced Certificate pay. Certificate pay amounts at or above those set forth in this
AGREEMENT remain in effect, and this AGREEMENT continues the right of all Officers to
qualify for or achieve Master Certification pay.

b) Education Incentive Pay

(1) Each Officer holding an Associate’s degree or sixty (60) hours of college credit
shall be paid one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month.

(2). Each Officer holding a Bachelor's degree shall be paid two hundred and twenty
dollars ($220.00) per month

(3) Each Officer holding a Master’s degree shall be paid three hundred dollars
($300.00) per month,

Section 10. Shift Differential

The CITY shall pay an additional three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month to an Officer
normally assigned to an evening or night shift for a twenty eight (28) calendar day cycle, when
the shift begins at or after 2:00 p.m. Only Officers working 50% or more of their shifts
beginning at or after 2:00 p.m., in a 28 calendar day cycle, shall be eligible. Shift differential
pay shall apply to all ranks up to and including Sergeant, This provision shall apply in lieu of the
City policy applicable to shift differential for any other employees.

Section 11. Monthly Paid Compensation

It is expressly understood and agreed that the CITY reserves the right to pro-rate and pay all
SBRIRZRDEBGH IOS cHmiudszsaHsevne

monthly payments in bi-weekly equivalents.
Section 12. Work Furloughs

It is expressly agreed and understood that during the term of this AGREEMENT, Officers
covered by this AGREEMENT shall be exempt from any mandatory employee work furlough or
other unpaid leave plan implemented by the CITY for the purpose of reducing base wages paid
to employees by reducing an employee’s normal work hours. This section does not apply to
disciplinary actions.

Section 13. Severe Weather

Nothing in this AGREEMENT prohibits the Department from adopting a policy regarding
leave for Officers required to provide essential services during severe weather or other
emergencies,

ARTICLE 8
OVERTIME, ON-CALL, COURT TIME AND CALL BACK

Section 1. Overtime

For purposes of computing overtime, all approved paid leave time, other than sick leave,
shall be calculated as hours worked.

Section 2. On-call status

The CITY will allow eight (8) hours of comp time per week for any non-exempt Officer on
call, as defined by Department policy implemented by the Chief. Officers placed on “court call”
while under subpoena to court for two or more consecutive calendar days, shall not be eligible
under the prior sentence, but shall receive one (1) hour of additional comp time per day for each
regularly scheduled day off or pre-approved leave day,

Section 3. Court time

a) An Officer who attends court more than one hour before the start of his/her regularly
scheduled shift shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours compensation at time and one half,
(e.g, If the Officer is assigned to work from 9:00 a.m. till 7:00 p.m., and he/she must attend
municipal court at 7:00 a.m, the same day, the Officer is entitled to four (4) hours of overtime).

b) If the Officer attends court one hour or less before the start of his/her regularly scheduled
shift, the Officer shall receive one (1) full hour of compensation at time and one half. (e.g. If the
Officer’s shift starts at 9:00 a.m., but he/she must attend municipal court at 8:00 a.m, or later, the
Officer shall receive one full hour of overtime).
c) An Officer who attends court afier his/her regularly scheduled shift has ended shall
receive a minimum of four (4) hours compensation at time and one half (e.g. If the Officer is
assigned to work from 10:00 p.m, tll 8:00 a.m. and he/she must attend municipal court at 8:00
a.m, the same date, the Officer is entitled to four (4) hours of overtime).

d) If the Officer’s court assignment begins during his/her regularly scheduled shift but
continues beyond his/her normal duty hours, the Officer will only be entitled to the actual
amount of overtime hours worked. (e.g, If the Officer is assigned to work from 10:00 p.m. til
8:00 a.m., and if the Officer’s court assignment begins at 7:30 am. and the Officer is not
dismissed from court until 9:00 a.m., the Officer shall receive only one (1) hour of overtime).

Section 4. Call back

a) Non-exempt Officers who are off-duty and receive notification to return to duty status
cone hour o less before the start of their regularly scheduled shift shall receive one (1) full hour
of compensation at time and one half.

b) Non-exempt Officers who are off-duty and receive notification to return to duty status
shall receive a minimum of three (3) hours of compensation at time and one half when notified to
return to duty status:

1. After the conclusion of their regularly scheduled shift, or
2, More than one (1) hour before their regularly scheduled shift

c) Non-exempt Officers who are off-duty and receive notification to return to duty status
shall receive only fifteen (15) minutes of compensation at time and a half should the callback be
cancelled within fifteen (15) minutes of the notification, or the actual time spent completing the
assignment lasts no more than fifteen (15) minutes.

ARTICLE 9
SPECIAL LEAVE PROVISIONS

Section 1, Emergency Leave

Each Officer may utilize up to forty (40) hours of paid emergency leave for a death in the
immediate family as defined in the City of Austin personnel policies.

Section 2. Sick Leave Donation

a) Ifan employee is in danger of having used all accrued time (vacation, sick, etc.) due to a
serious illness or injury, as defined by the FMLA, Officers may voluntarily donate up to forty
(40) hours of vacation or sick leave to the ill or injured employee to avoid loss of pay. No
Officer shall be permitted to bank more than four hundred (400) hours of such donated leave
within any twelve (12) month period of time, Donated leave may only be used for the employee

10
to whom donated. In the event that all of the donated leave time is not used, the CITY shall not
be obligated to make any redistribution of banked hours to the donors. The remaining unused
donated amount shall not be paid on separation.

b) For purposes of Section 2 of this Article, “employee” shall mean any City of Austin
employee except a Chapter 143 civil service employee of the Fire Department or the EMS
Department.

Section 3, Payment of Sick Leave on Separation

a) Separation pay for accrued sick leave will be paid only to Officers with at least twelve
(12) years of actual service who separate in good standing, An Officer shall not be considered to
have separated in good standing if he/she is indefinitely suspended or leaves the Department in
lieu of termination. Except as provided in the following paragraph, the maximum accrued sick
leave payable will be 1400 hours,

b). The maximum accrued sick leave payable will be increased to 1700 hours if, in addition
to the above requirements, the Officer has not used more than 80 hours of sick leave in either of
the two prior twelve month periods before the date of separation, and has not used more than 120
hours cumulative in the prior 24 month period before the date of separation, The Chief shall
have the right to grant hardship approval for use of leave above these amounts on the basis of
actual documented medical conditions or treatment justifying the absence.

Section 4, Administrative Leave
Officers may be granted Administrative Leave based on participation in a CITY or
Departmental program that awards Administrative Leave to program participants or for any
purpose or event authorized by the Chief.
Section 5. Preemption
Officers shall be entitled to Special leave as provided in this Article and as provided for
and defined by City of Austin and APD policy and procedure as of the effective date of this
AGREEMENT. Such entitlements shall not be changed during the term of this AGREEMENT,

and shall totally preempt any provisions for leave under Chapters 141, 142, and 143 of the Local
Government Code.

ARTICLE 10
HOLIDAYS, VACATION AND SICK LEAVE

Section 1. Christmas Holiday

All non-exempt hourly Officers whose shift begins on December 25 shall continue to be paid
time and one half their regular hourly rate for all hours actually worked for the entire shift

IL
Exempt Officers who are required by their immediate supervisor to work on Christmas shall be
paid a holiday stipend pursuant to CITY policy.

Section 2, Seniority Standards

The CITY shall provide by policy for the application of seniority standards on use of
Holidays and Vacation, but agrees that any policy will apply equal standards, either department-
wide or division-wide.

Section 3. Vacation Accrual Rate

All Officers shall accrue regular vacation leave at the rate of 6.25 hours for each pay period
in which benefits accrue.

Section 4. Accrual Caps for Vacation and Exception Vacation

a) All Officers may accrue up to four hundred (400) hours of vacation and up to one
hundred sixty (160) hours of exception vacation, The maximum hours of vacation payable upon
separation shall continue to be two hundred forty (240) hours of vacation and one hundred sixty
(160) hours of exception vacation, in accordance with City policy.

b) It is the Officer's responsibility to ensure that the vacation and exception vacation
balances remain at or below the accrual caps. Hours in excess of the caps will not accrue and no
Officer will receive financial compensation for any hours in excess of the cap.

Section 5. Sick Leave Accrual Rate

All Officers shall accrue sick leave at the rate of 6.08 hours for each pay period in which
benefits accrue.

Section 6. Preemption

Officers shall be entitled to Holiday, Vacation and Sick leave as provided in this Article
and as provided for and defined by City of Austin and APD policy and procedure as of the
effective date of this AGREEMENT. Such entitlements shall not be changed during the term of

this AGREEMENT, and shall totally preempt any provisions for leave under Chapters 141, 142,
and 143 of the Local Government Code.

ARTICLE 11
ASSOCIATION BUSINESS LEAVE

Section 1. Definitions

As used in this Article:
a) “Association Business” means time spent in Meet and Confer negotiations; administering
the terms of this AGREEMENT, including the adjusting of grievances and participating in a
dispute resolution process; representing Officers in a disciplinary process (to the extent allowed
by this AGREEMENT); and attending the annual State CLEAT conference, the
ASSOCIATION’S Executive Board meetings, regular ASSOCIATION business meetings and
ASSOCIATION seminars and workshops (subject to the provisions of Section 4 below).

Section 2. Establishment of Association Business Leave Time Pool

a) Each year during the term of this AGREEMENT, during the first ten (10) days of the
calendar year, the CITY will contribute 7,000 hours of Association Business Leave (ABL) to a
pool of leave time which may be used in accordance with this Article. The CITY will track
deductions from the pool as ABL is used.

b) Any pool hours remaining at the end of a calendar year will remain in the pool to be
utilized in the following year. Hours of leave in the pool shall never have any cash or surrender
value.

Section 3. Use of Association Business Leave
a) ASSOCIATION President

(1) The ASSOCIATION President may use ABL for any lawful activity consistent with
the ASSOCIATION’S purposes, except as specifically prohibited by this AGREEMENT.

(2) The ASSOCIATION President may be permitted up to 2080 hours of ABL per
year. Use of ABL by the ASSOCIATION President may be denied or revoked only in the event
of an emergency situation. The ASSOCIATION President will be returned to ABL status after
the emergency situation ends.

b) ASSOCIATION Board Members and Committee Chairs

(1) ASSOCIATION Board Members and Committee Chairs may use ABL to conduct
ASSOCIATION Business as authorized in this Section. Board Members and Committee Chairs
may also use ABL for special events that support the mission of the Department or the
ASSOCIATION, but do not otherwise violate the terms of this Article. The practice of
addressing cadet classes twice during cadet training, with approval of the time and content by the
Chief, shall continue through the duration of this AGREEMENT. Such time spent addressing
cadet classes shall be deducted from the Pool. This provision does not exclude the Chief from
approving other individuals or groups to address cadet classes at his/her discretion, including
employee representative groups with current dues check off, but excluding groups that seek to
represent Officers regarding wages, hours and other conditions of employment.

(2) ASSOCIATION Board Members and each of the standing Committee Chairs may
each be authorized to utilize up to three hundred (300) hours of ABL from the Pool during the
year.
(3) Subject to the Chief's operational control and approval, two (2) Board Members or
Committee Chairs may be authorized to use more than three hundred (300) hours of ABL from
the Pool during the year, No more than one-half (1/2) of the hours specified in this Subsection
may be utilized for legislative and/or political activities as limited by Section 4. If ABL for such
Board Members(s) or Committee Chair(s) is revoked for any reason other than an emergency
situation, the ASSOCIATION President may meet with the Deputy City Manager or the
Assistant City Manager over public safety to review such action. The timeline for filing a
grievance, if any, shall be tolled until such review has been completed.

c) ASSOCIATION Members

The ASSOCIATION may request approval for the use of additional ABL for
ASSOCIATION members. Any use of additional ABL will be solely at the Chief's discretion,

d) Accounting for ABL

All Officers shall account for all ABL taken through the Chief's office, and such time
shall be subtracted from the Association Leave Pool. There shall be no entitlement for overtime
pay for any hours worked on ABL.

e) Officer Conduct While on ABL

While on ABL, all Officers shall abide by the policies, rules, regulations, procedures, and
directives of the Austin Police Department. ABL may be revoked for violations of such policies,
including but not limited to acts that bring discredit to the Department or to the CITY, that tend
to adversely affect the confidence of the public in the integrity of the Department, or improperly
damage or impair the reputation of the Department. The CITY recognizes the
ASSOCIATION’ prerogative to publically express interests related to the wages, rates of pay,
hours of employment, or conditions of work affecting the members of the ASSOCIATION. The
CITY further recognizes that from time to time, the interests of the ASSOCIATION may not be
shared by the Department or CITY. Expression of such interests in a manner consistent with the
philosophy and values of the Department will not be considered to be a violation of this
Subsection.

f) Temporary Vacancy

(1) Inhis or her sole discretion, the Chief of Police may determine that the continuous
absence from duty of more than three months due to the usage of ABL creates a vacancy in the
affected Officer’s rank, but shall not expand the size of the classified service. When the Officer
whose absence created the vacancy returns to active duty, thus creating a surplus in his/her rank,
the last person promoted to that rank will be demoted to the next lower classification and placed
on a reinstatement list, with such rights as prescribed by this Article.

(2) The same result applies to all other promotions in lower ranks which resulted from
the first promotion and subsequent demotion.
(3) There shall be only one reinstatement list for each rank for persons demoted by
virtue of this Section, Any person placed on the reinstatement list shall remain on the list
indefinitely. Persons on the list shall be entitled to reinstatement to the rank from which they
‘were demoted in the same order as the demotion occurred. This results in the last demoted at that
rank being the first reinstated. Reinstatements must occur off of the reinstatement list for that
rank before any promotions from a promotional eligibility list. Until such reinstatements occur
and the reinstatement list is exhausted, there shall be no “vacancy” created at that rank for the
purpose of any promotional eligibility list.

Section 4. Use of ABL for Legislative/Political Activities

a) It is specifically understood and agreed that ABL shall not be utilized for legislative
andlor political activities at the State or National level, unless they relate to the wages, rates of
pay, hours of employment, or conditions of work affecting the members of the ASSOCIATION.
At the local level, the use of ABL for legislative andlor political activities shall be limited to
raising concerns regarding officer safety. ABL shall not be utilized for legislative and/or
political activities related to any election of public officials or City Charter amendments, ABL
shall not be utilized for legislative and/or political activities that are sponsored or supported by
the ASSOCIATION’S Political Action Committee(s).

b) It is specifically understood and agreed that no ABL shall be utilized for legislative
andlor political activities at the local, state, or national level that are contrary to the CITY's
adopted legislative program. No ABL shall be utilized for activities prohibited by Section
143.086 of Chapter 143 or by the Texas Ethics Commission, Nothing contained in this
Subsection is intended to prohibit an Officer from using vacation time to engage in legislative
and/or political activities.

Section 5. Request for ABL

All Association Business Leave will be requested in writing to and approved by the
ASSOCIATION President, and submitted in advance for final approval by the Chief in
accordance with this Article, The Chief may waive the requirement that the request and approval
be in writing. Requests for use of ABL shall be made as far in advance as is practicable.

Section 6. Effect of Contract Expiration
The provisions of this Article shall remain in full force and effect after expiration of this

AGREEMENT until the earlier of the date a successor Agreement has been reached, or twelve
(12) months after expiration of this AGREEMENT,
ARTICLE 12
ASSOCIATION COMMUNICATION

Section 1. Association Access to Bulletin Boards, Pagers

The ASSOCIATION'S access to CITY facilities and equipment to communicate with its
membership shall include the use of one (1) bulletin board installed at each substation and
satellite office, one (1) bulletin board in other locations agreed to by the ASSOCIATION and the
Chief, and Departmental pagers. Use of pagers shall be in accordance with written Departmental
policy, or shall otherwise be approved in advance by the Chief's office. Use of Department
equipment to create or send email on ASSOCIATION business is not allowed. The design and
placement of the bulletin boards shall be approved in advance by the Chief or his designee.

Section 2. Guidelines for Association Bulletin Boards

The following guidelines shall apply to materials posted on the bulletin boards:

a) There shall be no personal attacks or inflammatory statements.

b) All materials shall be directed toward dissemination of ASSOCIATION information.

c) Any concems about the content of posted material shall be brought to the attention of the
ASSOCIATION'S executive board for review and adjustment as soon as the concems are
noticed, The Chief shall direct the objectionable material to be removed from the bulletin board
until final determination,

d) In any case, the Police Chief retains the final decision as to whether ASSOCIATION

material may be posted on bulletin boards, At no time shall the bulletin boards contain any
political endorsement, whether at the local, state or federal level.

ARTICLE 13
PROMOTIONS

Section 1. Corporal/Detective
a) Eligibility
(1) A Police Officer shall be eligible to sit for the Corporal/Detective promotional
examination after completing four (4) years of continuous service in the rank of Police Officer
immediately before the date of the written examination from the date of initial commission with

APD.

(2) The job description for the Corporal/Detective rank shall include acting as a
supervisor when a Sergeant is not available, conducting assigned investigation and other duties

16
as determined by the Chief and set out in the job description and general orders.

(3) A Coxporal/Detective becomes eligible for promotion to Sergeant after two (2)
continuous years in rank. Any Corporal/Detective designated to perform duties as an acting
Sergeant, shall be entitled to higher classification pay under the same criteria set forth in
Department policy then applicable to any other supervisor temporarily working in the next
higher rank,

(4) Positions in the rank of Corporal/Detective shall be filled from an eligibility list
created by a promotional procedure consisting of a written examination conducted in accordance
with this Article,

b) Scoring

For the rank of Corporal/Detective the eligibility list shall be calculated as follows:

 

Written Examination Poi
(See Section 5)

 

Maximum Exam Points 100
Maximum Education Points 2
Maximum Seniority Points +15
Total Maximum Points: lin

**Formula shall be carried to 3 decimal points and rounded up from 0005, Police Civil
Service tie-breaking rules will be applied if necessary.

) Seniority

Each Officer shall be entitled to up to a maximum of fifteen (15) seniority points to be
added to the written exam score, equivalent to one (1) point per year of service, which shall be
prorated for partial years.

d) Education

(1) The following education points shall be added to each candidate’s score, in
accordance with the accreditation standard referenced in Article 7 Section 9 for education
incentive pay. No cumulative points shall be allowed for more than one degree or Certification.

(i) Add.5 point for 60 college credits
(ii) Add 1.0 point for Bachelor Degree or Master Police Officer Certificate
(iii) Add 2.0 points for Masters Degree

It is the responsibility of the Officer seeking education points to ensure that the Training

Academy has the necessary supporting documentation for education points. ‘The documentation
must be received by the Training Academy no later than 5:00 p.m. on the seventh (7") business

17
day before the written examination is administered. No education points will be counted unless
proper documentation is timely received by the Training Academy.

Section 2, Sergeant
a) Promotional Procedure for Rank of Sergeant

(1) Positions in the rank of Sergeant shall be filled from an eligibility list created by a
promotional procedure consisting of a written examination and either a Technical Skills
Evaluation or an Assessment Center conducted in accordance with this Article.

(2) For each promotional cycle, the Chief of Police will determine whether the process
will include a Technical Skills Evaluation or an Assessment Center. The notice for the Written
Examination shall indicate whether the process will include a Technical Skills Evaluation or an
Assessment Center.

b) Optional Technical Skills Evaluation

(1) The Technical Skills Evaluation will be developed by a consultant chosen by the
Chief of Police from a list generated by the Director of Civil Service. The Evaluation will consist
of a written scenario to which the candidate shall submit a written response.

(2) The Evaluation will be administered by the Civil Service Commission immediately
following the Written Examination and before the grading of the Written Examination. The
candidate’s written responses to the Evaluation will be sealed and held for scoring by assessors
selected by the consultant based on the same criteria used for selecting Assessment Center
assessors in Section 6 below. The candidate’s written responses to the Evaluation will not be
graded unless the candidate scored at least seventy percent (70%) on the Written Examination,

(3) Scoring of the written responses will be based on a key provided to the assessors by
the consultant, The scoring key will award points based on whether the response includes
applicable topics or concepts and shall not allow partial credit for topics or concepts, to ensure
that the scoring is objective in nature and does not reflect the assessor’s subjective judgment.

) Scoring

After the Assessment Center or Technical Skills Evaluation scoring has been completed
for the rank of Sergeant the eligibility list shall be calculated as follows:

 

  

ten Examination Points: Assessment Center or

(See Section 5) Technical Skills Evaluation
Maximum exam points 100 Maximum points 100
Maximum seniority points +15 Maximum education points. +2
Total maximum points: 115 Total maximum points 102
SRBIFRDEBHIBOSecHmriudsHsevone

PROMOTION ELIGIBILITY LIST FORMULA:

(Written examination points + seniority points) / 115 x 100 x..70 adjustment factor
+
(Assessment Center or Technical Skills Evaluation Points + Education Points
/ 102 x 100 x .30 adjustment factor

Total points for promotion list**

*Formula shall be carried to 3 decimal points and rounded up from 0005. Police Civil
Service tie-breaking rules will be applied if necessary.

d) Seniority

Each Officer shall be entitled to up to a maximum of fifteen (15) seniority points to be
added to the written exam score, equivalent to one (1) point per year of service, which shall be
prorated for partial years.

¢) Education

(1) The following education points shall be added to each candidate’s score. These
points shall only be added to the Assessment Center or Technical Skills Evaluation score in
accordance with the formula below, and shall only apply to college degrees from an accredited
college or university, meeting the accreditation standard referenced in Article 7 Section 9 for
education incentive pay. No cumulative points shall be allowed for more than one degree or
Certification,

(i) Add.5 point for 60 college credits
(ii) Add 1.0 point for Bachelor Degree or Master Police Officer Certificate
(iii) Add 2.0 points for Masters Degree

(2) It is the responsibility of the Officer seeking education points to ensure that the
Training Academy has the necessary supporting documentation for education points, The
documentation must be received by the Training Academy no later than 5:00 p.m, on the seventh
(7°) business day before the written examination is administered. No education points will be
counted unless proper documentation is timely received by the Training Academy.

Section 3. Lieutenant
a) Promotional Procedure for Rank of Lieutenant
Positions in the rank of Lieutenant shall be filled from an eligibility list created by a

promotional procedure consisting of a written examination and an Assessment Center conducted
in accordance with this Article.
b) Scoring

After the Assessment Center scoring has been completed, for the rank of Lieutenant the
eligibility list shall be calculated as follows:

Written Examination Points: Assessment Center:
(See Section 5)
Maximum exam points 100 Assessment Center points 100
Maximum seniority points +15 Maximum education points +2
Total maximum points: 115 Total maximum points 102

PROMOTION ELIGIBILITY LIST FORMULA:

(Written examination points + seniority points) / 115 x 100 x .50 adjustment factor
+

(Assessment Center Points + Education Points) / 102 x 100 x .50 adjustment factor

Total points for promotion list**

**Formula shall be carried to 3 decimal points and rounded up from 0005, Police Civil
Service tie-breaking rules will be applied if necessary.

) Seniority

Each Officer shall be entitled to up to a maximum of fifteen (15) seniority points to be
added to the written exam score, equivalent to one (1) point per year of service, which shall be
prorated for partial years.

d) Education

(1) The following education points shall be added to each candidate’s score. These
points shall only be added to the assessment score in accordance with the formula below, and
shall only apply to college degrees from an accredited college or university, meeting the
accreditation standard referenced in Article 7 Section 9 for education incentive pay. No
cumulative points shall be allowed for more than one degree.

(i) Add 1.0 point for Bachelor Degree
(ii) Add 2.0 points for Masters Degree

(2) It is the responsibility of the Officer seeking education points to ensure that the
Training Academy has the necessary supporting documentation for education points. The
documentation must be received by the Training Academy no later than 5:00 p.m, on the seventh
(7°) business day before the written examination is administered, No education points will be
counted unless proper documentation is timely received by the Training Academy.

20
Section 4. Commanders
a) Promotional Procedure for Rank of Commander
Positions in the rank of Commander shall be filled from an eligibility list created by a
promotional procedure consisting of a written examination and an Assessment Center conducted
in accordance with this Article, or by appointment by the Chief in accordance with Section 4e
below.

b) Scoring

After the Assessment Center scoring has been completed for the rank of Commander, the
eligibility list shall be calculated as follows:

Written examination points: Assessment Center:
(See Section 5)

Maximum exam points 100 Assessment Center points 100

Maximum seniority points +15 Maximum education points _+2

Total maximum points: 115 Total maximum points 102

PROMOTION ELIGIBILITY LIST FORMULA:

(Written examination points + seniority points) / 115 x 100 x .50 adjustment factor
+
(Assessment Center Points + Education Points) / 102 x 100 x .50 adjustment factor

Total points for promotion list**

**Formula shall be carried to 3 decimal points and rounded up from 0005, Police Civil
Service tie-breaking rules will be applied if necessary.

) Seniority
Each Officer shall be entitled to up to a maximum of fifteen (15) seniority points to be
added to the written exam score, equivalent to one (1) point per year of service, which shall be
prorated for partial years.
d) Education
(1) The following education points shall be added to each candidate’s score. These

points shall only be added to the assessment score in accordance with the formula below, and
shall only apply to college degrees from an accredited college or university, meeting the

21
accreditation standard referenced in Article 7 Section 9 for education incentive pay. No
cumulative points shall be allowed for more than one degree.

(i) Add 1.0 point for Bachelor Degree
(ii) Add 2.0 points for Masters Degree

(2). It is the responsibility of the Officer seeking education points to ensure that the
Training Academy has the necessary supporting documentation for education points, The
documentation must be received by the Training Academy no later than 5:00 p.m. on the seventh
(7°) business day before the written examination is administered. No education points will be
counted unless proper documentation is timely received by the Training Academy.

) If, during the term of this AGREEMENT, the number of classified positions at the rank
of Commander is increased from the current number of eighteen (18) authorized Commanders to
either twenty (20) or twenty-one (21), such newly created positions shall be filled as follows:

(1) Upon creation of the twentieth (20") classified position at the rank of Commander,
the Chief of Police shall be entitled on a one-time basis to fill that position by discretionary
appointment of any Officer on the Commander Eligibility List in existence on the date the
position is created, It is expressly understood and agreed by the Parties that no Officer shall have
a right to fill such position by virtue of being on a reinstatement lis.

(2) Upon creation of the twenty-first (21") classified position at the rank of
Commander, the Chief of Police shall be entitled on a one-time basis to fill that position by
discretionary appointment of any Officer on the Commander Eligibility List in existence on the
date the position is created. It is expressly understood and agreed by the Parties that no Officer
shall have a right to fill such position by virtue of being on a reinstatement list.

(3) The Officers appointed in accordance with this Article will have full civil service
protection.

(4) This provision expires at the end of this AGREEMENT.

Section 5, Written Examination for Promotion to the Ranks of Corporal/ Detective,
Sergeant, Lieutenant, and Commander

All candidates for the ranks of Corporal/Detective, Sergeant, Lieutenant, and Commander
shall first take a written examination. The maximum score for the written examination shall be
one hundred (100) points. The written examination shall consist of questions relating to the
duties of the rank to be filled, as contained in reading material selected by the Chief of Police
The CITY may engage an independent consultant to professionally develop the written
examination questions after consultations with the Director of Civil Service. The CITY will
make a reasonable effort to have the written examination validated. The examination may be
validated before or after the examination is given. Prior to being administered, the finalized
examination shall be kept in a safe and secure manner.

22
The CITY shall make reasonable efforts to provide a six (6) month study time window prior
to promotional examinations, but it is recognized that expiration or exhaustion of a list may
necessitate an earlier examination.

Section 6. Assessment Center Process for Promotion to the Ranks of Sergeant,
Lieutenant or Commander

a) Officers who pass the Sergeant’s, Lieutenant's or Commander's written promotional
examination with a score of seventy percent (70%) or higher will proceed to the next step of the
examination process, which is an Assessment Center (unless a Technical Skills Evaluation is
used for the rank of Sergeant).

b) Prior to the written test being administered, the Chief shall establish assessment criteria
based on job content and responsibility. ‘The Director of Civil Service will generate a list of
consultants, and will review that list with the Chief, who will approve the list. The Chief shall
also appoint three (3) members to serve on an Assessment Center Review Committee (ACRC),
plus one (1) alternate. The ASSOCIATION shall also select three (3) individuals to serve on the
ACRC and one (1) alternate, All ACRC members shall be selected from the tested rank or
above. The ACRC shall meet and consider the list of consultants approved by the Chief and
recommend an Assessment Center Consultant from the list, subject to Council approval,
pursuant to City purchasing policies and procedures.

c) After the Assessment Center Consultant has been selected, the Consultant will orient the
ACRC. The Consultant will confer with both the Chief and the ACRC on the needs or issues
affecting the design of the Assessment Center. Any input from the ASSOCIATION will be
summarized by the ACRC and made available to anyone who requests it. The Consultant shall
make all final decisions concerning the design and implementation of the Assessment Center.

d) The consultant will design the Assessment Center from among the following exercises:

In-Basket
Problem Solving/Analysis

Written and Oral Resumes/Structured Interviews
Role-Playing

Memo/Report Writing

Oral Presentation/Plan Preparation

Staff Meeting

Special Event/Operations

The consultant is not required to utilize all of the exercises, but may select the exercises or
combine the listed exercises into one or more exercises that are best suited for the particular

rank,

e) The Consultant also selects the assessors, who shall meet the following criteria:

23
(1) Active duty, sworn officers of similar rank to the promotion, or above, from cities
with a population of 200,000 or greater;

(2) Shall not reside in Austin;
(3) Shall not be related to any candidates for promotion;

(4) Shall not be known to, beyond mere acquaintance, any candidates for promotion;
(5) Shall have two (2) years of experience in the promoted or equivalent rank; and
(6) Shall not be a current or former employee of the City of Austin

f) The Consultant shall conduct an orientation for candidates prior to administering the
Assessment Center. If the Consultant deems the orientation mandatory, all candidates must
attend in order to participate. If the consultant deems orientation to be mandatory, then at least
two (2) orientations shall be scheduled with one in the morning and one in the afternoon. Ifa
mandatory orientation is scheduled during an Officer's work time, he/she will be permitted to
attend,

g) The assessors selected by the Consultant will assess the candidates for the rank, The
assessors shall award up to one hundred (100) points to each candidate participating in the
assessment center, The assessment sessions will be videotaped, and candidates may review their
own session pursuant to procedures established by the Civil Service Director, provided that
candidates are given up to four (4) hours, which may be provided in smaller increments of time,
to review their assessment session. The Civil Service Director shall make blocks of time
available for Officers to review examination results from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and, in addition,
shall provide at least two (2) evening options until 10:00 p.m, However, the Civil Service
Director will not provide these time periods and the required staff unless the times are reserved
in advance. Examination reviews will be conducted on the Officer’s off-duty time, Copies of
the videotapes will not be given to the candidate. Nothing in the assessment center process may
be appealed either to the Police Civil Service Commission, hearing examiner, or the District
Court.

h) Eligible Officers who do not participate in the Assessment Center process or the
Technical Skills Evaluation process without legitimate excuse shall be removed from the
eligibility list

Section 7. Eligibi
Commander

y Lists for the Ranks of Corporal/Detective, Sergeant, Licutenant, and

 

a) All promotional eligibility lists created under this Article shall be constructed, with the
highest total score being ranked number one and descending in numerical order.

b) All promotional eligibility lists shall be valid for twenty-four (24) months from the date
the final eligibility list is initially posted, In the event of any occurrence which results in a

4
change to the eligibility list, the changed list shall be effective on the day the original list was
effective, even after termination of this AGREEMENT. In the event of a clerical or electronic
error in computing the test scores, the expiration date of any promotional examination eligibility
list may be amended by written agreement between the President of the ASSOCIATION and the
City Manager.

c) Ifa written promotional examination for a rank has been given prior to the expiration of
this AGREEMENT, the promotional process for that rank may continue to completion, the
expiration of this AGREEMENT notwithstanding, and the resulting eligibility list shall have a
life of twenty-four (24) months from the date the final eligibility list is initially posted. In the
event of any occurrence which results in a change to the eligibility list, the changed list shall be
effective on the day the original list was effective, even after termination of this AGREEMENT.

Section 8, Appeals Criteria Committee

‘An Appeals Criteria Committee (ACC) will determine the criteria for what may be appealed
to the Police Civil Service Commission following all written promotional examinations. The
‘ACC shall establish appeal criteria which will be used for all written examinations held during
the term of this AGREEMENT. The ACC, composed of seven (7) individuals, shall be
appointed as follows:

a) Three (3) members appointed by ASSOCIATION, each having taken at least one (1)
promotional exam;

b) Two (2) members appointed by the Chief of Police, each having taken at least one (1)
promotional exam;

c) One (1) member appointed by the Director of Civil Service ; and
d) One (1) member appointed by the Chair of the Police Civil Service Commission.

A simple majority of the ACC shall approve the criteria, The Chief may reconvene the ACC
if, after an eligibility list has been established, it appears that clarification or modification of the
criteria is warranted. The criteria approved by the ACC shall not be appealable to the Police
Civil Service Commission, a hearing examiner, or to District Court,

Section 9. Appeal Process After Written Examination

Within 72 hours after a promotional examination is held, the Commission shall post the
individual raw scores by PID numbers only on a bulletin board located in the main lobby of the
city hall. Any Officer who has taken a written promotional examination may, within seven (7)
business days of the posting of the written promotional exam results, review his/her examination
results, The process shall be established by the Director of Civil Service; provided, however,
that each Officer who has taken a promotional examination may have up to four (4) hours to
review his/her examination, write, and submit the appeal, if any, which must be based on the
appeal criteria approved by the ACC. Once an appeal is filed, it shall be assigned a number and

25
processed anonymously. The Officer may obtain a copy of his or her appeal. ‘The Civil Service
Director shall make blocks of time available for Officers to review examination results from 8:00
a.m, to 5:00 p.m., and, in addition, shall provide at least two (2) evening options until 10:00 p.m.
However, the Civil Service Director will not provide these time periods and the required staff
unless the times are reserved in advance. Examination reviews will be conducted on the
Officer's off-duty time, There will be no appeal to the Civil Service Commission, a hearing
examiner, or to the District Court of any facet of the examination review process.

Section 10. Review by Employee Review Committee

An Employee Review Committee (ERC) will be appointed to screen written examination
appeals to the Civil Service Commission, applying the criteria established by the ACC to
determine which appeals should be rejected because they do not meet the criteria, Assuring for
diversity as is practical and possible the ERC shall be comprised of five (5) members as follows:

a) Four (4) officers of the rank of the promotional exam or higher, two (2) each appointed
by the ASSOCIATION and the Chief of Police; and

b) One (1) member appointed by the Director of Civil Service,

Appeals may advance from the ERC to the Civil Service Commission by a vote of a simple
majority of the ERC. The ERC will not make any statement, assertion, or recommendation
regarding the validity of an appeal or subsequent Civil Service Commission action. ‘There will
be no State District Court appeal of the ERC’s examination appeal determinations or from the
Police Civil Service Commission's written examination appeal decisions, except an appeal
alleging the CITY's failure to validate the written examination,

Section 11. Time Limit to Fill Vacant Positions
It is expressly understood and agreed that the provisions in Chapter 143,036(d) and (e) and
143.014(f) of the Local Government Code prescribing time limits for filling vacancies at the rank
of Sergeant or above shall be expanded to one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days from the
date the vacaney occurs during the term of this AGREEMENT,
Section 12. Committee on the Assessment Center Process
The CITY and the ASSOCIATION shall each appoint two (2) persons to a committee that
shall schedule a meeting with the participants in each Assessment Center process to discuss the
strengths and weaknesses perceived by the participants, after completion of the process. The
Committee may recommend changes in the procedures to the Chief.

Section 13. Military Promotions/Demotions

The following changes are made to Sections 143.036 and 143.072 of the Texas Local
Government Code:

26
a) When an Officer is promoted as the result of a vacancy created by a military leave of
absence, when the Officer on military leave returns to active duty in the Department, the person
who filled the most recent vacancy at that rank shall be the one who is demoted to the next
lowest classification and placed on a reinstatement list, with such rights as prescribed in this
Article.

b) The same result applies to all other promotions in lower ranks which resulted from the
first promotion and subsequent demotion.

c) All other provisions of Sections 143,036 and 143.072 not specifically changed by this
AGREEMENT shall remain in effect

Section 14. Vacancy Created by Indefinite Suspension

a) Notwithstanding any provision in this Article or any provision in Local Government
Code Chapter 143, an indefinite suspension of an Officer (despite any pending appeal) shall
create a vacancy, but shall not expand the size of the classified service. In the event that an
indefinite suspension is overturned on appeal and the Officer is reinstated to active duty in the
Department, the person who filled the most recent vacancy at that rank shall be the one who is
demoted to the next lowest classification and placed on a reinstatement list, with such rights as
prescribed in this Article,

b) The same result applies to all other promotions in lower ranks which resulted from the
first promotion and subsequent demotion.

Section 15. Reinstatement List

a) There shall be only one reinstatement list for each rank for persons demoted by virtue of
Sections 13 and 14 of this Article.

b)_ Any person placed on the reinstatement list shall remain on the list indefinitely.

) Persons on the list shall be entitled to reinstatement to the rank from which they were
demoted in the same order as the demotion occurred. This results in the last demoted at that rank
being the first reinstated, Reinstatements must occur off of the reinstatement list for that rank
before any promotions from a promotional eligibility list. Until such reinstatements occur and
the reinstatement list is exhausted, there shall be no “vacancy” created at that rank for the
purpose of any promotional eligibility lis.

d) Time spent on a reinstatement list shall not be considered a break in service for civil
service purposes, including, but not limited to eligibility for future promotional examinations.

Section 16. Effect of Contract Expiration

The provisions of this Article shall remain in full force and effect after expiration of this
AGREEMENT as to:

27
SRBIFREBH IO ScHmriudsHsevone

a) All promotional eligibility lists created during this AGREEMENT; and

b) All reinstatement lists created pursuant to this Article.

ARTICLE 14
HIRING PROCESSES

Part A. Application of Chapter 143 Processes

The ASSOCIATION, recognizing the CITY’s need for flexibility in the hiring of both
experienced police officers and Cadets for the Department’s regular Training Academy program,
hereby agrees to the deviations from Chapter 143 hiring procedures specifically authorized by
this Article, Except as allowed by this Article, the CITY will comply with the hiring procedures
specified in Chapter 143, and retains all prerogatives granted to it by the statutory procedures.

Part B, Initial Hiring Process
Section 1, Submission of Proper Application

a) In order to be considered for the position of cadet, each applicant must first submit a
proper application as defined by the Department. A proper application shall include, but not be
limited to, information on personal history, criminal history, driving record and age. The
information submitted shall be used by the Police Department to determine whether the applicant
meets the minimum qualifications to proceed to the testing phase of the process.

b) The Police Chief shall establish the eligibility requirements for applicants for the position
of police cadet, consistent with Chapter 143 and this AGREEMENT.

Section 2, Maximum Age of Applicants

For all applicants, the maximum age for application to the cadet position shall be forty-five
(45) years old.

Section 3, Screening and Testing of Applicants

a) The Police Chief will develop and implement the screening and testing procedures used
to determine whether an applicant will be offered a position as a police cadet in a Police
Academy class. ‘The screening and testing procedures will include, at a minimum, a structured
Oral Interview Board and a background investigation, Nothing in this AGREEMENT or in
Chapter 143 will restrict the nature of the tests administered to applicants or the procedures used
to administer those tests.

b) Applicants who successfully complete all of the screening and testing procedures will be

28
placed on an eligibility list per Department policy or procedure, Applicants on the eligibility list
may be offered a position as police cadet in any upcoming Police Academy class.

c) Each eligibility list created as a result of the process described in this Section shall
remain effective for twenty-four (24) months after certification by the Civil Service Commission.

Section 4. Police Internship Program

The Department may create and implement a Police Internship Program for individuals who
are interested in becoming Austin Police officers. Anyone hired into the Internship Program
must pass the same screening and testing procedures as applicants for the position of Police
Cadet, either at the beginning or at the end of their participation in the Program, The duration of
the Police Intemship Program will be at least the equivalent of a college semester, Any intern
who successfully completes the Police Internship Program shall be placed at the top of the
current or next eligibility list for hire as a Police Cadet. Up to thirty-eight percent (38%) of each
Police Academy class may consist of interns who successfully completed the Police Internship
Program,

Section 5. Effect on Present Cadet Classes

It is specifically understood and agreed that the hiring process set out in this AGREEMENT
shall not apply to persons hired before the effective date of this AGREEMENT.

Section 6. Probationary Period

The “at will” probationary period of individuals filling beginning positions in the police
Department shall begin, under this AGREEMENT, on the date the cadet receives his/her
commission and shall end at the expiration of fifteen (15) months, The probationary period of
any cadet that already holds a commission prior to entering the police academy shall begin on the
date the officer receives their first assignment after successful completion of the academy, and
shall end at the expiration of fifteen (15) months. However, any leave taken by a probationary
police officer during this probationary time period, including but not limited to injury leave,
FMLA leave, sick leave, shall extend this probationary period by the length of the leave taken.
(Approved vacation leave other than FMLA will not so extend the probationary period.)

Part C. Modified Hiring Process
Section 1. Applicability

The Modified Hiring Process applies only to the hiring of experienced police officers who
may not need to attend the Department’s regular Training Academy program,

Section 2. Eligibi

  

y Requirements

a) The Chief of Police shall establish the eligibility requirements for applicants for the
Modified Hiring Process. The requirements need not be the same as those established by
Chapter 143 or those applicable to applicants for the position of Cadet in the Department's

29
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

regular Training Academy. The requirements may be modified by the Chief of Police, but shall
include at least the following:

(1) At the time of application, each applicant must be actively employed as a police
officer for a municipal, county, or state law enforcement agency that handles a full
array of urban police work. Each applicant must have a total of at least three years
of active service as a police officer for one or more municipal, county, or state law
enforcement agency. Employment by or experience with a school or university law
enforcement agency is not acceptable.

(2) Each applicant shall hold a current peace officer license from the Texas
Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education (TCLEOSE) or
shall meet criteria established by the Chief for obtaining the TCLEOSE license,

(3) Each applicant will be subject to a background investigation,

b) The Chief of Police or his designee may, at his or her sole discretion, deny the application
of any applicant for the Modified Hiring Process and may determine whether a particular
applicant meets the eligibility requirements.

c) Once the hiring process for a modified class has been identified, the CITY will provide
the process to the ASSOCIATION prior to accepting applications, The CITY agrees not to
change the hiring process for that hiring cycle unless a court, the DOJ, the EEOC/TWCCRD, or
a third party vendor that participated in designing the process, determines that the process
outcome is unlawful under Title VII or Chapter 21 of the Texas Labor Code.

Section 3. Selection and Placement

a) The Chief of Police shall establish the selection criteria and procedures for the Modified
Hiring Process, which need not be the same as those established by Chapter 143 or those
applicable to applicants for the position of Cadet in the Department’s regular Training Academy.
Applicants who meet the selection criteria and procedures may be hired without being placed on
an eligibility list.

b) Upon hire, the applicant will be placed in the position of “Cadet Senior,” regardless of
any rank or position the officer previously held in another law enforcement agency, to the same
extent as if they had been hired under the processes prescribed by Chapter 143. Each Cadet
Senior must complete a Modified Training Academy and probationary period.

Section 4, Training and Probation

a) The Chief of Police shall establish the training requirements for a Modified Training
Academy. All Cadet Seniors hired through the Modified Hiring Process must successfully
complete the Modified Training Academy.

b) Each Cadet Senior shall successfully complete a probationary period of at least three

30
months following completion of the Modified Training Academy, but not to exceed the
probationary period for officers hired through the Department's regular hiring process,

Section 5. Ci

 

Service Status

a) A Cadet Senior who successfully completes the Modified Training Academy will be
placed in the Civil Service classification of Police Officer and automatically becomes a full-
fledged Civil Service employee and has full Civil Service protection, subject to successfully
completing probation. Until completion of probation, each officer hired through this Modified
Hiring Process is an at-will employee who may be discharged by the Chief of Police at any time,
without right of appeal

b). Until completion of probation, an Officer hired through the Modified Hiring Process is
excluded from the coverage of Articles 17 and 18 and cannot file grievances pursuant to Article
20 regarding disciplinary actions.

Section 6, Pay and Seniority

a) The Chief of Police may determine the pay rate for each Cadet Senior during the
Modified Training Academy. Upon completion of the Academy, the Chief of Police may
determine the pay rate for each Police Officer hired through this Modified Hiring Process. Any

pay rate established by the Chief shall not exceed that of an Officer with two years” experience
in the Austin Police Department,

b) Regardless of the pay rate established for each Cadet Senior, seniority for purposes of
longevity pay shall begin when the Officer successfully completes the Modified Training
Academy.

Section 7. Promotional Eligibility

Officers hired through the Modified Hiring Process must meet the same promotional
eligibility requirements as Austin Police Department Officers hired through the Department's
regular initial hiring process.

Section 8, Implementation

The Modified Hiring Process described by this Article may be used at any time, for any
number of applicants, as authorized by the Chief of Police.

Part D. Additional Provisions
Section 1. Benefit of the Bargain
The ASSOCIATION and the CITY share the goal of recruiting and hiring the most qualified

applicants to become Austin Police Officers. The ASSOCIATION acknowledges the significant
effort and skill of the Department’s Recruiting Unit in trying to meet this goal, but recognize that

31
the Department needs to be able to adjust hiring procedures as necessary, without having to wait
until the next Meet & Confer negotiation process. The parties agree that the degree of flexibility
incorporated into this Article is of benefit to both parties and that this AGREEMENT would not
have been reached without the flexibility provided by this Article.

Section 2. Effect of Contract Expiration

The provisions of this Article shall remain in full force and effect after expiration of this
Agreement as to:

a) Any hiring process which has been commenced in substantial reliance upon the
provisions of this Article;

b) The length of the “at will” probationary period for individuals in that status prior to the
expirations of this AGREEMENT;

c) Any eligibility list created under the terms of this Article will remain in effect for 24
months, notwithstanding the expiration of this AGREEMENT;

d) Any interns who are participating in the Police Internship Program at the expiration of
this AGREEMENT may be placed at the top of the first eligibility list created after expiration of
this AGREEMENT.

ARTICLE 15
DRUG TESTING

Section 1. Commitment to an Effective Drug Interdiction Program

The CITY and the ASSOCIATION agree that Officers may be called upon in hazardous
situations without warning, and that it is imperative to the interest of the Officers and the public
to ensure that Officers are not substance impaired. In order to further their joint interest in
protecting Officers and the public, the CITY and the ASSOCIATION agree to mandatory drug
testing as described in this section. The CITY and the ASSOCIATION have a mutual interest in
ensuring that drug impaired Officers do not perform law enforcement duties, The CITY and the
ASSOCIATION are committed to the principle that the mandatory drug testing policy for
Officers is designed and shall be administered to result in disciplinary action only against those
Officers who have violated the Police Department's rules, regulations, policies and procedures.

Section 2, Random Testing
One hundred percent (100%) of Officers at all ranks, including the Chief, shall be susceptible
to mandatory testing for illegal drugs and controlled substances during each calendar year on a

fair and impartial statistical basis at the CITY's expense. The fair and impartial statistical basis
(in which each Officer has an equal chance of being selected during a calendar year) shall be by

32
a non-discriminatory computerized program operated and certified as non-discriminatory by an
independent firm hired by the CITY, and the Officer shall be tested upon being selected by the
computer.

Upon notice of selection for random testing, any Officer shall provide a urine sample in
accordance with the policy or protocol established by the testing laboratory. Failure to provide a
sample shall be equivalent to insubordination and may be the basis for suspension or indefinite
suspension.

Section 3. Assurance of Accurate Results

Officers shall have the right to request that their urine sample be stored in case of legal
disputes. The urine sample will be submitted to the designated testing facility where a sample
will be maintained for the period of one year. Officers may, at their own expense, request to
have a test administered at an approved physician's office accompanied by the testing personnel
provided such testing is administered within eight (8) hours after notification by the Chief. Drug
testing shall consist of a two-step procedure:

1. Initial screening test.
2. Confirmation test.

Should a confirmation test be required, the test procedure will be technologically different
and more sensitive than the initial screening test. Officers shall be provided with a notice of the
result and may obtain a copy of the actual laboratory result upon request to the Lieutenant
assigned responsibility as Drug Testing Coordinator.

The CITY and the ASSOCIATION agree that only an appropriately certified laboratory
should conduct drug testing. The laboratory selected shall be experienced and capable of quality
control documentation, chain of custody and have a demonstrated technical expertise and
proficiency in urine analysis and shall comply with all requirements of an appropriately certified
laboratory. The CITY shall require any laboratory selected for collecting samples to conduct a
background investigation on those laboratory personnel involved in the collecting or handling of
an unsealed sample. In addition, the CITY shall require any laboratory involved in collecting
samples to use only employees who have not been arrested by Officers of the Austin Police
Department or convicted of a felony or misdemeanor crime involving dishonest conduct or
possession of illegal drugs to be involved in collecting or handling of an unsealed sample
collected from an Officer. In the event that the laboratory that collects the initial samples is not
the same laboratory that conducts the actual testing of those samples, only the laboratory that
collects the initial samples must comply with the background and criminal history provision of
this AGREEMENT. Test results shall be inadmissible in any administrative disciplinary hearing
if it is determined that the laboratory collecting samples failed to conduct a background
investigation on the laboratory personnel involved in collecting or handling the unsealed sample
which resulted in a positive test result.

All records pertaining to the Department-required drug tests shall remain confidential except
to the extent used in a disciplinary appeal. Drug test results and records shall be stored in a

33
locked file under the control of the Drug Coordinator, and under the supervision of the Chief,
who will maintain original copies submitted by the laboratory. No access to these files shall be
allowed without written approval of the Chief.

Section 4, Testing on Reasonable Suspicion

Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prohibit the Chief from conducting a drug test on
an Officer, or a search of any areas in which the Officer does not have a personal privacy
expectation, based upon reasonable suspicion in accordance with the guidelines as set forth in
Department policy for such actions. Such actions may be taken upon the agreement of any two
supervisors that there is a reasonable basis for a suspicion that:

a) An Officer is presently using or under the influence of illegal drugs or inhalants;
b) An Officer has possession of illegal drugs or inhalants;

c) An Officer has been associated with or involved with others who were using or under the
influence of illegal drugs or inhalants, or who were in possession of same, which association or
involvement was not authorized or required in connection with any law enforcement duty, under
circumstances which reasonably indicate participation or complicity with, or protection of such
other individuals; or

d) Any conduct or situation described in a-c immediately above involving alcohol, while on
duty, or which results in on-duty impairment.

Section 5, Definitions
For the purposes of this Article:

"Drug testing” shall be defined as the compulsory production and submission of a urine
sample by an Officer for chemical analysis to detect the presence of prohibited drug usage, in
connection with the random testing process set forth herein; and production or submission of
urine, blood, or hair sample for a required test based on the reasonable suspicion standards set
forth herein,

ARTICLE 16
CITIZEN OVERSIGHT OF
THE AUSTIN POLICE DEPARTMENT

Section 1. Citizen Oversight
a) Citizen Oversight means the process which incorporates citizen input into. the

administrative review of conduct of APD Officers and the review of the Austin Police
Department's policies and procedures, The City of Austin may provide for Citizen Oversight of

34
the Austin Police Department, Citizen Oversight may include an Office of the Police Monitor
and a Citizen Review Panel, The CITY agrees that there will be no parallel process created in
addition to the one contemplated by these provisions.

b). The purpose of Citizen Oversight is:

(1) To assure timely, fair, impartial, and objective administrative review of complaints
against police officers, while protecting the individual rights of officers and citizens;

(2) To provide an independent and objective review of the policies and procedures of
the Austin Police Department; and

(3) To provide a primary, but not exclusive, location for accepting administrative
complaints of officer misconduct.

c) Except as otherwise provided by this AGREEMENT, the Chief of Police retains all
management rights and authority over the process of administrative investigation of alleged
misconduct by APD Officers that could result in disciplinary action.

d) Except as specifically permitted in this Article, the Citizen Oversight process, regardless
of its name or structure, shall not be used or permitted to gather evidence, contact or interview
witnesses, or otherwise independently investigate a complaint of misconduct by an Officer.
There shall be no legal or administrative requirement, including but not limited to subpoena
power or an order from the City Manager or the Department, that an Officer appear before or
present evidence to any individual, panel, committee, group, or forum of any type involved in
Citizen Oversight. This provision has no application to any Independent Investigation
authorized by the Chief of Police or the City Manager, regardless of whether the Independent
Investigation was recommended by a Panel or Police Monitor, or to any hearing of an appeal of
disciplinary action pursuant to this AGREEMENT and/or Chapter 143 of the Texas Local
Government Code. Police Officers remain subject to orders or subpoenas to appear and provide
testimony or evidence in such investigations or hearings,

Section 2, Definitions
Inthis Article:
a) “Critical Incident” means:

(1) An alleged use of force or other action by an Austin Police Officer that directly
results in serious bodily injury or death (The definition of “serious bodily injury” found in the
Texas Penal Code, Section 1.07(a)(46) will apply. );

(2) A death in custody; or

(3) An officer involved shooting.

35
b) “Independent Investigation” means an administrative investigation or inquiry of alleged
or potential misconduct by an Officer, authorized by the Chief of Police or City Manager and
conducted by a person(s) who is not:

(1) An employee of the City of Austin;
(2) An employee of the Office of the Police Monitor; or
(3) A volunteer member of the Panel.

An “Independent Investigation” does not include attorney-client work product or privileged
material related to the defense of claims or suits against the City of Austin,

c) “Complaint” means an affidavit setting forth allegations or facts that may form the basis
of future allegations of misconduct against an officer and which serves as the basis for initiating
an investigation.

d) “Complainant” means a person, including an Officer, claiming to be a witness to or the
victim of misconduct by an Officer. “Complainant” does not include the Department designee in
the case of an administrative referral

Section 3. The Office of the Police Monitor (“OPM”)
a) Access to Confidential Information

The Police Monitor will have unfettered access to the Internal Affairs investigation
process, except as provided herein, The Police Monitor may inquire of the Commander of the
Internal Affairs Division or the Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee, as to the status of any
pending IAD investigation

b) Complaint Intake

(1) The OPM shall not gather evidence, contact or interview witnesses (except the
complainant as provided herein), or otherwise independently investigate a complaint or other
information of police misconduct, The OPM shall not have the authority to subpoena witnesses.
There shall be no administrative requirement, including but not limited to an order from the City
Manager or the Department, that an Officer appear or present evidence to the Police Monitor.
The OPM is authorized to accept complaints of Officer misconduct as provided in this Section.

(2). The OPM may obtain the following information in connection with the filing of a
complaint of officer misconduct:

The complainant's personal information;
The nature of the complaint;

Witness information;

The incident location, date, and time; and

ESSE

36
(e) The APD officer(s) involved

(3) The OPM shall digitally audio record the taking of the information provided in
subsection (b)(2). The OPM will promptly forward the completed complaint and audio
recording to IAD. A complaint by a complainant who is not a Police Officer shall not be
accepted unless the complainant verifies the complaint in writing before a public officer who is
authorized by law to take statements under oath. A complainant may be subsequently
interviewed by the IAD investigator for purposes of clarification or to obtain additional
information relevant to the investigation.

(4) Personnel from the OPM shall assist an individual in understanding the complaint
process and the requirements for filing a complaint but shall not solicit or insist upon the filing of,
a complaint by any individual.

c) Access to Investigation Interviews

A representative from the OPM may attend an interview of the Officer who is the subject
of the investigation or administrative inquiry, as well as all witness interviews, The OPM
representative may directly question the Officer who is the subject of the investigation only if
agreed to by the subject Officer or his/her representative and the IAD investigator, At the
conclusion of or during a break in any interview, the OPM representative may take the IAD
investigator aside and request that the investigator ask additional questions. Whether such
information is sought in any witness interview is within the discretion of the IAD investigator.

d) Access to Dismissal Review Hearings

The Police Monitor may attend any Dismissal Review Hearing (or other administrative
hearing conducted for the purpose of determining whether the Department shall take disciplinary
action against an Officer for alleged misconduct). Neither the Police Monitor nor the Internal
Affairs Representative(s) may remain in the Hearing while the chain of command and the Chief
of Police or his/her designee discusses the final classification and/or appropriate discipline, if
any, to be imposed. The final classification of an allegation of misconduct is within the sole
discretion of the Chief of Police, subject to the Officer’s right of appeal of any discipline
imposed as provided by Chapter 143 of the Texas Local Government Code and this
AGREEMENT

¢) Quarterly Meetings

On a quarterly basis, the Police Monitor, the Chief of Police, the Commander of the
Internal Affairs Division, and the ASSOCIATION President shall meet to discuss any issues
related to the citizen oversight process.

Section 4. Citizen Review Panel (“Panel”)

a) Function

37
The Panel shall serve to make recommendations to the Chief of Police as provided in this
Article, and in addition to review individual cases of Officer conduct as authorized in this
Article. Panel members shall perform their duties in a fair and objective manner.

b) Qualifications

To be eligible for appointment to the Panel, applicants must not have a felony criminal
conviction, received deferred adjudication for a felony, or be under felony indictment. Prior to
appointment, Panel members must submit to a criminal background investigation to determine
their eligibility to serve on the Panel. A felony conviction, felony indictment, or felony deferred
adjudication, after appointment, shall result in the immediate removal of the member from the
Panel by the City Manager.

c) Training

Each member must complete the training prescribed herein prior to commencing their
service on the Panel, except as specified herein, The required training shall include:

(1) Attending a three to four (3-4) day training by APD tailored specifically for Panel
members including, at a minimum, the following:

. Special Investigations Unit;

. Officer Involved Shootings;

. Response to resistance;

|. The Police Training Academy;

. Crisis Intervention Team;

Firearms, including FATS training;

. Bomb and SWAT;

. Ride-outs on at least two shifts (14 hours) in different parts of the City, one of
which must include a Friday or Saturday night in Downtown Command from 11
pm to 3 am, The Downtown Command ride-out must be completed within six
months of selection as a Panelist, and

i, A presentation by the Association.

FRrmeacee

(2) Attending six (6) hours of training provided by the Intemal Affairs Division.

These training requirements are subject to change by unanimous agreement of the Chief of
Police, the ASSOCIATION President, and the Police Monitor.

d) Resign to Run
Any person involved in the citizen oversight process as a Panel member, who files for
public elective office shall immediately resign from their position in the citizen oversight

process, and failing such resignation shall be immediately removed by the City Manager,

@) Cases Subject to Review by Panel

38
The Panel may review the following two categories of cases regarding officer conduct

(1) Review Requested by Complainant: Not later than thirty (30) calendar days after
the Police Monitor forwards notice of the outcome of the investigation to the
complainant, the complainant may request that the Police Monitor refer the
complaint to the Panel. ‘There is no limitation as to the type of case which may be
referred to the Panel at the request of the complainant.

(2) No Review Request by Complainant: Without a complainant’s request, only the
following cases may be referred to the Panel:

a. A*Critical Incident” as defined in this Article;
b. The appearance of a pattern of serious misconduct by the Officer involved;
c. The appearance of a pattern of Department-wide misconduct;

d. The appearance of serious official misconduct by one or more members of the
Department;

The appearance of bias based misconduct; or

£ The appearance of issue(s) to be addressed by policy, procedure, or training
recommendations,

) Nature of Proceedings

(1) The review of any case by the Panel shall not be conducted as a hearing or trial
Except for the receipt of public input/communications as provided by this Section or an
Independent Investigation authorized by this Article, the Panel shall not gather evidence, contact
or interview witnesses, or otherwise independently investigate a complaint. The Panel shall not
have the authority to subpoena witnesses. There shall be no administrative requirement,
including but not limited to an order from the City Manager or the Department, that a Police
Officer appear or present evidence to the Panel. The Panel shall immediately forward any
information or evidence of which it becomes aware to the Chief of Police through the Police
Monitor.

(2) A quorum shall be established prior to beginning the review of any case by the
Panel.

(3) Not less than five (5) business days prior to a Panel meeting, the OPM shall provide
the Internal Affairs Division and the individual designated by the President of the
ASSOCIATION as the Panel liaison, with a copy of the Panel meeting agenda, ‘The Panel shall
not take action upon or receive public input/communications concerning any case or issue not
listed as an agenda item. Citizens wanting to address the Panel during the public

39
input/communications section of the meeting must complete a speaker sign-up card listing the
agenda item they wish to address, and will be limited to addressing the topic identified. The
Internal Affairs Division shall promptly notify any Officer who is the subject of a complaint
listed as an agenda item as to the scheduled Panel meeting. Notice of special meetings shall be
handled in a similar manner, unless circumstances require a shorter notice, in which case the
notice shall be issued as soon as the special meeting is scheduled.

(4) By virtue of its purely advisory role, the Panel is not a governmental body and is
not subject to the Open Meetings Act. Those portions of the meeting during which public
input/communication is accepted shall be open to the public and recorded by video and audio.

g) Access to Confidential Information

(1) Panel members shall have full access to all administrative investigative and
disciplinary files necessary to perform their functions under this AGREEMENT. Panel members
may ask questions and obtain specific facts, details and information from the Police Monitor,
IAD, or the Chief's office. As part of such access, the Police Monitor shall make available to
individual Panel members all IAD case files scheduled for review pursuant to subsection “f (3)”
above. Individual Panel members may review the IAD case file for up to eight (8) hours, at the
Police Monitor’s office and in the presence of a member of the Monitor’s staff. This review
opportunity may occur before the Panel’s private session and/or after the Panel’s public session
regarding such case, The Monitor’s Office may hold a conference call with the Panel in which
the Panel is given a preview of the general nature of the cases that will appear at the next Panel
meeting. The focus of the discussion shall not be on the specific facts of any particular case.
The purpose of this conference call is so that the Panel members may decide if they need to
review the file prior to the meeting. The prohibitions and restrictions in Section 8 of this Article
apply to any confidential information viewed by Panel members during this review opportunity.
Panel members shall not copy or remove any portion of the file. ‘The Police Monitor shall be
responsible for security of the file

(2) Inan effort to ensure the Panel has a more complete view of the types of cases the
APD reviews, the Police Monitor shall meet with the Panel twice a year to provide them an
overview of APD activity up to that point in the calendar year.

h) Private Case Briefing Session

(1) Prior to receiving any communication from the complainant or any other public
input/communications, the Panel may meet in Private Session to be briefed conceming the facts
of the particular case to be reviewed, ‘The Police Monitor and/or the IAD representative shall
present to the Panel the information obtained from the IAD investigation. ‘The duties of the IAD
representative may be performed by others, including the chain of command, training staff, and/
or forensics, Members of the Panel may be provided with READ ONLY electronic access to all
or part of the IAD files, or the physical files themselves, during these presentations.

40
(2) An APD Officer designated by the President of the ASSOCIATION and one
individual from the Internal Affairs Division shall be present during the Panel Private Session
case briefing, subject to the following provisions:

a. The Association’s Representative will not participate in the briefing and is
present only as an observer, with the following exceptions:

(i) The Association Representative may request that the Police Monitor allow
the representative to present information relevant to a case before the
Panel,

(ii) A Panel member may request that the Association Representative present
information relevant to a case before the Panel.

iii) Any information provided by the Association Representative shall be
y pl y PI
presented in a neutral manner.

b. The Association Representative may not be involved in the case as a witness,
investigator, relative, or officer in the chain of command

c. Information in the possession of the Association Representative as a result of
participation in such briefing shall not be disclosed or revealed other than as
necessary as a part of official Association business in monitoring and enforcing
this AGREEMENT, or in the normal course of dispute resolution processes
under this AGREEMENT.

(3) During any private Panel briefing, the presenter should exercise discretion and omit
information from the briefing that the Police Monitor deems to be irrelevant to the citizen’s
complaint, as well as information of a highly personal nature that would constitute an
unwarranted invasion of an individual’s personal privacy interests.

(4) In addition to those individuals involved in briefing the Panel, and the Association
Representative, the Assistant Police Monitor, the staff member from the Office of the Police
Monitor that is assigned to the case, and a designated attorney from the City Attomey’s Office
may be present during the Private Case Briefing Session. No other individual may be present
unless the Panel requests further information.

i) Public Session and Comments

After the Private Session, the Panel shall meet in Public Session to receive public
input/communications. During the public session, the Police Monitor shall take precautions to
prevent discussion of the facts of the particular case and to prevent the Public Session from being
used as a forum to gather evidence, interview witnesses, or otherwise independently investigate a
complaint. Any individual who indicates that he has new or additional evidence concerning the
particular case shall be referred to the Chief of Police or his designee. ‘The rules that apply to
citizen communications with the City Council shall apply to the public session of the Panel

41
meetings, The Police Monitor, in consultation with the Panel, shall set the time limits for such
proceedings, and shall be responsible to prevent discussion of matters not on the Session agenda.

j) Communication from Complainant and/or Officer
(1) Public Session:

Subject to the provisions of Subsection “h,” the Complainant shall be permitted to
address the Panel in the Public Session, The Officer who is the subject of the complaint may, but
is not required, attend and listen to the address by the complainant, and may also address the
Panel.

(2) Private Session:

If the Complainant articulates relevant privacy or safety concerns, the Police Monitor
may allow the complainant to address the Panel in a private session, The Officer who is the
subject of the complaint may, but is not required, attend and listen to the address by the
complainant, and may also address the Panel. If the complainant is anxious or intimidated by
the presence of the Officer, the Panel shall videotape the complainant's address to the Panel, and
allow the Officer to view and respond to the taped statement outside the complainant's presence.
Other than the complainant and the responding police officer, only those persons authorized to
attend the Panel Private case briefing may be present during this private Panel Session.

k) Deliberations
After receiving public input, if any, the Panel shall discuss the particular case under
review in private session. The Police Monitor and/or the Assistant Police Monitor, the staff
member from the Office of the Police Monitor that is assigned to the case, and a designated
attorney from the City Attomey’s Office may be present during such discussion. No other
individual may be present unless, the Panel requests further information; if the Panel does so, the
Police Monitor or Assistant Police Monitor, and the [A Commander or Lieutenant, must also be
present,
1) Action and Recommendations
(1) The Panel shall not take action or make recommendations not authorized by this
Article, At the conclusion of the review process set forth above, the Panel, upon a majority vote
of its total members, may make the following written recommendations to Chief of Police:
a. Further investigation by the Department is warranted;
b. Department policies warrant review and/or change;

c. An “Independent Investigation” is warranted; or

d. A non-binding recommendation on discipline, limited to cases involving a

2
“critical incident” as defined in this Article.

(2) The final decision as to appropriate discipline is within the sole discretion of the
Chief of Police, subject to the Officer’s right of appeal of any discipline imposed as provided by
Chapter 143 of the Texas Local Government Code and this AGREEMENT. Neither the OPM
employees nor individual members of the Panel shall publicly express agreement or
disagreement with the final disciplinary decision of the Chief, other than as set forth in the
written recommendation, A deliberate violation of this provision shall be subject to the dispute
resolution process set forth in Section 7 of this Article, but a Panel member shall be permanently
removed from the Panel upon a violation of this standard.

(3) Members must attend the meeting and hear the merits of the case in order to vote.
The Panel’s recommendations shall be reduced to writing, The Panel’s written recommendations
shall explain the Panel’s issues(s) or concern(s).

(4) The Police Monitor shall consult with the Panel in formulating any
recommendations to the Chief of Police.

Section 5. Independent Investigation

a) The Chief of Police and the City Manager retain all management rights to authorize an
Independent Investigation conceming police conduct.

b) If the Panel, pursuant to Section 4(I)(1)(c), recommends that an Independent
Investigation is warranted, the Panel shall provide a public report setting forth the basis and
concerns of the Panel supporting any recommendation for an Independent Investigation, In
addition, the Panel shall provide a public report setting forth the Panel’s conclusions and
recommendations after its review of any Independent Investigation.

Section 6. Public Release of Information
a) Documents Subject to and Timing of Public Release:

The provisions of Section 143.089(g) of the Texas Local Government Code are expressly
modified to the extent necessary to permit public release of the following documents in
the manner prescribed by this Section:

1) A Panel recommendation that Department policies warrant review and/or change, as
authorized by Section 4(1)(1)(b). Unless made confidential by a law other than
Section 143,089(g) of the Texas Local Government Code, such recommendations
shall be subject to public release, in their entirety, upon delivery to the Chief of
Police,

2

‘A Panel recommendation that further investigation by the Department is warranted, as
authorized by Section 4(I)(I)(a). Unless made confidential by a law other than
Section 143,089(g) of the Texas Local Government Code, such recommendations

4B
1 shall be subject to public release, in their entirety, only after the Police Chiefs final
2 disciplinary decision as to the subject Officer(s), and only if the Police Chief imposes
3 discipline.
4
5 3) A Panel recommendation that an Independent Investigation is warranted, as
6 authorized by Section 4(I)(1)(c). Unless made confidential by a law other than
7 Section 143,089(g) of the Texas Local Government Code, such recommendations
8 shall be subject to public release, in their entirety, only after the Police Chief's final
9 disciplinary decision as to the subject Officer(s), regardless of whether discipline is
10 imposed
2 4) A Panel report setting forth the basis and concerns of the Panel supporting any
B recommendation for an Independent Investigation, as authorized by Section 5(b).
4 Unless made confidential by a law other than Section 143.089(g) of the Texas Local
15 Government Code, such recommendations shall be subject to public release, in their
16 entirety, only after the Police Chief's final disciplinary decision as to the subject
7 Officer(s), regardless of whether discipline is imposed.
18
19 5) A Panel report setting forth the Panel’s conclusions and recommendations after its
20 review of any Independent Investigation, as authorized by Section 5(b). Unless made
21 confidential by a law other than Section 143.089(g) of the Texas Local Government
n Code, such recommendations shall be subject to public release, in their entirety, only
B after the Police Chief's final disciplinary decision as to the subject Officer(s),
4 regardless of whether discipline is imposed.
25
26 6) A panel recommendation on discipline in a case involving a critical incident, as
7 authorized by Section 4(1)(1)(d). Unless made confidential by a law other than
28 Section 143,089(g) of the Texas Local Government Code, such recommendations
29 shall be subject to public release, in their entirety, only after the Police Chief's final
30 disciplinary decision as to the subject Officer(s), regardless of whether discipline is
31 imposed
32
3 7) The body of a final report (but not exhibits) prepared by an investigator who conducts
34 an Independent Investigation authorized by the Chief of Police or City Manager
35 concerning police conduct, whether or not recommended by the Panel. Unless made
36 confidential by a law other than Section 143,089(g) of the Texas Local Government
37 Code, the body of such report shall be subject to public release, in its entirety, only
38 after the Police Chief's final disciplinary decision as to the subject Officer(s),
39 regardless of whether discipline is imposed.
40
41 It is expressly understood and agreed by the parties that any recommendation and/or
2 report released pursuant to this Section may contain information which would otherwise
48 be made confidential by Section 143.089(g) of the Texas Local Government Code.
4

45 b) The public release of information authorized in this AGREEMENT will be reviewed by
46 — the City of Austin Law Department to insure compliance with this AGREEMENT and to

4
determine whether the release of such information may be prohibited by any other law.
c) Unauthorized Release of Confidential Documents/Information:

(1) Exceptas permitted by this AGREEMENT, employees of the OPM and members of
the Panel shall not publicly comment on the specifics of pending complaints and investigations
prior to a Panel decision. All public comments and communications by the OPM shall be factual
and demonstrate impartiality to individual police officers, the Austin Police Department, the
Austin Police Association, employees of the City of Austin, residents of the City of Austin, and
community groups.

(2) Should a person participating on a Panel make public statements which, to a
reasonable observer, would be perceived to express or demonstrate a position, bias, or
prejudgment on the merits of a particular case that is under investigation or subject to review,
prior to the completion of the citizen panel process for that case, such person will not be allowed
to participate in the review, deliberation, or drafting of recommendations concerning that case.
This provision does not prohibit the Panel or an individual Panel member from making generic,
non-case related public statements about the Austin Police Department, or from providing
information about the process, which does not appear to prejudge the merits, or demonstrate a
bias on the case. In the event of a deliberate violation of this standard, the Panel member shall
be permanently removed from the Panel as set forth below.

(3) No public comment or communication (including but not limited to oral or written
statements, reports, newsletters, or other materials made, released, published or distributed) by
the OPM or Panel members will make reference to or identify an Officer by name, unless such
release is then permitted by law, or the Officer’s name has become public as a matter of fact by
lawful or authorized means, or by the Officer’s own release. Public comments or
communications by the OPM and the Panel shall conform to state and federal law and this
AGREEMENT regarding confidentiality, and shall not contain information that is confidential or
privileged under this AGREEMENT or state, federal or common law.

(4) All OPM written publications shall be provided to the APD and the APA
simultaneously with distribution to the public.

(5) Any deliberate release of information that is made confidential by law or by this
AGREEMENT shall result in the permanent removal of the offending member from the Panel.
Any deliberate premature release of information before it may properly be released likewise will
result in the permanent removal of the offending member from Panel,

Section 7. Dispute Resolution

a) Complaints concerning the conduct of OPM employees shall be filed with the Police
Monitor, or if the complaint concerns the personal conduct of the Police Monitor, shall be filed
with the City Manager. If not resolved at the first level, a fact finder shall be appointed to review
relevant materials and take evidence to reach written findings of fact, which shall be expedited
for final resolution within two weeks after appointment. ‘The fact finder shall be appointed by

45
SBIFRDEBGHHOSecHmiudsaHwevone

striking an AAA list, if the parties do not otherwise agree on a fact finder. Upon conclusion of
the fact finding, and after review and evaluation of the fact finder’s report, the Police Monitor (or
City Manager if the complaint concerns the personal conduct of the Police Monitor) shall make a
decision. The final decision shall be made by the City Manager.

b) Complaints conceming the conduct of Panel members shall be filed with the City
Manager. If a signed complaint is filed alleging specific comments by a Panel member that
violate the standards in subparagraph 6(c) above, the Panel’s consideration shall be postponed or
the particular Panel member shall not participate, until the matter is finally resolved, A
complaint may not be based on statements or conduct previously raised and found insufficient
for disqualification. Only one of such Panel members may be temporarily disqualified under this
provision on a particular case, The City Manager shall promptly determine the complaint. The
ASSOCIATION may appeal from the decision of the City Manager through the expedited
arbitration process in this AGREEMENT. If two (2) consecutive complaints are found
insufficient on a particular Panel member, subsequent complaints on that Panel member shall not
result in temporary removal, but upon final determination that there has been a violation, such
member shall be subject to permanent removal. Nothing shall prevent the Chief from taking
disciplinary action within the statutory time frame, under the provisions of Chapter 143, as
modified by this AGREEMENT.

Section 8. Access to Section 143.089(g) Files

a) Information conceming the administrative review of complaints against Officers,
including but not limited to Internal Affairs Division files and all contents thereof, are intended
solely for the Depariment’s use pursuant to Section 143.089(g) of the Texas Local Government
Code (the 143,089(g) file). All records of the Police Monitor’s Office that relate to individual
case investigations and the APD 143,089(g) file, although same are not APD files or records,
shall have the same statutory character in the hands of the Police Monitor, and shall not be
disclosed by any person, unless otherwise authorized by law or this AGREEMENT. Public
access to such information is strictly governed by this AGREEMENT and Texas law. To the
extent necessary to perform their duties, individuals involved in the Citizen Oversight process
are granted a right of access to the information contained within the 143,089(g) files of Officers
to the extent authorized by this AGREEMENT.

b) Individuals involved in the Citizen Oversight process shall not be provided with
information contained within a personnel file, including the 143.089(g) file of an Officer, that is
made confidential by a law other than Chapter 143 of the Texas Local Government Code, such
as records concerning juveniles, sexual assault victims, and individuals who have tested positive
for HIV. All persons who have access to IAD files or investigative information by virtue of this
AGREEMENT shall not be provided with access to any records of criminal investigations by the
APD unless those materials are a part of the IAD administrative investigation file

c) All individuals who have access by virtue of this AGREEMENT to IAD files or
investigative information, including the information contained within the 143.089(g) files of
Officers, shall be bound to the same extent as the Austin Police Department and the City of
Austin to comply with the confidentiality provisions of this AGREEMENT, Chapter 143 of the

46
Texas Local Government Code, and the Texas Public Information Act. All such individuals
shall further be bound to the same extent as the Austin Police Department and the City of Austin
to respect the rights of individual Police Officers under the Texas Constitution and the Fourth,
Fifth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution, including not revealing information
contained in a compelled statement protected by the doctrine set forth in Garrity v. New Jersey,
385 U.S. 493 (1967), and Spevack v, Klein, 385 U.S, S11 (1967).

d) A breach of the confidentiality provisions of this AGREEMENT and/or Chapter 143 of
the Texas Local Government Code by any individual involved in Citizen Oversight:

(1) Shall be a basis for removal from office;

(2) May subject the individual to criminal prosecution for offenses including, but not
limited to Abuse of Official Capacity, Official Oppression, Misuse of Official
Information, or the Texas Public Information Act; and/or

(3) May subject the individual to civil liability under applicable State and Federal law.

@) The confidentiality provisions of this AGREEMENT, Chapter 143 of the Texas Local
Government Code, and the Texas Public Information Act, are continuous in nature. All
individuals involved in Citizen Oversight are subject to these confidentiality provisions even
after their association with the Oversight process has terminated.

f) Following any review of an alleged violation of the confidentiality provisions of this
AGREEMENT, the City Manager’s office will provide information about the outcome of that
review to any Officer(s) directly affected by the alleged violation.

Section 9, Use of Evidence from the Citizen Oversight Process in Disciplinary Appeals

Opinions or recommendations from individuals involved in Citizen Oversight in a particular
case may not be used by a party in connection with an appeal of any disciplinary action under the
provisions of Chapter 143 of the Texas Local Government Code and this AGREEMENT. No
party to an arbitration or Civil Service proceeding may use or subpoena any member of the
Citizen Review Panel or the Police Monitor (unless the Police Monitor took the complaint in the
relevant case) as a witness at an arbitration or Civil Service proceeding including, but not limited
to live or deposition testimony, which concerns their duties or responsibilities in the oversight
process or their opinions or recommendations in a particular case. This provision shall not
prevent any testimony for evidentiary predicate.

Section 10. Partial Invalidation and Severance

In the event that a Court Order, Judgment, Texas Attomey General Opinion, or arbitration
decision, which is final and non-appealable, or which is otherwise allowed to take effect, which
order, judgment, opinion, or decision holds that the right of access to the information contained
within the 143,089(g) files of Officers granted by this Article or the public dissemination of
information pursuant to this Article, results in “public information” status under the Texas Public

47
Information Act of the information contained within the 143.089(g) files of an Officer, the
provision or provisions resulting in such a change in the status of the 143,089(g) file shall be
invalidated and severed from the balance of this AGREEMENT.

Section 11. Remedies
a) Benefit of the Bargain

The CITY expressly retains its right and ability to proceed with the determination of whether
or not police misconduct occurred and the authority of the Chief to impose disciplinary action.
The ASSOCIATION recognizes the fact that such reservations are essential to this
AGREEMENT. No dispute concerning the operation and function of the Police Monitor’s
Office or the Panel shall impair or delay the process of the Chief’s investigation and
determination of whether or not police misconduct occurred and the degree of discipline, if any,
to impose. This includes internal dispute resolution procedures in this AGREEMENT, any
grievance process or arbitration, and any litigation over such issues. In other words, any such
dispute resolution processes may proceed, as set forth in this contract or by law, but the
disciplinary process may likewise and simultaneously proceed to its conclusion without delay,
The statutory time period for the Chief of Police to take disciplinary action against an Officer
shall be tolled to the extent of any period in which a court order, injunction, or TRO, obtained by
the Officer involved or the ASSOCIATION on behalf of the Officer, halts the Department's
investigative or disciplinary process, In no event will the actual time exceed 180 calendar days.
The parties agree that the processes in this AGREEMENT, together with the remedies set forth
and the procedural protections and rights extended to Officers in this AGREEMENT are
adequate remedies at law for all disputes arising under this Article.

b) Expedited Arbitration

The parties have agreed to expedited arbitration for all unresolved grievances related to the
application or interpretation of this Article in order to achieve immediate resolution and to avoid
the need for court intervention in equity. Such arbitrations shall be conducted pursuant to the
Expedited Labor Arbitration Procedures established by the American Arbitration Association
(“AAA”), and in effect at the time of the dispute, To be appointed, the arbitrator must be
available to hear the arbitration within thirty (30) calendar days of selection and a decision shall
be made within one (1) week of the hearing. The parties agree to create a list of pre-approved
arbitrators. Failing same, or in the absence of an available arbitrator from such pre-approved list,
the arbitrator designated by the AAA shall be required to be licensed as an attorney in the State
of Texas. The parties both agree that the arbitrator has the discretion to receive and hear issues
and testimony by written submission or phone conference, but may also require live testimony
where appropriate.

48
ARTICLE 17
PROTECTED RIGHTS OF OFFICERS

Section 1. Effect of Article

a) The following provisions shall apply to the administrative investigation of alleged
misconduct by Officers and the process of administrative discipline. To the extent of any
conflict between this AGREEMENT and the provisions of Chapter 143 of the Texas Local
Government Code, the provisions of this AGREEMENT shall control. To the extent of any
conflict between this Article and any other provision of this AGREEMENT, this Article shall
control.

b). To be considered by the CITY as a basis for investigation and/or discipline, there must be
a complaint as defined in this Article.

Section 2, Definitions

Inthis Article:

a) “Complaint” means any affidavit, administrative referral, or other document setting forth
allegations or facts that may form the basis of future allegations of misconduct against an
officer and which serves as the basis for initiating an investigation. The complaint must
be signed by the complainant.

b) “Complainant” means either a person claiming to be a witness to or victim of misconduct
by an Officer; or the Department designee in the case of an anonymous complaint or

administrative referral.

c) “Disciplinary Action” means suspension, indefinite suspension, demotion in rank,
reprimand, or any combination of those actions.

4) "Investigation" means an administrative investigation of alleged misconduct by a police
officer that could result in disciplinary action.

e) “Investigator” means an agent or employee of the Department or an Independent
Investigator who is conducting an investigation.

f) “Statement” means any communication (oral or written) setting forth particulars or facts
regarding the alleged misconduct under investigation,

g) “Evidence” means statements, reports, records, recordings, documents, computer data,
text, graphics, videotape, photographs, or other tangible forms of information, including a

“complaint”.

Section 3, Compelled Testimony

49
There shall be no legal or administrative requirement, including but not limited to subpoena
power or an order from the City Manager or the Department, that an officer appear before or
present evidence to any individual, panel, committee, group, or forum of any type involved in
Citizen Oversight. This provision has no application to any Independent Investigation
authorized by the Chief of Police or the City Manager, regardless of whether the Independent
Investigation was recommended by the Citizen’s Review Panel or the Police Monitor, or to any
hearing of an appeal of disciplinary action pursuant to this AGREEMENT and/or Chapter 143 of
the Texas Local Government Code, Officers remain subject to orders or subpoenas to appear and
provide testimony or evidence in such investigations or hearings,

Section 4. Access to Records by Officers

a) Not less than forty eight (48) hours before the Officer who is the subject of an
investigation provides a statement to an investigator, the Officer shall be provided a copy of the
complaint(s). The Department may omit the name and/or identity of the person making the
complaint. In the event that the complaint(s) does not contain all allegations of misconduct
under investigation, not less than forty eight (48) hours before the investigator begins the initial
oral or written interrogation of the Officer, the investigator must inform the Officer in writing of
the additional allegations being investigated. This paragraph does not apply to a Dismissal
Review Hearing or any other administrative hearing conducted for the purpose of determining
whether the Department shall take disciplinary action against an Officer for alleged misconduct.

b) Before the Officer who is the subject of an investigation provides a statement to an
investigator, the Officer and his representative shall be provided an opportunity to review any
videotape, photograph, or other recording of the operative conduct or alleged injuries, if any,
which is the subject of the allegations if such recording is within the possession or control of the
Department.

c) An Officer is entitled to a copy of his or her statement to the Internal Affairs Division at
the time when the statement is finalized and signed by the Officer, but the statement remains
confidential in the hands of the Officer pursuant to 143,089(g), APD policy, and orders of non-
communication about internal investigations, except for consultations with counsel and/or
ASSOCIATION representatives who are not involved in the investigation.

d) Before the Officer who is the subject of an investigation provides a statement to an
investigator, the Officer and his representative shall be allowed to review the portions of any
document(s) in which it is alleged that the Officer provided false, incomplete, inconsistent, or
conflicting information, or in which it is alleged that the Officer omitted information in violation
of any law or Department policy,

@) Before the Officer who is the subject of an investigation provides a statement to an
investigator, the Officer and his representative shall be allowed to review any report, supplement,
use of force report, or other statement recorded or written by the Officer, setting forth particulars
or facts regarding the operative conduct which is the subject of the allegation(s).

50
f) Not less than forty eight (48) hours before a Dismissal Review Hearing (or any other
administrative hearing conducted for the purpose of determining whether the Department shall
take disciplinary action against an Officer for alleged misconduct)

i) The Officer and his representative shall be allowed up to eight hours to review any
and all evidence gathered or obtained during the investigation, The evidence available for
review shall include the [A summary, if any; and

ii) The Department shall provide written notice of the alleged policy violations and the
specific range of discipline being considered. The Chief of Police shall not be restricted to the
alleged policy violations and/or the range of discipline provided pursuant to this subsection in
making the final decision as to discipline, if any.

2) When the Chief of Police is notified that the Panel plans to review a case involving a
“critical incident” or an allegation of a civil rights violation, the Officer and his representative
shall be given an opportunity to meet with the Internal Affairs investigator and review witness
statements and photographic or videotape evidence contained in the IA file, for up to eight hours.

h) Neither the Officer nor his representative will be permitted to make copies of any
witness statements, audio tapes, photographic or videotape evidence reviewed; however, they
may take written notes only, provided that they comply with the confidentiality and use
provisions in Section 6.

i) Nothing in this Article shall be construed as requiring the Department to provide or make
available for review by the Officer or his representative any evidence from criminal
investigations by the Austin Police Department unless that evidence is a part of the Internal
Affairs Division administrative file, No criminal investigation material that is part of the Internal
Affairs Department case file can be released if there is a pending criminal investigation or
judicial proceeding,

Section 5. Dismissal Review Hearings (The Officer’s Loudermill Hearing)

When a Dismissal Review Hearing (or any other administrative hearing conducted for the
purpose of determining whether the Department shall take disciplinary action against an Officer
for alleged misconduct), is held, the following procedures shall apply:

a) It shall be optional for the Officer who is the subject of the investigation to attend and
answer any questions at the hearing, Questions posed at the DRH do not constitute an
“investigation” as defined in Section 2d. No negative inference will be permitted should the
Officer elect not to attend or answer questions. If the Officer chooses not to attend or has
determined he/she will not answer any questions at the hearing, the Officer must give 48 hours-
notice to the Department by filling out the necessary waiver form.

b) Should the Officer choose to attend, the Officer may audio tape the portions of the

hearing in which the chain-of-command and Chief of Police or his designee discuss the IAD
investigation and the disciplinary decision with the Officer.

51
Section 6. Confidentiality of Records and Misuse of Information

The access to records provided in Section 4 of this Article has been granted in exchange for
the following agreements intended to insure confidentiality and to prevent retaliation or the
threat of retaliation against any witness in an investigation:

a) Information provided or made available for review remains confidential in the hands of
the Officer and his/her representative pursuant to 143.089(g), APD policy, and orders of non-
communication about internal investigations, except for consultations with counsel and/or
ASSOCIATION representatives who are not involved in the investigation.

b) Retaliation or the threat of retaliation by an Officer, or by an individual at the direction
of the Officer, against the author of an Internal Affairs statement is strictly prohibited. A
sustained violation of this subsection shall result in either a temporary or indefinite suspension.

c) Ifan Officer is suspended for an alleged violation of Subsection b, the Officer shall have
the right to appeal the suspension to the Civil Service Commission or to an Independent Third
Party Hearing Examiner pursuant to the provisions of this AGREEMENT and Chapter 143 of the
Texas Local Government Code. The Commission or the Hearing Examiner shall decide whether
the specific charge related to this Section is true, If the charge is found to be true, the
Commission or Hearing Examiner must affirm the disciplinary action and cannot amend, modify,
or reduce the period of disciplinary suspension, Sections 143,053(e) & (f) of the Texas Local
Government Code are hereby superseded to the extent of any conflict with this Section.

Section 7, Right to Representation

An Officer who is the subject of an investigation or administrative inquiry shall have the
right to be represented either by an attorney or an ASSOCIATION representative of the Officer’s
choice during an interview, provided the attomey/representative complies with the Internal
Affairs interview protocol, An Officer shall have the right to be represented by either an
attorney or an ASSOCIATION representative of the Officer’s choice during a Dismissal Review
Hearing (or administrative hearing conducted for the purpose of determining whether the
Department shall take disciplinary action against an Officer for alleged misconduct.)

Section 8, Violation of Officer’s Rights

If the Department or any investigator violates any of the provisions of this Article or of
Section 143.312 of the Texas Local Government Code while conducting an investigation, the
violation may be considered by the Civil Service Commission or a Hearing Examiner in any
disciplinary appeal hearing if the violation substantially impaired the Officer’s ability to defend
against the allegations of misconduct.

Section 9, Scheduling of Indefinite Suspension Appeal

If an Officer appeals an indefinite suspension to an Independent Third Party Hearing

52
Examiner, the parties will make a good faith effort to schedule the appeal of an indefinite
suspension within 90-180 days of the date the Officer was indefinitely suspended.

ARTICLE 18
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS, DEMOTIONS & APPEALS

Section 1, Suspensions of Three (3) Days or Less
a) Appealable and Non-Appealable Suspensions

It is understood that most Officers will make some errors during their career involving
rule violations, including those who are good, professional Police Officers. The parties agree
that short disciplinary suspensions are for the purpose of reinforcing the need for compliance
with Departmental standards and not necessarily as punishment.

The parties agree that when an Officer is suspended for 1, 2, or 3 days, the Officer may
choose one of two methods of dealing with the suspensions as listed below:

(1) Suspensions that may not be appealed. The Officer may choose to use vacation or
holiday time to serve the suspension with no loss of paid salary and no break in
service for purposes of seniority, retirement, promotion, or any other purpose. The
Officer must agree that there is no right to appeal if this method of suspension is
chosen.

(2) Suspensions that may be appealed. The Officer may appeal the suspension to a
Hearing Examiner or the Civil Service Commission, If the Officer chooses to
appeal the suspension, the Hearing Examiner or Civil Service Commission’s
authority is limited to ruling on whether or not the charges against the Officer are
true or not true. If the Hearing Examiner or Civil Service Commission finds the
charges to be true, there is no authority to mitigate the punishment. If the Hearing
Examiner or Civil Service Commission finds the charges to be not true, the Officer
shall be fully reinstated with no loss of pay or benefit.

b). Hearing Costs on Appealable Suspensions

In the event that an Officer appeals a 1, 2 or 3 day suspension to a Hearing Examiner, itis
agreed that the party that loses the hearing shall be responsible for all costs of the Hearing
Examiner, including travel and lodging if necessary.

To facilitate such payment on the part of the Officer, he/she shall submit, at the time of
appeal, a signed payroll deduction agreement that if the Hearing Examiner rules in favor of the
CITY he/she authorizes up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month to be deducted from
his/her regular pay until such time as what would usually be the CITY’s portion of the Hearing
Examiner’s costs have been satisfied.

53
c) Reductions of Suspensions of Three (3) Days or Less to a Written Reprimand

The parties agree that temporary suspensions of 1, 2, or 3 days that were imposed on or
after March 25, 2001, will be automatically reduced to a written reprimand under the following

conditions:

(1)

2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Suspensions of 1, 2, or 3 days, which are/were not appealed, shall be reduced to a
written reprimand two (2) years after the date the suspension was served on the
Officer if:

i, The Officer does/did not have a sustained complaint for substantially similar
conduct within two (2) years from the date the suspension was served on the
Officer.

Suspensions of 1, 2, or 3 days, which are/were not appealed, shall be reduced to a
written reprimand three (3) years after the date the suspension was served on the
Officer if:

i, The Officer has been previously disciplined for substantially similar conduct,
and;

ii. The Officer does/did not have a sustained complaint for substantially similar
conduct within the next three (3) years from the date the suspension was served
on the Officer.

Any controversy over whether or not the prior conduct was substantially similar
may be presented to a Hearing Examiner under the other provisions of this Article,

Suspensions of 1, 2, or 3 days that are/were appealed to the Civil Service
Commission or a Hearing Examiner are not eligible for reduction to a written
reprimand under this AGREEMENT.

Suspensions of 1, 2, or 3 days that are/were reduced to a written reprimand shall not
be introduced, cited, or used in any manner in subsequent disciplinary suspensions
or appeals as to that Officer, but the original disciplinary decision is not covered by
this Section as to contentions of disparate discipline by other Officers.

If the conditions set forth in subparts (a) or (b) are met, the Department shall notify
the Civil Service Commission in writing that the temporary suspension has been
reduced to a written reprimand. A copy of this document shall be included in the
IAD investigative file, and the Department shall enter a notation in all disciplinary
databases or records reflecting this change. The parties agree that the Department
and the Civil Service Commission will not alter, destroy, conceal, or remove, any
documents related to the temporary suspension, including but not limited to the

54
letter of temporary suspension that was filed with the Commission as required by
LGC 143.052(c), or the IAD investigative file itself.

Section 2, Suspensions of Fifteen (15) Days or Less

If the Chief determines to suspend an Officer for fifteen (15) days or less, the Chief may, at
his sole discretion in hardship cases, authorize use of the Officer's accumulated vacation leave to
cover all or part of the suspension. It is also understood and agreed that if the Chief permits the
use of vacation days for suspension, such days off shall be considered as equal punishment to
traditional unpaid days of suspension. In no case will sick leave be substituted for unpaid days
of suspension,

Section 3, Mutually Agreed Temporary Suspensions of Sixteen (16) to Ninety (90) days.

a) The Police Chief may, in cases the Chief deems to warrant indefinite suspension, offer to
impose instead a suspension without pay for a period from sixteen (16) to ninety (90) days. If
the Officer accepts the mutually agreed suspension, there shall be no appeal either to the Civil
Service Commission, to the District Court or to a Hearing Examiner. It is also understood and
agreed that if the Chief permits the use of vacation days for suspension, such days off shall be
considered as equal punishment to traditional unpaid days of suspension. In no case will sick
leave be substituted for unpaid days of suspension.

b) In cases where the Officer’s TCLEOSE license is suspended, the Chief of Police may
impose a non-appealable suspension commensurate with the period during which the license is
suspended.

Section 4, Payment for Accrued Leave Upon Indefinite Suspension.

a) An Officer who has been indefinitely suspended may, upon request, be paid in a lump
sum for up to two hundred forty (240) hours of accrued vacation and up to one hundred sixty
(160) hours of accrued exception vacation.

b) If the indefinite suspension is overtumed as a result of the appeal, the Civil Service
Commission or a Hearing Examiner may restore such leave, but a total award of leave and back-
pay, if any, shall be offset by the amount paid to the Officer under Subsection a) above.

Section 5. Alternative Discipline by the Police Chief

In considering appropriate disciplinary action the Police Chief may require that an Officer be
evaluated by a qualified professional designated by the Police Chief. If that professional
recommends a program of counseling andlor rehabilitation for the Officer, the Police Chief may,
as an alternative to temporary or indefinite suspension, or in combination with a temporary
suspension, require that the Officer successfully complete the recommended program. The
program of counseling andor rehabilitation will be completed on the Officer's off-duty time,
unless the Police Chief approves the use of accrued vacation leave or sick leave. ‘The Officer
shall be responsible for paying all costs of the program of counseling andlor rehabilitation which

55
are not covered by the Officer’s health insurance plan. If the Officer's misconduct involves
alcohol-related behavior, the Police Chief may require that the Officer submit to mandatory
alcohol testing, when ordered by the Police Chief, for a specified period of time. If, after
entering the program of counseling and/or rehabilitation, the Officer fails or refuses to complete
the program, the Officer may be indefinitely suspended. ‘The Officer has the right to appeal to
the Police Civil Service Commission or to a third party Hearing Examiner any discipline
imposed under this section by filing an appeal notice in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 143, On appeal, the Police Civil Service Commission or Hearing Examiner shall have
the same duties and powers set forth in Chapter 143, but shall not have the power to substitute a
program of counseling and/or rehabilitation different from the program imposed by the Police
Chief or to substitute any period of suspension for the required program of counseling and/or
rehabilitation,

Section 6, Alternative Discipline by Agreement

In considering appropriate disciplinary action, the Police Chief may require that an Officer be
evaluated by a qualified professional designated by the Police Chief. If that professional
recommends a program of counseling and/or rehabilitation for the Officer, the Police Chief may
offer the Officer the opportunity to enter into an alternative disciplinary agreement under which
the Officer would accept a temporary suspension of up to ninety (90) days and agree to
successfully complete the program of counseling and/or rehabilitation recommended by the
qualified professional designated by the Police Chief. The program of counseling and/or
rehabilitation will be completed on the Officer's off duty time, unless the Police Chief approves
the use of accrued vacation leave or sick leave. The Officer shall be responsible for paying all
costs of the program of counseling and/or rehabilitation, which are not covered by the Officer's
health insurance plan. If the Officer's misconduct involved alcohol related behavior, the Police
Chief may require that the Officer submit to mandatory alcohol testing, when ordered by the
Police Chief, for a specified period of time. If the Officer accepts the opportunity for agreed
alternative discipline, the Officer may not appeal any terms of the Agreement, If the Officer fails
to successfully complete the program of counseling andlor rehabilitation, the Officer may be
indefinitely suspended without right of appeal.

Section 7. Last Chance Agreement

a) In considering appropriate disciplinary action, the Police Chief may require that an
Officer be evaluated by a qualified professional designated by the Police Chief. If that
professional recommends a program of counseling and/or rehabilitation for the Officer, the
Police Chief may offer the Officer, as an alternative to indefinite suspension, the opportunity to
enter into a last chance agreement, The agreement may include the following provisions in
addition to any other provisions agreed upon by the Officer and the Police Chief.

(1) The Officer will successfully complete the program of counseling and/or

rehabilitation recommended by the qualified professional designated by the Police
Chief.

56
(2) The program of counseling and/or rehabilitation will be completed on the Officer's
off-duty time, unless the Police Chief approves the use of accrued vacation leave or
sick leave. The Officer shall be responsible for paying all costs of the program of
counseling and/or rehabilitation, which are not covered by the Officer's health
insurance plan,

(3) The Officer will agree to a probationary period not to exceed one (1) year, with the
additional requirement that if, during the probationary period, the Officer commits
the same or a similar act of misconduct, the Officer will be indefinitely suspended
without right of appeal

b) If the Officer’s misconduct involves alcohol-related behavior, the Police Chief may
require that the Officer submit to mandatory alcohol testing, upon order by the Police Chief, for a
specified period of time. If the Officer accepts the opportunity for a last chance agreement, the
Officer may not appeal any terms of the agreement. If the Officer fails to successfully complete
the agreed upon program, the Officer may be indefinitely suspended without right of appeal.

Section 8, Extending Disciplinary Deadline by Agreement

a) An Officer and the Chief, or designee, may agree to extend any statutory deadline for
imposing discipline for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, Either the Officer or the Chief
may offer or request the extension. The agreement to extend the statutory deadline shall be in
writing and shall be signed by both the Officer and the Chief, or designee.

b) Any disciplinary action taken by the Chief before the extended deadline shall be
considered timely. An agreement to extend the deadline does not affect an Officer’s right of
appeal from the disciplinary action,

Section 9. Hearing Examiner Retained

The CITY recognizes that during the term of this AGREEMENT Officers have the right to
an appeal of an indefinite suspension or suspension for a definite number of days (subject to the
provisions herein on non-appealable suspensions of | to 3 days) before a Hearing Examiner as
provided in Section 143.057 of the Texas Local Government Code. During the term of this
AGREEMENT, the parties specifically agree to retain this right of appeal, as modified herein,
notwithstanding any change to Section 143.057 which may occur as a result of court or
legislative action.

 

Section 10. Hearing Examiner Provisions

In order to be mutually accepted on the hearing examiners list, an individual must be
impartial to the ASSOCIATION and the CITY, shall be a member of the American Arbitration
Association (AAA), have formal training in presentation and evaluation of evidence, and have
experience in deciding municipal employment issues.

37
Section 11. Procedures for Hearings Before the Civil Service Commission and
Independent Hearing Examiners

It is expressly agreed that Civil Service Commission hearings and hearings before Hearing
Examiners under 143.057 are informal administrative hearings and are not subject to discovery
or evidentiary processes. Specifically it is understood that neither the Texas Rules of Evidence
(TRE) or the Texas Rules of Court (TRC) apply to such hearings, If the Department calls a
witness to testify during a hearing and that witness has given a statement to Internal Affairs
regarding the pending case, then the Department will provide a copy of that statement to the
Officer's counsel/representative at the time the witness is called to testify,

Section 12. Procedures Before Hearing Examiners
In any proceeding before a hearing examiner, the following procedures shall be followed:

a) The Department shall furnish the charge letter to the Hearing Examiner by delivering
a copy to the AAA far enough in advance, so that the Hearing Examiner receives the
copy at least five (5) days before the start of the hearing.

b). The Officer may furnish a position statement to the Hearing Examiner by delivering
copies to the AAA and to the Department far enough in advance, so that the Hearing
Examiner and the Department receives the copies at least five (5) days before the start
of the hearing,

At the close of the presentation of evidence, the Hearing Examiner shall conduct a
post-hearing conference with counsel/representatives for the Department and the
Officer and advise them as to what issue(s) the Hearing Examiner wants covered in
post-hearing briefs. This does not preclude either party from briefing anything not
requested by the Hearing Examiner.

2

Failure of the AAA to meet its obligations as set out in this Subsection does not
jeopardize the hearing rights of either the CITY or the Officer.

Section 13. Special Appeal Process for emotions

a) This Section applies only to involuntary demotions based on misconduct or performance
issues. It does not apply to the following:

(1) Demotions related to the return from military service of another officer;

(2) Demotions caused by a reduction in force;

(3) Demotions related to the reinstatement of another officer after recovery from a
disability;

(4) Demotions from the rank of Assistant Chief of Police;

(5) Demotions related to the reinstatement of another officer after indefinite
suspension; or

(6) Demotions due to return to work of an ASSOCIATION representative on ABL.

58
b) If the Chief chooses to demote an Officer, the Chief shall file with the Civil Service
Commission a written statement giving the reasons for the demotion. A copy of the written
statement shall be furnished immediately to the affected Officer.

c) The Officer may appeal the demotion by filing a written appeal notice with the Director of
Civil Service within ten (10) days after the date of the demotion, The Officer may elect to
appeal to an independent third-party Hearing Examiner selected in accordance with the
provisions of Section 143,057 of the Local Government Code, as amended by this
AGREEMENT. The Officer’s election to appeal to a Hearing Examiner must be contained in the
Officer’s initial notice of appeal.

d) During the pendency of the appeal, the Officer’s rank and pay shall not be changed but
the Chief may reassign the Officer to perform duties appropriate to the rank held by the Officer
immediately prior to the promotion. The Officer’s absence from his promoted position shall not
create a vacancy, but the Chief may pay higher classification pay to another Officer to perform
the duties of the promoted position.

@) If the Officer appeals to the Civil Service Commission, the decision of the Commission is
final and may not be appealed further. If the Officer appeals to a Hearing Examiner, the decision
may be appealed only on the grounds that the Hearing Examiner was without jurisdiction or
exceeded its jurisdiction or that the order was procured by fraud, collusion, or other unlawful
means,

f) If the Commission or Hearing Examiner upholds the Chief's demotion, the Officer shall
be returned to the rank held immediately prior to the promotion, the Officer's pay shall be
adjusted accordingly, and the Officer’s name shall be permanently removed from the
promotional eligibility list if the list is still in effect. The Officer’s time in grade in the promoted
position shall not count toward eligibility for future promotion.

g) Ifthe Commission or Hearing Examiner overturns the Chief's demotion, the Officer shall
be returned to the promoted rank in an assignment to be determined by the Chief.

h) This Section shall be entitled to preemption including but not limited to Sections
143.010, 143.015, 143.054, 143.057 and all provisions of Subchapter B of the Texas Local
Government Code Chapter 143

Section 14. Substitution of Demotion for Indefinite Suspension

In the appeal of an indefinite suspension, the Civil Service Commission or a Hearing
Examiner may substitute a demotion for the indefinite suspension imposed by the Chief.

Section 15. Mediation

The CITY shall implement a voluntary mediation process concerning both citizen and
internal complaints. The ASSOCIATION may appoint two persons to work with the CITY in

59
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

developing the specific operating procedure. The process shall include and be based upon the
following concepts:

a)

Mediation shall be an option offered to the complainant at the time the initial
complaint is filed for minor nature complaints, such as rudeness,

Zs

For a complaint to proceed to mediation, both the Officer and the complainant must
voluntarily agree.

Once mediation has been agreed to, the matter cannot be returned to the Department
to be handled as a disciplinary matter.

Section 16. Effect of Contract Expiration

The provisions of this AGREEMENT shall remain in full force and effect after expiration of
this AGREEMENT as to:

a) Any investigation assigned a Control Number by the Internal A fairs Division prior to
the expiration of this AGREEMENT;

b) Any disciplinary decision by the Chief prior to the expiration of this AGREEMENT;
or

©) Any appeals of such disciplinary action.

Section 17. Authority of the Civil Service Commission/Hearing Examiner

If an Officer is indefinitely or temporarily suspended, the Officer shall have the right to
appeal the suspension to the Civil Service Commission or to an Independent Third Party Hearing
Examiner pursuant to the provisions of this AGREEMENT and Chapter 143 of the Texas Local
Government Code. The Commission or the Hearing Examiner shall decide whether the specific
charge related to this Section is true. If the charge is found to be true, the Commission or
Hearing Examiner may affirm or reduce the suspension imposed by the Chief of Police to a
temporary suspension not to exceed 180 days.

Section 18. Access to IAD File

If an Officer appeals a disciplinary action, and provides a written request, the CITY will
provide to the Officer and his/her representative a copy of the unredacted IAD file within five (5)
business days of receiving the request. The file remains confidential in the hands of the Officer
and his/her representative to the extent the release of such information is still protected from
public disclosure by Local Government Code Section 143.089(g) or other law. Additionally, all
individuals who have access by virtue of this AGREEMENT to IAD files or investigative
information, including the information contained within the 143.089(g) files of Officers, shall be
bound to the same extent as the Austin Police Department and the City of Austin to comply with

60
the confidentiality provisions of this AGREEMENT, Chapter 143 of the Texas Local
Government Code, and the Texas Public Information Act, All such individuals shall further be
bound to the same extent as the Austin Police Department and the City of Austin to respect the
rights of individual Officers under the Texas Constitution and the Fourth, Fifth, and Fourteenth
Amendments to the U.S. Constitution, including not revealing information contained in a
compelled statement protected by the doctrine set forth in Garrity v, New Jersey, 385 U.S, 493
(1967), and Spevack v. Klein, 385 U.S, S11 (1967). The Officer and his/her representative shall
not be provided information contained within an IAD file that is made confidential by a law
other than Chapter 143 of the Texas Local Government Code, such as records concerning
juveniles, sexual assault victims, and individuals who have tested positive for HIV.

ARTICLE 19
ASSIGNMENT CHANGES

Section 1. Advance Notice of Assignment Changes
a) Notice of Assignment Changes

Except for normal shift rotations, for assignment changes that are determined far enough
in advance, the Department will provide a twenty-eight (28) calendar-day notice to the affected
Officer. Advance notice of the assignment change is not required if prior notice is not in the best
interest of the Department or in any emergency situations. Advance notice of the assignment
change may be waived by the Officer.

b). Hardship Transfers

In the event of special hardship, an affected Officer may appeal to the Assistant Chief of
their Bureau for consideration of temporary scheduling or other adjustments to reduce or address
personal hardships. The Chief shall create a joint committee with representatives appointed by
the ASSOCIATION to evaluate hardship claims and to recommend action to the Assistant Chief.

Section 2, Requested Job Assignment Transfers

a) A list of all currently vacant positions throughout the Department will be maintained on
the APD intranet and available for review by Officers. Absent exigent circumstances, a vacancy
will be posted on the APD intranet as near as possible to 10 days prior to the application
deadline.

b) A reasonable, good faith effort shall be made to post initial assignment vacancies. It is
recognized and understood that notice cannot be sent for all backfill transfers resulting from the

initial vacancies.

c) The posting process shall not apply to vacancies that the Department fills by promotion,
vacancies filled during Department-wide leveling, involuntary transfers, or mutually agreed

61
swaps.

4) All Officers are eligible to seek transfer to any vacancies within the Department for
which they are qualified. Oral or written reprimands shall not affect an Officer’s ability to apply
for a transfer to a sought after position, but may be considered along with all other factors in
making a selection among applicants.

e) Applying for a posted position shall neither jeopardize nor insure an Officer’s current
assignment, The Chief shall establish a committee with representatives appointed by the
ASSOCIATION to recommend changes or improvements in the process of posting notice of job
assignment opportunities or openings.

Section 3. Proposed Adjustments to Work Schedules

a) Itis recognized that Command Staff, through the authority of the Chief of Police, retains
the right to adjust work schedules, days off, and other similar conditions of employment within
the Department.

b) In the event of a proposed adjustment to work schedules that would have a significant
impact upon working conditions of affected Officers, the Commander or Assistant Chief
contemplating that adjustment shall notify the President of the ASSOCIATION in writing of the
proposed work schedule adjustment at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to its implementation.
Advanced notice shall not be required in emergency situations, The ASSOCIATION, after
receiving such notification may request in writing a meeting with the involved
Commander/Assistant Chief to discuss the merits/necessity of the work schedule change, and to
suggest an implementation plan that accomplishes the goals of the Department and has least
possible impact upon the affected Officers, The involved Commander/Assistant Chief shall be
required to meet with the President of the ASSOCIATION within five (5) business days of this
written request. If the ASSOCIATION and the Commander/Assistant Chief do not resolve the
ASSOCIATION’s concerns, the President of the ASSOCIATION may schedule a meeting with
the Chief of Police and involved Commander/Assistant Chief to further consult on the matter,
The final decision to implement the proposed work schedule adjustment shall be retained by the
Chief of Police.

c) For purposes of this Article, significant impact upon working conditions caused by an
adjustment to work schedules refers to a change to an organizational component's hours or days
off.

d) This Section shall not apply to any work hour adjustments made as a result of an
emergency or unforeseen event, staffing shortages, or emergency crime threats to the
community, and nothing in this Article is intended to diminish the capability of the Chief of
Police to move personnel in response to unforeseen events and emergencies.

@) This Article shall not apply to reasonable work hour adjustments within units that by their

very nature must remain flexible in scheduling capability in response to crime trends, ongoing
investigations, and community outreach requirements.

62
f) The failure to notify and meet with the President of the ASSOCIATION as provided in
this Article is subject to the AGREEMENT grievance procedure set forth in Article 20 of this
AGREEMENT, and any remedy shall be limited to requiring notice and review of the decision in
accordance with this Article, and not any change in hours or days off.

Section 4. Proposed Adjustments to Policies and Procedures

a) Itis recognized that Command Staff, through the authority of the Chief of Police, retains
the right to set policy and procedures for employees, which may vary from one operational unit
or division to another. On the other hand, the ASSOCIATION has a legitimate interest in
providing input on behalf of its members as to the choices to implement variations in policy that
have an impact on members.

b) In the event of a proposed adjustment to policies which differ or vary between units or
divisions, the Commander or Assistant Chief contemplating that adjustment shall notify the
President of the ASSOCIATION in writing of the proposed change at least thirty (30) calendar
days prior to its implementation. Advanced notice shall not be required in emergency situations
The ASSOCIATION, after receiving such notification may request in writing a meeting with the
involved Commander/Assistant Chief for the purpose of discussing the merits/necessity of the
change, and to suggest an implementation plan that accomplishes the goals of the Department
and has least possible impact upon the affected Officers. The involved Commander/Assistant
Chief shall be required to meet with the President of the ASSOCIATION within five (5) business
days of this written request. If the ASSOCIATION and the Commander/Assistant Chief do not
resolve the ASSOCIATION’s concerns, the President of the ASSOCIATION may schedule a
meeting with the Chief of Police and involved Commander/Assistant Chief to further consult on
the matter. The final decision to implement the proposed policy or procedure change shall be
retained by the Chief of Police.

) This section shall not apply to any policy and procedure changes made as a result of an
emergency or unforeseen event, staffing shortages, or emergency crime threats to the
community, and nothing in this Article is intended to diminish the capability of the Chief of
Police to make changes in policy and procedure in response to unforeseen events and
emergencies,

d) The failure to notify and meet with the President of the ASSOCIATION as provided in
this Article is subject to the AGREEMENT grievance procedure set forth in Article 20 of this
AGREEMENT, and any remedy shall be limited to requiring notice and review of the decision in
accordance with this Article, and not any change in policy or procedure.

Section 5, Special Event Assignments

a) In this Section:

(1) “Special Event(s)” means the following listed events only:

63
& Mardi Gras
South by Southwest
Texas Relays
Halloween

Fel Race

 

(2) “Significant schedule change” means a change to an Officer’s regularly assigned
duty-hours or days off initiated or approved by the Chief of Police or Assistant Chief of Police.

b) An Officer subjected to a significant schedule change to perform duties at a Special Event
will be provided a twenty-eight (28) calendar-day notice of the schedule change. If such notice
is not possible, the Officer will be granted 20 hours of Administrative Leave, Failure to utilize
any part of these hours by December 31* of the year accrued will result in forfeiture of the accrued
Administrative Leave hours.

c) When the ASSOCIATION President knows or should know of the Department's failure
to provide advance notice as required by this Section, the ASSOCIATION President shall
promptly notify the Chief or designee and the Labor Relations Office.

d) This Section shall not apply to:
(1) A significant schedule change caused, less than twenty-eight (28) days prior to the
Special Event, by the need to back-fill for an Officer who had previously received the advanced

notice but who is not available for the assignment.

(2) A significant schedule change caused, less than twenty-eight (28) days prior to the
Special Event, by an unforeseen change in the schedule or scope of the Special Event.

e) Reserve Police Officers

To enhance the Department's ability to staff Special Events and to lessen workforce
disruption caused by short-term significant schedule changes, the CITY and the ASSOCIATION
agree that the Department may employ Reserve Officers, as defined in this AGREEMENT,
under the following circumstances:

(1) Reserve Officers shall be temporary employees.

(2) Employment and assignment of Reserve Officers shall be limited to performing
duties at Special Events. Subject to the discretion of the Chief, Reserve Officers may perform

any and all duties of a commissioned peace officer while working such assignments only.

(3) Reserve Officers may be required to attend and complete training as determined by
the Chief.

(4) Reserve Officers shall not be approved by the Department for any secondary
employment that is conditioned on the actual or potential use of law enforcement powers by the

64
Reserve Officer, or for elective Department overtime.

ARTICLE 20
AGREEMENT GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Section 1. Goals and Objectives

The parties agree that they share the interest of resolving disputes with minimum
confrontation. To this end, the parties will attempt to insure that disputes are identified and
resolved through a process committed to mutual respect, open communication, and joint problem
solving, and to informally resolve grievances where possible both prior to their filing and prior to
arbitration.

Section 2. Nature of Grievances

As used in this Article, a “grievance” is defined as any dispute, claim, or complaint involving
the interpretation, application, or alleged violation of any provision of this AGREEMENT. A
grievance may be filed under this procedure by the ASSOCIATION or by any individual Officer
to whom this AGREEMENT applies. A grievance which does not relate to the application
and/or interpretation of any provision of this AGREEMENT shall be processed in accordance
with a procedure to be established in writing by the Chief of Police, Grievances pending as of
the effective date of this AGREEMENT shall be processed under procedures in effect prior to
the AGREEMENT, Pending shall mean that the written grievance has been filed.

Section 3. Timelines

Any timeline or deadline provided in this Article may be extended by mutual written
agreement of the parties involved at the particular step of the process where the timeline applies.
If any timeline or deadline for a decision is missed by the CITY, the grievance automatically
proceeds to the next step in the process. If any timeline or deadline for a decision is missed by
the ASSOCIATION, the grievance is considered to be resolved and dismissed.
Section 4. Steps of Grievance Procedure

The steps of this grievance procedure are as follows:
Step 1

a) Filing of Grievance

The ASSOCIATION President or an aggrieved Officer who desires to file a grievance

under this procedure must file his/her grievance with the Association Grievance Committee
within thirty (30) business days after the ASSOCIATION President or the Officer knew of or

65
should have known of the facts or event(s) giving rise to the grievance. A copy of the grievance
shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police, or designee, by the Association Grievance Committee
within three (3) business days after receipt of the grievance.

b)_ Response by Association Grievance Committee

Within fifteen (15) business days after its receipt of a grievance filed by an individual
Officer or filed on behalf of the ASSOCIATION under this procedure, the Association
Grievance Committee shall determine, in its sole discretion, if a valid grievance exists, If the
Association Grievance Committee determines that the grievance is valid, the grievance shall
proceed to Step 2 of this procedure, If the Association Grievance Committee determines that the
grievance is not valid, the ASSOCIATION President will notify the Chief that no further
proceedings are necessary,

Step 2

Any grievance found to be valid by the Association Grievance Committee shall be submitted
to the Chief of Police within fifteen (15) business days of the Step 1 ruling. Each grievance shall
be submitted on a form agreed to by the parties and must include:

(1) A brief statement of the grievance and the facts or events upon which itis based;
(2) The section(s) of the AGREEMENT alleged to have been violated;
(3) The steps taken, if any, by the grievant to resolve the issue; and
(4) A proposed resolution of the grievance.
A grievance submitted in substantial compliance with this section shall not be denied on the

basis of form. Within fifteen (15) business days after receipt of the Step 2 grievance, the Chief
of Police shall submit a written response to the Association Grievance Committee

Step 3

Ifa grievance is not resolved at Step 2 , the ASSOCIATION may within fifteen (15) business
days after receipt of the Chief's Step 2 response, submit the grievance to arbitration in
accordance with the provisions of this AGREEMENT. The grievance arbitration procedure shall
be implemented by the ASSOCIATION notifying the Chief of Police in writing of its intent to
submit the grievance to arbitration.

Step 4
The arbitration hearing will be scheduled by agreement at the earliest date possible,

preferably within thirty (30) business days after submitting the grievance to arbitration. The
arbitrator will be selected as agreed or under the AAA process.

66
The hearing shall be held at a location which is convenient for all parties and the arbitrator
and shall be conducted informally, without strict evidentiary or procedural rules. Unless
otherwise mutually agreed, the submission to the arbitrator shall be based on the written
grievance statement submitted by the Association Grievance Committee at Step 2. The arbitrator
shall consider and decide only the issue(s) in the grievance statement or submitted in writing by
agreement of the parties. ‘The hearing shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible and the
arbitrator's written decision shall be provided to both parties within thirty (30) calendar days
after close of the hearing, unless the parties mutually agree otherwise.

The parties specifically agree that the arbitrator's authority shall be strictly limited to
interpreting and applying the explicit provisions of this AGREEMENT. The arbitrator shall not
have authority to modify the AGREEMENT or create additional provisions not included in the
AGREEMENT. The parties agree that neither the CITY nor the ASSOCIATION shall have ex
parte communications with the arbitrator concerning any matter involved in the grievance
submitted to the arbitrator.

Each party shall be responsible for its own expenses in preparing for and representing itself
at arbitration. The fees of the arbitrator shall be borne by the losing party. In the event of a
composite decision, the arbitrator shall determine the portion of such cost to be borne by each
party. The written decision of the arbitrator may be appealed only on the grounds that the
arbitrator was without jurisdiction or exceeded his jurisdiction; that the decision was procured by
fraud, collusion, or other unlawful means; or that the arbitrator’s decision is based upon a clear
and manifest error of law,

Section 5. Election of Remedies

It is specifically and expressly understood that filing a grievance under this Article, which
has as its last step final and binding arbitration, constitutes an election of remedies

Section 6, Statutory Appeals and Hearings
Except as specifically provided in this AGREEMENT, all statutory rights of appeal to the
Civil Service Commission or Hearing Examiner, including disciplinary matters, promotional

bypasses, and demotions will be governed by Chapter 143 and are not subject to this contract
grievance procedure,

ARTICLE 21
TERM OF AGREEMENT

Section 1. Term of Agreement
a) This AGREEMENT shall be effective as of the date it is ratified by the City Council,

except as to any provisions herein specifically made effective on any other date. It shall remain
in full force and effect, subject to the provisions of this Article, until September 30, 2017.

67
b) The provisions of this AGREEMENT do not apply to any Officer who separates from
CITY employment before the effective date of this AGREEMENT or before the effective date of
any specific provisions hereof.

Section 2, Continuing Relationship

a) The parties acknowledge their longstanding history of successful Meet & Confer
negotiations and their joint efforts to continue to build on the framework of each previous
agreement. This AGREEMENT is the product of that relationship and negotiation history. This
includes agreements on the issues which may require a contractual modification of existing civil
service law (access to the 143.089(g) file, and release of defined reports from Independent
Investigations and the CRP), agreements to outline the broad concepts of citizen oversight, and
agreements which clarify rights which exist with or without the AGREEMENT, Other aspects
of the CITY’s implementation of citizen oversight are its prerogatives under Texas law and the
City Charter, and do not require contractual provisions. Both parties recognize that without the
continued ability of the CITY to carry out citizen oversight, this agreement would not have been
reached, either as to the economic issues or the additional provisions for the procedural
protections of Officer’s rights,

b) In the event of any court order, judgment, Texas Attorney General’s opinion or
arbitration decision brought or caused by Officers or the APA which substantially impairs
oversight access to the 143.089(g) file, prevents release of the defined portions of reports of
Independent Investigation and the CRP, invalidates the 180 tolling provision in Article 16, or
impairs the CITY’s right to expedited arbitration as contemplated herein, the CITY may reopen
negotiations to resolve and correct the issue or provide an alternate resolution. If a negotiated
resolution of the issue is not achieved, the CITY may terminate this AGREEMENT after ninety
(90) days written notice, and the parties may resume negotiations toward a successor agreement
under the provisions Section 143.301 et.seq., of the Texas Local Government Code.

c) In the event of any court order, judgment, Texas Attorney General’s opinion or
arbitration decision brought or caused by the City of Austin or other party with standing under
this AGREEMENT substantially impairs the provisions of Article 17 pertaining to Officer's
rights, or which would allow full access to investigative evidence of Officer misconduct in the
absence of a disciplinary decision imposed by the Chief, the APA may reopen negotiations to
resolve and correct the issue or provide an alternate resolution, If a negotiated resolution of the
issue is not achieved, the CITY may terminate this AGREEMENT afier ninety (90) days written
notice, and the parties may resume negotiations toward a successor agreement under the
provisions Section 143.301 et.seq., of the Texas Local Government Code.

Section 3, Notice and Renegotiation
If either the CITY or the ASSOCIATION desires to engage in negotiation for a successor
Agreement, then either or both shall give the other party written notice of its desire to negotiate

for a new Agreement no less than 120 days before the expiration of the present AGREEMENT.
In the event that notice of intent to renegotiate is given by either party, and the parties agree, the

68
parties will begin negotiations for a new Agreement not later than sixty (60) days after notice is
given, unless the parties agree otherwise,

Section 4, Continuation During Negotiations

If the parties are engaged in negotiations for a successor Agreement at the time this
AGREEMENT expires, the ASSOCIATION’s and the CITY’s negotiating teams shall have the
authority to extend this AGREEMENT in thirty (30) calendar day increments by mutual written
agreement, during any period of good faith negotiations after such termination date, not to
exceed a total of six (6) months.

Section 5. Effect of Termination

a) Inthe event that a successor Agreement has not been ratified before the expiration date of
this AGREEMENT (the expiration date of September 30, 2017, or any extended expiration date
under Section 4 above), all provisions of this AGREEMENT, both economic and non-economic,
shall expire and no longer be in full force and effect, except as to specific Articles or Sections
hereof which provide that some or all of their terms will continue beyond expiration of this
AGREEMENT

b) After expiration/termination of this AGREEMENT, it is expressly understood that the
wages and compensation specified in this AGREEMENT may then be placed at a level
determined by the City Manager, as funds are authorized by the City Council, and this does not
preclude wages and compensation being rolled back to pre-contract levels, as they existed on the
day prior to the effective date of this AGREEMENT.

Section 6, Funding Obligations

The CITY presently intends to continue this AGREEMENT each fiscal year through its term,
to pay all payments due, and to fully and promptly perform all of the obligations of the CITY
under this AGREEMENT. All obligations of the CITY shall be paid only out of current
revenues or any other funds lawfully available therefore and appropriated for such purpose by
the City Council, in compliance with the Texas Constitution, Article XI, Sections 5 and 7. In the
event that the City of Austin cannot meet its funding obligations, as provided in the State
Constitution, this entire AGREEMENT becomes null and void.

ARTICLE 22
NOTICES

Section 1. Association Notices
Notices the ASSOCIATION is required to provide to the CITY under this AGREEMENT or

Chapter 143, unless specifically noted otherwise, will be provided in writing to the office of the
Chief of Police, the Labor Relations Office and the designated lawyer in the City Attorney's

69
Office.
Section 2. City Notices

Notices the CITY is required to provide to the ASSOCIATION under this AGREEMENT or
Chapter 143, unless specifically noted otherwise, will be provided in writing to the
ASSOCIATION President's office and the ASSOCIATION’s designated attorney,

Section 3, Designation of Notice Recipients

Within 10 calendar days after the effective date of this AGREEMENT, both parties will
provide the other written notice of the correct mailing and e-mail addresses of its designated
recipients.

Section 4. Timeliness of Mail Notice

A notice provided by mail will be deemed timely if addressed to the two correct mailing
addresses for the CITY or the ASSOCIATION and postmarked no later than the date such notice
is due,

Section 5, Adequacy of Email Notice

Use of email communications under this paragraph shall be preceded by confirmed
exchanges at the outset of the AGREEMENT, from the sending to receiving servers, prior to
using the email option for notices under this Section. Each party agrees to provide notice of any
change in email addresses of any designated recipient following the initial exchange of emails,
In recognition of the fact that email systems are dependent on a number of technical factors, the
parties agree to confirm the receipt of email notices by sending a “read receipt” to the other party
or sending a brief acknowledgment of receipt. A notice sent by e-mail will be deemed timely if
addressed to the two correct e-mail addresses for the CITY or the ASSOCIATION and sent by
4:59 p.m, on the due date.

Section 6, Notice of Address Changes
The parties agree to provide written notice of any changes of physical address or e-mail
address to the other party within 7 calendar days of the change.
ARTICLE 23
ENTIRE AGREEMENT
Section 1, Subjects and Issues
The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which resulted in this AGREEMENT,

each had the unlimited right and opportunity to raise issues and make proposals with respect to
any subject or matter not removed by law from the meet and confer process, and that the

10
SBIFRDEBGHHOSecHmiudsaHwevone

understandings and agreements arrived at by the parties after the exercise of that right and
opportunity are set forth in this AGREEMENT. Therefore, the CITY and the ASSOCIATION,
for the duration of this AGREEMENT, each voluntarily and unqualifiedly waive the right, and
each agrees that the other shall not be obligated, to meet and confer with respect to any subject or
matter referred to, or covered in this AGREEMENT, or with respect to any subject or matter not
specifically referred to or covered in this AGREEMENT, even though such subjects or matters
may not have been within the knowledge or contemplation of either or both of the parties at the
time they negotiated or signed this AGREEMENT, except as provided for single issue
negotiation above.

Section 2. Amendment of the Agreement

a) Except as explicitly provided for in this AGREEMENT, this AGREEMENT may be
amended during its term by the parties only by written mutual agreement ratified in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 143.

b) The parties may mutually agree to corrections or clarifications by Memorandum of
Agreement with the authority of the Board of Directors of the ASSOCIATION and the City
Manager for the CITY.

Section 3. Benefit of the Bargain

a) Inthe event that the Texas Legislature amends any provision of Texas Local Government
Code Chapters 141, 142 or 143, which changes wages or benefits for City of Austin Police
Officers during the term of this AGREEMENT, any such amendment shall not be applicable to
the Officers covered by this AGREEMENT, unless the City Council adopts such amendment by
Ordinance. Examples of wages and benefits include, but are not limited to, base salary,
longevity, assignment pay, sick leave, vacation, health insurance, and weapon provision
mandates,

b) During the negotiation of this AGREEMENT, the CITY and the ASSOCIATION have
agreed on the stated enhancements to employee compensation and benefits, in reliance on the
cost of those enhancements, Both parties acknowledge that this AGREEMENT would not have
been reached, as reflected in this document, if the cost to the CITY had been higher. In the event
of any proceeding in which the ASSOCIATION asserts the right to additional compensation or
pay enhancements based on the provisions of this AGREEMENT, the decision-maker shall
consider the cost of the contractual pay and benefits enhancements as part of the mutual
agreement and meeting of the minds that resulted in approval of this AGREEMENT by both
patties.

Article 24
SAVINGS CLAUSE/PREEMPTION

Section 1. Effect of Illegal Provision

7
If any provision of this AGREEMENT is subsequently declared by legislative or judicial
authority to be unlawful, unenforceable, or not in accordance with applicable statues, all other
provisions of this AGREEMENT shall remain in full force and effect for the duration of this
AGREEMENT, and the parties shall meet as soon as possible to agree on a substitute provision.

Section 2. Preemption of Local Government Code & Other Provisions

a) “Conflict preemption” intended unless otherwise specified. Texas Local Gov't Code
$143,307 authorizes the parties to preempt “any contrary statute, executive order, local
ordinance, or rule adopted by the state or a political subdivision or agent of the state, including a
personnel board, a civil service commission, or a home-rule municipality” through a labor
agreement. To the full extent authorized by §143.307, the parties agree that the provisions of
this AGREEMENT shall preempt those portions of any state statute, executive order, local
ordinance, or rule with which they specifically conflict only to the extent of such conflict;
remaining portions of such provisions will continue to govern the parties’ actions.

b) “Total preemption” only where specified, However, to the extent allowed by §143,307,
the parties may totally preempt a state statute, executive order, local ordinance, or rule, by
placing a provision in this AGREEMENT that: (1) specifically states it is intended to “totally
preempt” the law in question, and (2) specifically identifies the law(s) being totally preempted.

Section 3, Change in Authorized Representative

During the term of this AGREEMENT, if there is a lawful withdrawal of recognition of the
Austin Police Association pursuant to Section 143.304 of the Texas Local Government Code,
then it will be the CITY’s option to continue the terms of this AGREEMENT or to cancel the
contract and engage in negotiations with the successor organization, if any.

ARTICLE 25
CONSOLIDATION OF PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICERS INTO APD

Section 1. Definitions

The following definitions apply to terms used in this Article and this AGREEMENT, unless
a different definition is required by the context in which the term is used:

a) “PSEM” refers to the City of Austin Public Safety and Emergency Management
Department, which was dissolved as a result of the consolidation of certain PSEM law
enforcement officers into the Austin Police Department,

b) “PSEM law enforcement officer(s)” refers to individuals who, on September 30, 2008

were
(1) PSEM employees and

2
(2) Were commissioned by TCLEOSE as peace officers.

c) “Transition Completion Date” refers to the date that the last PSEM law enforcement
officer successfully completed the modified cadet training program designed by APD
specifically for the transition process.

Section 2. Completion of Transition and Civil Service Status

a) The parties acknowledge that the consolidation of former PSEM law enforcement
officers into APD has been fully accomplished. All former PSEM law enforcement officers who
successfully completed the modified cadet training program, as determined by the Chief, are
Civil Service employees, subject to the provisions of this AGREEMENT.

b) The parties hereby ratify the initial placement of PSEM law enforcement officers into the
APD Civil Service Rank of Police Officer, regardless of their previous positions or rank in
PSEM. Any change in rank resulting from the consolidation transition shall not be construed as
a demotion under either Civil Service law or the City’s Personnel Policies. A former PSEM law
enforcement officer whose rank changed as a result of the consolidation transition may not file a
grievance regarding that change in rank under the grievance process set out in this
AGREEMENT or under the City’s Personnel Policies.

Section 3. Wages and Benefits

a) The parties hereby ratify the initial placement of PSEM law enforcement officers into the
APD Base Salary Schedule, The parties agree that after initial placement, former PSEM officers
will advance through the step pay program in sequence based on the Officer’s initial placement
without regard to the Officer’s years of service with APD or PSEM prior to October 1, 2008.

b) Each former PSEM law enforcement officer will receive longevity pay as provided in
Article 7 of this AGREEMENT based on the Officer’s cumulative years of service with both
PSEM and APD.

c) Any change in compensation resulting from the consolidation transition shall not be
construed as a demotion or promotion under Civil Service law, this AGREEMENT, or the
CITY’s Personnel Policies. A former PSEM law enforcement officer whose compensation
changed as a result of the consolidation transition may not file a grievance regarding that change
in compensation under the grievance process set out in this AGREEMENT or under the CITY’s
Personnel Policies.

Section 4. Transfer of Special Vacation Balances
a) Special vacation balances of former PSEM law enforcement officers due to settlement of

claims regarding vacation accrual rates have been transferred to APD and shall remain subject to
the terms of the applicable settlement agreement.

B
Section 5. Payment of Accrued Sick Leave

Accrued sick leave will be paid to former PSEM law enforcement officers under the
following conditions:

a) An Officer who retires under both the City of Austin Employees Retirement System and
the Austin Police Retirement System, will be paid for all accrued sick leave in accordance with
the provisions of Article 9, except that the 12-year service requirement shall not apply.

b) An Officer who was hired by the City of Austin prior to October 1, 1986, who separates
from the CITY for any reason other than retirement will be paid for a maximum of 720 hours of
accrued sick leave,

c) An Officer who was hired after October 1, 1986, who separates from the CITY after the
effective date of this Article for any reason other than retirement will be paid for accrued sick
leave in accordance with Article 9 of this Agreement, but years of service with PSEM will not be
counted as years of service with APD for purposes of the 12-year service requirement.

Section 6. Promotional Eligibility

A PSEM law enforcement officer who successfully completes the transition and becomes an
APD Officer shall be eligible to take the promotional examination for the rank immediately
above Police Officer upon completion of five (5) years of service. For purposes of calculating
the required five (5) years of service, all service with APD after the Transition Completion Date
plus up to three (3) years of continuous service in PSEM immediately prior to the effective date
of this Article shall be counted toward the requirement.

Section 7. Conditions Precedent
Approximately six (6) years after the System began participating in the Proportionate
Retirement Program, the System’s actuary must conduct a five-year experience study to

determine whether the CITY’s contribution rate should be increased or decreased based on
utilization of the Proportionate Retirement Program during that period,

4
Appendix A-1. Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Pay Schedule

Proposed Police Pay Scale FY2013-14
40 Hour Week
GRADE AB 0D © FG A T a
PAYSTEP 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 8 90 100 110 120 130
YEAR BASE 1 2 3 = 45 G7 1 12
JOFFICER [HR] $27-114] S00427] $03502] $53502] 953502] 900582] 05992] 05902] $05900] $05900] SGB4G] $08.400] $28.408

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

T7050 Mol $4 700[ $6274] Sari] SSRN SHALI| SeaaT| $6.278[ $6208] $6.28] SEG] GH.eEA| SE HGH S6.GbM
P02 YR| $66,397| $63,287| S69,a61] $69.851| $69,851] $69,851] $74.739[ $74,739] $74,739 $74,739] $79,972] $7972] $79.972
ICORPORALT

DETECTIVE | HR $36,604] $36.604] 90.167] $39.167| $39.167| $39.167| _$41.909] $41,909] _$41.909}
17025 NO, $6,345] $5,345| $6,769] $6,703] $6.789| $6,709] $7 264] $7.264| $7264
POT YR S76,T37| $7G.Ta7] SOrMbT| SET AGT] $B1AGT] Ser AGr]_ $87,170] $67,170] $87,170}
ISERGEANT [FR S2EOT|_$420R1] $42.691] $45.680] 45.680] 345.680]
17070 NO. $7400[ $7,400 $7.400[ $7,918] $7318] __ $7,916]
P08 YR $68,797| $88,797] $88,797| $95,014] $95,014] $95,014]
[CEUTENANT_[ RR SHUG] SE25HT]_SSZ5GT]_$52537
T7045 NO, $E510] $9,105] $9,105] $9,105
POS YR $02,117] $109,265] $108,265] $109,265
[COMMANDER [ AR 360-744] 360.743]
7018 NO. $10,529] $10,529]
Pr YR $126,347] $126 347

 

NOTES: MONTH & ANNUAL PAY RATES ARE APPROXIMATIONS DUE TO STATISTICAL ROUNDING.
Police Cadet_$19.23 HOURLY, $3,334 MONTHLY, $40,000 ANNUAL

GRADE _N 0 P a R s T U V Ww x Y Z
PAYSTEP 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 «© 250-260
YEAR 13 14 «= 15 16S 17_—Ss 18 S190 BH
JOFFICER [RR] $36448] S41.139] $41-109] 44.020] $44.020] $44020] $44.02] $44 020] $44.020] $44.020[_ 44.0007 $44020[_$44.029

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7050 MO] Sen64[ Star] $7131] $7630] Srea0]_S7bs0l $7630] S7ea0] $7620] ST es0 $7,680] $7600] $7,600
PO YR $79572| $85,569] $05,569] $97,561] $97,561] $07,561] $97 567] $9561] S97561] $07,501] 997.561] $91,567] $07,507
ICORPORALT

JOETECTIVE | HR| $44,900] $44,042] $4442] $47.982] $47,982] 47.982] $47.982] $47.982] $47.962| $47.982| $47.982| $47,982] $47.982
17025 Mol” $7264[_ $7,773] $7773|_ $8317] S6.3t7| $B317| $8.917|_$8.317| $B.3T7] $8317| $83T7[ $8317 $8,377
POT YR] Se7.t70] $95,271] $oa271] $09,802 $99,802] So9.A02| $90.02] $e9,a02] $9 802] $09,e02] $e0.802] Fo~,a02| $09 802
SERGEANT [FR] $45600[ S48876] S40876] S62290] $62.208] $52298] $52208] $52 200] $62.208] $52206] S62.208] $52205] $52208
17070 MO|” $7918[ $8,472] $e472] $9,065] $9065[ $8065] $9,065] $9,065] $9,065] $9,065] $9,065] $9065] $9,065
P08 YR | $95,044] $101,663] $101,663] $108,761] $108,781] $108,761] $108,781] $108,764] $108,761] $108,761] $108,781] $108,7ét] $108,787
[CEUTENANT [FR] $52591] $56.209[ $56209[ S60.144] $6014] $0014] $60.144] SGOT] S60.T44] $60TH4] $60.14] $6014] $60.144
T7045 MO] $3105] $0,743] $0743]_STOAze] $10.425] $10,425] $TO.A2S] $10,428] $10.42] $10,425] _$10.A2s] $1025] $10.45
@ YR | $109,265] $116,975] $116,916] $125,099] $125,099] $125,099] $125 099] $125,099] $125,098] $125,099] $125 099] $125,085] $125 009
[COMMANDER [HR] $60,744] $64.996] $64 905] S69545] 969545] $O2545] $60.545] SHO545] $69.545] SOEIS] S60.545] $9545] $60.545
7018 MO| $10,529] $17,266] $11,266] $12,055] $12,055] $12,055] $12056| $12,055] $12,055] $12,055] $12,056] $12,055] $12,055
P10 YR [$126,347 | $136,191] $135,191] $144 654] $144,654] $144 G54] $144 654] $144 G54] $144, 54] S144 G54] STAs 54] S144 Go4] S14 54

 

NOTES: MONTH & ANNUAL PAY RATES ARE APPROXIMATIONS DUE TO STATISTICAL ROUNDING.
Police Cadet_$19.23 HOURLY, $3,334 MONTHLY, $40,000 ANNUAL

 

 

ear The pay norease wilbe 15. efectve ht pay pend FY 201-10

15

HRD Effective Date: Ist Pay Period FY14
Appendix A-2. Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Pay Schedule

Proposed Police Pay Scale FY 2U14-15

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

40 Hour Week

GRADE A BC D © F Go AH T ad cM

PAYSTEP 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130

YEAR BASE 1 203 4 ~ 5 6 7 8 9 1 62
JOFFICER [HR] $27.85] $90,731] $33916] $33.9%@] $33.9t6] $33.918] $96.292] $36.292] $36,202] $36292] $38833] $38.833] $08.83
7050 Mol sara7| $5327[ $579] s5.a79[ sara] $5879] $6,291] $6291] $6,201 $6294] $6731] S6731| $6,734
poz YR] $56,964] $63:920] $70,560] $70,550 $70,550] $70,560] _$75.407| $75.487| $75.4a7| $75.87] $80,772] $80,772] $80,772
TORFORALT
JDETECTIVE | HR $3670} $3670] $39.556] $30558| $39:558] $39558] 42.328] $42.925| $42,328
7025) MO S608] $6408] S557] $6857] SeAST| Sea5r| —STAaT|_—S7a7| 87]
por YR $76,898] $76,896] $82,281] $82,281] $82,281] $82,284] $88,042| $88,042] $08,002
ISERGEANT [HR S4.11a]_$43.118] $43,118] $46-136] $46,136] $46.136)
7070 NO Srava|_ svaral” S7aval $7997] S7907[ $7997)
pos YR $99,685] $89,685] $89,685] $95,964] $05,964] $05,964
[LIEUTENANT [RR $49,586] $53057[ $53.057[_ $53,057
7046) MO $8,585] $0,196] $0,196] $9,195
pos YR $103,138] $110,356] $170,368) $170,359
[COMMANDER | HR 961.354] 961351
7018 MO Si0,634) $10,634
Pio YR Siar oii] $127.84
INOTES: MONTH & ANNUAL PAY RATES ARE APPROXIMATIONS DUE TO STATISTICAL ROUNDING.
[Police Cadet_$19.23 HOURLY, $3,334 MONTHLY, $40,000 ANNUAL

GRADE NO P QR Ss TT U V W X YY 2

PAYSTEP 140 150 160 170 180 190 200» «210-220 «230-240-250 260

YEAR 13141516 17/1819 Ot

JOFFICER [HR] $38835] $41,550] $4,560] 944.400] $44.e60) 44460] $44.460] $44460] $44,460] $44.460] $44.460] $44.460]_$44.460
7050 Mol $6731] S7202] $7202] $7706] $7,706] $7706] $7,706] $7,706] $7,706] $7,705) $7,706] $7,706] _ $7,708
poz YR] $00,772] $86.425[ $06,425] $92.47] $e2.a77|_se2a77| seza77|_soo.ar7|_seaa77| sez.ar7| sori] $e2477|_ $9247)
TORFORALT
JDETECTIVE | HR| $42.28] $45,200] $45,290) 48.462] sua.ce2] $48,462] S48.462] $48,462] 48.462] $48.462] $48.462/ $48.462| $48.462
7025 Mo] $7397[ $7,850] $7,860] $8400] $8,400] $8400] $8,400] $8400] $8,400] $8400] $6,400] $8,400] $8,400
por YR | $88,042] —$94,20q[ $04,204] $100,800] $100 200[ $100,800] $100 800 $t00,800{ $100,800] $100,800[ $100,800] $00 800] $100 80)
JSERGEANT [HR] $46.36] $49.365] Seas6s] 52821] $5821] $52821] $52821] Ss2e2i] $sze21] $e2.e2i] $5282q] $52821] $5282"
7070 Mo] $7997| $8557] $6567[ $9,156] $9,156] $9,156] $9,156] $9,156] $9,166] $9,156] $9,156] $9,156] _ $9,186
poe YR | $96,964] $102,680] $102,680] $109,868] $109,268] $109,868] $109,868] $109,868] $109.68] $109,868] $109,268) $109,868] $109 86)
LIEUTENANT [HR] $53.057] $56.74] $96.771] $60745] $60.745[ 960.745] 60745] $60.745] 960.745] $60.745] $60.745] 960.745] $60,749
7045 Mol $9,196] $9,840] Sado] $10,529] $10,529] st0.529] $10,829] $1029] _s10.529[ $10,629] $10,529] $10,529] $10,529
Pos YR | $110,368] $118,084] $118,084] $126 350] $126,360] $126,350] $126,350] $126,350] $126 360] $126,350] $126,360] $126,360] $126,350)
[COMMANDER [HRT $61.51] $65.646] sesG46] 70.241] $7024i] s7O241] STO2s] $7024%] sTO2s1] $7024i] $7024] $70.261] $70.24
7018 MO] Sioe34] —S11.379]_SiH.a79] $12,175] Stat7a]_sizt7s| $12,175] Sia.tr5|_sizi76| sia.t7s] $12,175] $12,179] _st2.A7
Pio YR [$127,614] $136,543] $196,543] $146,107] $146,101] $146,101] $146 ror] $146, t0%] $146,101] $146,101] $146,104] $146,101] $146.10
INOTES: MONTH & ANNUAL PAY RATES ARE APPROXIMATIONS DUE TO STATISTICAL ROUNDING.
[Police Cadet_$19.23 HOURLY, $3,334 MONTHLY, $40,000 ANNUAL
852 The pay crease wil be 1.0% efecve frst pay peod FY 2014-16, Effective Date- 1st Pay Period EY

  

 

76
Appendix A-3. Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Pay Schedule

40 Hour Week
Proposed Police Pay Scale FY 2015-16
GRADE A 8 CD FFG - T 7 KO ™

PAYSTEP 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130
YEAR BASE 14 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 4 1
OFFICER THR] $27.65q] $31,086] $24.267] $34.257] $04.257]_$34.257[ $36.655[ $26,655] $36,655] $06,655] $39.221] $3021] $30.224

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17050 MOT S47aq] $5,380] $5998] $5,938] $5938] $5038] $6.53] $6,350] $6,363] $6,359] $6,798] $6,798] $6,799)
P02 yR| $57,530] $64,569] $71,255] $71,255] $71,255] $71,256] 76.24%] s7624i| s76241] $76.241] $81,580] $87,580] $81,580]
[CORPORAL

DeTECTIVE_| HR $37-340| _$37.340| $39,954] $30.954] $30954] s39.954] s42.751|_$4275%]_$42751
7028 NO $6472] $6472] $6925] $6925 $6,925] $6,925] $7410 7.410] $7,470
Por YR $77,667] $77,667| $83,104] $83,t04] $83,104] $83,104] $88,922] $88,922] $80 922]
SERGEANT [HR S4a54g] S43.540] 43.540] 46.508] $46,598] $46.55
17070 MO $7548] $7548] $7,548] $8077] $8,077] $8,077]
FOB YR $90,582] $00,582] $00,582] $96,923[ $06,923] $06,923
LIEUTENANT [HR $5081] $53587] $53.587] _$53.587|
17045 NO se6ei| $0,286] $9,288] $0,289)
Poe YR $104,170] $114,464] $117,461] $111 464
[CONMANDER [HR 961.965] $61,965]
7018 NO S10.741] $10,744
P10 YR $128,887] $128 887|

 

 

NOTES: MONTH & ANNUAL PAY RATES ARE APPROXIMATIONS DUE TO STATISTICAL ROUNDING.
Police Cadet_$19.23 HOURLY, $3,334 MONTHLY, $40,000 ANNUAL

GRADE N 0 P a R s T U vooOWw)SCOX Y Zz
PAYSTEP 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 © 230 «240-250-260
YEAR 13 14 1516 S718 19S 0h kB
JOFFICER [HR] $3921] $41,966] $41.966] $44,905] $44,905] $44,905] $44,905] $44,905] $44,905] $44.905] $44,905] $44,905] $44.905]

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17050 MO $6798 $7274] 7.274] $7,783] $7,763] $7,763] $7,783] $7,783] $7,783] $7,763 $7,783] $7,783] _ $7,789)
P02 yR | $81,580] $87,289[ $07,289] $93,402] $95,402] “$93.402] $03,402] $03,402| $03,402] $93,402] “$03.402] $93.402] $93,402]
[CORPORALT

DETECTIVE | HR| $42.751] $45,743] $45:743] 48.946] 48.946) Sas.c46] Sua.c4e] $48.46] $48,946] $48.946] 4e.g46] $48,946] 48.946
7025 Mol” $7410] $7,929 $7929] $8484] $8,484] $8,484] Seaad] Sa44] $0,484] $8.484] S8.aaa] Seca] $0,484
Por yR | 88,972] $95,146] $05,146] $101,208] $101,808] $101 808] $101,808] $107 e08] $107,208] $107,208] stot 208] $101,808] $101 609]

 

 

SERGEANT [HR] $46598] S40869] $49.850] $53,350] $63,350] $52.50] $53.60] $53,350] $63.360] $53,350] $62.50] $53.50] $59.360]
17070 Mol seor7|sa6e2| $a.642] $0.247[ sa247| Saza7| Soze7| $0247] $0.247| 99,247] Saz47[ Soza7| $9,247)
Poe YR | $96,923] $103,706] $103,706] $110,967| $110 967| $110,967] $110,967] $110,967] $110,967] $110,967] $110,967] $110,967] $110 967|

 

 

 

 

LIEUTENANT [HR] $53,587] $57-390[  $57:300] $61,353] 964.350] 961.253] 961.353] $61,353] $61,363] 961.259] 961.353] _961.359]_ 961.369)
7045 MOT $0288| S9.9a0[ $9,930] “Stoesa] sioeaq] Sioea4] S106s4] $10,634) STOGs4] StO,e3q] Siqea4] S10.634] $10,634)
P09 YR [$111 461] $119,265] $119,266] $127,613] $127 613] $127 613] $127,619] $127,619] $127,613] $127 6tal S127-613] $127,619] $127,614]

 

 

 

 

[COMMANDER HRT $61,965] $66:302[ 66.302] “s7o.943[_srosds]_s7o943[_$70.943] $70.943] s7o.943]_sro9%]_s7a943[_s7o.943[_$70.945)
7018 Mol stoi] stt4e2] stt4o2]  staz07|_si2.297[_$i2.207|si2207| 12.207] staz97|_sia,297|_$i2.207| $12,207] $12,297)
P10 ‘YR [$128,887] $137,909] $137,909] $147,562] $147 562] $147 562] $147,562] $147,562] $147 562] $147 562] S147 562] $147 562] $147 562]

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

NOTES: MONTH & ANNUAL PAY RATES ARE APPROXIMATIONS DUE TO STATISTICAL ROUNDING.
Police Cadet_$19.23 HOURLY, $3,334 MONTHLY, $40,000 ANNUAL

 

 

 

[Year 3 The pay increase willbe 10% effective frst pay period FY 2016-16

 

7

HRO Effective Date: Ist Pay Period FYI6
Appendix A-4. Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Pay Schedule

Proposed Police Pay Scale FY 2016-17

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HRD

40 Hour Week

GRADE A OBC Dc F G 4H T J K tM

Paystep 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 140 120 130

YEAR BASE 1 2 3.4 5 6 7 89 0
jorricer [HR] $28.212] $31,656] $34943] $34.943] $34.943] $34,943] $37-388] $97.386] $37,388] $37.988] $40.005] $40,005] $40,005
7060 nol $4880] $5488 $6057] S6057| S6057| S.057| Se4ei| SéaBi] SeaBi] SEAai] Se.g34  Se.9G4] Se.a3q
Poe yr| $58,661] $65,850] $7268%] $72681] $7268i] $72,681] $77,766] $77,766] $77,766] $77,766| $83,211] $e3.2r1] $83,214
[coRPORALT
perecTve [HR $38.087| $38,087] $40,753] $40.753] $40.753] $40.753] $43,606] $43,606) $43,606
7008 m7 $6,002| $6,602] $7,064] $7,064] $7064] $7,064| $7,558] $7,558] _ $7,558
Por YR $79220| $79,220] $44,766] $24,766] $84,766] $84,768] $00,701] $90,701[ $90,704
SERGEANT [HR ‘Saaan0] $44.420] 44420] $47.590] $47 530] $47.509
70 WO S76va] $7699] $7,690[ $8,258] $6236[ $8,208
Pos YR $02,93[ $92,383] $92,393] $98,062] $98,862] $99,869
tevrenant_ [HR $54,083] $54,658] 954.659] $54 650
as no) Sae54] $0.47al soara| $9.47
Poe YR $106,253] $113,694] $113,694] $113,604
[counanoeR [HR 365204] $63.20
vote wo $10,955[ $10,985)
m ¥e $131 | $134,465
NOTES: MONTH & ANNUAL PAY RATES ARE APPROXIMATIONS DUE TO STATISTICAL ROUNDING.
Police Cadet $19.23 HOURLY, $3,334 MONTHLY, $40,000 ANNUAL

GbE NN 0 PF Q@ R Ss TT U VW X #<Y @

PaysTEP 140 150 160 © 170 «180 «190» 200 210-220» 230» 240250260

YER 13° 141516 1718192
jorricer [HR] $40.005] $42,805] $42.805] $45,803] $45.03] $45,003] $45.03] $45.003] $45,803] $45.03] $45,003] $45.03] $45,809
7080 mol $6,934] $7420] $7,420] $7.39] $7,539] $7,930] $7939] $7,939] $7,930] $7939] $7,930] $7,900] $7,939
Poe ya] $83,217] $69,036| $89,035] $95,270] $96,270] $96,270] 95.270] $95,270 $95,270] $96,270] $95,270] $95,270] $95,279
[CORPORALT
DETECTE |u| 43.606] s46.65e| $46,656] $49.925] $49,925] 49.925] s4a92s] 49.975] $49.25] sua.gr5| 49.925] $4,925] $49,925)
008 wo| $7558] $6.087| $8087] $8,654] See54[ $8,654) se.o54]  sea5a] $8,654] Sed] Sa.G54| $0,654] Sa,cey
por yr] $90,701] $97,048] $07,048] $03,844] $103,844] $103,e44] $103,844] $103,844] s103.e4a] $103,844] $103,044] $103,844] $103,844
SERGEANT [HR] S47 530] S50856] $50,856] S64417] SoAATT| SG4ATT] SOAAIT] SG4ATT] SOUAIT] SHAATT] SGLATT] SeAATT] $5447]
vo70 nol $8,238] $8816] $8815] $9432] $9432] $9,432] $9492] saaaa] $9.4s2] $942[ So.asa] $9402] $9,439
Pos YR| $98,862] $105,780] $105,700) $113,186] $113,186] $113,106] $113,186] $175, t86] $113,186] $173 186] $113, raa] $173,186] $113, 89
ecurenant [HR] $54.659] $58486] $58.486] 62500] 962.580] 62580] 962500] $62.500] $62580] 962.580] 62580] 962.580] $62.50
ras wo] $9,474] $10,138] $10,138] _stoge7| sioea7| si0.ee7| stoea7| sioga7| stoes7| sioea7| sio.ee7| Stoaa7| $10.87
Poe ‘| $113,694] $121,650] $121,660) $130,166] $130,166] $190, r66] $190,166] $130,166] $130,166] $130,166] $190, 68] $130,166] $130, 69
Jcoumanoer [HR] $63,204] $67,628] $67.626] $72.362] $72.62] $7362] $72362] $72.362] $7262] $72,962] $72362] $72362] $72.36
ote nol $10.955] Sti T22| Sii72| S25] sizs0[ sass size] S254] si2H] size] stasis] SiZsKG] $i2589
m WR | S131 465] $140 667| $140,667] $160,573] $150,513] $180,513] $150.5%3] $150,515] $150,573] $150.53] $t80.sta] $160.5T3] $150,515
NOTES: MONTH & ANNUAL PAY RATES ARE APPROXIMATIONS DUE TO STATISTICAL ROUNDING.
Police Cadet $19.23 HOURLY, $3,334 MONTHLY, $40,000 ANNUAL
fear 4: The pay increase willbe 2.0% effective rst pay period FY 2076-17

78

Effective Date: 1st Pay Period FY 17
