 

AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE CITY OF JACKSONVILLE
AND THE
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

OCTOBER 1, 2011 - SEPTEMBER 30, 2014
AGREEMENT

BETWEEN

CITY OF JACKSONVILLE

AND

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

OCTOBER 1, 2011 - SEPTEMBER 30, 2014
TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE PAGE
AGREEMENT .................-0005- wee 1
ARTICLE 1: F.O.P. RECOGNITION -. 3
ARTICLE 2: F.O.P. SECURITY AND CHECK OFF... ..... 0.0.0... ee eee ee ee eee 5
ARTICLE 3: F.O.P. ACTIVITIES 2.2.6... ee eens 7
ARTICLE 4: MANAGEMENT SECURITY ..... 0.0.0... ccc cee eee 9
ARTICLE 5: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS ...... 1... 0... ee eee eee eee 11
ARTICLE 6: SPECIAL MEETINGS - 13
ARTICLE 7: BULLETIN BOARDS.......... - 15
ARTICLE 8: WORK RULES.............. . 17
ARTICLE 9: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ........... 2.0... 2c cece e eee eee 19
ARTICLE 10: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE .............. 00.00. ee eee eee 23
ARTICLE 11: BILL OF RIGHTS .... 2.0.6... eee eee ee 25
ARTICLE 12: COMPREHENSIVE DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE

POLICY AND PROCEDURES.............. 20. e cece eee eens 27
ARTICLE 13: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION ............. 0.00 cece eee eee eee 39
ARTICLE 14: FILES... 6... eee ene eens 41
ARTICLE 15: PERSONAL LEAVE PLANE ... 43
ARTICLE 16: PERSONAL LEAVE PLAN P ... - 47
ARTICLE 17: USE OF LEAVE...................- - 50
ARTICLE 18: BEREAVEMENT AND FUNERAL LEAVE ..................0-0-- 55
ARTICLE 19: LEAVE DONATION ......... 00.6. c eee eee eee ee 57
ARTICLE 20: MILITARY LEAVE .......... 0.6.6 cece cece ee ee eens 59
ARTICLE 21: HOLIDAYS .... 0.0... 6c eee eens 61
ARTICLE 22: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT............ - 63
ARTICLE 23: WAGES... 1.6... ee eee ee - 68
ARTICLE 24: COMPENSATION FOR COURT RELATED MATTERS - 74
ARTICLE 25: FITNESS FOR DUTY EXAM ..... 0.0... 0... 0c cece eee eee 79
ARTICLE 26: SAFETY AND HEALTH... .. 2.2.2... cee ce eee eee 81
ARTICLE 27: PHYSICAL ABILITY TESTING ........... 0.0.0. eee ee ee eee eee 83
ARTICLE 28: INJURY-IN-LINE-OF-DUTY .......... 0.0... cece ee eee eee 85
ARTICLE 29: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ....... 87
ARTICLE 30: LIFEINSURANCE .......... 92
ARTICLE 31: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT. . - 94
ARTICLE 32: SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT ....... 2.0... 0.06. e ee eee eee 96
ARTICLE 33: PROMOTIONS... 2.2.6... ee eee eee 98
ARTICLE 34: PHYSICAL ABILITY POLICY ... 100
ARTICLE 35: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .. 106
ARTICLE 36: SEVERABILITY ............. .. 108
ARTICLE 37: RESIDUAL RIGHTS ...... 0.0... 2c eee eee 110
ARTICLE 38: ENTIRE AGREEMENT .............. 0.00 cece ee eee eee 112
SCHEDULE A... 1... ee eee eee 114

SCHEDULE B ... 1... eee eens 116
SCHEDULE CC... 1... eee eee eens
SCHEDULE D ... 1... eee eee eens
SCHEDULE E ... 1... eee
APPENDIX A... 0... eee teen eee nee
APPENDIX A: PREAMBLE ............ 0.06. e cece cee tenet eee
ARTICLE A-1: ARTICLES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE .
ARTICLE A-2: GRIEVANCES AND SEPARATIONS . .
ARTICLE A-3: HOLIDAYS ......... 0... cece cece eee eee
ARTICLE A-4: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT

ARTICLE A-5: WAGES... 26.0.6
ARTICLE A-6: INJURY IN-LINE-OF-DUTY ........... 0.0.00. eee eee eee
ARTICLE A-7: LIFE INSURANCE .... 0... 2... eee
ARTICLE A-8: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS... . a
ARTICLE A-9: MILITARY LEAVE .... 0.0... 6c eee eee
ARTICLE A-10: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ............... 0000 e eee
ARTICLE A-11: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE ................ 0.000000 ee
ARTICLE A-12:
ARTICLE A-13:
ARTICLE A-14:
APPENDIX B:

  

 

ARTICLE B-1: ARTICLES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE .....................4- 163
ARTICLE B-2: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE ............... 2.0000 e eee 165
ARTICLE B-3: USE OF LEAVE .... 1.0.2... eee eee 167
ARTICLE B-4: MILITARY LEAVE .......... 0... cece cece eee eee 171

ARTICLE B-5: HOLIDAYS
ARTICLE B-6: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT

 

ARTICLE B-7: WAGES ... 1.2... ce eee eee
ARTICLE B-8: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
ARTICLE B-9: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT .............. 00.0000 e ee eee 181
ARTICLE B-10: COMPREHENSIVE DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE
POLICY AND PROCEDURES ................ 0.0.0 eeeeuee 183

ARTICLE B-11: MATTERS NOT ADDRESSED. .

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

AGREEMENT

This AGREEMENT is entered into between the City of Jacksonville, hereinafter
referred to as the Employer! and The Jacksonville Consolidated Lodge No. 5-30
of the Fraternal Order of Police, hereinafter referred to as the F.O.P. It is the
intent and purpose of this Agreement to assure sound and mutually beneficial
working and economic relationships between the parties hereto, to provide an
orderly and peaceful means of resolving any misunderstandings or differences
which may arise and to set forth herein a basic and full agreement between the
parties concerning rates of pay, wages, hours of employment, and other terms
and conditions of employment. There are and shall be no_ individual
arrangements or agreements covering any part or all of this Agreement contrary
to the terms herein provided. Either party hereto shall be entitled to require
specific performance of the provisions of this Agreement. It is mutually
understood and declared to be the public policy of the Employer and the F.O.P.
to promote harmonious and cooperative relationships between the Employer
and its employees, and to protect the public by assuring, at all times, the orderly
and uninterrupted operations and functions of government.

1 The “Employer” means the Office of the Sheriff or the City of Jacksonville as the context may
require.
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
1.1

1.2

1.3

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 1: F.O.P. RECOGNITION

Pursuant to and in accordance with all applicable provisions of Chapter
447, Florida Statutes, the Employer recognizes the F.O.P. as the exclusive
collective bargaining representative for those employees in the certified
bargaining unit, defined by Certification 278 issued on November 18, 1997,
and clarified on May 9, 2006, as all sworn Police Officers of the rank of
sergeant and below (see attached Schedule A), including sworn Judicial
Officers and full-time temporary sworn certified bailiffs for the purpose of
bargaining collectively in the determination of the wages, hours and
terms and conditions of employment of the public employees within the
bargaining unit unless and until recognition of such bargaining
representative is withdrawn by a vote of the majority of the employees
represented.

“Employees” shall mean all employees who are employed by the City of
Jacksonville whose classifications appear on the attached Schedule A.

erms and conditions of employment for the full-time temporary sworn
certified bailiffs referred to in this section are set forth in Appendix A of this
Agreement and not in the provisions of the main agreement.

erms and conditions of employment for the sworn Judicial Officers
referred to in this section are set forth in Appendix C of this Agreement
and notin the provisions of the main agreement.

t is further understood and agreed that the President or an alternate of
he Jacksonville Consolidated Lodge No. 5-30 of the F.O.P. will be the
official spokesman for the Fraternal Order of Police in any matter between
he F.O.P. and the Employer. The alternate shall be selected from one of
he officers listed below:

 

Business Agent

First Vice President

Second Vice President

Secretary

Member of Board of Directors

Florida State Lodge representative (with letter of authorization to
represent Jacksonville Consolidated Lodge No. 5-30)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Any alternate designated by the President shall be designated in writing,
including the period of time covered by such designation. A written list of
he accredited officers and representatives of the F.O.P. shall be furnished
‘o the Sheriff and the City’s Director of Employee Services immediately
after their designation and the Sheriff and the City’s Director of Employee
Services shall be notified of any changes of said representatives within five
5) days.

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 2: F.O.P. SECURITY AND CHECK OFF

Upon receipt of a written authorization from an employee covered by this
Agreement, the Employer will deduct from the employee's pay the
amount owed to the F.O.P. by such employee for dues. There will be
twenty-six (26) deductions per year. The Employer will remit such sums to
the F.O.P. no later than the tenth (10th) day of the month following such
deductions. The F.O.P. will certify any changes in the membership dues
rate to the Employer in writing over the signature of the authorized officer
or officers of the F.O.P. at least thirty (30) days in advance of the effective
date of such change. The Employer's remittance will be deemed correct
if the F.0.P. does not notify the Employer in writing within two (2) weeks of
its receipt.

The F.O.P. will indemnify, defend, and hold the Employer harmless against
any claim made and against any suit instituted against the Employer on
account of any check off of F.O.P. dues.

An employee may revoke his/her authorization for deduction of dues,
provided the employee gives thirty (30) days notice to the F.O.P. and the
Employer by registered or certified mail. The Employer will not discontinue
dues deduction from any employee prior to authorization of the F.O.P. or
the employee. The Employer will not discontinue F.O.P. dues deduction
simply because an employee has changed from one F.O.P. bargaining
unit to another F.O.P. bargaining unit.

No dues deduction shall be made from the pay of an employee for any
payroll period in which the employee's net earnings for that payroll period
are less than the amount of dues to be checked off. “Net earnings” shall
mean “net" after required deduction of federal taxes, Social Security,
Pensions, Credit Union, and Health and Life Insurance premiums.

Should an employee's pay be insufficient to make all the deductions
he/she has authorized, deductions will be taken in the following order:

A. All legally required deductions will be deducted from the
employee's pay check. Legally required deductions include but are
not limited to deductions for taxes, court ordered deductions and
F.O.P. dues deductions when the employee has authorized dues

deductions.

B. If any remaining payroll deduction slots are available on the
employee's paycheck, the slots will be used for City sponsored plans
or activities.
2.6

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Cc. If any remaining payroll deduction slots are available on the
employee's paycheck, the slots will be used for other F.O.P.
sponsored plans or activities that have been authorized by the
employee. Provided that if any employee requests in writing to
change the priority of his/her payroll deductions and replace an
F.0.P. deduction with a non-F.O.P. deduction, the written request of
the employee will govern.

D. If any remaining payroll deduction slots are available on the
employee's paycheck, the slots will be used for any other
deductions for plans or activities that have been authorized by the
employee.

In accordance with Chapter 447, Florida Statutes, Public Employees shall
have the right to form, join and participate in or refrain from forming,
joining and/or participating in any employee organization of their own
choosing. They shall have the right to be represented by any employee
organization of their choosing to negotiate collectively through a certified
bargaining agent with the Employer in the determination of the terms and
conditions of their employment.
3.1

3.2

3.3

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 3: F.O.P. ACTIVITIES

Employees shall have the right to join the F.O.P., to engage in lawful
concerted activities for the purpose of collective negotiation or
bargaining or other mutual did and protection, to express or
communicate any view, grievance, complaint or opinion, within the
bounds of good taste, related to the conditions or compensation of
public employment or its betterment, all free from any restraint, coercion,
discriminations or reprisal. There shall not be restraint, discrimination or
reprisal against any employee because of that employee's membership
or lack of membership in the F.O.P. or by virtue of his/her holding office or
not holding office in the F.O.P. The Employer and the F.O.P. shall apply this
provision to all employees.

A. On Duty Solicitation by F.O.P.

Solicitation of any kind by the F.O.P., including the solicitation of
grievances, membership, and the collection of F.O.P. monies, shall
not be engaged in during working hours.

B. F.O.P. Meetings

No F.O.P. meeting shall be held on Employer time.
Cc. On Duty F.O.P. Presentations

The President of the F.O.P. or the designated representative may
address any assembly or personnel of the Sheriff's Office at their
regular roll call, at each in-service training and at each recruit class
at the police academy for a period of time agreed upon by the
F.O.P. and the Office of the Sheriff.

D. On Duty Solicitation Prohibited

Employees will not be subjected to solicitation for monies or
membership by outside groups (including insurance companies or
charity groups) while on duty, including roll call.

The Employer will furnish a bank of three thousand (3000) hours for use as
F.O.P. Pool Time. This time shall be used for F.O.P. activities by any
member of the F.O.P. Approval of such time shall be authorized by either
the F.O.P. President, First Vice-President, Second Vice-President, or
Secretary. Time charged will be the actual time used. The F.O.P. may
rollover not more than 500 unused hours to a subsequent year. When the
F.0.P. requests time off under these provisions, the employee that is to be
off shall electronically submit the request to the Office of the Sheriff for
approval. Such leave request must be in accordance with Article
17.2(C)(1)(2) of this contract.
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
4.1

4.2

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 4: MANAGEMENT SECURITY

The F.O.P. and its officers, representatives and members agree that during
the life of this Agreement, they shall not instigate, promote, sponsor,
engage in or condone any strike, slow down, concerted stoppage of
work, intentional interruption of Employer operations, or similar activities
during the terms of this Agreement. The consideration for such provision is
the right to a resolution of disputed questions. Management has the right
to discharge or otherwise discipline any or all employees who violate the
provisions of this paragraph. The only questions that may be raised in any
proceeding, grievance, judicial or otherwise, contesting such action is
whether the provision prohibiting strikes, slowdowns, concerted stoppage
of work, intentional interruptions of Employer operations or similar activities
was violated by the employee to be discharged or otherwise disciplined.

A. The F.O.P., its representatives, members, or any persons acting on
their behalf, agree that the following “other unlawful acts" as
defined in Chapter 447, Florida Statutes, are expressly prohibited:

(1) Soliciting employees during the working hours of any
employee who is involved in the solicitation.

(2) Distributing literature during working hours in areas where the
actual work of employees is performed, such as offices,
warehouses, schools, police stations, fire stations, and any
similar public installation. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the distribution of literature during the employee's
lunch or in such areas not specifically devoted to the
performance of the employee's official duties.

(3) Instigating or advocating support, in any positive manner, for
an employee organization's activities from high school or
grade school students during classroom time.

B. The circuit courts of this state shall have jurisdiction to enforce the
provisions of this section by injunction and contempt proceedings if
necessary. An employee who is convicted of a violation of any
provision of this section may be discharged or otherwise disciplined
by the Employer notwithstanding further provisions of any collective
bargaining agreement.

Cc. No employee organization shall directly or indirectly pay any fines or
penalties assessed against individuals pursuant to the provisions of
this article.
43

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

The Employer and the F.O.P. agree that the basic intent of this Agreement
is to provide a fair day's work in return for a fair day's pay and to provide
conditions of employment suitable to maintaining a competent work
force. The Employer and the F.O.P. affirm their joint opposition to any
discriminatory practices in connection with employment, promotion,
training, or assignment, remembering that the public interest requires the
full utilization of employees’ skill and ability without regard to race, color,
creed, national origin, marital status, or gender.

10
5.1

5.2

5.3

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 5: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

It is the right of the Employer to determine unilaterally the purpose of each
of its constituent agencies, set standards of service to be offered to the
public, and exercise control and discretion over its organization and
operations, including the right to subcontract. It is also the right of the
Employer to direct its employees, take disciplinary action for proper
cause, and relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for
other legitimate reasons by seniority provided, however, that the exercise
of such rights shall not preclude employees or their representatives from
raising grievances, should decision on the above matters have the
practical consequences of violating the terms and conditions of this
collective bargaining agreement.

Whenever it is determined that Civil Emergency conditions exist, including
riots, civil disorders, hurricane conditions, or similar catastrophes, or when
such conditions can reasonably be determined to be imminent, excluding
the normal operational requirements of major civic/sporting events such
as the Super Bowl, the provisions of this Agreement may be suspended by
the Mayor and/or Sheriff during the time of the declared emergency
provided that wage rates and monetary fringe benefits shall not be
suspended.

No provision of this Agreement shall affect the City of Jacksonville's right

and ability to classify employees as exempt from coverage by the Fair
Labor Standards Act.

11
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 6: SPECIAL MEETINGS

The Employer and the F.O.P. agree to meet and confer on matters of mutual
interest upon the written request of either party. The written request shall state
the matter or matters to be discussed and the reason(s) for requesting the
meeting. Discussion shall be limited to matters set forth in the request or other
subjects mutually agreed to, but it is understood that these special meetings
shall not be used to renegotiate this Agreement. Such special meetings shall be
held within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of the written request and at a
time and place mutually agreeable to the parties. The F.O.P. shall have the right,
at these special meetings to recommend to the Employer corrections to any
inequities known to the F.O.P.

13
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14

 
7.1

7.2

7.3

7.4

7.5

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 7: BULLETIN BOARDS

The F.O.P. shall be provided partial use of suitable bulletin boards,
including at least one (1) in each division so designated by the Employer.
The F.0.P. may if it so desires, provide a bulletin board, of standard size, for
its own exclusive use in keeping with the decor of the above locations
and with the approval of the Employer. In addition, the F.O.P. will be
provided with centralized electronic posting (“electronic bulletin board”)
within the JSO system, for the same purpose.

The F.O.P. agrees that it shall use space on bulletin boards provided for in
Section 7.1 above only for the following purposes:

 

Notices of F.O.P. meetings

Elections of F.O.P. Officers

Reports of F.O.P. committees

Rulings and policies of the F.O.P.
Recreational and social affairs of the F.O.P.
Notices by public bodies

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Before they are posted, copies of all material, notices, or announcements
shall be submitted to the Employer.

No material, notices, or announcements shall be posted by the F.O.P.
which contain anything political or controversial, or anything adversely
reflecting upon the City of Jacksonville, its officials, managers, consultants,
or agents, its independent agencies, its employees, or any other labor
organization. Any proven violation of this section by the F.O.P. shall entitle
the Employer to cancel immediately the provisions of this Section and to
remove that bulletin board or the partial use thereof.

Notices or other information intended for the JSO electronic bulletin board
shall be submitted on acceptable electronic medium to the JSO Chief of
Personnel or designee for approval as to compliance with 7.2 before
being posted. Notices or other information intended for the electronic
bulletin board shall include a specific date on which the notice or
information is to be automatically deleted from the electronic bulletin
board. Approved materials will be posted electronically as soon as
practicable.

15
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16

 
8.1

8.2

8.3

8.4

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 8: WORK RULES

Reissuance of Conflicting Written Directives

On or before sixty (60) days after City Council approval of this Agreement,
all written directives issued by the Office of the Sheriff that are in conflict
with the terms and provisions of this Agreement shall be reissued so that
no conflicts exist between written directives and the terms of this
Agreement.

Notice and Scheduling of In-Service Training

It shall be the policy of the Office of the Sheriff wnenever possible to give
at least ten (10) working days’ notice to employees scheduled for in-
service training and to schedule employees on the midnight shift for such
training after regular days off (RDO’s) have been observed. It is
recognized, however, that last minute changes are often necessitated
due to unanticipated sickness, court subpoenas, family situations, etc.,
and such situations may reduce the notification time in some cases.

Emergency Situation Meals

In accordance with the Master Plan for Emergency Control of the Office
of the Sheriff, employees who are required or ordered to work more than
twelve (12) hours on a single tour of duty, due to a declared emergency,
shall be furnished a hot meal on the second and each succeeding day,
within the twelve (12) hour tour of duty. The Office of the Sheriff will make
a reasonable effort to designate a safe and secure area near the
emergency area for employees to consume this meal. On the first day of
said emergency situation, a reasonable effort will be made to furnish
affected employees a hot meal within their twelve (12) hour tour of duty.

The F.O.P. recognizes the value to the general public of allowing
representatives from reserve/auxiliary or police associated organizations
to ride in police vehicles with regular officers, and will cooperate with the
Office of the Sheriff in promoting these programs. Other organizations or
individuals may also be included in the plan, all for the benefit of law
enforcement in general and for the Office of the Sheriff in particular.

Any Police Officer who does not wish to ride with a particular individual
may decline to do so by notifying his/her commanding officer through an
Inter-department Correspondence (P-004). The correspondence shall
outline the specific reasons for not wanting to ride with the individual
which shall be forwarded to the JSO Chief of Personnel. This refusal is for
information only and will not become part of the employee's personnel
file or be used for purposes of disciplinary action and approval of such
request will not be unduly withheld.

17
8.5

8.6

8.7

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Members of the reserve unit or of other police departments shall not be
allowed to perform any policing functions, unless such member is under
the direct supervision and control of a certified Police Officer, nor will a
member of such unit wear or display rank greater than that of a certified
Police Officer with whom he/she is assigned to provided, however, that
should the Office of the Sheriff declare an emergency to exist, the above
provisions shall not apply for the duration of such emergency.

Transfers

It shall be the sole right of the Office of the Sheriff to transfer employees
between any subsections of the organization, based upon operational
needs. Employees shall be notified at least ten (10) calendar days prior to
the transfer, except where the nature of a particular situation requires
immediate reassignment.

Administrative Leave Without Loss of Pay

An employee may be placed on administrative leave without loss of pay
for any reason deemed necessary by the Sheriff's Office.

18
9.1

9.2

9.3

9.4

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 9: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

A grievance is defined as a dispute involving the interpretation or
application of this Agreement. Any grievance filed shall refer to the
provision(s) of this Agreement alleged to have been violated, and shall
adequately set forth the facts pertaining to the alleged violation and the
remedy sought. Grievances challenging demotion with loss of pay,
suspension with loss of pay or termination shall be filed at Step IV.

In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Article, the
day of the act, event, or default from which the designated period of
time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so
computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday
recognized by this Agreement, in which event the period shall run until the
end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday
recognized by this Agreement.

Step 1:

Within ten (10) days of the occurrence or within ten (10) days after the
employee could reasonably have known of the occurrence (whichever is
later), the aggrieved employee shall reduce his/her grievance to writing,
sign it, and present it to the Assistant Chief or his/ner designee. The
Assistant Chief or designee shall obtain the facts concerning the
grievance and shall within ten (10) days of receipt of the grievance
conduct a meeting with the grievant and the grievant's representative.
The grievant may be accompanied at this meeting by an F.O.P.
representative. The Assistant Chief or designee shall submit a written
response to the grievant (with a copy to the F.O.P.) not later than ten (10)
days following the Step 1 meeting.

Step 2:

If the grievance is not settled at the first step, the grievant may present the
grievance to the Division Chief or his/her designee. The grievance must
be presented to the Division Chief or his/her designee within five (5) days
of receipt of the Step 1 response or, if a timely Step 1 response is not
received, within five (5) days from the day the Step 1 response was due.
The Division Chief or designee shall obtain the facts concerning the
grievance and shall within ten (10) days of receipt of the grievance
conduct a meeting with the grievant and the grievant's representative.
The grievant may be accompanied at this meeting by an F.O.P.
representative. The Division Chief or designee shall submit a written
response to the grievant (with a copy to the F.O.P.) not later than ten (10)
days following the Step 2 meeting.

19
9.5

9.6

9.7

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS
Step 3:

If the grievance is not settled at the second step, the grievant may
present the grievance to the Director or his/her designee. The grievance
must be presented to the Director or his/her designee within five (5) days
of receipt of

the Step 2 response or, if a timely Step 2 response is not received, within
five (5) days from the day the Step 2 response was due. The Director or
designee shall obtain the facts concerning the grievance and shall within
ten (10) days of receipt of the grievance conduct a meeting with the
grievant and the grievant's representative. The grievant may be
accompanied at this meeting by an F.O.P. representative. The Director or
designee shall submit a written response to the grievant (with a copy to
the F.O.P.) not later than ten (10) days following the Step 3 meeting.

Step 4:

If the grievance is not settled at the third step, the grievant may present
the grievance to the Sheriff or his/her designee within five (5) days of
receipt of the Step 3 response or, if a timely Step 3 response is not
received, within five (5) days from the day the Step 3 response was due.
Within ten (10) days of receipt of the grievance, the Sheriff or designee
shall conduct a meeting with the grievant and the grievant's
representative. The grievant may be accompanied at this meeting by an
F.O.P. representative. The Sheriff or designee shall submit a written
response to the grievant (with a copy to the F.O.P.) not later than ten (10)
days following the Step 4 meeting.

Arbitration:

A. If the grievance is not settled in accordance with this Article, the
grievant or the F.O.P. (on behalf of the grievant) may request
arbitration by providing a written request to the JSO Chief of
Personnel (with a copy to the City’s Director of Employee Services)
not later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the Step 4 response or,
if a timely Step 4 response is not received, within thirty (30) days from
the day the Step 4 response was due. The request shall set forth the
specific provision(s) of the Agreement claimed to have been
violated. If the request to arbitrate is not received by the JSO Chief
of Personnel within the thirty (30) day limit, the Employer's Step 4
response shall be final and binding upon the grievant and the F.O.P.

B. In the event the grievant submits the request for arbitration without
the financial support of the F.O.P., the grievant shall also submit
written notice of his/her intent to pay all applicable costs of the
arbitration. The grievant shall provide the Employer with written
confirmation that sufficient funds are reserved in trust or escrow for
the payment of arbitration services before the arbitration shall be
allowed to proceed.

20
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

(1) The F.0.P. and the Employer will mutually select a panel of
five (5) qualified arbitrators to serve on a rotating list. The
arbitrators selected must reside in Duval, Nassau, Clay, Baker,
or St. Johns County. The rotation sequence shall be randomly
determined by the F.O.P. and the Employer. The first arbitrator
on the rotation sequence shall be assigned to the first
grievance advanced to arbitration, with succeeding cases
assigned to the remaining arbitrators seriatim. Once the
rotation sequence has been determined, an arbitrator
cannot be assigned out of rotation unless mutually agreed by
both parties. The parties may also mutually agree at any time
to remove an arbitrator from the panel.

(2) Upon ratification of this Agreement, the F.O.P. and Employer
shall identify two (2) existing arbitrators as having four-year
terms and two (2) existing arbitrators as having two-year terms
each, commencing from January 1, 2012. Upon completing
the term limits of the two-year arbitrators, their successors shall
each have four (4) year term limits, as will all other panelists
thereafter. The parties agree that all arbitrators shall complete
their panel assignments regardless of their term limits.

(3) The F.O.P. has the right within sixty (60) days following
ratification of all F.0.P. bargaining agreements to strike one
(1) of the panelists existing as of January 1, 2012. The parties
shall then appoint the retired Fourth Judicial Circuit judge with
AAA credentials into the slot vacated by the stricken panelist.
This retired, but newly appointed arbitrator shall maintain the
same term limit as that of the vacating panel arbitrator.

 

Once an arbitrator has been notified of his/her grievance
assignment, the date for the arbitration hearing will be set as soon
as practicable.

The parties shall rotate the administrative responsibilities for
maintenance of the arbitration system on an annual basis.

All testimony given at the arbitration hearing shall be under oath.

Post-hearing briefs may be filed at the request of either party or the
arbitrator.

The arbitrator shall render his/her decision within thirty (30) days of
receipt of post-hearing briefs or of the close of the hearing,
whichever is later.

The arbitrator shall have jurisdiction and authority to decide the
grievance, as defined in this Article. However, the arbitrator shall
have no authority to change, modify, amend, ignore, add to,
subtract from, or otherwise alter or supplement the Agreement or
any part thereof or any amendment thereto.

21
9.8

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

J. The arbitrator shall consider only the specific issue(s) submitted to
him/her in writing by the parties, and shall have no authority to
consider or rule upon any matter which is stated in this Agreement
not to be subject to arbitration, or which is not specifically covered
by this Agreement.

K. The arbitrator's decision shall be exclusively based upon specific
findings of fact and conclusions which shall be the predicate for
any decision. In rendering any decision, the arbitrator shall only
consider the written, oral, or documentary evidence submitted at
the hearing.

L. The arbitrator may not issue declaratory or advisory opinions. The
arbitrator shall be confined exclusively to the issue(s) presented to
him/her, which issue(s) must be actual and existing.

M. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on al
parties, subject to those challenges permitted by law. However, the
authority and responsibility of the Employer as provided by Chapter
447, Florida Statutes, and the Charter of the City of Jacksonville shall
not be usurped in any manner unless specifically amended or
modified by this Agreement.

N. Each party shall bear the cost of its own witnesses and
representatives. The parties shall bear equally the cost of the
arbitrator. Any party requesting a copy of the transcript of the
arbitration hearing shall bear the cost of it. Any employee who acts
independently of or in disregard of the position of the F.O.P. shal
pay his/her own share of the arbitrator's cost and expense.

oO. Election of Remedies: It is specifically and expressly understood tha
taking a grievance to arbitration constitutes an election of remedies
and a waiver of any and all rights by the appealing party and al
persons whom it represents. No employee shall file an appeal
under this agreement concerning any matter that he/she has
previously appealed through the Civil Service and Personnel Rules
and Regulations.

 

Any grievance not processed within the time limits provided in this Article
shall be considered abandoned. Provided, however, the time limits set
forth in this Article may be extended by joint agreement of the Employer
and the F.O.P. (or the employee if appropriate) which is confirmed in
writing. The parties may mutually agree in writing to waive any time limits
or provisions of the grievance procedure.

22
10.1

10.2

10.3

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 10: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE

All discipline taken against any bargaining unit employee shall be for
proper cause. The procedure for dismissals, demotions, and suspensions
shall be as outlined in the City of Jacksonville Civil Service and Personnel
Rules and Regulations and the Florida Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of
Rights, Section 112.532, Florida Statutes, as in effect upon signing of this
Agreement unless modified in this Agreement. Should the Florida Law
Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights be repealed (Section 112.532, Florida
Statutes), said repeal will not affect or modify the provisions of this section.

Police recruits and entry level probationary Police Officers (as opposed to
police sergeants on promotional probation) who are dismissed from
employment shall have no right to a Civil Service Board hearing, or to
appeal pursuant to this Agreement.

A. Disciplinary Hearing Board

There shall be established a Sheriff's Disciplinary Hearing Board for
the purpose of such hearings. Said Board shall be composed of five
(5) members, with two (2) members being selected by the
administration, two (2) members being selected by the aggrieved
officer; and the fifth member being selected by the other four (4)
members. The Board members shall be law enforcement officers
who are currently employed by JSO. No member of this Board shall
be a relative of the aggrieved officer, as defined by the Civil
Service Board rules. The hearing will be informal. Neither the
aggrieved officer nor the Employer shall utilize an attorney for the
presentation during the informal hearing proceedings. During the
hearing, the aggrieved officer will be provided the opportunity to
respond to the charges against him/her, and to tell his/her side of
he story. The aggrieved officer shall be permitted to provide a list
of witnesses, and present evidence as part of a defense. Any
member of the board may request, through the chairperson, to call
upon the witnesses provided to give testimony germane to the
events leading to the charges being levied. The Board will review
he information presented during the informal hearing, and consider
he JSO disciplinary standards, and then make a recommendation
o the Sheriff about the level of discipline (if any) that it believes
should be imposed in the case. The Board's decision will be
advisory and not binding upon the Sheriff. If the decision of the
Sheriff is unsatisfactory to the aggrieved officer, he/she may appeal
his decision to the Civil Service Board within ten (10) days, or
request arbitration within five (5) working days, as provided in Article
9.6 Step IV. It is agreed that the convening of the Sheriff's
Department Hearing Board shall be effectuated as expeditiously as
possible following the charges being levied against the aggrieved

 

 

23
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

officer. Should the accused officer request to continue the hearing
or delay its convening, then it is agreed that the officer waives
his/her emoluments in exchange for the continuance of the
hearing.

No suspension with loss of pay shall be implemented until any
requested civil service or arbitration hearing has been held and an
opinion rendered, except as provided for in Article 13. (This shall not
apply to terminations).

24
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 11: BILL OF RIGHTS

11.1. Whenever a law enforcement officer is under investigation and subject to
interrogation or interview by members of his/her agency for any reason
which could lead to disciplinary action, demotion, or dismissal, such
interrogation shall be conducted under the following conditions:

A.

he interrogation or interview shall be conducted at a reasonable
hour, preferably at a time when the law enforcement officer is on
duty, unless the seriousness of the investigation is of such a degree
hat immediate action is required.

he interrogation or interview shall take place either at the Office of
nternal Investigations or at the office of the police unit in which the
incident allegedly occurred as designated by the investigating
officer or agency.

he law enforcement officer under investigation shall be informed
of the rank, name, and command of the officer in charge of the
investigation, the interrogating officer, and all persons present
during the interrogation or interview. All questions directed to the
officer under interrogation or interview shall be asked by and
hrough one (1) interrogator at any one (1) time.

he law enforcement officer under investigation shall be informed in
writing of the nature of the investigation prior to any interrogation or
interview and the officer shall be informed of the name(s) of all
complainants.

nterrogating sessions or interviews shall be for reasonable periods
and shall be timed to allow for such personal necessities and rest
periods as are reasonably necessary.

 

he law enforcement officer under investigation or interview shall
not be subjected to offensive language or threatened with transfer,
dismissal, or disciplinary action. No promise or reward shall be
made as an inducement to answer any questions.

he entire interrogation or interview of a law enforcement officer,
including the times of all recess periods, shall be recorded!, and
here shall be no unrecorded questions or statements. A copy of the
recorded interrogation or interview shall be provided upon request
within 72 hours following the interrogation or interview.

 

1 “Recorded” shall mean any of the following: taking of statement by audio tape, videotape or
by a court stenographer. However, the parties recognize that any officer conducting or
observing an interview may take handwritten notes.

25
H.

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

If the law enforcement officer under interrogation or interview is
under arrest, or is likely to be placed under arrest as a result of the
interrogation or interview, the officer shall be completely informed
of all his/her rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation
or interview.

At the request of any law enforcement officer under investigation,
he/she shall have the right to be represented by counsel or any
other representative of his/ner choice, who shall be present at all
times during such interrogation or interview.

The law enforcement officer who is a subject of a complaint or
allegation shall be notified in writing by the Internal Investigation
section of the disposition of the complaint or allegation upon the
conclusion of the investigation. The investigation shall be concluded
with the finding of sustained, not sustained, exonerated, or
unfounded.

Any law enforcement officer who is the subject of an investigation
or interview has the right to review, along with his/her
representative, the complaint or allegation and all written and/or
recorded statements, regardless of form, made by _ the
complainant(s) and witness(es) immediately prior to the beginning
of the interview.

Whenever practical, any officer who is the subject of an

investigation will be interviewed or interrogated after all other
known witnesses and complainants have been interviewed.

26
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 12: COMPREHENSIVE DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE

POLICY AND PROCEDURES

12.1 Mutual Agreement

A.

The Employer and the F.O.P. agree to the promotion of a drug free
workplace through fair and reasonable drug testing methods for
the protection of the City of Jacksonville and its employees. The
drug testing policy of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office is a proactive
approach to a potentially serious problem facing all members of
society. Within the limitations, as outlined in this Article, employees
found to have drug abuse problems will be encouraged to
participate in an employee assistance program or a rehabilitation
program.

It is further agreed that drug use has serious adverse effects upon
users in the work force resulting in the loss of productivity, posing a
threat to the workplace and to public safety and security.
Maintaining a healthy and productive work force and safe working
conditions free from the effects of drugs are the goals of both the
Employer and the F.O.P. It is understood that drug use creates a
variety of workplace problems, including increased injury on the
job, increased absenteeism, and increased financial burdens on
health and benefit programs. Criminal justice work requires and the
safety of the public demands total mental and physical functioning
of employees at all times. The Jacksonville Sheriff's Office has a
responsibility in the interest of public safety to monitor the use and
abuse by employees of controlled substances, and other
drugs/medicines.

The Employer agrees to establish drug testing standards to balance
the interests of the Employer, employees, and the welfare of the
general public through a fair, confidential, and accurate drug
testing program.

 

Employees who feel that they are abusing drugs are encouraged to
contact the Employee Assistance Program for help in overcoming
this problem. Normal agency benefits such as the Employee
Assistance Program, appropriate leave, and the group medical
plan are available to aid in the rehabilitation process. Staff assigned
to the Employee Assistance Program will support employees in this
process by providing referral to the appropriate agency suited to
address the particular need of the employee.

The sale, purchase, transfer, use, or possession of illegal drugs, or
drugs obtained illegally, is a violation of state and federal criminal
statutes and, therefore, may result in termination. Use, or being

27
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

under the influence of alcohol while on duty or while driving a City
vehicle presents a danger to the public, to the officer involved, and
to other officers, and therefore, may result in termination.

In order to maintain the integrity of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office
and to ensure public safety, the Jacksonville Sheriffs Office requires
that all employees shall not:

(1) Abuse legal drugs;

(2) Sell, purchase, transfer, use, or possess illegal drugs, or drugs
obtained illegally;

(3) | Report for work and/or use Sheriff's Office equipment while
under the influence of a legal drug taken as a medication to
the extent that job performance would be affected.

12.2 Discussion

A.

Drug screening provides management with a method to assist in
the detection of a possible problem so that it may be dealt with in
the proper manner.

Drug screening of Sheriff's Office employees is a deterrent to their
becoming involved with drugs. Additionally, it assists management
in its efforts to detect drug problems within the Sheriff's Office. Drug
screening provides an avenue for identifying a specific problem
associated with drug use/abuse.

Personnel are cautioned that drug screening is not an absolute
indicator of drug use. It is a single indicator that must be combined
with other information before a final determination is made. The
drug screening program is interwoven with established Sheriff's
Office policy as it is affected by administrative procedures, internal
investigations, Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights, criminal
investigations, etc. The final determination (e.g. no action,
disciplinary action, treatment or termination) is based on an
accumulation of information and is consistent with the best interest
of the Sheriff's Office and the employee.

12.3 Definitions

A.

Controlled Substance - Any of the substances named in Schedules |
through V of Section 893.03, Florida Statutes, and any "designer
drugs" that may hereafter be proscribed by law and which are
subject to manufacturing, distribution, preparation, dispensation,
and administrative controls.

28
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Employee Assistance Program - A confidential program designed to
assist employees and their families with a multitude of problems that
may affect the employee's work performance. Employees may
volunteer for the program or be referred to it by their supervisors.

Confirmation Test - An additional analytical procedure used to
identify the presence of a specific drug or metabolite in a
specimen. The confirmation test must be different in scientific
principle from that of the initial test procedure. The confirmation
method must be capable of providing requisite specificity,
sensitivity, and quantitative accuracy.

Illegal Drug - Any drug or substance, including controlled
substances, the possession of which without a prescription is defined
as a violation of state or federal statutes; or any prescription drug
that was not prescribed to the affected employee by a person
licensed to issue such prescription.

Legal Drugs - Any prescription medication or any over-the-counter
medication that has some medicinal value/purpose and is being
used by the person for whom it was prescribed.

Substance Abuse - The excessive or erratic ingestion, consumption,
inhalation, or injection of any illegal drug or legally obtained drug or
medicine not in prescribed amounts or at proper time intervals.

Use of Drugs - The injection, inhalation, ingestion, or consumption of
any drug, whether prescription or non-prescription, or any
controlled substance as defined under Florida law.

“Under the Influence” - A condition in which employees are unable
to appropriately perform their duties because of the use of any
drug, controlled substance, or alcohol. Employees shall be deemed
to be under the influence if they are physically or mentally impaired
and/or unable to perform their duties in an acceptable manner.

12.4 Responsibility for Reporting Legal Drug Use

A.

Sheriff's Office employees using drugs or therapeutic treatments
prescribed by a physician or other authorized health practitioner
shall determine from the prescribing person whether the treatment
prescribed has any effects which may interfere with the
performance of their duties. If the treatment prescribed has such
effects, employees shall inform their supervisors of that fact.

29
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Any Sheriffs Office employee using legal over-the-counter non-
prescription drugs which in any way impair or affect his/her job
performance is responsible for bringing this fact to the attention of
his/her immediate supervisors on Form P-004. Information relating to
he use of over-the-counter drugs can be removed at the request
of the employee after it has been in the medical file for six (6)
months, unless the usage of such medication is part of on-going
reatment.

he supervisor of any employee, upon being informed that such
employee is using over-the-counter or prescription drugs which
could interfere with the performance of his/her duties shall make
further inquiries to determine whether the employee is fit to perform
hose duties. Upon consultation with his/her commanding officer,
he supervisor will decide whether the employee is fit for duty. If
unfit, the employee shall be placed on personal leave. Should the
employee and the commanding officer not concur on the ability of
he employee to perform his/her duties, the department staff duty
officer will make the final determination. Information regarding the
use of legal drugs being taken by an employee will be forwarded to
he JSO Personnel Division where it will be maintained in a
confidential medical file.

 

All Sheriff's Office employees have an obligation to inform a
supervisor or ranking officer if another employee is using drugs in
violation of the law or Sheriff's Office Rules and Regulations.

If any employee knowingly ingests any drug in the performance of
his/her duties, the supervisor on duty will be immediately notified
and the incident reported on Form P-004. The supervisor will see that
the employee is provided with immediate medical attention if
necessary. The employee will be placed on an appropriate duty
status. The incident will be documented with the initiation of Form P-
004 to be followed by a detailed report from the employee's
commander through channels to the Sheriff. Every effort should be
made to avoid such ingestion. Unless employees’ lives are
endangered, they will refrain from the consumption, ingestion,
injection, or inhalation of a substance which may either physically or
mentally be dangerous to employees.

Employees knowingly subjected to the passive inhalation of a drug,
such as marijuana, will submit a Form P-004 to the supervisor on
duty. The report will indicate the substance the individual was
exposed to, the period of time exposed, and give a brief statement
explaining the necessity for the exposure. The report will be
forwarded to the Sheriff for review.

30
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

12.5 Drug Screening Program

A.

The Employer shall post a notice of the department's drug testing
policy on bulletin boards in areas that are accessible to employees.

Urine testing of employees can be an effective means by which to
identify those in need of counseling, treatment, or disciplinary
action. The testing program is intended to supplement, not
replace, other means by which the use of drugs can be detected.

Employees will be required to participate in the drug testing
program under the following conditions:

Q)

When there is a reasonable suspicion that an employee is
using, under the influence of or in possession of illegal drugs,
or is using or under the influence of alcohol while on duty, or
that the employee is abusing alcohol or illegal drugs and the
abuse either adversely affects his/her job performance or
represents a threat to the safety of the employee, coworkers,
or the public. Reasonable suspicion drug/alcohol testing can
be ordered by any supervisor with the approval of a
commanding officer (lieutenant or above). An immediate
supervisor requesting a drug/alcohol test founded on
reasonable suspicion should consider among such facts and
inferences:

(a) Observable behavior while at work, such as direct
observation of drug/alcohol use or of the physical
symptoms or manifestations of being under the
influence of a drug/alcohol.

(b) Abnormal conduct or erratic behavior while at work or
a significant deterioration in work performance.

(c) Areport of drug/alcohol use provided by a reliable and
credible source which has been independently
corroborated with observable behavior.

(d) Evidence that the employee has tampered with a
drug/alcohol test during his/her employment with the
Employer.

(e) Information that an employee has caused or
contributed to an accident while at work combined
with observable behavior indicating the possibility that
drug/alcohol usage may be involved.

31
(f)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold,
solicited, or transferred drugs, or used or been under the
influence of alcohol, while working or while on the Employer's
premises or while operating the Employer's vehicle,
machinery, or equipment.

Following a serious accident or incident in which safety
precautions were violated or unusually careless acts were
performed and there is reasonable suspicion to believe these
actions were the result of using drugs.

Routine fitness for duty: The Employer will require a drug test
any time an employee is referred to a_ physician or
psychologist for a fitness for duty examination.

Random Drug Testing Program: As part of the Sheriff's Office
random drug testing program each employee of the
bargaining unit will be randomly assigned a number that will
be the only source identifying the individual submitting a
sample for drug testing.

Follow-up testing: Should an employee in the course of
employment enter, or be required by the Employer to enter,
into an employee assistance program for drug-related
problems, the Employer may require the employee to submit
to a drug test as a follow up to the program for up to two (2)
years thereafter.

When an employee is found in possession of illicit drugs or
when illicit drugs are found in an area controlled or used
exclusively by the employee.

During basic recruit training and prior to completion of an
employee's probation.

When an employee is transferred into, during the assignment,
and when transferred from the SWAT Team, Bomb Squad, or
any specialized unit where, during the assignment, the
employee will be involved with narcotic investigations and/or
have access to illicit drugs.

As part of a rehabilitation program (mutually agreed to by

the affected employee and_ the _ Sheriffs Office
Administration).

32
(10)

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

As a result of prior disciplinary proceedings against the
employee related to the use of drugs. (Such testing shall be
conducted by the Internal Affairs Unit with the approval of,
and in coordination with, the JSO Chief of Personnel. The
Employer may require the employee to submit to a drug test
as a follow up to the disciplinary action for up to two (2) years
thereafter.

12.6 Procedure for Testing

A. Drug Testing Responsibility

Q)

(2)

The JSO Personnel Division shall be responsible for drug testing
of employees under-going basic recruit training, probationary
Police Officers, and employees selected through the random
drug testing program.

The Internal Affairs Unit shall be responsible for drug testing of
any employee whom it reasonably suspects has used or is
found to be in possession of a drug, or other controlled
substance in violation of the law, Sheriff's Office orders, and
rules and regulations. The Internal Affairs Unit shall also
conduct drug testing of employees as the result of prior
disciplinary proceedings related to the use of drugs.

B. Confidentiality

Q)

(2)

(3)

All information, interviews, reports, statements, memoranda,
and drug test results, written or otherwise, received by the
Employer through a drug testing program are confidential
communications.

The release of information obtained through any of the drug
testing programs shall be solely pursuant to a written consent
form signed voluntarily by the person tested except where
such release is compelled by a hearing officer, a court of
competent jurisdiction, pursuant to an appeal taken under
this section, or when required for a departmental Disciplinary
Hearing Board, arbitration, or Civil Service Board proceeding.
Drug testing information shall also be released to the Bureau
of Criminal Justice Standards and Training for the purpose of
reviewing certification eligibility.

Any employee authorizing the release of drug testing
information must submit a signed communication to the JSO
Chief of Personnel advising:

(a) The name of the person who is authorized to obtain the
information,

33
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

(b) The purpose of the disclosure,
(c) The precise information to be disclosed, and
(d) The duration of the consent.
(4) The Employer shall use drug test results when consulting with
legal counsel in connection with actions brought under or

related to this Article or where the information is relevant to
the Employer's defense in a civil or administrative matter.

12.7. Testing Procedures

A.

The Employer shall pay the cost of all drug tests which are required
of employees. Employees shall pay the costs of any additional drug
tests not required by the Employer.

Prior to taking a drug test, employees must advise the Employer of
any prescription or non-prescription medications they are taking.
The Employer will provide information to the employee of the most
common medications by brand or common name which may alter
or affect a drug test. Employees will also be advised of all drugs for
which the Employer will test, described by brand or common
names, as applicable, as well as by chemical names. Information
regarding the use of prescription or non-prescription drugs taken by
the employee will be presented in a written communication that will
be maintained in a confidential medical file in the JSO Personnel
Division. The ingestion of any prescription or non-prescription drug
by an employee shall not preclude the administration of the drug
test, but shall be taken into account in interpreting any positive
confirmed results.

Individuals responsible for conducting drug tests are acting under
the direct authority of the Sheriff. Employees being tested shall
cooperate fully. Any attempt to alter or tamper with the specimen,
its container, or any mechanical device, instrument, or document
by any individual is grounds for termination and/or prosecution
under applicable Florida Statutes.

The Employer will establish guidelines for the collection of drug test
samples that will afford protection to the employee to include:

(1) Specimens shall be collected with due regard to the privacy
of the individual providing the specimen and in a manner
reasonably calculated to prevent substitution or
contamination of the sample.

34
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

(2) Specimen collection shall be documented and_ the
documentation procedures shall include:

(a) Labeling of specimen containers to reasonably
preclude the likelinood of erroneous identification of
est results.

(b) Specimen collection, storage, and transportation to the
esting site shall be performed in a manner which will
reasonably preclude specimen contamination or
adulteration.

(c) he Employer shall use a chain of custody procedure to
ensure the proper record keeping, handling, labeling,
and identification of all specimens to be tested.

When an employee is required to provide specimens for a testing
procedure, the employee shall provide one (1) specimen (large
enough to be divided into two (2) separate samples at the time of
collection in order to facilitate the testing procedures).

The threshold level or cut-off limit of the analytical testing
procedures shall be established in accordance with the State of
Florida Agency for Health Care Administration in conjunction with
the standards developed by the Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), regarding testing and
protocol and procedures.

 

When employees are required to participate in any of the drug
testing procedures, the initial testing specimen will be subject to an
EMIT (Enzyme Multiple Immunoassay Technique). If the results of the
initial test are negative, no further testing will be done.

(1) Employees selected for random drug testing will be assigned
a number which will be the only means available of
identifying the individual who provided the specimen.

(2) | Random numbers assigned to employees will be maintained
in a confidential file under the direct supervision of the JSO
Chief of Personnel.

(3) Specimen collection will not be taken at any of the
correctional housing facilities and the specimen container will
not reveal the name of the contributing employee.

The Employer will use the Evidential Breath Testing Device
(EBT) to test for the presence of alcohol in an employee's
system. The test will be performed by a Certified Breath

35
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Analyzer Technician (BAT) using a EBT approved by the
National Highway Safety Administration. If the initial test
registers an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater, a
confirmation test will be performed. The employee will be
placed in a separate room under the observation of the BAT
for at least 15 minutes, but not more than 20 minutes, after
which he/she will be given a confirmation EBT.

Random drug testing conducted by the Employer may occur
before, during, or immediately after the regular work period of the
employee, and shall be compensated in accordance with this
Agreement.

The Internal Affairs Unit shall be called whenever one or more of the
circumstances described in Article 12.6(A)(2) comes to the
attention of members of the Sheriff's Office.

(1) Once called, the Internal Affairs Unit shall have complete
authority over the investigation.

(2) |The employee shall be advised in writing of the reason(s) for
the order to submit to the test and that failure to do so
constitutes failure to obey a direct order.

12.8 Results of Test

A.

If the results of the initial test are positive, the Employer will submit
the sample for a confirmation test using a GC/MS (Gas
Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry) test or other method
specified by DHHS Guidelines to verify the initial test results that will
be conducted by an outside licensed laboratory capable of
supplying an analysis of drug content. When a confirmation test is
necessary, the Employer will ensure the proper storage and
transportation of the specimen to a licensed laboratory for
processing.

After receipt of a positive confirmed test result from the testing
laboratory, the Employer shall inform the employee of the positive
test result, the possible consequences of such results, and the
options available to the employee.

The Employer shall provide to the employee, upon written request,
acopy of the confirmation test results.

Within ten (10) working days after receiving notice of a positive
confirmed test result, the employee may submit information to the
Employer explaining or contesting the test results, and why the
results do not constitute a violation of the Employer's policy.

36
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

All reports of positive test results shall be received by the JSO Chief
of Personnel and maintained in a confidential medical file.

12.9 Disciplinary Procedures

A.

Any employee who refuses to submit to a drug test or whose
confirmation drug test is found to be positive is subject to
disciplinary action. Such disciplinary action is subject to the
grievance procedures provided for through Article 9 of this
Agreement and the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and
Regulations.

The employee may be either immediately suspended or reassigned
pending the results of the confirmation test for the use of illegal
drugs.

Positive confirmation tests for illegal drugs shall result in the
immediate suspension of an employee which may be followed by
termination proceedings. In appropriate cases, every effort will be
made to help the employee deal with a legal drug problem by
proper referral to the Sheriff's Employee Assistance Program.
However, if this effort fails or is obviously inappropriate given the
nature of the problem, appropriate disciplinary action shall be
initiated.

The Employer may discipline or discharge an employee on the sole
basis of the employee's first positive confirmed drug test when the
employee has either refused to participate in an employee
assistance program or a drug rehabilitation program, as evidenced
by withdrawal from the program before its completion, or a report
from the program indicating unsatisfactory compliance; or by a
positive test result on a confirmation test while participating in or
after completion of the program.

37
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

The Employer shall discipline an employee, subject to termination
proceedings, who has failed or refused to sign a written consent
form allowing the Employer to obtain information regarding the
progress and successful completion of an employee assistance
program or a drug rehabilitation program.

Employees participating in an employee assistance program or a
drug rehabilitation program may be considered as being in a
temporary limited duty status.

The Employer shall not discharge or discipline an employee solely
upon voluntarily seeking treatment, while under the employ of the
Employer, for a drug-related problem if the employee has not
previously tested positive for drug use, entered an employee
assistance program for drug-related problems, or entered a drug
rehabilitation program. However, the Employer shall terminate an
employee when the presence of illicit drugs is confirmed.
Employees who have been tested may not use this aspect of the
Agreement as a means of protection from disciplinary action.

12.10 All laboratory Reports of a Drug Test Shall include:

A.

The name and address of the laboratory which performed the test
and the positive identification of the person tested (not the
employee's social security number), or if applicable, the random
number.

Positive results of confirmation tests.

A list of the drugs for which the drug analyses were conducted.

The type of tests conducted and the minimum cut-off levels of the
tests.

Any correlation between medications reported by the employee
and the confirmation test results.

38
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 13: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION

13.1 The Sheriff, or designee, may impose an immediate suspension without
pay in advance of the conclusion of any of the procedures set forth in the
grievance and arbitration article or in the Civil Service and Personnel Rules
and Regulations in the following cases:

A. When an employee has been arrested on a felony charge (other
than arrests for incidents occurring in the "good faith" performance
of their duties, such as accidental shootings);

B. When an employee fails a substance abuse test (with confirmation);

Cc. When an employee fails to obey a lawful direct order from a
superior officer; or

D. When an employee is a danger to himself/herself or others.

13.2 The immediate emergency suspension without pay must be issued by the
Division Chief or above.

13.3 Upon request of the employee, within the next business day after an
immediate emergency suspension, the employee will be afforded the
opportunity to meet with the assigned Division Chief for the purpose of
coordinating a meeting between the Sheriff or designee and the
employee to determine any further action that may be taken.

39
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

40

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 14: FILES

14.1 Files that contain the following information will be purged on the following
schedule:

A.

Formal Investigations - Cases which are unfounded, exonerated, or
not sustained - one (1) year from the date of case disposition.

Sustained Formal Investigations cases involving written reprimand
without suspension - three (3) years from the date of case
disposition.

Sustained Formal Investigations - cases involving written reprimand
with suspension or loss of pay - five (5) years from the date of the
case disposition.

Formal Counselings will be purged one (1) year from the date of
issue. Official records of Formal Counseling will be maintained in the
employee's division file, and not in the Internal Affairs unit. The
employee's division file will follow the employee as that employee is
reassigned throughout the agency.

Officers will be notified after their cases have been purged.

Files and other materials purged pursuant to this section may not be
used as evidence by either party in any disciplinary or grievance
proceeding or hearing.

Upon completion of any internal investigation, the officer on whom
the complaint was made shall be notified. Should the internal file be
requested by any public party, every reasonable effort will be
made to notify the involved officer(s) as to who the requesting party
is, and the date and time as to when the file will be made
available. If, however, said officer(s) cannot be notified within
twenty-four (24) hours, the requested information will be provided
within the limits of governing statutes, court orders, etc. In such
cases, officers will be notified that information from their files was
released. | When the Employer provides access to the internal
investigation “Final Action Report” pursuant to a public record
request, the Employer will also provide the party requesting access
to the record(s) a written definition of the terms used to describe
the disposition of the internal investigation(s). (Reference Schedule
B)

14.2. The Employer will comply with applicable court orders and Section
119.07(3) (I), Florida Statutes, and until otherwise directed by court order,
will not reveal the home address, telephone number, social security

41
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

number, or photograph of active or former law enforcement personnel;
the home address, telephone number, social security number,
photograph, or places of employment of the spouses and children of
such personnel; and the names and locations of the schools and day
care facilities attended by the children of such personnel.

It shall be the right of any officer, at reasonable times, to inspect and
make a copy of his/her personnel records, internal file, and division file. All
JSO personnel shall keep personnel matters confidential within the terms
of this Article and applicable statutes.

42
15.1

15.2

15.3

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 15: PERSONAL LEAVE PLAN E
Applicability

This article shall apply to all permanent, probationary and provisional
employees of the following categories:

A. Employees hired on or after October 1, 1968 and prior to January

10, 1989;

B. Employees hired prior to October 1, 1968, but chose not to remain
subject to former sick leave and terminal leave policies in April,
1969;

Cc. Employees hired prior to October 1, 1968, who chose on or before
September 30, 1968, to become subject to this provision; and

D. Those employees who select to use their option and participate in
the personal leave plan shall remain in said plan until such time as
this personal leave plan or policy should be changed. Then said
employees shall have the right to exercise their option as to which
plan they wish to participate in.

Leave Accrual Rates

Employees shall accrue personal leave with pay according to the
following schedule on a bi-weekly basis:

Upon Completion of Hours Accrued Per Year
Continuous Service

0 months through 4 years 160
5 years through 9 years 184
10 years through 14 years 208
15 years through 19 years 232
20 years through 24 years 256
25 years or more 280

The rate of accrual shall change to the higher rate at the start of the first
pay period of the month in which the employee's employment
anniversary occurs.

Rollback

Personal leave shall accrue to a maximum of 960 hours. The Employer will
compensate the employees on an hour-for-hour basis for any accrued
amount over 960 hours as of September 30 each year. These payments
may be as early as the second pay day in November, but shall be made

43
15.4

15.5

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

no later than the first pay day in December at the September 30 rate of

pay.

Leave Sellback

A.

An employee who does not use all of the personal leave accrued in
a fiscal year may be paid for all or part of the difference, on a
percentage basis, between the amount of leave used and the
amount of leave accrued for that fiscal year on an hour-for-hour
basis. Payments will be made on the second payday in January at
the September 30 rate of pay.

To receive such payment, the employee must make an irrevocable
election of the percentage to be sold. The election must be made
no later than September 30 of the fiscal year preceding the fiscal
year in which the leave will accrue. Elections shall be made in
accordance with administrative procedures established by the City
of Jacksonville.

Employees otherwise eligible for this option who do not elect to sell
a percentage of leave prior to the deadline will not be permitted to
sell any leave.

This payment will not be available to an employee who would have
less than eighty (80) accrued annual leave hours remaining after
such payment.

Using Leave to Fund Deferred Compensation

The Employer will provide employees eligible to retire the option to use
leave time to fund their Deferred Compensation Program pursuant to the
terms of this article and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations in the
following manner:

A.

An employee who is within 3 years of normal retirement under the
Police and Fire Pension Plan (PFPP,) and who wishes to sell back
personal leave must notify the City, in writing, of his/her intent to sell
back personal leave, no more than three years prior to the date
that the employee is eligible for normal retirement.

The notice of intent to sell back personal leave becomes
irrevocable once the employee makes such election.

When an employee elects to sell back personal leave, the City will
compensate the employee for up to one-third of the total amount
of accrued leave in the employee's personal leave and retirement
accounts during each of the three years prior to the date of the
employee's eligibility for normal retirement. Each year, the

44
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

employee will be compensated on an hour-for-hour basis for one
third of the hours that were in the account(s) at the time the
election was made. Leave will be depleted in three equal annual
installments during the three-year period prior to normal retirement
eligibility. Payments will be made on an hour-for-hour basis at the
employee's regular rate of pay at the time the payments are
made. An employee's contribution to all deferred compensation
accounts shall be limited by applicable IRS regulations.

Periods of employee election, and payment dates shall be
established by the City of Jacksonville in accordance with IRS
regulations. Any leave remaining in an employee's personal leave
and/or retirement account will be paid to the employee in a lump
sum at retirement.

This option is not available to an employee who would have fewer
than eighty (80) hours personal leave remaining after the sell back.

15.6 Upon termination, which includes resignation and discharge not for
cause, the employee shall be paid for all accrued personal leave and alll
accrued retirement leave.

15.7

Upon retirement of an employee, said employee's personal leave
account and retirement leave account shall be used or paid for on a
hour-for-hour basis up to a maximum of nine hundred sixty (960) hours in
each account under the following provisions:

A.

Such leave may be taken either immediately prior to desired
eligible retirement date, which leave may then be used for the
fulfillment of time service requirements, or

Such leave may be taken following fulfillment of time service
requirements;

Employee on such leave may be maintained on the regular payroll,
thereby continuing to avail the employee of payroll deductions,
pension contributions and insurance deductions;

Upon written request to be placed on such leave, said request shall
be irrevocable;

While on such leave, an employee shall not accrue personal leave
but shall be eligible for legal holidays and any general salary
increases but not performance/step increases.

At the employee's option, such leave may either be taken or be
paid for in one lump sum on an hour-for-hour basis.

For the purpose of the Personal Leave Plan, retirement is defined in

45
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

the following manner:

Q)
(2)
(3)

(4)

Full-time service as required by the appropriate pension plan.

Early vested retirement under the appropriate provision for
vesting.

Ten years of service with the City for those employees
covered solely by Social Security.

Vested retirement with more than 10 years service with the
City for those employees who are covered by the Florida
Retirement System.

15.8 Upon the death of an employee, the employee's next of kin or estate in
accordance with the law, shall be paid for all accrued personal and
retirement leave accrued on the basis of one (1) hour's pay for each hour
in said accounts.

15.9

The Sheriff, upon recommendation of the Meritorious and Awards
Committee, shall provide an employee with commendation paid leave in
the following manner:

 

Officer of the Month One day

 

 

Officer of the Year Four days

 

 

 

46
16.1

16.2

16.3

16.4

16.5

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 16: PERSONAL LEAVE PLAN P

This article shall apply to all permanent, probationary and provisional
employees employed on or after January 10, 1989.

Method of Earning and Accruing Personal Leave:

A. Employees shall accrue personal leave with pay for straight time
hours worked in accordance with the following schedule:

Upon Completion of Hours Accrued Per Year
Continuous Service
0 months through 4 years 160
5 years through 9 years 184
10 years through 14 years 208
15 years through 19 years 232
20 years through 24 years 256
25 years or more 280
B. Employees shall earn leave time based on time actually worked

and time on approved leave with pay.

Cc. Personal leave will be credited to the employee at the rate stated
in section 16.2 (A) on a bi-weekly basis. The leave shall be credited
on the last day of the pay period.

D. The rate of accrual shall change to the higher rate at the start of
the pay period in which the anniversary date of employment
occurs.

Personal leave shall accrue to a maximum of six hundred (600) hours. At
the end of the fiscal year, an employee with accrued and unused
personal leave in excess of six hundred (600) hours will be paid for
accrued and unused personal leave in excess of six hundred (600) hours
at the employee's rate of pay at the end of the fiscal year.

Upon retirement or termination following the completion of ten (10) years
of service, the employee shall be paid for all unused accrued personal
leave on an hour-for-hour basis. Such employees shall have the option of
using accrued personal leave immediately after or prior to their desired
eligible retirement date and then be paid for the remainder of such leave
at the employee's option.

Upon termination of employment with less than ten (10) years of service
for other than retirement, the employee shall be paid for seventy-five per
cent (75%) of all unused accrued personal leave on an hour-for-hour
basis.

47
48

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

16.6 The Sheriff, upon recommendation of the Meritorious and Awards
Committee, shall provide an employee with commendation paid leave in
the following manner:

 

Officer of the Month One day
Officer of the Year Four days

 

 

 

 

 

49
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 17: USE OF LEAVE

17.1 Personal Leave

A.

Accrued Leave

When eligible and authorized, employees may use their accrued
personal leave for any reason.

Eligibility for Leave Use

Accrued personal leave may be taken at any time when approved
by the appropriate Commanding Officer-Supervisor. Personal leave
shall be scheduled with due regard to the employee's request with
any extenuating circumstance to be considered and consistent
with the operating requirements of the JSO.

Leave Request and Approval Procedures

Q)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employees shall request leave and the Employer shall note
approval or disapproval of such leave in a form designated
by the Employer.

Except in cases of illness or emergency, requests for personal
leave of up to two (2) consecutive working/shift days must be
submitted for approval at least twenty-four (24) hours in
advance,

Except in cases of illness or emergency, requests for personal
leave of more than two (2) and up to four (4) consecutive
working/shift days must be submitted for approval at least
forty-eight (48) hours in advance.

Requests for leave due to illness or emergency shall be
submitted as soon as practicable.

Charging for Leave

(a) Employees will be charged for actual leave time
taken, with a one-quarter (1/4) hour minimum.

(b) Leave will be charged only against an employee's
regular work day and shall not be charged for
absences on prearranged overtime work, unscheduled
call-in overtime work days, or holidays.

50
D.

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Advance Leave Scheduling Procedure
(1) Classification Seniority Priority Request

A request for one (1) or more consecutive working/shift days
may be submitted on or before February 1st, of each
calendar year for the following twelve months. More than
one block of leave time may be requested. Advance
scheduling of these leave requests will be accomplished as
soon as practicable after February 1s on a classification
seniority basis.

(2) Seniority Personal Leave List

Each squad, watch, zone, or section of a division shall
establish a seniority personal leave list. Employees in each
classification will select their personal leave and the
employee with the most seniority in classification shall have
the right of first personal leave choice. The employee with the
next higher seniority in classification will have the next right of
choice and so on down the list.

(3) | Scheduling After February 1

After February 1, personal leave will be scheduled on a first
come, first serve basis for available dates.

17.2 Use of Leave for Illness and Emergencies

A.

llIness

Accrued personal leave may be used for absence from duty due to
the employee's illness.

Accrued personal leave may also be used in the case of serious
illness in the employee's immediate family.

The term, "immediate family", as used in this Article, shall mean: an
individual's spouse, children, mother, father, brothers, sisters, half-
brothers, half-sisters, aunts, uncles, grandparents, grandchildren,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, sons-in-
law, daughters-in-law, step-parent, step-children, and other
relatives who permanently reside with the individual. Special
consideration may also be given to any other person who has had
a close, long-standing, personal relationship with the employee
where such a person acted similar to and/or stood in the place of a
mother, father, brother, sister, or grandparent of the employee.

51
52

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS
Emergencies

In each case where an emergency situation arises or where serious
illness exists at the home of a law enforcement officer, that law
enforcement officer shall be granted sufficient time off duty to
complete or make the necessary arrangements to alleviate that
emergency situation or serious illness. Under Personal Leave Plans E
and P, this time off duty may be charged to the employee's
personal leave time, in the discretion of the appropriate supervisor.

Extended Illness

For employees who accrue personal leave under Personal Leave
Plan E:

(1) _ If an extended illness causes an employee to use all of his/her
accrued personal leave, then such employee may use
his/her retirement account.

(2) In the event an employee has fewer than eighty (80) hours in
the employee's personal leave account, the employee may
use his/her retirement account for a bona fide illness of the
employee at the employee's option. This option may also be
used for a bona fide illness of the employee's immediate
family, if substantiated with a physician's statement that the
employee's presence is necessary.

(3) An employee who requires eighty (80) or more hours of leave
due to an extended and continuous illness, may elect to
deduct the leave from his/her retirement leave account.

(4) The above options should be submitted upon the
commencement of such leave or immediately upon returning
to duty.

Documentation

All employees shall be required to furnish to the Employer such
information as may be requested for the proper administration of
this section.

17.3. Unscheduled Absence

A.

Notification

For unscheduled absences not requested and approved in
advance, an employee must notify the Sheriff's Office as early as
possible, but no

later than forty-five (45) minutes before starting time, on the first day
the employee is unable to report for work. The employee will notify

53
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

the Sheriff's Office of the reason for the absence, and when the
employee expects to return to work.
B. Investigation

Excessive use of unscheduled leave is subject to investigation by the
Sheriff's Office. An employee will be counseled whenever a pattern
clearly develops where an employee is abusing unscheduled leave.
(Example: when unscheduled leave is combined with regular days
off more than three (3) times annually.)

C.Unauthorized Absence
An employee who is absent and who fails to comply with rules and

regulations governing leave usage will be charged with
unauthorized absence.

D. Employees shall request leave and the Employer shall note
approval or disapproval of such leave on a form provided by the
Employer.

54
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 18: BEREAVEMENT AND FUNERAL LEAVE

18.1 When Leave May Be Authorized

A.

Bereavement Leave for Immediate Family Members

At the time of the death of a member of an employee's immediate
family as defined in Article 18.2, the Employer may authorize the
employee paid time off of up to five (5) days.

Funeral Leave for JSO Employee
An employee may be granted paid time off to attend the funeral of

a JSO employee as authorized by the appropriate Assistant Chief or
higher level official.

18.2 Definition of Immediate Family

For purposes of this Article, “Immediate Family” shall be defined as
the listed relatives of the employee and the employee's spouse.

 

“Immediate Family” Defined

 

 

 

 

spouse
children Including

step-children and children's spouses
parents Including step parents and parents-in-law
brothers & sisters Including half- siblings, and brothers- and

sisters- in law

 

aunts & uncles

 

| grandparents

 

 

grandchildren

 

other relatives who permanently reside with the employee

 

Special consideration may also be given to any other person who
has had a close, long-standing, personal relationship with the
employee, where such a person acted similar to, and/or stood in
the place of, a mother, father, brother, sister, or grandparent of
the employee.

 

 

 

18.3 Provisions Governing Leave Authorization

A.

The JSO will not unreasonably deny a request for Bereavement or
Funeral Leave subject to the provisions of this Article.

The employee may be required to supply documentation of the

death, as well as of the employee's relationship to the deceased,
prior to approval of the funeral leave request.

55
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

(1) Needs of employees upon the death of a family member
may vary depending upon individual circumstances.

(2) In determining the amount of funeral leave to be authorized
in each situation, the JSO will take into consideration such
factors as:

(a) Distance to the funeral location;

(b) Relationship of the employee to the deceased; and

(c) |The demands the death has placed on the employee
for funeral arrangements and other business matters.

An employee, who requires additional time to attend to family matters, or
for the death of relatives not included in this definition, may request to use
other accrued leave for bereavement purposes. Such requests for leave
shall not be unreasonably denied.

56
19.1

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 19: LEAVE DONATION

n the event an employee is forced, after exhausting all terminal
leave, holidays and personal leave, to be placed on leave without
pay status, due to illness or off-duty injury, another employee may
donate leave time (Annual Leave, Compensatory Leave, or
Holiday) to the ill or injured employee provided said donor has at
least eighty (80) hours of personal leave accrued.

Employees donating compensatory leave may donate no more
han eight (8) hours of their compensatory leave for each ill or
injured employee per consecutive six (6) month periods.

n the event an illness is reclassified as a workers’ comp injury, all
such used and unused time will be returned to the original donor(s).

© properly administer this plan, the donating employee will report
o the JSO Chief of Personnel and submit his/her days which will be
dated for use in lieu of leave without pay days or until such time as
he employee receiving such time returns to duty.

 

Exception to Section 19.1(A): No employee who was given the
option to use accrued leave for the purpose of satisfying a
disciplinary action requiring reduction of pay and who as a result of
exercising that option is left without accrued leave may receive a
donation of such leave time for the purpose of replenishing
accrued personal leave lost for disciplinary reasons until the
employee either has accrued leave equivalent to the amount of
disciplinary reduction, or has been off work without pay for a period
equal to the duration of the disciplinary penalty. Provided that this
subsection shall only apply in those cases where a single incident
gives rise to both the disciplinary reduction and the injury that
resulted in the exhaustion of accrued leave.

57
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

58

 
20.1

20.2

20.3

20.4

20.5

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 20: MILITARY LEAVE

Leaves of absence, re-employment and other related rights of employees
entering into the military service shall be as described under the
Uniformed Services Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA)
of 1994 and Chapter 115, Florida Statutes.

Employees who are commissioned reserve officers or reserve enlisted
personnel in the United States military or naval service or members of the
National Guard are entitled to leaves of absence from their respective
duties, without loss of vacation leave, pay, time, or efficiency rating, on all
days during which they are engaged in training ordered under the
provisions of the United States military or naval training regulations for such
personnel when assigned to active or inactive duty.

Leaves of absence granted as a matter of right under the provisions of
section 20.2 may not exceed 240 working hours in any one fiscal year.
Administrative leaves of absence for additional or longer periods of time
for assignment to duty functions of a military character shall be without
pay and shall be granted by the Employer, and when so granted shall be
without loss of time or efficiency rating.

Employees who request time off for military leave are responsible for
advising their supervisor at the earliest possible time of the dates when
they are scheduled for any training assemblies which conflict with their
normal work schedule.

Employees may request adjustment of their schedules for a military
weekend drill by written request to their supervisors. Such requests shall be
submitted at least fourteen (14) days prior to drill date. A determination
under this section is not subject to the grievance or arbitration process,
but the employee may request a review by the division chief.

An employee granted an extended military leave may elect to be paid
from accumulated annual leave.

59
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

60

 
21.1

21.2

21.3

21.4

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 21: HOLIDAYS

Employees in the bargaining unit shall observe those days established by
this Agreement and Council Ordinance which consist of the following:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

January First New Year's Day

Third Monday in January Martin Luther King's Birthday
Third Monday in February Presidents’ Day

Second Friday of May Police Memorial Day

Last Monday in May Memorial Day

July Fourth Independence Day

First Monday in September Labor Day

November Eleventh Veterans’ Day

Fourth Thursday in November Thanksgiving Day

Day after Thanksgiving Day after Thanksgiving Day
December Twenty-Fourth Christmas Eve

December Twenty-Fifth Christmas Day

 

Any day declared a holiday by Ordinance of the Council or proclamation
of the Mayor.

Whenever an observed holiday shall occur on an employee's scheduled
day off, the Employer may elect to schedule the employee to take a day
off on another date mutually agreed upon or to compensate him/her at
the straight time rate in order to equalize the observed legal holidays in
Section 21.1.

Should any holiday not be used during a calendar year due to scheduling
or other reasons, then that employee shall be allowed to carry over to the
next year unused holidays. If for some reason the carry-over holidays are
not taken by September 30 of that year, the Employer will compensate
the employee for those days not taken. There will be nothing in this section
which authorizes the carry-over of any holiday for which compensation
has been made pursuant to Section 21.2 hereof.

Any permanent or probationary employee shall receive payment for any
paid holiday unless:

A. Employee has an unexcused or unpaid absence on the last regular
work day preceding such holiday or on the next regular work day
following such holiday;

B. Employee is on leave of absence or layoff on the day on which
such holiday occurs;

Cc. Employee fails to report for work without justifiable reason for such
absence having been scheduled to work on such holiday.

61
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

D. Employee is receiving workers’ compensation or supplemental
workers’ compensation pay.

21.5 When any employee is required to work on a day observed by that
employee as a holiday pursuant to 21.6, the employee shall be paid at
the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times their regular rate of pay and
shall be allowed to take a day off at a later date.

21.6 Those employees who work a Monday through Friday work week shall
observe holidays as set forth annually in the City Employee Services
Directive on that subject. All other employees shall observe the holidays
on the day on which the holiday occurs.

62
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 22: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT

22.1

22.2

22.3

Purpose of Article

The purpose of this Article is to define hours of work; however, nothing in
this Agreement shall be construed as a guarantee or limitation of the
number of hours to be worked per day, days per week, or for any other
period of time except as may be specifically provided herein. It is
understood and agreed that the Office of the Sheriff is a twenty-four (24)
hour, seven (7) days per week operation and that nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed as prohibiting the rescheduling of
manpower to suit the needs and requirements of the Office of the Sheriff,
provided that contract requirements regarding notification and overtime
will be met.

Work Period

The work period for Police Officers covered by this Agreement shall be a
period of twenty-eight (28) consecutive days which may begin on any
day of the week and the regular work schedule during that period shall
consist of one hundred sixty (160) hours.

Overtime Pay
A. Overtime based on time worked in work period

Police Officers covered by this Agreement shall be compensated at
time and one-half for all hours worked in excess of one hundred
seventy-one (171) hours in a work period except as otherwise
provided in the Agreement. It is understood and agreed by the
parties that any specific provisions of this Agreement providing for
payment of overtime will supersede this section 22.3(a).

B. Overtime for more than 16 hours of work per day

Double time shall be paid for all hours worked in excess of sixteen
(16) hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period.

Cc. Weekly Overtime

Employees covered by this Agreement will be paid at rate of time
and one half (1/2) for all hours worked in excess of those normally
scheduled in a forty (40) hour work week, or eighty (80) hour work
period. Whenever an employee is required to work double the time
normally scheduled, then an overtime rate of two (2) times the
employee's regular rate will be paid for hours in excess of twice the
normal schedule.

63
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Premium Payments

Premium payments for hours worked shall not be duplicated. For the
purpose of this Agreement, the following items of payment are

agreed to be "Premium Payments."

(1) Holidays - 21.1

(2) CallBack - 22.5

(3) Stand-By Pay - 24.1

(4) Depositions or Court-Time - 24.1

(5) | Hearing Board or Internal Investigations — 23.3
(6) Pager Stand-By - 23.11

Compensatory Time

Compensation for overtime shall be in the form of cash payments

unless compensatory time is mutually agreeable between

he

employee and the Sheriff. Police Officers may accrue up to four

hundred eighty (480) hours of compensatory time; once

his

maximum amount of compensatory time is reached, compensation
for additional overtime hours worked shall be in the form of cash
payments. Compensatory time shall be earned at the same rate it

would have been paid had cash payment been received.

he

Employer may require employees who have five (5) days or more of

compensatory time accrued to utilize compensatory time.
Employer may also require employees who have two (2) or

hours of compensatory time accrued to utilize compensatory time.

22.4 Meal Periods

A.

Employees on shifts will be provided a meal period when
workload permits.

The normal daily work schedule for all other employees covered
this Agreement shall have a meal period not to exceed forty-
(45) continuous minutes when the workload permits.

22.5 Call Back

An employee who has left his/her normal place of work for his/
residence and is called back for overtime work shall be paid for such
overtime in accordance with the above, provided that he/she shall

64

he
less

he

by
ive

 

ner
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

receive a minimum

65
22.6

22.7

22.8

22.9

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

payment of two and one-half (2-1/2) hours at time and one-half (1-1/2)
their regular rate. The minimum time provided herein does not apply if
any early call-in period extended into the start of the employee's regular
work period.

Authorization for Overtime Required

No employee may authorize overtime for themselves but shall be entitled
to receive overtime as appropriately authorized by their supervisor.

Off Duty Call with Assigned Vehicle

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 22.3 (A) when an officer
assigned a vehicle on a permanent basis is off-duty and is required to
handle a call by a designated supervisor (exception: when otherwise
provided by General Order) said employee shall be paid at the regular
rate unless such duty required that officer to work in excess of one
hundred seventy-one (171) hours in the twenty-eight (28) day work period,
in which case section 22.3 (A) shall apply.

The Employer agrees that it will comply with all provisions of the Fair Labor
Standards Act. Provided, however, that any arbitration decision alleged
to be contrary to law may be appealed to the judicial system.

Regular Hourly Rate of Pay for Overtime Calculations

For the purpose of calculating overtime, the hourly rate of pay for alll
employees covered by this collective bargaining agreement, the
following payments shall be included:

(a) Shift Differential Pay (Weekly Basis)

(b) = Education Incentive Payments (Monthly)

(c) Payments for Reaching Levels of Certification (Monthly)
(d) Longevity Pay (Monthly)

(e) | Working Out of Classification Pay (Daily or Weekly Basis)
(f) Regular Base Salary (Monthly)

(g) Training Officer Differential Pay

All payments set forth above which are paid on a monthly basis shall be
added together to reach a monthly base; that monthly base shall be
multiplied by twelve (12) and then divided by fifty-two (52) to reach a
weekly base; then the payments set forth above which are paid on a
weekly rate shall be added to the weekly base to reach a final weekly
base. The final weekly base shall then be divided by forty (40) to reach an
hourly rate which will be the rate used to calculate the payment of

66
overtime.

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

67

 
23.1

23.2

23.3

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 23: WAGES

Employees shall be compensated in accordance with the pay plan
attached as Schedules D and E as follows:

A. New employees in the classification of Police Officer shall be hired
at step 1 of the current pay plan and shall progress thereafter, when
eligible, on the current pay plan.

B. New employees in the classification of Police Recruit shall be hired
at 95% of the Step One rate for Police Officers. Upon successful
completion of field training, Police Recruits shall advance to Police
Officer with a 12-month probationary period status and shall be
paid at Step One of the Police Officer pay plan.

Cc. Each employee shall progress in the current pay plan, when eligible
per Schedule C, based on total years of continuous service as a
Police Officer and/or Police Recruit with the Jacksonville Sheriff's
Office.

D. Salary rates at each step of the pay plan shall decrease as follows:

(1) A 3% salary decrease of all employees at each step of
Schedules D and E effective on January 1, 2012;

(2) A 0% salary change at each step of Schedules D and E
effective on October 1, 2012;

(3) A 0% salary change at each step of Schedules D and E
effective on October 1, 2013.

Inter-Rank Differential

There shall be a seventeen and one-half percent (17.5%) differential
between the pay rates for sergeants and officers at each step of the pay
plan.

Out-of-Classification Pay

A qualified employee who is temporarily assigned by the supervisor to
serve in a higher class or position for at least one continuous hour shall be
paid for the period of time actually worked in the higher class at the rate
for the step of the pay grade for the higher classification which is the
same as the step to which the employee is assigned in the pay grade for
his/her own classification.

68
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

23.4 Pay Incentive Plan for College Degrees

College incentives shall be governed by the “Pay Incentive Plan for
College Degrees.”

A. Employees are eligible for incentive payments on the following basis:

 

PAY INCENTIVE PLAN FOR COLLEGE DEGREES
Incentives Applicable to Employees Hired
After October 1, 2006
Degree or Status Monthly
Master of Arts or Science $200.00

 

 

 

 

 

PAY INCENTIVE PLAN FOR COLLEGE DEGREES
Incentives Applicable to Employees Hired Prior to
October 1, 2006

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Degree or Status Monthly
Associate of Arts or Science $100.00
Bachelor of Arts or Science $150.00
Master of Arts or Science $200.00
B. The following rules shall govern administration of incentive payments

for attainment of college degrees.!

(1) A newly-hired employee will be eligible for an incentive
payment for which he/she qualifies under this Plan upon
successful completion of probation as a Police Officer.
Permanent Corrections Officers or Judicial Officers who
transition to Police Officer shall not be required to complete
probation in order to be eligible for incentive payment.

(2) An employee may only receive one level of incentive pay.
Incentive payments for multiple degrees or credits are not
cumulative.

(3) | Payment of incentives will be effective as of the first day of

1 "A Judicial Officer who is subsequently appointed to the classification of Police Officer or Police Recruit
shall thereafter be governed by the terms of Article 23 of the contract in chief, except that the former
Judicial Officer shall not be entitled to receive educational incentive payments for an Associate of Arts,
Associate of Science, Bachelor of Arts, or Bachelor of Science degree, regardless of the hire date of the
Judicial Officer and notwithstanding that the Judicial Officer may have been receiving such payments
while a Judicial Officer. This means that such an employee shall, for the purpose of education incentive
payments payable under Article 23, be treated as if he/she was hired on or after October 1, 2006."

69
23.5

23.6

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

the pay period after which the employee provides required
documentation of eligibility to the JSO Personnel Division.

(4) — To qualify for incentive pay under this Plan, an employee must
have graduated with a 2.0 GPA or “C” average.

(5) To qualify for any level of incentive pay, an employee must
have a minimum of 18 credit/semester hours in Criminal
Justice. For purposes of this Plan, “Criminal Justice” means the
subjects outlined in the Criminal Justice Programs of Study as
published in the catalog of Florida State College at
Jacksonville.

(6) Only semester hours/credits from a college or university
accredited by the Southern Association of Secondary Schools
and Colleges or equivalent will be recognized for incentive
pay qualification.

Employees assigned to work any shift other than the normal day shift shall

 

 

 

 

 

 

receive the following shift differential pay:
Starting Time Differential
After 12:00 p.m. 3.75% of base pay
After 10:00 p.m. 3.50% of base pay

 

Evaluations
A. Employee evaluations shall be standard and in writing.

B. Except as provided in subsection 23.6(C), the rater must be a
certified Police Officer of higher rank, or an appointed ranking
member of the Sheriff's staff. The rater must be a person who has
been taught about established JSO evaluation policies and
procedures.

Cc Officers who are on special assignment to the Mayor's Office, the
Office of General Counsel, the State Attorney's Office, the JEA
Special Investigation unit, and similar special assignments may be
rated by a civilian supervisor from the office where the officer is on
special assignment. In such cases, the civilian supervisor performing
the evaluation will consult with the officer’s next higher level police
supervisor regarding the evaluation.

D. An employee who believes that the Employer has not followed the
proper evaluation procedure (e.g., qualification of the rater or
failure to follow written policy and procedure) may follow the
grievance procedure as outlined in this Agreement through Step IV.

70
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

In the event the Employer proposes to change the existing
evaluation system, the Employer and the F.O.P. agree to establish a
committee, consisting of F.O.P. and management representatives
from the JSO who will be given the opportunity to review and
recommend procedural changes in the current evaluation system
prior to implementation of any changes.

23.7 Incentive Programs

In addition to the regular wages provided under this Agreement, the
Employer may elect to establish incentive programs for its employees. If
the Employer elects to establish such incentive programs, the program
may consist of awards of cash payments or other types of awards to
individual employees or groups of employees as determined by the
Employer in order to recognize job performance improvements, improved
job safety records, suggestions or actions which result in job-related cost
savings or job-related benefits, or other similar job-related improvements
which can be documented and measured.

23.8 Field Training Officer Differentials

A.

Qualified Field Training Officers shall be granted an additional five
percent (5%) above their base pay for each day they are actually
training an assigned police/reserve officer trainee.

Qualified Field Training Patrol Sergeants shall be granted an
additional five percent (5%) | above their base pay for each day
they are actually supervising a Field Training Officer who is assigned
a Police Officer trainee.

23.9 Pilot Trainer Differential

Qualified Helicopter and Fixed Wing Pilot trainers, who have a FAA
Certified Flight Instructor's Certification, shall be granted an additional five
percent (5%) above their base pay for each day they are actually training
an assigned trainee.

23.10 Payment When Required to Answer Pager while Off-Duty

When an off-duty employee is required by his/her supervisor to be
answerable to a pager, he/she shall be compensated one (1) hour at the
regular rate of pay for each day if the following requirements are met:

A.

The employee must be the only officer in the Unit required to be
answerable to a pager. (Except that in the Homicide Section, the
entire unit on call shall qualify.)

B. The employee shall not have received a call to duty during the time

he/she is required to be answerable to a pager.

23.11 Canine Care

71
23.12

may
the
the

23.13

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Officers assigned to canine duty shall receive one (1) hour per shift to
provide canine care. The employee will be compensated for one (1) hour
for canine care on the employee's day off. There shall be no premium
compensation

for canine care unless the employee works in excess of one hundred
seventy-one (171) hours in the twenty-eight (28) consecutive day work
period provided for in 22.2.

Special Assignment Differentials

At the direction of the Mayor, the City’s Director of Employee Services
authorize payment of a monthly differential, in an amount determined by
Mayor, to bargaining unit employees regularly assigned to the Office of
General Counsel, or the Mayor’s Office.

Reimbursement for Take Home Vehicles

Employees living outside Duval County, but within ten (10) miles of the
county line, shall reimburse the City $25.00 per pay period for the use of
the take home vehicle. The reimbursement will automatically be
deducted from the employee's bi-weekly pay. However, the following
shall apply:

A. Should take home vehicles become inoperable as verified by the
Office of the Sheriff, the assigned employee will be reimbursed at
the rate of $3.56 per actual day worked; and

B. Employees assigned to a motorcycle unit without also being
assigned an additional take home vehicle are exempt from this
subsection.

72
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

73

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 24: COMPENSATION FOR COURT RELATED MATTERS

24.1 Duty Related Court Appearances

A.

Payment for Required Telephone Standby While Off-Duty

When an off-duty employee is required by the State Attorney's
Office or the Judge of any court to be on telephone standby, the
employee will notify the court liaison officer of such order. The
standby requirement will then be confirmed and the employee
compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times his/her
regular rate of pay for those hours the court is in session or until
released accordingly.

Payment for Off-Duty Court Appearance

When an off-duty employee is subpoenaed to court or other
proceedings for testimony or by the State Attorney or Public
Defender for pre-trial conference or deposition arising from duties
performed as a Jacksonville Police Officer, he/she will be
compensated in the following manner:

(1) For all off-duty employees on regular day off or approved
leave, a four (4) hour overtime compensation will be credited
for the first appearance on any given calendar day and a
minimum of one (1) hour or actual time, whichever is greater,
for all appearances thereafter. If there is no lapse between
appearances, it shall be treated as one appearance.

(2) If a subpoena is directed for appearance to a private
attorney's office for deposition arising out of official duties,
compensation will be credited provided the court liaison
officer has confirmed the subpoena.

Payment for Court Appearance Before or After Duty

(1) | One Hour or Less — Personnel eligible for overtime who are
attending court or other proceedings arising out of the course
of their official duties for one (1) hour or less before or after
their scheduled tour of duty shall receive a minimum of one
(1) hour of overtime.

(2) |More Than One Hour — Personnel attending court or other
proceedings exceeding one (1) hour before or after tour of
duty shall be paid a minimum of three (3) hours or actual
time, whichever is greater, at their overtime rate.

(3) If there is no lapse between appearances, it shall be treated

74
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS
as one appearance.

75
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

24.2 Filing Information

A.

Compensation for Filing Information While Off-Duty

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 22.3(C) a one (1) hour
minimum of overtime shall be paid when filing a direct information
with the State Attorney’s Office while off duty. If such filing extends
beyond one (1) hour, then time used in excess of one (1) hour will
be paid at the employee's regular rate of pay unless such time
would be in excess of one hundred seventy-one (171) hours during
the employee's 28 day work period. In that event, the rate of pay
would be time and one-half (I-1/2).

Compensation for Filing Information Before or After Duty

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 22.3(C) if officers elect to
file immediately prior to or after the employee’s regular duty
assignment, the employee will be compensated at the employee’s
regular rate of pay unless such time would be in excess of one
hundred seventy-one (171) hours during the employee's 28 day
work period. In that event the rate of pay would be time and one-
half (1-1/2).

For the purpose of this section, immediately prior to shall be defined
as one (1) hour prior to the regular duty assignment and after shall
be defined as one (1) hour after the regular duty assignment.

24.3 Witness Appearance

A.

Fact Witness

When an off-duty employee is required to appear before any
hearing board, arbitrator, or internal investigation as a fact witness
(as opposed to a character witness) as the result of receiving a
subpoena or direct order in the course and scope of employment,
the employee will be compensated at the same rate as for duty-
related court appearances, as set out in Article 24.1 (c). A “fact”
witness is one who testifies to what was seen, heard, or observed
regarding an underlying event at issue. A “fact” witness is not a
witness who testifies to opinions, character, or like testimony.

Character Witness

Any employee who appears before any hearing board, arbitrator,
or internal investigation to testify as a character witness (as
opposed to a fact witness) whether or not as the result of receiving
a subpoena, must request and use leave during the time necessary
to appear and testify.

76
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

A character witness is one who offers an opinion about the
reputation of a person or who describes specific instances of
conduct of a person for the purpose of proving that person's
character. Examples of testimony as a character witness include,
but are not limited to cases where the witness testifies that the
person has a good reputation in the community or within the
sheriff's office that the person is a law abiding citizen or good Police
Officer, that the person has a good reputation for truth and
veracity, or that the person has a reputation for being unreliable,
untrustworthy.

77
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

718

 
25.1

25.2

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 25: FITNESS FOR DUTY EXAM

The Employer has the right to require any employee to undergo a medical
or psychological examination by an assigned doctor at any time to
ascertain whether or not the employee is physically and mentally
capable of performing the duties required of the employee's
classification.

This examination will be conducted on Employer time and at Employer

expense. Time spent obtaining the examination shall be considered work
time and shall be paid as such at the applicable rate of pay.

719
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

80

 
26.1

26.2

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 26: SAFETY AND HEALTH

The Employer agrees that it will conform to and comply with laws as to
safety, health, sanitation and working conditions properly required by
Federal, State and local law. The Employer and the F.O.P. will cooperate
in the continuing objective of eliminating safety and health hazards where
they are shown to exist.

Protective devices, wearing apparel, and other equipment necessary to
protect employees from injury shall be provided by the Employer in
accordance with established safety practices. Such practices may be
improved from time to time by the Employer and the F.O.P. Such
protective devices, apparel, and equipment, when provided by the
Employer, must be used and the F.O.P. agrees that willful neglect and
failure by an employee to obey safety regulations and to use safety
devices shall be just cause for disciplinary action.

81
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

82

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 27: PHYSICAL ABILITY TESTING

27.1. Employees shall be subject to annual physical ability testing, in
accordance with the terms of the Jacksonville Sheriffs Office Physical
Ability Testing Policy as described in Article 34.

27.2. The parties agree to the following clarifications of the Physical Ability
Testing Policy:

A.

Changes to Test - The Employer is permitted to make administrative
changes to the Physical Ability Test. Examples of permitted changes
include but are not limited to: improving the surface of the test
course, removing handles from test dummy, and making similar
improvements to test equipment.

Concerted Police Activity - An injury that occurs while in the course
of "concerted police activity" is defined as an injury that occurs
while the officer is actively involved in police actions.

Thirty Day Grace Period - An employee who fails the physical ability
test will be given a grace period of thirty calendar days during
which he/she may retake the test. During this thirty day grace
period, the employee will be required to initiate and participate on
duty in the rehabilitation provided for in the policy. However, the
disincentives listed in the policy will not go into effect unless the
employee fails to pass the test within the thirty day grace period.

“Forfeiture of Annual Step Raise" - the step raise normally provided
to the employee will be delayed to such time when the employee
passes the physical ability test. Once the employee passes the
physical ability test, the annual step raise will be granted (provided
that the employee is otherwise eligible for step raise) as follows:

(1) The raise will be retroactive to the date that the step raise
would normally be provided in those cases where no part of
the delay is attributable in any way to the employee.

Examples of cases where no part of the delay is attributable
in any way to the employee:

e The test was postponed or delayed by the Employer

because the testing facility was not available and the

employee rescheduled to the next available date.

e The test was postponed or delayed because the
employee was on special assignment at the direction
of the Employer.

 

(2) The raise will be prospective only in all other cases (for
example, when the employee requests a postponement, or

83
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

when the employee does not pass the test.)
“Forfeiture of Take Home Car "and "Forfeiture of Police Related
Secondary Employment "means that these will be withheld until the
employee has passed the physical ability test.

Priority for Accommodations — Section 34.2 of the Accommodation
section of the Physical Ability Test Policy establishes a priority listing
which will be used in determining which employees will be bumped
because the number of qualifying officers exceeds the number of
available Permanent Light Duty Positions. The third priority ("officers
who are most senior’) refers to the fact that officers who are more
senior and eligible for retirement will be bumped before officers
who have not qualified for retirement.

84
28.1

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 28: INJURY-IN-LINE-OF-DUTY

An employee who sustains a temporary disability which results in payment
of a wage benefit under the Workers’ Compensation Laws of the State of
Florida shall be granted a supplemental payment under the following
conditions:

A.

During the first twenty eight (28) calendar days of such disability, the
employee shall receive net supplemental pay based upon his/her
net take-home pay reduced by the Workers' Compensation
indemnity payable. In no event shall any employee receive more
than his/her net after-tax take-home pay from the City.

Thereafter, the Employer, may, at its sole discretion (which discretion
shall not be subject to contest or arbitration), grant additional injury-
in-line-of-duty leave in increments of twenty eight (28) calendar
days. Such extensions shall be cumulative, not to exceed twenty-
four weeks, except as noted in the following paragraphs.

Any such employee injured shall be examined every twenty eight
(28) calendar days by a medical doctor(s) selected by the
Employer.

In the event such employee fails to return to duty due to
disagreement between a medical doctor(s) for the employee and
the Employer, then the Employer shall select a duly qualified
medical doctor who shall resolve the medical disagreement. In
resolving the medical disagreement between the employee's
doctor and the Employer's doctor, the judgment, discretion and
decision of the doctor selected to resolve such medical
disagreement shall be final and not subject to arbitration. If such
injured-in-line-of-duty leave continues through the twenty-fourth
(24th) week following the pay period in which such injury occurred,
the employee's supplemental pay shall be terminated. Termination
of supplemental pay to the employee shall also occur on the date
of any medical determination that the employee will be unable to
return to duty within the twenty-four (24) week period which began
on the first day such employee was unable to work due to injury-in-
line-of-duty. After termination, the employee's right to
compensation shall be governed by the provisions of the Workers’
Compensation Laws of the State of Florida, and by his/her
entitlement to pension rights and sick leave benefits, if any. (Note:
The Employer (Sheriff or his/her designee) in its sole discretion, which
discretion cannot be changed or modified by an arbitrator, may
provide a defined extension to the twenty-four (24) week period,
not to exceed twenty (20) days for each extension).

85
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Cc. An employee who is temporarily partially disabled from performing
the duties of his/her classification due to a covered condition may
be temporarily reassigned without reduction in pay, in accordance
with the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations, to other
duties commensurate with the employee's qualifications, his/her
physical and psychological restrictions and availability of
appropriate employment.

28.2 This Article shall be subject to and governed by the provisions of Chapter
440, Florida Statutes.

86
29.1

29.2

29.3

29.4

29.5

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 29: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS

Employee Death Payments

In the event of an employee's death, payment shall be made for any and
all accrued overtime, vacation leave, and other terminal leave benefits
which such employee would have been entitled to receive under the
applicable provisions of law and only in the following sequence; to the
wife or husband; or to any child or children over the age of eighteen (18),
or to the designated guardian if the child or children are under the age of
eighteen (18); or the mother or father; or thereafter to the designated
administrator of the deceased employee's estate.

Reimbursement for Use of Personal Vehicle

Where an employee is required to use his personal automobile in the
performance of his duty, said employee will be reimbursed for operating
expenses at the rate per mile traveled as prescribed by applicable City
Council Ordinance, exclusive of mileage traveled to and from said
employee's work location. Parking space will be provided for employees
who are required to use their personal vehicle as a condition of
employment in the performance of their duties, provided parking spaces
are available.

Comprehensive Medical Coverage

The Employer agrees to provide a choice of comprehensive group health
plans from which the employee may select, including one high
deductible health plan at no cost to the employee. Effective January 1,
2012, employees will be required to pay five percent (5%) of the actual
cost of any health plan selected other than the high deductible plan, but
such a payment shall be capped and not exceed thirty dollars ($30.00)
per month. In addition, the Employer will pay fifty percent (50%) of the
cost of comprehensive medical coverage of eligible dependents. The
employee will pay the remaining fifty percent (50%) of the cost.

Dental Health Plan

The Employer agrees to pay the premium per month, per employee
covered by this Agreement for the purpose of providing payment of a
comprehensive dental health plan for the employees.

Payroll Deductions for Agent of Record
The Employer agrees to provide a payroll deduction process that is to be
available to employees in the bargaining unit for various employee plans.

This provision shall not be construed to compel the Employer to enter into

87
29.6

29.7

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

any contractual arrangements with third parties or to undertake any legal
liability not expressly provided for in this Agreement.

These plans shall be administered by the "Agent of Record” so designated
by the F.O.P. It is understood and agreed that the Employer may assess a
charge not to exceed four (4) cents per deduction per payroll. Further, it is
agreed that the Employer assumes no responsibility or liability to or for the
F.O.P.’s Agent of Record. Solicitation for these plans shall only be made at
times mutually agreed to by the City’s Department of Employee Services,
Jacksonville Sheriff's Office, and the F.O.P. so as to prevent loss of
productivity.

If the F.O.P. provides the Employer with at least 100 signed enrollment
forms from bargaining unit employees authorizing their enrollment in an
F.O.P. sponsored employee plan or activity, the Employer will create and
assign a payroll deduction code for that plan or activity. If, after the
creation of the payroll deduction code, the enrollment for that plan or
activity falls below seventy-five (75), the City may delete the payroll
deduction code from the City payroll system and discontinue payroll
deductions for the plan or activity.

Voting

During an election, an employee whose hours of work do not allow
sufficient time for voting shall be allowed necessary time off with pay for
this purpose. Where the polls are open two (2) hours before or two (2)
hours after the regular scheduled work period, it shall be considered
sufficient time for voting.

F.O.P. Heart/Hypertension Special Benefit

Purpose: To provide special benefits to law enforcement officers who
suffer heart disease and/or hypertension subsequent to their date of
employment, but who are not otherwise covered under the Florida
Workers’ Compensation law.

A. Coverage and Limitations
(1) Medical

(a) Employees will file heart/hypertension claims for
reimbursement of covered expenses through their City
medical insurance carrier.

(b) The City will reimburse employees for covered co-
payments and deductibles until the employee has
been off work 52 weeks due to heart disease or
hypertension, and is unable to return to work according
to an approved medical doctor. Such reimbursements

88
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

shall not
exceed $3,500 per plan year and $10,000 lifetime and
shall terminate once an employee retires under Pension
Fund rules.

(2) Disability

(a) Upon application to the JSO Chief of Personnel,
employees will continue to receive paid leave not
otherwise chargeable for the first 84 calendar days of
covered illness. After 84 calendar days have elapsed,
the employee will receive paid leave at the rate of 2/3
of his/her salary for the next 84 calendar days. During
this period, the employee, at his/her option, may elect
to retain full pay by utilizing sick leave or personal leave
at one-third (1/3) day for each day. Thereafter, full sick
leave or personal leave must be utilized.

(b) If an employee, due to heart/hypertension disability, is
temporarily, partially disabled from performing the
duties of his/her classification, he/she may be
temporarily reassigned without reduction in pay in
accordance with the Civil Service and Personnel Rules
and Regulations to other duties commensurate with
medical and mental fitness, availability of suitable work,
and the employee's qualifications for the position.

(c) Second or subsequent heart/hypertension claims will
be considered only if the employee has returned to full
duty for three months following the first incident. An
employee shall not receive more than 36 weeks of full
pay under this provision.

(3) Death

In the event of the death of an employee due to heart
disease or hypertension prior to retirement, the City shall pay
a death benefit/funeral allowance of up to $2500, but not
exceeding actual funeral expenses.

(4) Disputes

Questions concerning payment of medical and pharmacy
bills under this section will be resolved by a Special Benefit
Committee consisting of the F.O.P. President or designee, the
City's Director of Employee Services or designee and the JSO
Chief of Personnel.

29.8 Career Development Program

The City shall fund the tuition reimbursement program $60,000.00 annually
89
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

for all F.O.P. bargaining unit members collectively. Reimbursement
requests from any F.O.P. member necessitating funding in excess of
$60,000.00 annually may be denied or limited based upon available
funding. Unused funding shall be reallocated annually as determined by
the City.

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

90
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

 

 

 

91

 
30.1 A.
B.
c.
30.2 The E

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 30: LIFE INSURANCE

he Employer shall provide and pay full premiums for group term life
insurance policy in the amount equal to the employee's yearly
salary with a double indemnity clause for accidental death for
hose employees covered by this Agreement.

n the event that the City is unable to obtain life insurance
coverage from an insurance carrier for employees who are
emporarily or permanently assigned to the helicopter or fixed wing
section, the City will self-insure for this amount in lieu of paying
premiums.

Benefits may be reduced at age 70, to 65% of the benefits under
he policy.

mployer shall provide and pay full premiums for $250,000 life

insurance covered per seat for all helicopter and fixed wing aircraft used
by employees covered by this Agreement while on police business.

Benefi
policy.

 

s may be reduced at age 70 to 65% of the benefits under the
. In the event that the City is unable to obtain this coverage from an

insurance carrier, the City will self-insure for this amount in lieu of paying
premiums.

92
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

93

 
31.2

31.3

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 31: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT

The Employer shall furnish uniform(s) to all personnel who are required to
wear such uniform(s) in the performance of their duties as set forth in the
Rules and Regulations of the Office of the Sheriff. Uniforms shall include all
necessary equipment for the employee’s performance of duty as a Police
Officer including weapons, leather goods, foul weather gear, rain boots,
cold weather gear and safety equipment, except socks and
undergarments.

The Employer agrees that before new uniforms and new personally-
assigned equipment are ordered, the F.O.P. will be consulted and asked
to survey the members concerning any proposed change for uniforms
and equipment. The F.O.P. may submit recommendations for the
improvement of said uniforms or equipment; however, these
recommendations are not binding upon the Employer.

Damage to Employee-owned Property

The Employer will pay to repair or replace covered personal property that
is damaged while the employee is on duty, so long as the loss or damage
did not result from the employee's negligence. Payments shall be subject
to the conditions set forth below.

A. Covered Personal Property

Covered personal property shall be defined as that equipment
necessary for the performance of the employee's official duties
including prescription eyeglasses/contacts lenses, prosthodontics,
and watches. Covered personal property shall include non-uniform
clothing. It shall not include telephones, pagers or electronic
devices. With the exception of watches, jewelry is not covered
personal property.

B. Payments

The Employer will make the determination to either repair or replace
damaged or lost covered personal property based upon the
relative costs of repair and replacement. Claims must be
supported by reasonable proof of loss or damage, and
documentation of cost, and shall be subject to claims-processing
procedures established by the Sheriff.

(1) | Payments authorized by this provision shall be reduced by the
amount of any insurance reimbursement received by the
employee for the loss or damage to the covered property.

(2) | Payments under this provision shall not exceed three hundred
dollars ($300.00), except that repair or replacement of

94
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

watches will be limited to one-hundred dollars ($100).

(3) The Employer shall make every reasonable effort to make
payments authorized under this Section within thirty (30) days
of the employee's submission of a claim.

31.4 Damage to Employer Property

31.5

When Employer property is damaged, destroyed, or lost as a result of an
employee's negligence, carelessness, or failure to take reasonable steps
to secure the property, the employee shall pay the cost of repair or
replacement, up to a maximum of $400, subject to the conditions set forth
below.

A.

For purposes of this section, “negligence” and “carelessness” do not
include inattention caused by the employee's immediate need to
perform official duties and responsibilities.

Examples of failure to take reasonable steps to secure property
include but are not limited to: leaving the property unattended in
an unsecured location such as an open car or unlocked building.

Clothing Allowance

Employees who are required to wear business attire (e.g. dress
coats or dress shirts and ties for men and civilian attire for women)
during duty hours shall be entitled to a clothing allowance of one
hundred dollars ($100) paid quarterly. Quarterly reimbursements
shall occur the second pay period following the end of the quarter,
provided the employee has worked or been on paid leave at least
ten (10) days in each month of the quarter.

Employees in the Organized Crime Section who are required by the
Employer to wear non-uniform type of clothing during duty hours
shall be entitled to a clothing allowance of one hundred dollars
($100) paid quarterly. Quarterly reimbursements shall occur the
second pay period following the end of the quarter, provided the
employee has worked or was on paid leave at least ten (10) days in
each month of the quarter.

An officer who uses personal or retirement leave prior to retirement

in accordance with Article 15.7 shall not receive the Clothing
Allowance while on such leave.

95
32.1

32.2

32.3

32.4

32.5

32.6

32.7

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 32: SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT

The number of hours an employee may work off-duty shall be limited to
one hundred four (104) hours per month. An eight (8) hour rest period shall
be mandated between an employee's ending tour of duty and the next
beginning tour of duty. The eight (8) hour rest period also applies to the
employee's days off. The one hundred four (104) hours per month of extra
duty may be supplemented by annual or compensatory leave. During the
24-hour period encompassing an employee’s scheduled work day, the
employee may not exceed 16 hours of work. The Sheriff or designee may
at his/her discretion waive the 104-hour per month limitation.

Employees who schedule approved secondary employment who are
paid a scheduling fee shall pay a flat fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) a job
per month scheduling fee.

The employee working secondary employment (or the secondary
employer) will remit to the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office an administrative
fee of $5.00 per hour for each hour paid, not necessarily worked. A $7.00
per hour administrative fee shall be charged for any secondary
employment where the police vehicle is utilized with the engine running
and emergency equipment in use for the majority of the assignment for
traffic control during road construction projects, and/or lane closures. The
$7.00 per hour administrative fee shall not apply to police escorts. The
administrative fee shall be in addition to the hourly rate paid to the officer
or supervisor as set forth in section 32.7 below. Fees for increments of time
less than an hour will be prorated.

Employees who intentionally evade the payment of the amounts required
by this Article will face appropriate discipline, and/or loss of secondary
employment.

 

Employees are prohibited from engaging in secondary employment while
in an on-duty status.

All administrative fees for a one (1) month period must be paid to JSO by
the 10 day of the following month. Employees whose payments are more
than two (2) weeks late will be subject to appropriate discipline, which
may include loss of secondary employment privileges.

The hourly rate, paid to the officer, for secondary employment shall be:

Officers $28.00
Supervisors $31.00

96
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

32.8 Restrictions on Secondary Employment, as stated in applicable General
Orders, and as amended by the Sheriff's Direct Review Committee, shall
apply to the extent they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Article.

32.9 Employees will not engage in secondary employment until they have
been off duty for two regular days, or worked one day following sick
leave, bereavement leave, injury on duty (IOD), light duty, suspension
(with or without pay) or administrative leave.

32.10 An employee who is denied secondary employment in violation of the

applicable General Orders may grieve the denial through Step 4 of the
grievance procedure. The decision made at Step 4 shall be final.

97
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 33: PROMOTIONS

Promotions within the bargaining unit shall be governed by the Civil Service and
Personnel Rules and Regulations, except that the "rule of 3" as provided in the
City Ordinance Code shall supersede the provisions of the Civil Service and
Personnel Rules and Regulations. Any disputes relating to promotions shall be
filed with the City’s Employee Services Department and resolved exclusively
through the Civil Service System

98
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

99

 
34.1 Policy

A.

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 34: PHYSICAL ABILITY POLICY

The Fraternal Order of Police (F.O.P.) and the Jacksonville Sheriff's
Office (JSO) recognize that sworn employees need to maintain a
sufficient degree of physical ability to handle the demands of the
profession. Therefore, the parties have agreed to schedule an
annual physical examination and physical ability test for Police
Officers to assure that physical ability is maintained. The parties
have also agreed to provide for a reasonable opportunity for
officers who fail the examination to gain compliance. Officers who
cannot successfully pass the physical ability examination after
being afforded a reasonable opportunity to do so are subject to
termination.

The physical ability test is job related, and is administered to ensure
that those officers protecting the public meet minimal levels of
physical fitness and do not pose a danger to themselves, fellow
officers, or the public.

The Mission of the JSO is to protect the lives and property of the
citizens of this community, to preserve peace, and to prevent crime
and disorder. As a matter of policy, the JSO recognizes the
following as essential components to the accomplishment of the
JSO Mission:

(1) An able bodied, fully staffed department whose officers can
effect an arrest and respond to emergency conditions; and

(2) Flexible staffing that grants managerial discretion to assign
the right person into the right position; and

(3) | Recognition that the assignment of supervisors must be need
and performance based, and that assignments based merely
upon an employee's physical condition is contrary to the
fulfillment of the Mission; and

(4) Officers who are injured in concerted police actions should
receive priority recognition; and

(5) The creation of incentives and disincentives will enhance
officer physical conditioning; and

(6) A Department that is not physically fit will provide less
protection and less effective services at a much greater cost.

100
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

34.2. Administration of the Physical Ability Testing Program

A.

Incentives:
In recognition of officers passing the physical ability test, those
officers shall receive:

(1) Timely step raises as provided for in Schedule C of the
Agreement;

(2) | Consideration for promotion when ranked on a certified
eligibility list;

(3) The thanks of the Administration and the Community who all
recognize that an able and fit public safety force will provide
enhanced protection and services at a lower cost to the
community.

Disincentives:

In recognition that officers failing the physical ability test provide less
service to the community, reduce the efficiency of the Department,
and increase the costs to the taxpayers, those officers failing the
physical ability test shall be subject to the following:

 

(1) Forfeiture of take home car privileges;

(2) — Forfeiture of annual step raise;

(3) | Delayed consideration for promotions;

(4) _ Forfeiture of police related secondary employment privileges.

Rehabilitation:

An officer who fails an annual physical ability test shall be given one

(1) calendar year from the date of the failure to pass the physical

ability test.

(1) During that calendar year, the officer will remain on duty but
will be required to participate in an on-duty training and/or
conditioning program which will require the officer's
participation at the training academy at least twice monthly.

he program will be personally designed to enable the officer
‘0 ultimately pass the examination.

101
(2)

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

If the officer so completely fails to pass the physical ability test
that it demonstrates a more serious fitness for duty problem,
the JSO may administer such other fitness for duty testing and
take such prudent action that would otherwise be
reasonable under the circumstances.

Accommodation:

As to officers who have failed a physical ability test:

Q)

(2)

(3)

After the one (1) calendar year set aside for rehabilitation, if
the officer is still unable to pass the physical ability test, the
officer shall be considered unable to perform the officer's
duties and if the officer does not qualify for accommodation
as set forth in Paragraph (2) below, the officer shall be
separated from employment as provided for in the Civil
Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations.

If the officer's inability to pass the physical ability test in a year
is a result of an ADA qualifying condition, the officer shall be
accommodated as provided in paragraph (3) below;
otherwise, the officer shall be separated from employment
pursuant to the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and
Regulations if the officer cannot be accommodated by
retirement or reassignment to non-sworn service.

An officer qualifying for accommodation in the sworn service
pursuant to paragraph (2) above shall be subject to the
following terms and conditions:

(a) The JSO shall make available a combined number of
positions for up to 1.5% of the total sworn police ranks
which will be designated as Permanent Light Duty
positions for all of those officers who either qualify for
accommodation under paragraph (2) above, or who
qualify for permanent accommodations as a result of
on-the-job injuries. Each such officer who wishes to be
placed in a Permanent Light Duty position so
designated must be able to perform the functions of
that position with the exception of an ability to effect
an arrest and respond to an emergency. A maximum
of three (3) supervisory positions will be included within
the total Permanent Light Duty positions.

102
(b)

(c)

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Any officer or supervisor who does not accept an
accommodation into one of the Permanent Light Duty
positions, or who does not opt for normal or disability
retirement, or who does not accept an
accommodation to a non-sworn position, shall be
subject to separation in accordance with the Civi
Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations as a result
of that officer's inability to perform the essentia
functions of the job.

In order to ensure the maximum availability o
accommodation for qualifying officers, officers serving
in a Permanent Light Duty position described in
Paragraph (3)(A) above, may serve in that position until
and unless the officer is “bumped.”

“Bumping” occurs when the number o
qualifying officers exceeds the number of available
Permanent Light Duty positions. The criteria for
bumping shall be as follows:

 

(i) When alll positions described in Paragraph (3)(A
are filled by qualifying officers, and another
officer becomes qualified, the officer with the
highest years of service shall no longer be
entitted to the position and shall be
accommodated by being provided the
opportunity to retire and or resign. Such an
officer who refuses to retire and or resign may
then seek further accommodation to a non-
sworn position or shall be separated from
employment pursuant to the Civil Service and
Personnel Rules and Regulations.

(ii) — In the event all qualifying officers are not eligible
for retirement or are not in the DROP program,
entitlement to Paragraph (3)(A) positions shall be
determined first by giving priority to officers
injured as a result of concerted police action;
secondly, by giving priority to officers who are
injured on-the-job; and finally, by giving priority to
officers who are most senior. An officer who is
“bumped” may seek reclassification as an

103
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

accommodation, but if no other position is
available, such officer shall be separated from
employment pursuant to the Civil Service and
Personnel Rules and Regulations.

34.3 Appeal

The JSO believes that a policy implemented fairly and uniformly
throughout the Department will provide consistency and fairness in its
application. The JSO recognizes, however, that exceptional
circumstances may exist which might warrant making limited exceptions
to this policy based on the extraordinary rehabilitative efforts of an officer
or for such other extraordinary circumstances demonstrated by an officer.
Therefore, an officer may appeal to the Sheriff, in writing, for an exception
to the application of any part of this policy to that officer.

A. The officer must show extraordinary circumstances that would
warrant the granting of such exception.

B. The Sheriff shall respond in writing to the officer and the decision of
the Sheriff shall be final.

104
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

105

 
35.1

35.2

35.3

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 35: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

In any suit, legal action or proceeding, wherein an employee covered by
this Agreement is sued as an individual, for damages, compensatory
and/or punitive, which arises from their official duties, the Employer
hereby agrees that it will provide legal counsel for said employee in
accordance with Section 111.07, Florida Statutes. The employee shall
have the right to retain an attorney of his choice at the employee's
expense to defend the employee in any individual claim.

It is understood and agreed that employees shall furnish written
notification of their intent to file suit against a third party in any court of
law, if the suit arises out of the employee's official duties. Notice shall be
provided to the Undersheriff, not less than five (5) days before the actual
filing date.

Whenever any employee is involved in an accident with any vehicle
owned, leased, or rented by the Employer, and said accident is solely a
result of equipment failure or defect unconnected with any negligence or
misconduct of the employee, the employee shall not be disciplined by
the Employer for the accident or results thereof. Any alleged equipment
failure or defect must be reported at the time of the accident and
included in the appropriate report. An employee's failure to follow the
Written Directives applicable to vehicle care and maintenance shall
nullify the provisions of this section.

106
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

107

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 36: SEVERABILITY

In the event any article, section or portion of this Agreement should be held
invalid and unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall apply only to the specific article, section, or portion thereof specified in the
court's decision; and upon issuance of such decision, the Employer and the
F.O.P. agree to immediately negotiate a substitute for the invalidated article,
section, or portion thereof.

108
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

109

 
37.1

37.2

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 37: RESIDUAL RIGHTS

The Employer retains all rights, powers, functions, and authority it had prior
to the signing of this contract except as such rights are specifically
relinquished or abridged in this contract.

All matters pertaining to terms of employment and working conditions
guaranteed by law to employees within the bargaining unit shall apply to
the extent that they are not in conflict with the provisions of this
Agreement.

110
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

111

 
38.1

38.2

38.3

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE 38: ENTIRE AGREEMENT

The parties acknowledge that during negotiations which resulted in this
Agreement each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make
demands and proposals with respect to any subject or matter not
removed by law from the area of collective bargaining and that the
understandings and agreements arrived at by the parties after the
exercise of that right and opportunity are set forth in this Agreement. This
Article shall not be construed to in any way restrict parties from
commencing negotiations under the applicable law on any succeeding
agreement to take effect upon termination of this Agreement.

Except as provided otherwise in this Agreement, this Agreement shall be
effective October 1, 2011 and shall remain in force to and including
September 30, 2014.

There shall be a reopener in negotiations for Fiscal Year 2011-2012 limited
to Articles 29 & B-8, Employee Benefits (negotiations shall not be limited to
the employee benefits stated with these articles).

The F.O.P. or the City must provide the other a thirty (30) day notice within
Fiscal Year 2011-2012, but prior to the beginning of reopening negotiations
over the Employee Benefits articles. During the initial negotiation session,
the parties agree to pre-schedule nine (9) additional negotiation sessions,
three (3) subsequent negotiation sessions for each of the following three
(3) consecutive months. Negotiations shall continue as needed thereafter
pursuant to Chapter 447, Florida Statutes.

112
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

113

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

SCHEDULE A

BARGAINING UNIT CLASSIFICATIONS

Sworn Bailiff
Judicial Officer
Police Recruit
Police Officer

Police Sergeant

114
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

115

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

SCHEDULE B
SAMPLE MEMORANDUM FINAL ACTION REPORT

TO: Party Requesting Public Records Related to Internal Investigations
FROM: Jacksonville Sheriff's Office

DATE: January 1, 2006

RE: Final Action Report — Disposition

In accord with the State of Florida’s General Records Retention Schedule for
Law Enforcement Agencies, the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office maintains a “Final
Action Report” that lists the disposition of all internal investigations.

The terms used in the Final Action Report to describe the disposition of the
matter are defined as follows:

Exonerated — The internal investigation determined that the alleged actions
occurred but were lawful and proper

Formal Counseling — A formal counseling session is a discussion between a
supervisor and a subordinate in which the subordinate's behavior and necessary
improvements are brought to the employee’s attention. Formal counseling is
not discipline.

Information - Letter Sent - A review by Internal Affairs showed that an
investigation was not warranted. The complainant was sent a letter advising of
this. No discipline or formal counseling is imposed on the officer.

Information Only —The internal investigation did not result in a formal summation.
No discipline or formal counseling was imposed on the officer. A record of the
matter is maintained by JSO for documentation purposes only.

Not Sustained —The internal investigation determined that there was insufficient
evidence available to prove or disprove the allegation.

Supervisor Referral - Letter Sent -- A review by Internal Affairs showed that a
formal investigation by JSO IA was not warranted. However, the Watch
Commander is sent the information informally to review and discuss with the
officer. The Watch Commander is also responsible for contacting the
complainant. The Watch Commander has the option of formally investigating
the matter or not.

Sustained —The internal investigation determined that there was a violation of
agency rules and/or regulations.

Unfounded -The internal investigation determined that allegations are false or

116
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS
not supported by the facts.

117
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

118

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

SCHEDULE C
REQUIREMENTS FOR PAY ADVANCEMENT

The JSO Personnel Division Director shall submit in writing to the City’s Director of
Employee Services the advancement in salary of each employee who has met
the requirements for pay advancement as provided herein. Provided the
following conditions are met, the employee’s advancement through the steps
of the Pay Grade to which assigned shall be automatic, beginning on the first
day of the first pay period following completion of one (1) year of continuous
service subsequent to his/her date of employment if the following conditions are
met:

Conditions:

(1) he employee is in good physical and mental health capable of
performing the duties of a Police Officer. (See Article 27, Physical Ability
esting)

(2) he employee's performance in the job is satisfactory for the year prior to
advancement to the next step.

(3) f the performance of the employee is not satisfactory or his/her health is
such that he/she cannot perform his/her duties, the step increase may be
delayed for a period of six (6) months at which time, his/her performance
will be reevaluated. If his/her performance has not improved substantially,
he delay can be extended for another six (6) months for another
evaluation. This process will be repeated until the employee's
performance improves to the required standard. Injury on duty will not be
a satisfactory reason to preclude advancement.

 

(4) he employee will be advised in writing as to the reason his/her step
increase was denied; and if the employee does not agree, he/she may
use the grievance procedure which will be inserted at Step Il or may file a
grievance with the Civil Service Board.

(5) All recommendations for salary advancement within grade shall bear the
approval and recommendation of the employee's Activity Supervisor and
Commanding Officer.

(6) Those employees eligible to receive steps shall have their time of service
calculated based on their years of continuous service as a sworn Police
Officer or Police Recruit with the Office of the Sheriff.

(7) | Requirements for advancement within the pay grades of the Pay Plan as
specified in the above procedures shall require continuous, satisfactory
service with the Office of the Sheriff.

(8) This Pay Plan is designated to provide the career officer with the
119
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS
opportunity to advance and remain as a first-line street officer.

120
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

121

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

SCHEDULE D

CITY OF JACKSONVILLE
SHERIFF'S OFFICE
POLICE OFFICER, POLICE OFFICER SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT

AND POLICE OFFICER PILOT
FIFTEEN (15) STEP PAY PLAN

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PAY GRADE 13.13 13.13
MONTHLY / ANNUAL | MONTHLY / ANNUAL
BASED ON 10/1/2008 - 01/1/2012 -
sTEP_| COMPLETION OF: 12/31/2011 09/30/2014

1 0-12 MONTHS 3,277 3,179
39,324 38,148

2 1 YEAR 3,464 3,360
41,568 40,320

3 2 YEARS 3,647 3,538
43,764 42,456

4 3 YEARS 3,810 3,696
45,720 44,352

5 4 YEARS 3,993 3,873
47,916 46,476

6 6 YEARS 4,699 4,558
56,388 54,696

7 8 YEARS 4,771 4,628
57,252 55,536

8 10 YEARS 4,846 4,701
58,152 56,412

9 11 YEARS 4,922 4,774
59,064 57,288

10 12 YEARS 4,997 4,847
59,964 58,164

11 13 YEARS 5,069 4,917
60,828 59,004

12 14 YEARS 5,145 4,99]
61,740 59,892

13 15 YEARS 5,219 5,062
62,628 60,744

14 16 YEARS 5,293 5,134
63,516 61,608

15 17 YEARS 5,367 5,206
64,404 62,472

 

 

 

 

 

 

Numbers are approximate due to rounding.

122

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

123

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

SCHEDULE E

CITY OF JACKSONVILLE

SH

ERIFF’S OFFICE

POLICE SERGEANT

ELEVEN

(11) STEP PAY PLAN

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PAY GRADE 13.14 13.14
MONTHLY / ANNUAL | MONTHLY / ANNUAL
BASED ON 10/1/2008 - 01/1/2012 -
STEP COMPLETION OF: 12/31/2011 09/30/2014

1 0-5 YEARS 5,067 $4,915
60,804 $58,980

2 6 YEARS 5,521 $5,355
66,252 $64,260

3 8 YEARS 5,605 $5,437
67,260 $65,244

4 10 YEARS 5,695 $5,524
68,340 $66,288

5 11 YEARS 5,783 $5,610
69,396 $67,320

6 12 YEARS 5,871 $5,695
70,452 $68,340

7 13 YEARS 5,956 $5,777
71,472 $69,324

8 14 YEARS 6,046 $5,865
72,552 $70,380

9 15 YEARS 6,133 $5,949
73,596 $71,388

10 16 YEARS 6,220 $6,033
74,640 $72,396

ul 17 YEARS 6,306 $6,117
75,672 $73,404

 

 

 

 

Numbers are approximate due to rounding.

124

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

125

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

126
Preamble
Article A-1
Article A-2
Article A-3
Article A-4
Article A-5
Article A-6
Article A-7
Article A-8
Article A-9
Article A-10
Article A-11
Article A-12
Article A-13
Article A-14

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

APPENDIX A
CERTIFIED BAILIFFS

Articles Adopted by Reference
Grievances & Separations

Holidays

Hours of Work and Overtime Payment
Wages

Injury in Line of Duty

Life Insurance

Management Rights

Military Leave

Miscellaneous Provisions

Discharge and Discipline

Alcohol & Drug Abuse Policy and Procedures
Matters Not Addressed

Leave

127
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

128

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

APPENDIX A: PREAMBLE

On November 18, 1997, the State of Florida Public Employees Relations
Commission (PERC) certified the Fraternal Order of Police as the bargaining
agent for full-time, temporary, sworn, certified bailiffs. The employees, who are
described in the November 18, 1997, order of the Public Employees Relations
Commissions Case Number RC-97-031, will be referred to in this Appendix as
“eligible employees.” This Appendix sets forth the agreement reached by the
City of Jacksonville and the Fraternal Order of Police (‘F.O.P.”) with regard to
the terms and conditions of employment of the eligible employees.

129
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

130

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-1: ARTICLES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE

A-1.1 The current provisions of Articles 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 26, 36, 37, and 38 of the
Agreement reached between the City of Jacksonville and the Fraternal

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Order of Police, Consolidated Lodge No. 5-30 [the Agreement”] (Police
Officers through Sergeants)] are hereby adopted by reference and made
a part hereof.

ARTICLE 1: F.0.P. RECOGNITION

ARTICLE 2: F.O.P. SECURITY AND CHECK OFF

ARTICLE 4: MANAGEMENT SECURITY

ARTICLE 6: SPECIAL MEETINGS

ARTICLE 9: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

ARTICLE 26: HEALTH & SAFETY

ARTICLE 36: SEVERABILITY

ARTICLE 37: RESIDUAL RIGHTS

ARTICLE 38: ENTIRE AGREEMENT

 

 

 

131
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

132

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-2: GRIEVANCES AND SEPARATIONS

A-2.1 Grievance Procedure

The employees covered by this Agreement are classified as Temporary
Part Time Court Bailiffs pursuant to Section 121.134, Ordinance Code, who
do not have a property interest in their employment. Temporary Part
Time Court Bailiffs do not have a right to the Civil Service
complaint/grievance procedure. The sole procedure available to
Temporary Part Time Court Bailiffs to grieve application of the terms of this
Agreement shall be the Article 8 grievance procedure, provided that
grievances of disciplinary actions shall be processed solely in accordance
with Article A-11: Discharge and Discipline.

A-2.2 Separations

Temporary Part Time Court Bailiffs may be separated from employment
without cause. When separated without cause, Temporary Part Time
Court Bailiffs shall receive ten (10) days written notice of separation, or ten
(10) days pay in lieu of notice, or any combination thereof. This provision
shall not apply to Temporary Part Time Bailiffs discharged for disciplinary
reasons.

133
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

134

 
A-3.1

A-3.2

A-3.3

A-3.4

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-3: HOLIDAYS

Eligible employees shall be entitled to compensation, as provided for in
sections A-3.2 and A-3.3 for the eleven (11) holidays listed below, or on
any day declared a holiday by ordinance of the City Council, or
proclamation by the Mayor.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

DATE EVENT
January First New Year's Day
Third Monday in January Martin Luther King’s Birthday
Third Monday in February Presidents’ Day
Last Monday in May Memorial Day
July Fourth Independence Day
First Monday in September Labor Day
November Eleventh Veterans’ Day
Fourth Thursday in November Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving Day after Thanksgiving Day
December Twenty-Fourth Christmas Eve
December Twenty-Fifth Christmas Day

 

Eligible employees who are not required to work on a holiday listed in
section A-3.1 will be compensated for eight (8) hours at their regular
hourly rate. However, no eligible employee who works less than forty
(40) hours per week will receive compensation for a holiday unless the
holiday is observed on a regularly-scheduled workday of the eligible
employee.

Employees who work a Monday through Friday work week shall observe
holidays as set forth annually in the City Employee Services Directive on
that subject.

In addition to the holiday compensation provided for in subsection A-
3.1, eligible employees who are required to work on a holiday shall be
compensated at one and one-half (1-1/2) times their straight time pay
for all hours worked on the holiday.

135
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

136

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-4: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT

A-4.1 SCHEDULES

Eligible employees’ work schedules shall be set at the sole discretion of
the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office.

A-4.2 OVERTIME

A.

Eligible employees shall be required to work overtime when and as
required. All overtime must be authorized and approved by the
appropriate supervisor.

An eligible employee shall be paid at the rate of one and one-half
(1-1/2) times the employee's regular rate of pay for all hours worked
in excess of 40 hours per week. All compensated time shall be
included as “hours worked” when calculating the 40 hour/week
threshold.

An employee who is called in to work outside of, and not continuous
with, his/her regularly-scheduled working hours shall be compensated
for the time worked at the straight time rate until the employee has
worked forty (40) hours for the week, at which time the employee
shall be paid at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the
employee's regular rate of pay.

137
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

138

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-5: WAGES

A-5.1 Certified Bailiffs shall be compensated at the rate determined by the
Jacksonville Sheriff's Office.

A-5.2 Certified Bailiff Sergeants may be hired at a rate of 20% above the pay
rate of Certified Bailiffs.

A-5.3 Incentive Program

At its sole discretion, the Employer may from time to time elect to establish
incentive programs for individuals or groups which may consist of cash or
other awards in recognition of improved job performance, improved job
safety records, innovative ideas that result in savings or other benefits, or
other similar work-related improvements, provided the F.O.P. is informed in
writing of any such programs.

139
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

140

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-6: INJURY IN-LINE-OF-DUTY

An eligible employee who sustains a temporary disability as a result of injury in
the course of, and arising out of, employment by the Employer shall be entitled
to the benefits payable under the Workers' Compensation Laws of the State of
Florida.

141
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

142

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-7: LIFE INSURANCE

The Employer shall provide ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) group term life
insurance for all eligible employees, at no cost to the employee.

143
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

144

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-8: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

A-8.1 It is the right of the Employer to determine unilaterally the purpose of each
of its constituent agencies, set standards of service to be offered to the
public, and exercise control and discretion over its organization and
operations, including the right to subcontract. It is also the right of the
Employer to direct its employees, take disciplinary action, and relieve its
employees from duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate
reasons, provided, however, that except as otherwise provided in this
Agreement, the exercise of such rights shall not preclude employees or
their representatives from raising grievances, should decision on the
above matters have the practical consequences of violating the terms
and conditions of this collective bargaining agreement.

A-8.2 Whenever it is determined that Civil Emergency conditions exist, including
riots, civil disorders, hurricane conditions, or similar catastrophes, the
provisions of this Agreement may be suspended by the Mayor and/or the
Sheriff during the time of the declared emergency provided that wage
rates and monetary fringe benefits shall not be suspended.

145
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

146

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-9: MILITARY LEAVE

Eligible employees shall be paid for military leave at their regular hourly rate
times the average number of hours they have worked per day during the six
weeks prior to the military leave (e.g. 40 hours a week worked - 8 hours pay; 30
hours a week worked - 6 hours of pay; 20 hours a week worked - 4 hours pay) to
the extent required by the Uniformed Services Employment and Re-employment
Rights Act of 1994 and the Florida Statutes and any other applicable laws.

147
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

148

 
A-10.1

A-10.2

A-10.3

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-10: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

In any suit, legal action or proceeding, wherein an eligible employee is
sued for damages, compensatory and/or punitive, which arises from
his/her official duties, the Employer will provide legal counsel in
accordance with Section 111.07, Florida Statutes.

It is understood and agreed that eligible employees shall furnish
notification, in writing, of their intent to file suit in any court of law, to
the Office of the Sheriff, not less than five (5) days before the actual
filing date, provided that said law suit affects or is connected in any
manner with the Employer.

When an eligible employee is involved in an accident with any vehicle
owned, leased, or rented by the Employer, and said accident is a
result of equipment failure or defect, unconnected with any
misconduct of the employee, the eligible employee shall not be held
accountable by the Employer for the accident or results thereof. Any
alleged equipment failure or defect must be reported at the time of
the accident and included in the vehicle defect section of the report.
Neglect by the employee in failing to present the vehicle for proper
maintenance will nullify all provisions of this section.

149
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

150

 
A-11.1

A-11.2

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-11: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE

Temporary Part Time Court Bailiffs shall not be subject to Part 3 Chapter
37 Ordinance Code and may not file a grievance to challenge
disciplinary action, but may challenge discharge only through the
system provided in this article.

Temporary Part Time Court Bailiffs are at-will employees and may be
separated from employment by the Sheriff at any time and for any
reason. A terminated employee who believes that he/she has been
stigmatized by his/her dismissal may receive a Name-Clearing Hearing
from the City's Director of Employee Services upon written request
submitted within ten (10) calendar days of the dismissal.

151
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

152

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-12: ALCOHOL & DRUG ABUSE POLICY AND
PROCEDURES

A-12.1 Mutual Agreement

The Employer and the F.O.P. agree to the promotion of a drug-free
workplace through fair and reasonable drug testing methods for the
protection of the City of Jacksonville and its employees. The drug and
alcohol testing policy of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office is a proactive
approach to a potentially serious problem facing all members of society.

The parties further agree that drug use and alcohol abuse have serious
adverse effects upon users in the work force resulting in the loss of
productivity, posing a threat to the workplace and to public safety and
security. Maintaining a healthy and productive work force and safe
working conditions free from the effects of drugs and alcohol are goals of
both the Employer and the F.O.P. The parties recognize that drug use
creates a variety of workplace problems, including increases in on-the-job
injuries, in absenteeism, and in the financial burden on health and benefit
programs. Criminal justice work requires, and the safety of the public
demands, optimum mental and physical functioning of employees at all
times. In the interest of public safety, the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office has a
responsibility to monitor employees’ use and abuse of controlled
substances and other drugs/medicines.

Employees who believe that they may be abusing drugs are encouraged
to contact the Employee Assistance Program for help in overcoming this
problem.

A-12.2Definitions

A. “Alcohol abuse” means the use of alcohol or alcoholic beverages,
on or off duty, which impairs or otherwise adversely affects the
employee's ability to perform his/her job duties. Using or being
under the influence of alcohol or alcoholic beverages on the job by
City employees is strictly prohibited.

B. “Drug abuse” means the ingestion of any controlled substance as
defined in Section 893.03, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to
time, not pursuant to a lawful prescription. The term “drug abuse”
also includes the commission of any act prohibited by Chapter 893,
Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time.

Cc. “Illegal drug” means any controlled substance as defined in Section

893.03, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time, not
possessed or taken in accordance with lawful prescription.

153
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Mandatory
Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs (the DHHS
Guidelines) means those guidelines as printed in the April 11, 1988
Federal Register (53 C.F.R. 11970), as they may be amended from
time to time.

“Reasonable suspicion” means a suspicion which is based on
specific, objective facts derived from the — surrounding
circumstances from which it is reasonable to infer that further
investigation is warranted.

A-12.3 Circumstances When Testing May be Required

A.

The Employer may require an eligible employee to submit to
alcohol and drug testing under any of the following circumstances:

(1) As part of the initial screening process for employment.

(2) When there is a reasonable suspicion that an eligible
employee is using, under the influence of, or in possession of
alcohol or illegal drugs while on duty, or that the employee is
abusing alcohol or illegal drugs and the abuse either
adversely affects his/her job performance or represents a
threat to the safety of the employee, co-workers, or the
public. Reasonable suspicion drug/alcohol testing can be
ordered by a captain or higher level commanding officer.

(3) Following a serious accident or incident in which safety
precautions were violated or unusually careless acts were
performed and there is reasonable suspicion to believe these
actions were the result of using drugs or alcohol.

(4) As part of the Sheriff's Office random drug testing program.
Such random drug testing may occur before, during, or
immediately after the regular work period of the employee,
and shall be compensated in accordance with the terms of
this Agreement.

The Employer will pay the cost of any tests required by this article.
Eligible employees who are tested on the basis of reasonable
suspicion may be returned to their job, assigned to a different work

location, or placed on leave pending receipt of the test results.

Failure or refusal to submit to substance abuse testing as required by
this article shall be cause for discharge.

154
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

A-12.4 Drug Testing Protocol and Procedures

The Sheriff's Office will establish guidelines for the collection of drug test
samples that will afford protection to the employee to include the
following:

A.

Specimens shall be collected with due regard for the privacy of the
individual providing the specimen and in a manner reasonably
calculated to prevent substitution or contamination of the sample.

When an employee is required to provide specimens for a testing
procedure, the employee shall provide one (1) specimen (large
enough to be divided into two (2) separate samples at the time of
collection in order to facilitate the testing procedures).

Documentation of specimen collection shall include:

(1) Labeling of specimen containers to reasonably preclude
erroneous identification of test results.

(2) Specimen collection, storage, and transportation to the
testing site shall be performed in a manner which will
reasonably preclude specimen contamination or adulteration.

(3) The Employer shall use a chain of custody procedure to ensure
the proper record keeping, handling, labeling, and
identification of all specimens to be tested.

(4) Employees selected for random drug testing will be assigned
a number which will be the only means of identifying the
individual who provided the specimen. The assigned numbers
will be maintained in a confidential file under the direct
supervision of the JSO Chief of Personnel.

The threshold level or cut-off limit of the analytical testing
procedures shall be established in accordance with the State of
Florida Agency for Health Care Administration in conjunction with
the standards developed by the Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), regarding testing and
protocol and procedures.

When eligible employees are required to participate in any of the
drug testing procedures, the initial testing specimen will be subject
to an EMIT (Enzyme Multiple Immunoassay Technique). If the results
of the initial test are negative, no further testing will be done.

155
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

F. If the results of the initial test provided for in Section 12.4(E) are
positive, the Employer will submit the sample for confirmation testing
using a GC/MS (Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry) test or
other method specified by DHHS Guidelines to verify the initial test
results. This test will be conducted by an outside licensed laboratory
capable of analyzing drug content. When a confirmation test is
necessary, the Employer will insure proper storage and

ransportation of the specimen to the laboratory for processing.

G.lf the results of the second test provided for in Section 12.4(f) are
positive, as confirmed by a qualified medical review officer, the
Employer shall promptly notify the employee of the results. At that
ime, the employee may elect to have the second sample tested.

H. A confirmed positive test result for the second sample (or for the first
sample if the employee chose not to have the second sample
ested) shall be grounds for discharge.

I. he Evidential Breather Testing Device (EBT) will be used by the
Employer to test for the presence of alcohol in an employee's
system. The test will be performed by a Certified Breath Analyzer
echnician (BAT) using a EBT approved by the National Highway
traffic Safety Administration. If the initial test registers an alcohol
concentration of 0.02 or greater, a confirmation test will be
performed. The employee will be placed in a separate room under
he observation of the BAT for at least 15 minutes but not more than
20 minutes, after which he/she will receive a confirmation EBT test.

J. he Employer will, to the extent permitted by law, keep the results of
any testing required by this article confidential. Furthermore, any
positive test results which the Employer later determines to have
been refuted shall have affixed thereto the subsequent refutation.
est results shall be considered confidential medical records.

 

A-12.5 Applicability of General Order XV.2

Eligible employees shall be subject to General Order G.O. XV.2 Drug
Screening Program.

156
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-13: MATTERS NOT ADDRESSED

To the extent any provision of the Agreement reached between the City of
Jacksonville and the Fraternal Order of Police, is not adopted herein by
reference, or is not specifically addressed in this Appendix A, said provision is null
and of no effect as it relates to eligible employees covered by this Appendix A.

157
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

158

 
A-14.1

A-14.2

A-14.3

A-14.4

A-14.5

A-14.6

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE A-14: LEAVE

Effective each September 30, during the life of this Agreement, each

 

 

 

 

 

eligible employee shall be credited with a bank of leave hours in
accordance with the following:
Hours Worked Leave Hours Credited
“Old” Fiscal Year “New” Fiscal Year

1820 - 2080 80

1560 - 1819 60

1040 - 1559 40

Less than 1040 -0-

 

 

 

 

Effective September 30 after an employee's four (4) year anniversary
date as a certified bailiff, the leave hours credited shall be 120 if that
employee works a minimum of 1820 hours during the previous fiscal
year.

No employee will be entitled to the higher leave hours unless they
maintain the minimum of 1820 hours in each fiscal year.

Effective each September 30, leave hours credited on the previous
September 30 but not used shall be forfeited. There shall be no
payment for credited but unused leave.

If a fulltime, temporary sworn certified bailiff is appointed to a Judicial
Officer position, without a break in service, his/her credited but unused
leave hours shall be transferred to his/her Leave Plan P account on an
hour-for-hour basis.

Policies governing donated leave shall not be applicable to eligible
employees.

Leave must be requested and approved in accordance with policies
established by the Sheriff's Office.

Eligible employees may be granted up to two (2) days off without loss
of pay as bereavement leave not otherwise chargeable upon the
death of the employee's spouse, child, mother, father, grandmother or
grandfather. Bereavement leave of one (1) day may be granted upon
the death of other members of an eligible employee’s immediate
household.

159
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

160

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

APPENDIX B: JUDICIAL OFFICERS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B-1 Articles Adopted by Reference

B-2 Discharge and Discipline

B-3 Use of Leave

B-4 Military Leave

B-5 Holidays

B-6 Hours of Work and Overtime Payment
B-7 Wages

B-8 Employee Benefits

B-9 Uniforms and Equipment

B-10 Comprehensive Drug and Alcohol Abuse Policy and Procedure
B-11 Matters Not Addressed

 

161

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

162

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE B-1: ARTICLES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE

B-1.1 The following articles from the October 1, 2011 - September 30, 2014
Police Officers’ collective bargaining agreement shall be applicable to

Judicial Officers.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 F.O.P. RECOGNITION

2 F.O.P. SECURITY AND CHECK OFF
3 F.O.P. ACTIVITIES

4 MANAGEMENT SECURITY

5 MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

6 SPECIAL MEETINGS

7 BULLETIN BOARDS

9 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

13 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION

14 FILES

16 PERSONAL LEAVE PLAN P

18 BEREAVEMENT AND FUNERAL LEAVE
19 LEAVE DONATION

25 FITNESS FOR DUTY EXAM

26 HEALTH & SAFETY

36 SEVERABILITY

37 RESIDUAL RIGHTS

38 ENTIRE AGREEMENT

 

163

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

164

 
B-2.1

B-2.2

B-2.3

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE B-2: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE

All discipline taken against a Judicial Officer shall be for proper cause. The
procedure for dismissals, demotions, and suspensions shall be as outlined
in the City of Jacksonville Civil Service and Personnel Rules and
Regulations and the Florida Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights,
Section 112.532, Florida Statutes, as in effect upon signing of this
Agreement unless modified in this Agreement. Should the Florida Law
Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights be repealed (Section 112.532, Florida
Statutes), said repeal will not affect or modify the provisions of this section.

Judicial Officers in their initial twelve (12) month probationary period who
are dismissed from employment shall have no right to a Civil Service Board
hearing, or to appeal pursuant to this Agreement.

A. Disciplinary Hearing Board

There shall be established a Sheriff's Disciplinary Hearing
Board for the purpose of such hearings. Said Board shall be
composed of five (5) members, with two (2) members being
selected by the administration, two (2) members being selected by
the aggrieved officer; and the fifth member being selected by the
other four (4) members. The board members shall be law
enforcement officers who are currently employed by JSO. No
member o f this Board shall be a relative of the aggrieved officer, as
defined by the Civil Service Board Rules. The hearing will be
informal. Neither the aggrieved officer nor the Employer shall utilize
an attorney for the presentation during the informal hearing
proceedings. During the hearing, the aggrieved officer will be
provided the opportunity to respond to the charges against
him/her, and to tell his/her side of the story. The aggrieved officer
shall be permitted to provide a list of witnesses, and present
evidence as part of a defense. Any member of the Board may
request, through the chairperson, to call upon the witnesses
provided to give testimony germane to the events leading to the
charges being levied. The Board will review the information
presented during the informal hearing, and consider the JSO
disciplinary standards, and then make a recommendation to the

Sheriff about the level of discipline (i
imposed in the case The Board’s de
binding upon the Sheriff.
unsatisfactory to the aggrieved of

any) that it believes should be
cision will be advisory and not

If the decision of the Sheriff is

 

icer, he/she may appeal this

decision to the Civil Service Board within ten (10) days, or request
arbitration within five (5) working days, as provided in Article 9.6
Step IV. It is agreed that the convening of the Sheriff's Disciplinary
Hearing Board shall be effectuated as expeditiously as possible
following charges being levied against the

aggrieved officer. Should the accused officer request to

165
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

continue a hearing or delay its convening, then it is agreed that the
officer waives his/her emoluments in exchange for the continuance
of the hearing.

No suspension with loss of pay shall be implemented until any
requested civil service or arbitration hearing has been held and an
opinion rendered except as provided for in Article 13. (This shall not
apply to terminations.)

166
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE B-3: USE OF LEAVE

B-3.1 Use of Leave for Illness

A.

Accrued sick and personal leave may be used for absence from
duty due to illness. Accrued sick or personal leave may also be
used in the case of serious illness in the employee's immediate
family. The term, "immediate family", as used in this Article, shall
mean: an individual's spouse, children, mother, father, brothers,
sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, aunts, uncles, grandparents,
grandchildren, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-
in-law, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law, step-parent, step-children, and
other relatives who permanently reside with the individual. Special
consideration may also be given to any other person who has had
a close, long-standing, personal relationship with the employee
where such a person acted similar to and/or stood in the place of a
mother, father, brother, sister, or grandparent of the employee.

In each case where an emergency situation arises or where serious
illness exists at the home of a Judicial Officer, the employee shall be
granted sufficient time off duty to complete or make the necessary
arrangements to alleviate that emergency situation or serious illness.
Under Personal Leave Plan P, this time off duty may be charged to
the employee's personal leave time, in the discretion of the
appropriate supervisor.

All employees shall be required to furnish to the Employer such
information as may be requested for the proper administration of
this section.

An employee must notify the Sheriff's Office as early as possible and
no later than forty-five (45) minutes before starting time the first day
the employee is unable to report for work because of illness. The
employee will notify the Sheriff's Office of the nature of the
employee's illness and the approximate amount of time the
employee will be absent.

Use of leave for illness is subject to investigation by the Sheriff's
Office. An employee will be counseled whenever a pattern clearly
develops where an employee is abusing leave taken for illness.
(Example: when leave for illness is combined with regular days off
more than three (3) times annually.)

Should an employee be absent due to illness and fail to comply

with the rules and regulations covering leave, such employee will
be charged with unauthorized absence.

167
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

G. Pregnancy and Childbirth: Disabilities caused or contributed
to by pregnancy, child birth, other related conditions or illnesses,
and the recovery from such conditions or illnesses are, for all job-
related purposes, genuine illnesses and should be treated as such.
Employees may take leave on the same general terms and
conditions for such illnesses as are otherwise applicable under leave
provisions of this Agreement.

B-3.2 Use of Personal Leave

A.

D.

Employees, when eligible and authorized, may use their personal
leave for any reason they deem necessary.

Accrued personal leave may be taken at any time when approved
by the appropriate Commanding Officer-Supervisor. Any such
personal leave shall be scheduled with due regard to the
employee's request with any extenuating circumstance to be
considered and consistent with the requirements of the Employer's
operation.

(1) Leave requests for personal use of up to two (2)
consecutive working/shift days must be submitted in writing
for approval at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance, unless
the personal leave is for illness. In the latter case, written
requests shall be submitted as soon as practicable.

(2) Leave requests for personal use of more than two (2)
and up to four (4) consecutive working/shift days must be
submitted in writing for approval at least forty-eight (48) hours
in advance, unless the personal leave is for illness. In the latter
case, written requests will be submitted as soon as
practicable.

Advance Scheduling of Leave

(1) Seniority Personal Leave List
There will be established in each a seniority personal leave list.
Employees with the most seniority in classification shall have
the first right of personal leave choice. The employee with the
next higher seniority in classification will have the next right of
choice and so on down the list.

(2) | Scheduling After February 1
After February 1, the scheduling of personal leave will be

accomplished on a first come, first serve basis for available
leave dates.

168
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

B-3.3 Upon written request with at least thirty (30) days advance notice, an
employee taking at least two (2) weeks of authorized paid vacation may
have advanced to him/her on his/her last regular pay day prior to
beginning the paid vacation, his/her normal bi-weekly take home pay.

B-3.4 Employees shall request leave and the Employer shall note approval or
disapproval of such leave on a form provided by the Employer.

A.

The minimum amount of personal leave to be taken and charged
shall be one-half (1/2) hour for the first half-hour. Personal leave will
be charged only against an employee's regular workday and shall
not be charged for absences on prearranged overtime work
and/or unscheduled call-in overtime work-days or holidays.

Should a legal holiday fall within an employee's scheduled personal

leave period, no personal leave time will be charged for the
holiday.

169
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

170

 
B-4.1

B-4.2

B-4.3

B-4.4

B-4.5

B-4.6

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE B-4: MILITARY LEAVE

Leaves of absence and re-employment rights of employees inducted into
military service shall be as provided in the Uniformed Services Employment
and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 and the Florida Statutes. The
following provisions shall govern to the extent that they are not in conflict
with these statutes. In the event of conflict, the statutes shall govern.

Reserve Training: Any employee who is a member of the Armed Forces
Reserve or of the National Guard will be granted military leave not to
exceed 240 working hours in a fiscal year after presentation of official
orders and submission of a Leave Request. The employee shall be paid for
the number of working days occurring during this military leave, according
to his/her regular work schedule.

Active Duty During Peacetime: Employees who enlist in the Armed Forces
during peacetime are not eligible for military leave but are entitled to
reemployment with the City within (90) days of release from active duty
with an honorable discharge. This reemployment will be without loss of
benefits or seniority. The reinstated employee will not accrue merit
increases during the absence.

Any member of a Reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United
States who enters upon active duty (other than for the purpose of
determining physical fitness and other than for training) or whose active
duty is extended during a period when the President is authorized to order
units of the Ready Reserve or members of a Reserve component to active
duty shall be eligible for military leave benefits (pay for the number of
working days, according to the employee's regular work schedule,
occurring during the first thirty (30) calendar days of military leave).

Employees on military leave will receive any general salary adjustments
that were granted during their absence to their job classification and earn
time toward longevity during the unpaid period of military leave. Drafted
or extended employees will continue to earn seniority credit toward
longevity, annual leave and promotional examination.

Active Duty During Wartime: Any employee who enters the Armed Forces
during a period of war between the United States and a_ foreign
government or who is called to active duty in the Armed Forces or
National Guard during wartime, shall be granted military leave for his/her
period of military commitment. Upon presentation of official orders, such
an employee shall receive pay for the number of working days,
according to his/her regular work schedule occurring during the first thirty
(30) calendar days of military leave.

 

 

An employee granted an extended military leave may elect to be paid
for accumulated annual leave.

171
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

B-4.7 Employees may request adjustment of their schedules for a military
weekend drill by written request to their supervisors. Such requests shall be
submitted at least fourteen (14) days prior to drill date. A determination
under this section is not grievable or arbitrable, but the employee may
request a review by the division chief.

172
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE B-5: HOLIDAYS

B-5.1 Eligible employees shall be entitled to compensation, as provided for in
sections B-5.3 and B-5.4 for the eleven (11) holidays listed below, or on any

B-5.2

B-5.3

B-5.4

B-5.5

day declared a holiday by ordinance of
by the Mayor.

he City Council, or proclamation

 

DATE

EVENT

 

January First

New Year's Day

 

Third Monday in January

Martin Luther King's Birthday

 

Third Monday in February

Presidents’ Day

 

Last Monday in May

Memorial Day

 

July Fourth

Independence Day

 

First Monday in September

Labor Day

 

November Eleventh

Veterans’ Day

 

Fourth Thursday in November

Thanksgiving Day

 

Day after Thanksgiving

Day after Thanksgiving Day

 

December Twenty-Fourth

Christmas Eve

 

 

December Twenty-Fifth

 

Christmas Day

 

Any permanent or probationary employee shall receive payment for any

paid holiday unless:

A. Employee has an unexcused or unpaid absence on the last regular
work day preceding such holiday or on the next regular work day
following such holiday;

B. Employee is on leave of absence or layoff on the day on which
such holiday occurs;

Cc. Employee fails to report for work without justifiable reason for such
absence having been scheduled to work on such holiday.

D. Employee is receiving workers’ compensation or supplemental

workers’ compensation pay.

 

Eligible employees who are not required to work on a holiday listed in
section B-5.1 will be compensated for eight (8) hours at their regular hourly
rate.

Employees who work a Monday through Friday work week shall observe
holidays as set forth annually in the City Employee Services Directive on
that subject.

Eligible employees who are required to work on a holiday shall be
compensated at one and one-half (1-1/2) times their straight time pay for
all hours worked on the holiday.

173
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

174

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE B-6: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT

B-6.1 SCHEDULES

Eligible employees’ work schedules shall be set at the sole discretion of
the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office.

B-6.2 OVERTIME

A.

Eligible employees shall be required to work overtime when and as
required. All overtime must be authorized and approved by the
appropriate supervisor. No employee may authorize overtime for
himself/herself, but shall be entitled to receive overtime as
appropriately authorized by his/her supervisor.

An eligible employee shall be paid at the rate of one and one-half
(1 4) times the employee's regular rate of pay for all hours worked
in excess of 40 hours per week. All compensated time shall be
included when calculating the forty (40) hour threshold.

175
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

176

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE B-7: WAGES

B-7.1 Judicial Officers shall be compensated at the rate determined by the

B-7.2

B-7.3

B-7.4

B-7.5

B-7.6

Jacksonville Sheriff's Office.

Upon successful completion of the initial probationary period, the base
salary of the employee shall be advanced five (5%) percent or to the
maximum of the range, whichever is less.

Incentive Program

At its sole discretion, the Employer may from time to time elect to establish
incentive programs for individuals or groups which may consist of cash or
other awards in recognition of improved job performance, improved job
safety records, innovative ideas that result in savings or other benefits, or
other similar work-related improvements, provided the F.O.P. is informed in
writing of any such programs.

At its sole discretion, the Employer may administer an “Employee Referral
Program” with financial incentives to encourage current employees to
refer candidates for employment in city jobs. Incentives will be in the form
of one-time payments. All eligible employees may participate in such a
program and receive incentives under the same terms and conditions.

Employees may participate in the City’s Career Development and Tuition
Reimbursement Program under the terms and conditions as outlined in the
City's Career Development Policy. The City shall fund the tuition
reimbursement program $60,000.00 annually for all F.O.P. bargaining unit
members collectively. Reimbursement requests from any F.O.P. member
necessitating funding in excess of $60,000.00 annually may be denied or
limited based upon available funding. Unused funding shall be
reallocated annually as determined by the City.

Pay Incentive for College Degree

A. Effective as of October 1, 2006, the previous “Pay Incentive or
College Credit” contained in Schedule B of the collective
bargaining agreement will be discontinued and will be replaced
with this “Pay Incentive Plan for College Degrees.”

B. Employees are eligible for incentive payments on the following basis

177
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pay Incentive Plan for College Degrees
Incentives Applicable to Judicial Officers
Degree or Status Monthly
Associate of Arts or Science $100.00
Bachelor of Arts or Science $150.00
Master of Arts or Science $200.00

 

 

 

Cc. The following rules shall govern administration of incentive payments
for attainment of college degrees.!

Q)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

A newly-hired employee will be eligible for an incentive
payment for which he/she qualifies Under this plan upon
successful completion of probation.

An employee may only receive one level of incentive pay.
Incentive payments for multiple degrees or credits are not
cumulative.

Payment of incentives will be effective as of the first day of
the pay period after which the employee provides required
documentation of eligibility to the JSO Personnel Division.

To qualify for incentive pay under this plan, an employee
must have graduated with a 2.0 GPA or “C” Average.

To qualify for any level of incentive pay, an employee must
have a minimum of 18 credit/semester hours in Criminal
Justice. For purposes of this Plan, “Criminal Justice” means
the subjects outlined in the Criminal Justice Programs of Study
as published in the catalog of Florida State College at
Jacksonville.

Only semester hours/credits from a college or university
accredited by the Southern Association of Secondary Schools
and Colleges or equivalent will be recognized for incentive
pay qualification.

1"A Judicial Officer who is subsequently appointed to the classification of Police Officer or Police Recruit
shall thereafter be governed by the terms of Article 23 of the contract in chief, except that the former
Judicial Officer shall not be entitled to receive educational incentive payments for an Associate of Arts,
Associate of Science, Bachelor of Arts, or Bachelor of Science degree, regardless of the hire date of the
Judicial Officer and notwithstanding that the Judicial Officer may have been receiving such payments
while a Judicial Officer. This means that such an employee shall, for the purpose of education incentive
payments payable under Article 23, be treated as if he/she was hired on or after October 1, 2006."

178
B-8.1

B-8.2

B-8.3

B-8.4

B-8.5

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE B-8: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS

Terminal Leave Payments

In the event of an employee's death, payment shall be made for any and
all accrued overtime, personal leave, and other terminal leave benefits
which such employee would have been entitled to receive under the
applicable provisions of law and only in the following sequence; to the
wife or husband; or to any child or children over the age of eighteen (18),
or to the designated guardian if the child or children are under the age of
eighteen (18); or the mother or father; or thereafter to the designated
administrator of the deceased employee's estate.

Reimbursement for Use of Personal Vehicle

Where an employee is required to use his personal automobile in the
performance of his duty, said employee will be reimbursed for operating
expenses at the rate per mile traveled as prescribed by applicable City
Council Ordinance, exclusive of mileage traveled to and from said
employee's work location. Parking space will be provided for employees
who are required to use their personal vehicle as a condition of
employment in the performance of their duties, provided parking spaces
are available.

Comprehensive Medical Coverage

The Employer agrees to provide a choice of comprehensive group health
plans from which the employee may select, including one high
deductible health plan at no cost to the employee. Effective January 1,
2012, employees will be required to pay five percent (5%) of the actual
cost of any health plan selected other than the high deductible plan, but
such a payment shall be capped and not exceed thirty dollars ($30.00)
per month. In addition, the Employer will pay fifty percent (50%) of the
cost of comprehensive medical coverage of eligible dependents. The
employee will pay the remaining fifty percent (50%) of the cost.

Dental Health Plan

Effective upon ratification, the Employer agrees to pay the premium per
month, per employee covered by this appendix for the purpose of
providing payment of a comprehensive dental health plan for the
employees.

Life Insurance

The Employer shall provide and pay full premiums for group term life
insurance policy in the amount equal to the employee's yearly salary with

179
B-8.6

B-8.7

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

a double indemnity clause for accidental death for those employees
covered by this Appendix. Benefits may be reduced at age 70, to 65% of
he benefits under the policy.

Payroll Deductions for Agent of Record

he Employer agrees to provide a payroll deduction process that is to be
available to employees in the bargaining unit for various employee plans.
his provision shall not be construed to compel the Employer to enter into
any contractual arrangement with third parties or to undertake any legal
iability not expressly provided for in this agreement.

hese plans shall be administered by the "Agent of Record” so designated
by the F.O.P. It is understood and agreed that the Employer may assess a
charge not to exceed four (4) cents per deduction per payroll. Further, it is
agreed that the Employer assumes no responsibility or liability to or for the
F.O.P.’s Agent of Record. Solicitation for these plans shall only be made at
imes mutually agreed to by the JSO Personnel Division, Jacksonville
Sheriff's Office, and the F.O.P. so as to prevent loss of production on work
ime.

Voting

During an election, an employee whose hours of work do not allow
sufficient time for voting shall be allowed necessary time off with pay for
his purpose. Where the polls are open two (2) hours before or two (2)
hours after the regular scheduled work period, it shall be considered
sufficient time for voting.

 

180
B-9.1

B-9.2

B-9.3

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE B-9: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT

The Employer shall furnish uniform(s) to all personnel who are required to
wear such uniform(s) in the performance of their duties as set forth in the
Rules and Regulations of the Office of the Sheriff. Uniforms shall include all
necessary equipment for the employee's performance of duty as a
Judicial Officer.

The Employer agrees that before new uniforms and new personally
assigned equipment are ordered, the F.O.P. will be consulted and asked
to survey the members concerning any proposed change for uniforms
and equipment. The F.O.P. may submit recommendations for the
improvement of said uniforms or equipment; however, these
recommendations are not binding upon the Employer.

Damage to Employee-owned Property

The Employer will pay to repair or replace covered personal property that
is damaged while the employee is on duty, so long as the loss or damage
did not result from the employee’s negligence. Payments shall be subject
to the conditions set forth below:

A. Covered Personal Property

Covered personal property shall be defined as that property
necessary for the performance of the employee's official duties
including non-uniform clothing, watches, prescription eye
glasses/contact lenses and prosthodontics. It shall not include
telephones, pagers, or electronic devices. With the exception of
watches, jewelry is not covered personal property.

B. Payments

The Employer will make the determination to either repair or replace
damaged or lost covered personal property based upon the
relative costs of repair and replacement. Claims must be supported
by reasonable proof of loss or damage, and documentation of
cost, and shall be subject to the claims-processing procedures
established by the Sheriff.

(1) | Payments authorized by this provision shall be reduced by the
amount of any insurance reimbursement received by the
employee for the loss or damage to the covered property.

(2) | Payments under this provision shall not exceed two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) except that repair or replacement of
watches will be limited to one-hundred dollars ($100).

181
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

(3) The Employer shall make every reasonable effort to make
payments authorized under this Section within thirty (30) days
of the employee's submission of a claim

B-9.4 Damage to Employer Property

When Employer property is damaged, destroyed, or lost as a result of an
employee's negligence, carelessness, or failure to take reasonable steps
to secure the property, the employee shall pay the cost of repair or
replacement, up to a maximum of $400, subject to the conditions set forth
below.

A. For purposes of this section, “negligence” and “carelessness” do not
include inattention caused by the employee's immediate need to
perform official duties and responsibilities.

B. Examples of failure to take reasonable steps to secure property

include but are not limited to: leaving the property unattended in
an unsecured location such as an open car or unlocked building.

182
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE B-10: COMPREHENSIVE DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE

POLICY AND PROCEDURES

B-10.1 Mutual Agreement

A.

The Employer and the F.O.P. agree to the promotion of a drug free
workplace through fair and reasonable drug testing methods for
the protection of the City of Jacksonville and its employees. The
drug testing policy of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office is a proactive
approach to a potentially serious problem facing all members of
society. Within the limitations, as outlined in this Article, employees
found to have drug abuse problems will be encouraged to
participate in an employee assistance program or a rehabilitation
program.

It is further agreed that drug use has serious adverse effects upon
users in the work force resulting in the loss of productivity, posing a
threat to the workplace and to public safety and security.
Maintaining a healthy and productive work force and safe working
conditions free from the effects of drugs are the goals of both the
Employer and the F.O.P. It is understood that drug use creates a
variety of workplace problems, including increased injury on the
job, increased absenteeism, and increased financial burdens on
health and benefit programs. Criminal justice work requires and the
safety of the public demands total mental and physical functioning
of employees at all times. The Jacksonville Sheriff's Office has a
responsibility in the interest of public safety to monitor the use and
abuse by employees of controlled substances, and other
drugs/medicines.

The Employer has established drug testing standards to balance the
interests of the Employer, employees, and the welfare of the
general public through a fair, confidential, and accurate drug
testing program.

Employees who feel that they are abusing drugs are encouraged to
contact the Employee Assistance Program for help in overcoming
this problem. Normal agency benefits such as the Employee
Assistance Program, appropriate leave, and the group medical
plan are available to aid in the rehabilitation process. Staff assigned
to the Employee Assistance Program will support employees in this
process by providing referral to the appropriate agency suited to
address the particular need of the employee.

The sale, purchase, transfer, use, or possession of illegal drugs, or
drugs obtained illegally, is a violation of state and federal criminal
statutes and, therefore, may result in termination. Use or being
under the influence of alcohol while on duty presents a danger to

183
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

the public, to the officer involved, and to other officers, and
therefore, may result in termination.

In order to maintain the integrity of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office
and to ensure public safety, the Jacksonville Sheriffs Office requires
that all employees shall not:

(1) Abuse legal drugs;

(2) Sell, purchase, transfer, use, or possess illegal drugs, or drugs
obtained illegally;

(3) | Report for work and/or use Sheriff's Office equipment while
under the influence of a legal drug taken as a medication to
the extent that job performance would be affected.

B-10.2 Discussion

A.

Drug screening provides management with a method to assist in
the detection of a possible problem so that it may be dealt with in
the proper manner.

Drug screening of Sheriff's Office employees is a deterrent to their
becoming involved with drugs. Additionally, it assists management
in its efforts to detect drug problems within the Sheriff's Office. Drug
screening provides an avenue for identifying a specific problem
associated with drug use/abuse.

Personnel are cautioned that drug screening is not an absolute
indicator of drug use. It is a single indicator that must be combined
with other information before a final determination is made. The
drug screening program is interwoven with established Sheriff's
Office policy as it is affected by administrative procedures, internal
investigations, Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights, criminal
investigations, etc. The final determination (e.g. no action,
disciplinary action, treatment or termination) is based on an
accumulation of information and is consistent with the best interest
of the Sheriff's Office and the employee.

B-10.3 Definitions

A.

Controlled Substance - Any of the substances named in Schedules |
through V of Section 893.03, Florida Statutes, and any "designer
drugs" that may hereafter be proscribed by law and which are
subject to manufacturing, distribution, preparation, dispensation,
and administrative controls.

Employee Assistance Program - A confidential program designed to
assist employees and their families with a multitude of problems that

184
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

may affect the employee's work performance. Employees may
volunteer for the program or be referred to it by their supervisors.

Confirmation Test - An additional analytical procedure used to
identify the presence of a specific drug or metabolite in a
specimen. The confirmation test must be different in scientific
principle from that of the initial test procedure. The confirmation
method must be capable of providing requisite specificity,
sensitivity, and quantitative accuracy.

Illegal Drug - Any drug or substance, including controlled
substances, the possession of which without a prescription is defined
as a violation of state or federal statutes; or any prescription drug
that was not prescribed to the affected employee by a person
licensed to issue such prescription.

Legal Drugs - Any prescription medication or any over-the-counter
medication that has some medicinal value/purpose and is being
used by the person for whom it was prescribed.

Substance Abuse - The excessive or erratic ingestion, consumption,
inhalation, or injection of any illegal drug or legally obtained drug or
medicine not in prescribed amounts or at proper time intervals.

Use of Drugs - The injection, inhalation, ingestion, or consumption of
any drug, whether prescription or non-prescription, or any
controlled substance as defined under Florida law.

“Under the Influence” - A condition in which employees are unable
to appropriately perform their duties because of the use of any
drug, controlled substance, or alcohol. Employees shall be deemed
to be under the influence if they are physically or mentally impaired
and/or unable to perform their duties in an acceptable manner.

B-10.4 Responsibility for Reporting Legal Drug Use

A.

Sheriff's Office employees using drugs or therapeutic treatments
prescribed by a physician or other authorized health practitioner
shall determine from the prescribing person whether the treatment
prescribed has any effects which may interfere with the
performance of their duties. If the treatment prescribed has such
effects, employees shall inform their supervisors of that fact.

Any Sheriffs Office employee using legal over-the-counter non-
prescription drugs which in any way impair or affect his/her job
performance is responsible for bringing this fact to the attention of
his/her immediate supervisors on Form P-004. Information relating to

185
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

he use of over-the-counter drugs can be removed at the request
of the employee after it has been in the medical file for six (6)
months, unless the usage of such medication is part of on-going
reatment.

Cc. he supervisor of any employee, upon being informed that such
employee is using over-the-counter or prescription drugs which
could interfere with the performance of his/her duties shall make
further inquiries to determine whether the employee is fit to perform
hose duties. Upon consultation with his/her commanding officer,
he supervisor will decide whether the employee is fit for duty. If
unfit, the employee shall be placed on personal leave. Should the
employee and the commanding officer not concur on the ability of
he employee to perform his/her duties, the department staff duty
officer will make the final determination. Information regarding the
use of legal drugs being taken by an employee will be forwarded to
he JSO Personnel Division where it will be maintained in a
confidential medical file.

 

D. All Sheriff's Office employees have an obligation to inform a
supervisor or ranking officer if another employee is using drugs in
violation of the law or Sheriff's Office Rules and Regulations.

E. If any employee knowingly ingests any drug in the performance of
his/her duties, the supervisor on duty will be immediately notified
and the incident reported on Form P-004. The supervisor will see that
the employee is provided with immediate medical attention if
necessary. The employee will be placed on an appropriate duty
status. The incident will be documented with the initiation of Form P-
004 to be followed by a detailed report from the employee's
commander through channels to the Sheriff. Every effort should be
made to avoid such ingestion. Unless employees’ lives are
endangered, they will refrain from the consumption, ingestion,
injection, or inhalation of a substance which may either physically or
mentally be dangerous to employees.

F. Employees knowingly subjected to the passive inhalation of a drug,
such as marijuana, will submit a Form P-004 to the supervisor on
duty. The report will indicate the substance the individual was
exposed to, the period of time exposed, and give a brief statement
explaining the necessity for the exposure. The report will be
forwarded to the Sheriff for review.

B-10.5 Drug Screening Program
A. The Employer shall post a notice of the department's drug testing

186
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

policy on bulletin boards in areas that are accessible to employees.

Urine testing of employees can be an effective means by which to
identify those in need of counseling, treatment, or disciplinary
action. The testing program is intended to supplement, not
replace, other means by which the use of drugs can be detected.

Employees will be required to participate in the drug testing
program under the following conditions:

Q)

When there is a reasonable suspicion that an employee is
using, under the influence of or in possession of illegal drugs,
or is using or under the influence of alcohol while on duty, or
that the employee is abusing alcohol or illegal drugs and the
abuse either adversely affects his/her job performance or
represents a threat to the safety of the employee, coworkers,
or the public. Reasonable suspicion drug/alcohol testing can
be ordered by any supervisor with the approval of a
commanding officer. An immediate supervisor requesting a
drug/alcohol test founded on reasonable suspicion should
consider among such facts and inferences:

(a) Observable behavior while at work, such as direct
observation of drug/alcohol use or of the physical
symptoms or manifestations of being under the
influence of a drug/alcohol.

(b) Abnormal conduct or erratic behavior while at work or
a significant deterioration in work performance.

(c) Areport of drug/alcohol use provided by a reliable and
credible source which has been independently
corroborated with observable behavior.

(d) Evidence that the employee has tampered with a
drug/alcohol test during his/her employment with the
Employer.

(e) Information that an employee has caused or
contributed to an accident while at work combined
with observable behavior indicating the possibility that
drug/alcohol usage may be involved.

(f) Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold,
solicited, or transferred drugs, or used or been under
the influence of alcohol, while working or while on the
Employer's premises or while operating the Employer's

187
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)
(8)

(9)

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS
vehicle, machinery, or equipment.

Following a serious accident or incident in which safety
precautions were violated or unusually careless acts were
performed and there is reasonable suspicion to believe these
actions were the result of using drugs.

Routine fitness for duty: The Employer will require a drug test
any time an employee is referred to a_ physician or
psychologist for a fitness for duty examination.

Random Drug Testing Program: As part of the Sheriff's Office
random drug testing program Judicial Officers will be
randomly assigned a number that will be the only source
identifying the individual submitting a sample for drug testing.

Follow-up testing: Should an employee in the course of
employment enter, or be required by the Employer to enter,
into an employee assistance program for drug-related
problems, the Employer may require the employee to submit
to a drug test as a follow up to the program for up to two (2)
years thereafter.

When an employee is found in possession of illicit drugs or
when illicit drugs are found in an area controlled or used
exclusively by the employee.

Prior to completion of an employee's probation.

As part of a rehabilitation program (mutually agreed to by
the affected employee and_ the _ Sheriffs Office
Administration).

As a result of prior disciplinary proceedings against the
employee related to the use of drugs. (Such testing shall be
conducted by the Internal Affairs Unit with the approval of,
and in coordination with, the JSO Chief of Personnel). The
Employer may require the employee to submit to a drug test
as a follow up to the disciplinary action for up to two (2) years
thereafter.

B-10.6 Procedure for Testing

A. Drug testing responsibility

Q)

The JSO Personnel Division shall be responsible for drug testing

188
(2)

F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

of probationary Judicial Officers and employees selected
through the random drug testing program.

The Internal Affairs Unit shall be responsible for drug testing of
any employee whom it reasonably suspects has used or is
found to be in possession of a drug, or other controlled
substance in violation of the law, Sheriff's Office orders, and
rules and regulations. The Internal Affairs Unit shall also
conduct section B-10.5(C)(5) follow up drug testing of
employees and section B-10.5(C)(8) rehabilitation drug
testing.

B. Confidentiality

Q)

(2)

(3)

(4)

All information, interviews, reports, statements, memoranda,
and drug test results, written or otherwise, received by the
Employer through a drug testing program are confidential
communications.

The release of information obtained through any of the drug
testing programs shall be solely pursuant to a written consent
form signed voluntarily by the person tested except where
such release is compelled by a hearing officer, a court of
competent jurisdiction, pursuant to an appeal taken under
this section, or when required by management to determine
whether to conduct a formal investigation or take disciplinary
action, or for a departmental Disciplinary Hearing Board,
arbitration, or Civil Service Board proceeding. Drug testing
information shall also be released to the Bureau of Criminal
Justice Standards and Training for the purpose of reviewing
certification eligibility.

Any employee authorizing the release of drug testing
information must submit a signed communication to the JSO
Chief of Personnel advising:

(a) The name of the person who is authorized to obtain the
information,

(b) The purpose of the disclosure,
(c) The precise information to be disclosed, and
(d) The duration of the consent.

The Employer may use drug test results when consulting with
legal counsel in connection with actions brought under or

189
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

related to this section or where the information is relevant to
the Employer's defense in a civil or administrative matter.

B-10.7 Testing Procedures

A.

The Employer shall pay the cost of all drug tests which are required
of employees. Employees shall pay the costs of any additional drug
tests not required by the Employer.

Prior to taking a drug test, employees must advise the Employer of
any prescription or non-prescription medications they are taking.
The Employer will provide information to the employee of the most
common medications by brand or common name which may alter
or affect a drug test. Employees will also be advised of all drugs for
which the Employer will test, described by brand or common
names, as applicable, as well as by chemical names. Information
regarding the use of prescription or non-prescription drugs taken by
the employee will be presented in a written communication that will
be maintained in a confidential medical file in the JSO Personnel
Division. The ingestion of any prescription or non-prescription drug
by an employee shall not preclude the administration of the drug
test, but shall be taken into account in interpreting any positive
confirmed results.

Individuals responsible for conducting drug tests are acting under
the direct authority of the Sheriff. Employees being tested shall
cooperate fully. Any attempt to alter or tamper with the specimen,
its_container, or any mechanical device, instrument, or document
by any individual is grounds for termination and/or prosecution
under applicable Florida Statutes.

The Employer will establish guidelines for the collection of drug test
samples that will afford protection to the employee to include:

(1) Specimens shall be collected with due regard to the privacy
of the individual providing the specimen and in a manner
reasonably calculated to prevent substitution or
contamination of the sample.

(2) Specimen collection shall be documented and_ the
documentation procedures shall include:

(a) Labeling of specimen containers to reasonably
preclude the likelinood of erroneous identification of
test results.

(b) Specimen collection, storage, and transportation to the
testing site shall be performed in a manner which will
reasonably preclude specimen contamination or
adulteration.

190
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

(c) |The Employer shall use a chain of custody procedure to
ensure the proper record keeping, handling, labeling,
and identification of all specimens to be tested.

When an employee is required to provide specimens for a testing
procedure, the employee shall provide one (1) specimen (large
enough to be divided into two (2) separate samples at the time of
collection in order to facilitate the testing procedures).

The threshold level or cut-off limit of the analytical testing procedures
shall be established in accordance with the State of Florida Agency for
Health Care Administration in conjunction with the standards
developed by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA), regarding testing and protocol and
procedures.

191
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

When employees are required to participate in any of the drug
testing procedures, the initial testing specimen will be subject to an
EMIT (Enzyme Multiple Immunoassay Technique). If the results of the
initial test are negative, no further testing will be done.

(1) Employees selected for random drug testing will be assigned
a number which will be the only means available of
identifying the individual who provided the specimen.

(2) | Random numbers assigned to employees will be maintained
in a confidential file under the direct supervision of the JSO
Chief of Personnel.

(3) Specimen collection will not be taken at any of the
correctional housing facilities and the specimen container will
not reveal the name of the contributing employee.

The Employer will use the Evidential Breath Testing Device (EBT) to
test for the presence of alcohol in an employee's system. The test
will be performed by a Certified Breath Analyzer Technician (BAT)
using a EBT approved by the National Highway Safety
Administration. If the initial test registers an alcohol concentration of
0.02 or greater, a confirmation test will be performed. The employee
will be placed in a separate room under the observation of the BAT
for at least 15 minutes, but not more than 20 minutes, after which
he/she will be given a confirmation EBT.

Random drug testing conducted by the Employer may occur
before, during, or immediately after the regular work period of the
employee, and shall be compensated in accordance with these
guidelines.

The Internal Affairs Unit shall be called whenever one or more of the
circumstances described in Article B-10(A)(2) comes to the
attention of members of the Sheriff's Office.

(1) Once called, the Internal Affairs Unit shall have complete
authority over the investigation.

(2) |The employee shall be advised in writing of the reason(s) for
the order to submit to the test and that failure to do so
constitutes failure to obey a direct order.

B-10.8 Results of test

A.

If the results of the initial test are positive, the Employer will submit
the sample for a confirmation test using a GC/MS (Gas
Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry) test or other method
specified by DHHS Guidelines to verify the initial test results that will
be conducted by an outside licensed laboratory capable of

192
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

supplying an analysis of drug content. When a confirmation test is
necessary, the Employer will ensure the proper storage and
transportation of the specimen to a licensed laboratory for
processing.

After receipt of a positive confirmed test result from the MRO, the
Employer shall inform the employee of the positive test result, the
possible consequences of such results, and the options available to
the employee.

The Employer shall provide to the employee, upon written request,
acopy of the confirmation test results.

All reports of positive test results shall be received by the JSO Chief
of Personnel and maintained in a confidential medical file.

B-10.9 Disciplinary Procedures

A.

Any employee who refuses to submit to a drug test or whose
confirmation drug test is found to be positive is subject to
disciplinary action. Such disciplinary action is subject to the
grievance procedures provided for through Article 9 of this
Agreement and the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and
Regulations.

The employee may be either immediately suspended or reassigned
pending the results of the confirmation test for the use of illegal
drugs.

Positive confirmation tests for illegal drugs shall result in the
immediate suspension of an employee which may be followed by
termination proceedings. In appropriate cases, every effort will be
made to help the employee deal with a legal drug problem by
proper referral to the Sheriff's Employee Assistance Program.
However, if this effort fails or is obviously inappropriate given the
nature of the problem, appropriate disciplinary action shall be
initiated.

The Employer may discipline or discharge an employee on the sole
basis of the employee's first positive confirmed drug test when the
employee has either refused to participate in an employee
assistance program or a drug rehabilitation program, as evidenced
by withdrawal from the program before its completion, or a report
from the program indicating unsatisfactory compliance; or by a
positive test result on a confirmation test while participating in or
after completion of the program.

The Employer shall discipline an employee, subject to termination
proceedings, who has failed or refused to sign a written consent
form allowing the Employer to obtain information regarding the

193
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

progress and successful completion of an employee assistance
program or a drug rehabilitation program.

194
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

Employees participating in an employee assistance program or a
drug rehabilitation program may be considered as being in a
temporary limited duty status.

The Employer shall not discharge or discipline an employee solely
upon voluntarily seeking treatment, while under the employ of the
Employer, for a drug-related problem if the employee has not
previously tested positive for drug use, entered an employee
assistance program for drug-related problems, or entered a drug
rehabilitation program. However, the Employer shall terminate an
employee when the presence of illicit drugs is confirmed.
Employees who have been tested may not use this aspect of these
guidelines as a means of protection from disciplinary action.

B-10.10 All laboratory reports of a drug test shall include:

A.

The name and address of the laboratory which performed the test
and the positive identification of the person tested (not the
employee's social security number), or if applicable, the random
number.

Positive results of confirmation tests.

A list of the drugs for which the drug analyses were conducted.

The type of tests conducted and the minimum cut-off levels of the
tests.

Any correlation between medications reported by the employee
and the confirmation test results.

195
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

196

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ARTICLE B-11: MATTERS NOT ADDRESSED

To the extent any provision of the Agreement reached between the City of
Jacksonville and the Fraternal Order of Police, is not adopted herein by
reference, or is not specifically addressed in this Appendix B, said provision is null
and of no effect as it relates to eligible employees covered by this Appendix B.

197
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

 

Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

198

 
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

INDEX

SUBJECT ARTICLE PAGE

ACCIDENTAL DEATH BENEFITS.......
ADMINISTRATION OF THE PAY PLAN .
AGENT OF RECORD
AGREEMENT.
ANNUAL LEAVE
ACCRUAL (PLANE) ..csccsceseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseeeeeeeee
ACCRUAL (PLAN P).
APPROVAL (PLAN E)
APPROVAL (PLAN P) oss.
MAXIMUM ACCRUAL (PLAN P)
MINIMUM USAGE. (PLAN P)
RETIREMENT (PLAN €).....
RETIREMENT (PLAN P) .
SELLBACK (PLAN P)
TERMINATION PAY (PLAN E) ..
TERMINATION PAY (PLAN P) ..
TERMINAL LEAVE BENEFITS (PLAN E)...
TERMINAL LEAVE BENEFITS (PLAN P) ...
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX B .
ARBITRATION ....
AUTOMOBILE ALLOWANCE ..
BILL OF RIGHTS.
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
BULLETIN BOARDS
CALL BACK PAY...
CLASSIFICATIONS
CLASSIFICATIONS
CLOTHING ALLOWANCE .
COLLEGE INCENTIVE .
COMPENSATION...
OVERTIME
COMPENSATION FOR Court RELATED MATTERS
COURT APPEARANCE........0+5
DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM
DENTAL HEALTH PLAN..
DEPENDENTS’ MEDICAL INSURANCE
DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE. .
DRUG ABUSE POLICY AND PROCEDURES, ‘COMPREHENSIVE
DRUG DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES
DUES...
EMERGENCY SUSPENSION
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS .....
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE ....
EXTENDED ILLNESS...
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY.

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

 

 

 

199
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS
14.. -41

 

FILES

 

SUBJECT ARTICLE PAGE

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

FITNESS FOR DUTY EXAM
F.O.P. ACTIVITIES ....
F.O.P. RECOGNITION...
F.O.P. SECURITY AND CHECK OFF
F.O.P. REPRESENTATIVES .......0+5
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

STEP I...

STEP Il.

sTeP Ill

STEP IV

RULES .

ARBITRATION
HEART/HYPERTENSION COVERAGE
HOLIDAY PAY...
HOLIDAYS ......
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT.
ILLEGAL DRUGS
INJURY-IN-LINE-OF-DUT
LEAVE DONATION
LIFE INSURANCE

 

LIGHT DUTY ...... . 80
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS -11
MANAGEMENT SECURITY 9

MEDICAL INSURANCE
MILITARY LEAVE .......
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
OUT OF CLASS PAY
OVERTIME .........
PAY DIFFERENTIAL
PAY INCENTIVE PLAN
PERSONAL LEAVE (PLAN E)
PERSONAL LEAVE (PLANP) .
ACCRUAL (PLAN E)
ACCRUAL (PLAN P)
MAXIMUM ACCRUAL (PLAN E) .
MAXIMUM ACCRUAL (PLAN P).
MINIMUM LEAVE USAGE (PLAN E) .
MINIMUM LEAVE USAGE (PLAN P).
USAGE (PLAN).
USAGE (PLAN P)
PERSONAL PROPERTY DAMAGE
PHYSICAL ABILITY POLICY
PHYSICAL ABILITY TESTING
POOL TIME.....
PROMOTIONS
REASONABLE SUSPICION
RESIDUAL RIGHTS
RETIREMENT LEAVE (PLAN E)
RETIREMENT LEAVE (PLAN P) ..

 

 

200
F.O.P. POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

ROLLBACK OF VACATION......eceeeesee8 43

   

SUBJECT ARTICLE PAGE

SAFETY AND HEALTH.......csccescesessessceseeeeesesseeeeenee
SCHEDULE A - (BARGAINING UNIT CLASSIFICATIONS
SCHEDULE B - (SAMPLE MEMO FINAL ACTION REPORT) .
SCHEDULE C - (REQUIREMENTS FOR PAY ADVANCEMENT)
SCHEDULE D - (POLICE OFFICER, POLICE OFFICER SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT,
POLICE OFFICER PILOT)
SCHEDULE E - (POLICE SERGEANT)...
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT ..
SELLBACK OF VACATION (PLAN E)
SELLBACK OF VACATION (PLAN P)
SEVERABILITY ........6
SPECIAL MEETINGS ......ccesseseeseeseeseeee
SUBSTANCE ABUSE TESTING PROCEDURE
SUPPLEMENTAL PAY ..
TEMPORARY DISABILITY .
TERM OF CONTRACT.
TERMINAL LEAVE BENEFITS
UNIFORMS & EQUIPMENT.
VOTING
WAGES
WITNESS DUTY
WORK RULES
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION ......s-ese00+

 

 

 

 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

201
