MEET & CONFER AGREEMENT

 

between the

HOUSTON POLICE OFFICERS’ UNION
(HPOU)
as the
Majority Bargaining Agent
for ali Police Officers
and the
CITY OF HOUSTON, TEXAS

THROUGH DECEMBER 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREAMBLE oo. secsccsssssssesuseessesssetinneenssetcissstinsseostetsistisstnsscunsseeesenasernseed

ARTICLE 4: DEFINITIONS ........sscscssssssccssesssssseessnresssssrersnersnsessssvessarsssurssaneseannessanereeees 2
ARTICLE 2: RECOGNITION ..cssssssssscrsssersssesssesenssneseorsenssanesssesrscaveteenseeeneneenanensenned 5
ARTICLE 3: DURATION .....ssssssssssssssescssseerssseensssenssereiseracsssvuterteunsessniesceseeconsenseneenssars 5
ARTICLE 4: AMENDMENTS ou... ccsesseesssessnserceecsssesatssnesssscassssesesssssonneorenensuetenuenens 6
ARTICLE 5: SAVINGS CLAUSE ..........cscsesssssecseessserssssessssssecssessensacsereeeeessesssnerared 6
ARTICLE 6: PREEMPTION OF LEGAL RIGHTS ........cccsssccssessssssscscnscccensseseneontecnsected 6

ARTICLE 7: COORDINATED PROGRAMS WITH OTHER
GOVERNMENTAL BODIES

 

ARTICLE 8: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

ARTICLE 9: EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT CHIEF
RANK AND POSITION(S) AND APPROVAL OF APPOINTMENTS
TO ASSISTANT CHIEF AND EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT

 

CHIEF OF POLICE
ARTICLE 10: CADET HIRING & SELECTION PROCEDURE ............ es cesseceeccseeseeee go
ARTICLE 11: UNION PRIVILEGES oo.cc.cccssccctsssssesssstsesaseeenseessseesseeeseceuescnacecseneeteneed 3
ARTICLE 12:

MBA GROUP LEAVE TIME POOL oc. sccsecsscseesssesseseesssessessessssacsstenesetseseeee 410
ARTICLE 13: NONDISCRIMINATION uu... sccscssssesssseeesssecccocsscueserseessnesnessensenannvests 14
ARTICLE 14: IN SERVICE TRAINING AND PRE-SERVICE TRAINING ................... 12
ARTICLE 15: MBA PARTICIPATION ON OFFICIAL.

COMMITTEES .ceccsuscccsssscssssamessessessceessanesnsnnesssseasssssessussnsesaeesseenesseesecasseceeessa 12
ARTICLE 16: MAINTENANCE OF STANDARDS:

AND BENEFITS ......escsssssssessscnsescssessessseanssaseesesensueessssseessesseacenesssessseserssueseessesecneenseuses 43
Table of Contents

Meet & Confer Agreement
ARTIGLE 17: LABOR RELATIONS COMMITTEE .........-sssssescssssssseecsessesscenseneeesetenee 13
ARTICLE 18: MINIMUM ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS AND

CONDITIONS FOR PROMOTION ......ssscsssssssssssessunssssssesesssseessnnenssnescsenencaseess 16
ARTICLE 19: PROMOTIONAL PROCESS. .......ssssssssssessssscssseesenstiesecnensnseressnensecssens 17
ARTIGLE 20: BYPASS STANDARDS AND PROTOCOLS ou... cessessseenntesmnenees 25
ARTICLE 21: CLASS B & C OFFICERS oo... ccsscssnessnsessseessentsnesseceveresnensraee 26
ARTICLE 22: DEPARTIENT DIVISION MANAGERS oo... ssssescseestereeeeeesceesenes 27

ARTICLE 23: TRANSFER OF CERTAIN FORENSIC FUNCTIONS TO
HOUSTON FORENSIC SCIENCE CENTER...

 

ARTIGLE 24: HEC CENTER .......cessseccossssessssesssscsssssssseaseseresnseneaneesssenterenteranseennennsees 28

DISPUTE RESOLUTION SYSTEMS AND PROCEDURES

ARTICLE 25: POLICE OFFICERS’ CIVIL SERVICE

COMMISSION (POCSC) ......scsseccsncesssessnsssnsessnsesensaseeaneccresseesssnueesantestareceeveessanee 29
ARTICLE 26: INDEPENDENT HEARING EXAMINERS. .......0...cccssseseccssssesssennee 32
ARTICLE 27: GONTRACT GRIEVANCES. .........scccssecsssesscesstsesstessseessscsecesssesenessseeenee 34
ARTICLE 28: GRIEVANCE EXAMINERS & PROCEDURE .........ccccesessscssseeneee 37
ARTICLE 29: MEDIATION OF CERTAIN DISCIPLINARY APPEALS 00... 38

INVESTIGATION, DISCIPLINARY PROCESS AND APPEALS
ARTICLE 30: INVESTIGATION OF OFFICER MISCONDUCT ...

 

ARTICLE 31: DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE .......-scssccssescsssssesscsessesescsnvenneeeenanesese! 40

SALARY, PAYS, AND BENEFITS

Table of Contents
Meet & Confer Agreement
-ii-
ARTICLE 33: SALARY, PAY & BENEFITS .0......sesscsscccsstsecsresoressvesesensensuseessaeenseenseeees 48

 

41. BASE AND SENIORITY PAY COMPENSATION 48
2. HPD TRAINING PAY 49
3. SENIOR POLICE OFFICER 50
4. ASSIGNMENT PAY 50
&, WEEKEND PREMIUM & SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL PAY 50
6. EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE PAY 51
7. COLLEGE TUITION REIMBURSEMENT 51
8. EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE 53
9. CLOTHING ALLOWANCEPAY 54
40. TEXAS POLICE TRUST 84
11. PARKING 55
12. HPD VEHICLE USE FEE 55
13. PATROL OFFICER INCENTIVE PAY 55
14. INVESTIGATOR INCENTIVES 56
15. BILINGUAL PAY 57
ARTICLE 34: PAID TIME OFF .......ssssssscssssssesssssssssssseersetesnetecssnsseecsnesonnrenserssnsneseeas 57
ARTICLE 35: EXEMPT EMPLOYEE ADDITIONAL
COMPENSATION TIME .......ssssscssressesesssssessessnecersesesnanervessueessarsecsunessennennereessneee 59
ARTICLE 36: NON-EXEMPT OFFICER COMPENSATORY
TIME ACCRUAL osc ccssessssccsssessssesessescontsssntonseessnseeneantessuecnateccenecssnesaessanersueee 60
ARTICLE 37:
ARTICLE 38:
ARTICLE 39: CONVALESCENT OFFICER LEAVE POOL, .........csssccssssesscessseseeseeees 63
ARTICLE 40: PERSONAL DAYS (PD) .....cssssssssssesssssseeccsserssneenssssesssnsecsussneeessnseesenss 63

ARTICLE 41: PHYSICAL FITNESS & AGILITY
PROGRAM ...

 

Table of Contents
Meet & Confer Agreement
~iii-
 

VOLUNTARY SEPARATION AND RETIREMENT

ARTICLE 44: PHASE DOWN PROGRAM ...........secccssscccssesssssesesseesssessnecesnnenessenueneend 67
MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS
ARTICLE 45: DEFERRED 457(b) COMPENSATION PLAN ........-cssecssecrssesseceresseens 80

ARTICLE 46: ADDITIONAL TERMS

ARTICLE 47: PHYSICAL AND MENTAL FITNESS PROCEDURES AND

 

PROTECTIONS
ARTICLE 48: DONATED PTO uw... .sscssessssesssessssesnsessneesseensesnnenessnensnsneassesaneusnsaescaseend 83
ARTICLE 49: OFFICER RESIDENCY INCENTIVE PROGRAM .......cccsseesssseeceeses 83

SIGNATURE AND APPROVAL PAGE
EXHIBITS:

A. Base Pay and Step Tables for 2015-2018
HPD Classified: Paid Time Off (PTO) Program
HPD Classified: Physical Agility Test (PAT)
Phase Down Program; Options Table
Investigative Incentive Pay Program

moo w

Table of Contents
Meet & Confer Agreement
-iv-
Meet & Confer Agreement
between the
Houston Police Officers’ Union
as the Majority Bargaining Agent for and
on behalf of all Police Officers

and the

City of Houston, Texas

 

 

 

PREAMBLE

WHEREAS, this Meet and Confer Agreement has been negotiated pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 143, Subchapter J, Sections 143.351 ef seq, Texas Local
Government Code and entered into on the date below written; and,

WHEREAS, the parties to this Agreement are the Houston Police Officers’
Union, a non-profit Texas corporation (HPOU), in its capacity as the sole and
exclusive Majority Bargaining Agent for and on behalf of all Police Officers of the
Houston Police Department (HPD), and the City of Houston, Texas (City); and,

WHEREAS, state legislation allows for an orderly and constructive procedure
for cities and police personnel to meet and confer regarding the effective and efficient
administration of police departments, having mutual regard for achieving and
maintaining harmonious working environments and relations, the establishment of
expectations of performance and excellence, the development of fair and equitable
standards for wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment for police
officers, and to provide for equitable resolution of differences which may arise; and

WHEREAS, as supervisors and administrators exclusively responsible for
management, personnel and operation of the Houston Police Department, the City
desires to voluntarily participate in the meet and confer process as an orderly and
effective means to conduct relations with its police officers in order to more effectively
and efficiently provide services to the citizens of this City; and,

WHEREAS, state law prohibits public employees from striking or participating
in work slow downs, and the HPOU on behalf of ail officers has pledged to support
the service and mission of the HPD and to abide by the statutorily imposed
prohibitions in a constructive and positive manner by also voluntarily participating in
the meet and confer process; and,

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -1-
WHEREAS, the City recognizes the HPOU as the sole and exclusive
bargaining agent with requisite authority to negotiate contractual terms in compliance
with state and local laws; and,

WHEREAS, this Agreement, being made under Subchapter J, Sections
143.361 et seq, of Chapter 143 of the Texas Local Government Code, shail become
effective and shall be enforceable and binding on the City, including the HPD and its
administrators, and the HPOU and all Police Officers employed by fhe City of
Houston Police Department, only if ratified and adopted by each party in the form and
manner required by state and local law; and,

WHEREAS, the parties have agreed to successful contracts and contract
amendments to date, and,

WHEREAS, this Agreement represents the latest and most current Agreement
between the parties; and,

WHEREAS, the parties hereby agree and adopt this Agreement to supersede
the previous Agreements in their totality and for all purposes; except as otherwise
specifically stated herein; and,

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the promises and covenants
contained herein, the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE 1: DEFINITIONS

The following definitions apply to terms used in this Agreement, unless a different
definition is required by the context in which the term is used.

Accredited College or University - A college, university, or institution of higher
learning that is recognized by accreditation agencies identified by the United States
Department of Education on their website.

Benefit year - A period of 365 days used for the purpose of awarding or calculating
benefits payable to employees, which as of the effective date of this Agreement runs
beginning with September 1 through August 31.

Board of Directors - The governing body of the Houston Police Officers’ Union.

Business Day - 8:00 A.M. through 5:00 P.M. (Central Time) on Monday
throughFriday, excluding City approved holidays. Note: Ail references to days in this
Agreement are to calendar days unless specifically designated otherwise.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -2-
Chapter 142, 143 - Chapters 142 and/or 143 of the Texas Local Government Code;
also includes any reference to any portion of Sections 142.001 ef seq or 143.001 et
seq, of the Texas Local Government Code.

Chief - The Chief of Police of the Houston Police Department or his designee in his
absence for any reason including disability.

City - The City of Houston, Texas, including ali agents, employees, officers and
elected officials.

Commission - The Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission of the City of Houston.

Contract grievance - Any disputes arising regarding any of the terms of this
Agreement that may be brought on behalf of one or more officers by the MBA or on
behalf of the City by the Chief of Police through specified procedures set forth herein.

Department or HPD - The Police Department of the City of Houston, Texas.

Exempt officers - All rank officers in the HPD who hold the classification of
Lieutenant, Captain, Assistant Chief, or Executive Assistant Chief or pay grades Vil
and above.

Fiscal Year ~ For purposes of this Agreement, shall be the City's formal budget year,
which, as of the effective date of this agreement runs from July 1 through June 30 of
each calendar year and is denominated by the calendar year for the last day of the
fiscal year (i.e. July 1, 2015 through June 30, 2016 is FY 2016).

Hire Date - The anniversary of employment service calculated from the date the
officer was employed by the Gity as a police cadet or a police officer, whichever is
earlier.

Human Resources Director (HR Director) - The Director of the Human Resources
Department who serves as the Secretary of the Civil Service Commission and is
responsible for the implementation of these provisions and compliance with these
proceedings. The term Director includes any designee.

JHE — Independent Hearing Examiner also referred to as Arbitrator.
Leave Balance ~ See Exhibit B - Paid Time Off.

Majority Bargaining Agent (MBA) - The police employee group selected pursuant
to Sections 143.351 ef seg, Chapter 143, Subchapter J, to represent all police
officers employed by the City of Houston Police Department. The police employee
group elected as the majority bargaining agent is the Houston Police Officers’ Union
(HPOU). Upon the effective date of House Bill 2972 of the 77th Session of the Texas

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -3-
Legislature, the HPOU is the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for all police
officers employed by the Houston Police Department.

Mayor - The duly elected Mayor of the City of Houston, Texas, as prescribed by the
City of Houston Charter.

Meet and Confer or Agreement - (a) The statutorily created process and procedure
to allow for election of a majority bargaining agent that has the sole and exclusive
authority to negotiate with a public employer concerning wages, salaries, rates of
pay, hours, working conditions, grievances, labor disputes, other terms and
conditions of employment and other administrative matters of interest to police
officers at the City of Houston as set forth in Sections 143.351 ef seg, Chapter 143,
Subchapter J.; and (b) A written contractual understanding of mutually agreed terms
of employment conditions, benefits, wages, hours, etc. as adopted and ratified by the
City and the Police Officers,

Non-exempt officers - All Probationary Police Officers, Police Officers, Senior Police
Officers and Sergeants.

Paid Time Off (PTO) — PTO is the bi-weekly accrual of time off accrued at the rate
and the terms specified in this Agreement, including attached Exhibit B.

Police Officer or Officer - All peace officers, as currently defined in Chapter
143.003(5), who are employed by the Houston Police Department (HPD) now or in
the future. The term does not include Academy cadets, civilian employees, retirees,
Arson Investigators employed by the Houston Fire Department, and any other
employees specifically excluded by the terms of this Agreement.

Police employee group - An organization (HPOU, OSSO, and AAPOL) in which at
least three (3%) percent of the police officers of the City the Houston Police
Department participate, and pay dues via automatic payroll deduction, and which
exists at the time of the execution of this Agreement and does not cease to exist
during the term of the Agreement.

President - The elected president of the HPOU in its capacity as the MBA.

Red Book - The calendar or ledger systems utilized by the respective divisions in the
Department to record time off requests, i.e., PTO, PD Hours, holidays, scheduled in-
service training, comp time, etc.

Straight time - A wage rate calculation that includes base pay and longevity only.

Sworn Date - The anniversary of employment service calculated from the date the
officer was sworn in officially as a police officer with the HPD.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -4-
TCOLE ~ The Texas Commission on Law Enforcement.

TLGC — Texas Local Government Code.

Union or HPOU - Houston Police Officers’ Union.

ARTICLE 2: RECOGNITION

1.

Based upon the HPOU’s submission to the City of the results of an election
performed in compliance with Chapter 143.355, the City recognizes the HPOU
as the sole and exclusive MBA for all police officers employed by the HPD
pursuant to Chapter 143.351, et seg, except for Assistant Chiefs, Executive
Assistant Chiefs, and the Police Chief.

This Agreement should not in any way be construed as a loss or reduction of
any benefits accrued by an Executive Assistant Chief or Assistant Chief under
a prior contract. The Phase Down Program shall be construed as a previously
accrued benefit.

ARTICLE 3: DURATION

41.

This Agreement shail be effective upon approval by the City Council, as
reflected by the signature of the Mayor, after ratification by the MBA, and shail
remain in fuli force and effect until the close of business on December 31,
2018, unless otherwise provided in this Agreement specifically including but
not limited to Section 5.4 below.

The parties may amend any part of this Agreement at any time during the term
of this Agreement in accordance with the Amendments Article herein.

The parties to this Agreement may mutually agree in advance to enter into
negotiations on or after January 1, 2018 to amend, renew, novate or extend
this Agreement before the expiration date.

if the parties have not entered into negotiations or have not come to an
agreement as to any amendments or a new contract prior to the expiration
date of this contract, either party may notify the other in writing at least ninety
(90) days before the expiration date that it desires to cancel the Agreement.

If neither party cancels the Agreement before the expiration date, it shall
continue from month to month

A. Provided, however, that if the parties do not reach a new agreement by
December 31, 2018, and this Agreement is continuing on a month to
month basis, a 2% cost of living increase to base pay will become
effective on the first full pay period after July 1, 2019.

B. Provided, further that despite the allowance of a cost of living increase,
nothing in this Agreement precludes the parties from continuing to
negotiate a new agreement for a set term.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -5-
ARTICLE 4: AMENDMENTS

1.

This Agreement may not be changed or altered in any manner except by
mutual agreement of the parties. The parties may establish Memorandums of
Understanding (“MOU”) relating to the interpretation and/or application of the
Agreement. An MOU may not amend or be construed to amend this
Agreement.

Any amendments of this Agreement shall be in writing, shall contain an
effective date, and shall be dated and signed by authorized representatives of
the respective parties.

Ail amendments shall be ratified in the same manner as provided by state law
for original ratification.

ARTICLE &: SAVINGS CLAUSE

4.

If any provision of this Agreement, or the application of such provision, should
be rendered or declared invalid by any court action or by reason of any
existing or subsequently enacted legislation, the remaining parts or portions of
this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect.

ARTICLE 6: PREEMPTION OF LEGAL RIGHTS

1.

Pursuant to Chapter 143.361, this Agreement shall supersede any previous
statute or ordinance concerning wages, salaries, rates of pay, hours of work,
and other terms and conditions of employment to the extent of any conflict with
an existing statute, and shall preempt all contrary City ordinances, Executive
Orders and Rules or General Orders of the HPD or the Commission.

However, to the extent not expressly preempted or superseded by this
Agreement, all rights provided to Police Officers by the Fire Fighter and Police
Officer Civil Service Act, Texas Local Government Code, Chapters 142 or 143,
other state statutes, city ordinances, General Orders, Executive Orders, rules
and/or regulations, including civil service rules, shall remain in full force and
effect unless changed by subsequent legislation, court order or judgment, or
Chief or Mayoral action.

This Agreement does not supersede any federal laws or the federal jurisdiction
of any United States District Court or Court of Appeal.

The City agrees not to adopt or impose any city ordinances, General Orders,
Executive Orders, rules and/or regulations, including civil service rules that
may conflict with the terms of this Agreement.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -6-
ARTICLE 7: COORDINATED PROGRAMS WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTAL
BODIES

1.

Upon the effective date of this Agreement, both parties agree to protect and
defend the provisions of this Agreement against any unauthorized challenges
at local, state and national legislative levels of government. Both parties agree
to not file or support any legislative effort that affects the terms and conditions
of this Agreement, that has not been mutually agreed to by both parties.

in the event any officer covered by this Agreement who is not representing the
Union attempts to violate any of the provisions of this Article, he/she shall be
prohibited from utilizing any of the provisions of this Agreement or any other
similar statutory authorization that allows an officer to petition a governmental
body.

ARTICLE 8: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

41.

it is expressly agreed that all management rights which currently or ordinarily
vest in and are exercised by the City/HPD/Chief, except those which are
clearly and expressly relinquished herein by the City/HPD/Chief, shall continue
to vest exclusively in and be exercised herein by the City/HPD/Chief.

The City/HPD/Chief shall retain all powers, duties, and rights established by
Constitutional provisions, state statutes, City Charter, City Ordinances or other
sources of law, and departmental rules, standing and General Orders and/or
instructions or directives, including administrative memos, and shall retain the
power to act or not to act as is deemed appropriate. This shall include, but not
be limited to, the right to:

A. Manage, determine, and control the use, location, and delivery of City
and/or Departmental services, City and Departmental equipment, take
home and other vehicle assignments, property, facilities and City or
departmental operations, Department work forces and City or
Departmental affairs.

B. Determine the Department’s activities and set forth all standards and
types of service(s) to be offered to the public.

c. Allocate and assign work duties and duty assignments to officers,
assign officers to shifts, to determine the number of shifts, hours of
work (not to conflict with Chapter 142.0017), starting time, and schedule
ail of the foregoing. The City/Chief retains the right to establish, modify,
or change any shifts, starting times, work hours and/or work schedules.

D. Direct police administrative activities, including determination of
qualifications, the right to hire, promote, suspend, discipline,
discharge/indefinitely suspend and/or transfer employees, and to
determine the size of the work force and to curtail activity when
necessary, except as specifically limited by the terms of this
Agreement; the right to set and administer policy regarding wages and

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -7-
fringe benefits, including, but not limited to, scope of insurance and
City’s participation in costs, if any, number of days of vacation, sick
leave, designated holidays, and paid time off, and to modify same at its
discretion, to the extent not inconsistent with the Agreement. Any force
reductions shall be accomplished in compliance with Chapter 143, as
modified by this Agreement.

E. Determine services and police tasks to be performed and methods,
schedules, standards, means and processes of the work, changes, or
the institution of new and/or improved methods.

F. Adopt and put into effect City and/or HPD rules and regulations,
performance and disciplinary rules, regulations and penalties for
violation thereof.

The rights listed above are not ali inclusive, but enumerate, by way of
illustration, the type of rights which belong to the City, HPD and/or the Chief;
and any other rights, powers, or authority the City had prior to the signing of
this Agreement are retained by the City and/or HPD, except those which are
clearly and specifically relinquished in this Agreement.

ARTICLE 9: EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT CHIEF RANK AND POSITION(S) AND
APPROVAL OF APPOINTMENTS TO ASSISTANT CHIEF AND EXECUTIVE
ASSISTANT CHIEF OF POLICE

1.

The Chief of Police may create and maintain an Executive Assistant Chief of
Police rank, classification and positions and appoint no more than five persons
to such positions as needed at his discretion to properly and adequately
administer the Department and allow for effective span of control. Any
appointments of persons to Assistant Chief or Executive Assistant Chief
positions, Chapter 143.102 notwithstanding, shall be accomplished without
assessment, examination or any other formal means of evaluation, by
appointment by the Chief. To become effective, only the approval by the
Mayor shail be required. Appointments may be made from any rank er class
of officers in the HPD so long as the appointee meets the minimum eligibility
and qualifying requirements established by the Chief for such rank/position.

Eligibility for appointment to the rank of Assistant Chief or Executive Assistant
Chief, shal! include at least a Master's degree from an accredited college or
university (not limited to a Texas state or private college or university) with a
major in any of the arts or sciences awarded through an accredited degree
program and at least five (5) years of service from sworn date with the HPD.
Service at another police department or jaw enforcement agency may not be
substituted for any part or all of the five-year service requirement.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -8-
ARTICLE 10: CADET HIRING AND SELECTION PROCEDURE

1.

As authorized by §143.1041, TLGC, the hiring and selection procedure
currently used by the HPD to select recruits for the Police Academy shall
continue as established on the effective date of this Agreement.

HPD is specifically authorized during the term of this Agreement and any
extensions thereof to give Civil Service entrance examinations after cadets
have completed the Academy training classes.

The MBA agrees not to challenge or assert any contrary position whether
directly, through participation in litigation (to the extent authorized by law) or
indirectly, by encouraging litigation challenging this term of the Agreement. To
the extent that the MBA has any pending or active claims or litigation to the
contrary, the MBA shail extricate itself from such participation and withdraw it,
to the extent allowed by law or contract.

ARTICLE 11: UNION PRIVILEGES

1.

The City/HPD shall deduct monthly union dues and other payroll deductions
from each officer/member or non-member who has voluntarily authorized dues
to be deducted from his/her biweekly pay. The letter requesting union dues
deductions shall be signed by the President of the Union, or his designee.

Any individual member or non-member of the MBA wishing to voluntarily
withdraw his/her authorization for union dues or payroll deductions may only
do so by appearing at the HPOU Building and obtaining a dues deduction stop
request form from the membership department. The completed dues
deductions form shall be acknowledged by the President of the HPOU or his
designee. The member or non-member shall then personally deliver the
completed and acknowledged form to the Manager of Classified Payroll,
Administration and Regulatory Affairs or their designee, with a copy forwarded
to the union at the end of each calendar month.

The City/HPD shall deduct special assessments authorized by the MBA’s
constitution and By-laws upon written request of the MBA that is signed by its
President or designee.

THE CITY/HPD SHALL NOT DEDUCT DUES OR DEDUCT ANY SUM
PROVIDED FOR HEREIN UNTIL THE POLICE EMPLOYEE GROUP
PROVIDES A SIGNED DOCUMENT FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE MBA
OR OTHER EMPLOYEE GROUP AGREEING TO INDEMNIFY, DEFEND
AND HOLD THE CITY/HPD HARMLESS AGAINST ANY CLAIMS,
DEMANDS, SUITS, OR ANY OTHER FORM OF LIABILITY THAT SHALL
ARISE OUT OF OR AS A RESULT OF ANY ACTION TAKEN BY THE
CITY/HPD FOR PURPOSES OF COMPLYING WITH THIS ARTICLE.

After the effective date of this Agreement, the City shall wire transfer dues or
any other authorized payroll deductions or payments covered by this

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -9-
Agreement to the financial institution account designated by the MBA on the
same business day as they are deducted from the officer's city payroll check.

The MBA is allowed to post only general membership or union notices and
announcements on the designated bulletin boards provided by the Department
at each division at the decentralized stations and at each division at HPD
Administrative Headquarters. The bulletin boards are provided as a courtesy
and convenience for announcements affecting members, such as recreation
and social events, meetings, elections, reports of activities, shared information
from other law enforcement organizations, laws and judicial decisions affecting
public employees, and are not intended as an open forum fer opinions,
commentaries, letters, or other written communication.

A. Any matter posted on the bulletin boards must clearly identify the
author and may not viclate any General Order or include any
disparaging, discriminatory, defamatory, or derogatory expressions,
terms, comments or depictions, caricatures, illustrations or drawings
whether generalized as a group/race or directed towards any specific
person(s), ethnic/racial/gender/religious groups, or the department that
would create any factionalism, friction, hostility, dissension or disruption
in the work order and flow.

B. Any item to be posted on the bulletin board must have the prior
approval of the Chief which shail be granted if the specific requirements
of this provision are complied with. Any item posted that is not in
compliance with this provision shall be removed immediately at the
Department's request. Any violations may void the privilege and
opportunity to post any matter in the future, even if it complies with all
the requirements.

Upon the effective date of this Agreement, the City shall amend the
department’s personne! information form to include a provision that would
enable all officers covered by this Agreement to authorize the release of
information contained on the form to the MBA.

ARTICLE 12: MBA GROUP LEAVE TIME POOL.

1.

in the first full pay period in September of each year, the department shall
deduct two (2) hours from each officer's Paid Time Off (PTO) accumulated
bank of time with a cash value and credit the time deducted to the MBA Union
Business Leave Pool (“UBLP”).

The donated time will be utilized by the MBA to conduct union business
associated with the administration, representation, and protection of this
Agreement, the MBA, and the Department.

A. The donated time will be utilized by the President and up to four (4)
designees who have been approved to utilize leave under the
provisions of this Agreement.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -10-
B. Additional approved members of the Union may also be allowed by the
Chief to utilize donated time that is available under the provisions of this
Article.

The Chief of Police reserves his existing authority to temporarily revoke the
utilization of banked time by an officer representing the MBA during declared
emergencies or when use of such time would create an undue disruption of
police services.

The MBA president or his designee shali notify the Chief of Police in writing
prior to the start of each calendar year of the names of the MBA
representatives who will be authorized to conduct union business on behalf of
the MBA. The Chief of Police may approve any changes to the annual list of
officers by the MBA after the beginning of each calendar year.

During the month of July of each year of this Agreement, an officer may elect
to cancel his donation of time to the MBA by personally appearing off duty at
the MBA office and completing the forms, in person.

A The MBA will deliver a copy of the leave-time pool withdrawal form five
(8) business days after submission of the form to the City's designee

Alt donated time in the MBA Union Business Leave Poo that is not utilized in
the benefit year in which it is donated shall be carried over to the next benefit
year leave pool. if the MBA determines that sufficient time exists in the MBA
Union Business Leave Pool, the president or his designee may temporarily
halt for a time certain the continued deduction of donated time from all officers.

In the event the MBA is unable to accumulate a sufficient amount of donated
time necessary to conduct union business, the MBA may be required to
reimburse the city for approved MBA representatives conducting union
business.

A. The rate of hourly pay for any such reimbursement shall be based on
median rate of pay of a police officer and shall be placed in the Houston
Police Department's budgeted overtime account.

ARTICLE 43: NONDISCRIMINATION

1.

Itis expressly agreed that no provision of this Agreement shall be construed or
implemented in a manner so as to discriminate against any officer for any
reason set forth below:

A. Any officer is free to join or participate in any police employee group of
his/her choosing or to not belong to any police employee group and still
be fairly represented in this Agreement. The City and the MBA shail not
discriminate for or against any officer on the basis of membership in an
Employee organization.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -11-
B. HPOU recognizes its responsibility as the exclusive MBA under the
meet and confer statute and agrees to fully comply with the law and this
Agreement, by fairly and fully representing all police officers in the
department so long as they are covered by this Agreement.

HPOU AGREES TO INDEMNIFY THE CITY/HPD/CHIEF AGAINST ANY
AND ALL CLAHMS, DEMANDS, SUITS OR OTHER FORMS OF LIABILITY
THAT MAY ARISE OUT OF OR BY REASON OF ANY ACTIONS TAKEN BY
THE HPOU IN VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION.

ARTICLE 14: IN-SERVICE TRAINING AND PRE-SERVICE TRAINING

4.

Department mandated in-service training will be conducted on-duty for ail
Officers. Additional on-duty training may be approved at the discretion of the
Depariment. The annual TCOLE required firearms qualifications for an
officer's primary handgun shall be conducted off-duty. Any Department
required remedial firearms training will be conducted on-duty.

The MBA may present a core curriculum lesson plan for all HPD pre-service
training and lateral entry classes in cooperation with the Division Commander
of the Academy, or his designee, and instruct cadets regarding the police labor
and legislative history of our department as well as expiain the current meet
and confer contract benefits and provisions, excluding the provisions of the
Houston Police Officers’ Pension System Meet and Confer Agreement.

ARTICLE 15: MBA PARTICIPATION ON OFFICIAL COMMITTEES

4.

The MBA may select one member and an alternate to participate on the HPD
Crash Review Board, Administrative Discipline Committee, and the Divisional
Administrative Disciplinary Committee, to be appointed by the Chief. Any other
appointments to HPD standing committees shall be at the sole discretion and
invitation of the Chief.

The MBA may also select one member and an alternate to participate on other
official standing committees of the City whose decisions affect officers and/or
their benefits such as the Health and Benefits Advisory Board at the
appointment of the Director of the Human Resources Department. This does
not apply to any committee in which the membership is restricted to
appointments of the City or the Mayor and any other authorities or entities.

The MBA shall recommend to the Mayor police officer nominees for any city
committee positions that are restricted to the appointment of the Mayer,
however, the final decision regarding which police officer (if any) is appointed
shail remain exclusively with the Mayor.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -12-
ARTICLE 16: MAINTENANCE OF STANDARDS AND BENEFITS

4.

All rights, privileges and working conditions enjoyed by officers under existing
federal and state laws on the effective date of this Agreement shall remain in
effect and unchanged for the duration of this Agreement unless changed by
this Agreement, mutual consent, legislative amendment or judicial decree.
More specifically, these include, but are not limited to:

A. HPD's obligation to supply uniforms and related accoutrements;

B. Clothing allowances for those assignments currently receiving them;
Cc. Breaks and meaitimes as part of the eight hour shift,
D.

All special and other specified pay rates set forth in Chapters 142 or
143 of the Texas Local Government Code, as well as City ordinances;

Court attendance requirements and compensation for attendance;

F. Current policy, practice and procedures on injury on duty leave and its
application to a second year of IOD leave; and,

G. Current extra job policy with respect to the maximum number of hours
that may be worked.

Those programs in place and in effect at the time that this Agreement is duly
ratified and adopted shail continue to be maintained, provided that specific
reference to a particular program is included in this Agreement, and provided
further that any clarifications, modifications, or and/or amendments to the
program shall establish the basis on which the program shall be administered.

m

ARTICLE 17: LABOR RELATIONS COMMITTEE (“LRC”)

41.

Purpose. The parties acknowledge that a harmonious working relationship is
essenitial to the success of this Agreement, and the first basic tenet of such a
working relationship is cooperation and mutual recognition of each other's
positions with regard to issues that affect officers.

A To such end, a Labor Relations Committee (‘LRC” or “Committee”)
shall continue as previously established to mutually explore such issues
and seek joint recommendations for resolutions to problems that may
arise in the workplace.

B. The Labor Relations Committee is meant to establish a more formal
and institutionalized mechanism for reciprocal exploration of workplace
issues in a positive manner. This forum is not for purposes of
embarrassment or castigation of one party by the other. Moreover, this
cooperative and mutual working relationship is advisory only and not
meant to supplant management initiatives, prerogatives and decision
making authority.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -13-
Cc. Neither the Chief, nor the HPD, nor the City is bound to implement any
resolution recommended by the Committee, except as specified to in
other Articles contained in this Agreement.

Structure and membership. The Committee shall continue to consist of ten
members. There is no qualification for appointment other than employment by
HPD. Five appointments each shall be made by the Chief and the President of
the MBA. Removal and appointments shall be at the sole discretion of the
appointing party at any time.

Meetings. The Committee shall meet regularly at least bi-monthly at an
agreed upon date, time and location, unless agreed otherwise by the
Chairperson and the President of the MBA. Special called meetings may be
held in the interim at the call of the Chief and be limited to issues requiring
special consideration. A quorum is not required for action to be authorized by
the Committee. The meetings are not public or subject to the Texas Open
Meetings Act.

Each meeting shall be conducted by a Facilitator, designated at the previous
month's meeting (on a rotating basis between the MBA and the City) who shall
call the meeting to order and facilitate the conduct of business on the Agenda
through agreed upon rules of order (Robert's, efc).

Items to be placed on the agenda shall be forwarded via the Chief to the
designated Facilitator at least seven days before the regular meeting so that
relevant data, documents, and information may be assembled in time for the
meeting and forwarded to the members of the Committee ahead of time.

A. The business of the meeting shall be conducted informally in an
atmosphere conducive to the open, candid and constructive discussion
of issues.

B. To the extent that any public entity may have confidential information,
Committee members shall respect the (lawful) confidentiality of
information and documents which may from time to time come before
the Committee and shall not disclose information, documents or other
information to anyone outside the City/HPD unless prior authorization is
given by the Chief. All such documents or other materials shall be
marked “Confidential — Disclosure Restricted.”

Cc. in keeping with the open and candid discussion, every member of the
Committee shall be furnished with all relevant documents or other
information necessary for full consideration of any issue on the Agenda
to the fullest extent allowed by law. Additional related documents and
information may be requested, but will only be provided, if relevant and
at the discretion of the Chief. Such additional information shall be
generally provided unless a legitimate business exclusion (such as
threatened or pending litigation, pending administrative decisions, etc.)
prohibits such disciosure.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -14-
6.

The Committee shall be responsible for the following:

1. Making recommendations on issues that affect officers;
2. responding to requests for input from the Chief,

3. proffering issues that affect the health and safety of officers,
including but not limited to equipment, working conditions, etc.,

4, selecting arbitrator/mediators for contract grievances;
5. selecting grievance examiners for Step Il grievance hearings:

6. appointing the selections made by each party and establishing
the rotational order of independent hearing examiners;

7. establishing rules and procedures for adoption and approval of
the POCSC;

8. identifying and suggesting ways to improve the effectiveness of
police officers, increase professionalism and develop pride in the
police services of the City of Houston;

9. developing a rotating police memorial master schedule;

10. developing and establishing the mentoring responsibilities for
entitlement to Mentoring pay;

11. reviewing and approving officers eligible to utilize the
Convalescent Officer Leave Pool consistent with the City's
existing policy,

12. developing and approving (by two-thirds vote) a new Physical
Agility Test (PAT) if requested by the Chief; and,

43. any other tasks delegated to the LRC in the Agreement.

tems that may not be discussed are personnel or disciplinary issues
affecting any individual officer, confidential medical or disability
information relating to an officer (unless written authorization is
provided by the officer), individual drug or alcohol tests or results, or
items specifically charged to other Committees, (e.g. strategic planning,
etc.) unless the Chief specifically requests or agrees that the matter
should come before the Committee.

The Committee has no investigatory powers or duties. No individual
member of the Committee may request information for purposes of
conducting individual or collective investigations of any issue or use
his/her membership on the Committee to directly represent or imply
authority to conduct an investigation of any kind.

Public Records. Because the City/Department is a local government agency,
any records or documents created by the Committee are subject to the Texas
Public Information Act and may be disclosed to any requestor upon written

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -15-
request through established departmental procedures unless there is an
exception to the Act, which requires or allows for non-disclosure.

Consultation With Experts. The MBA may consult with one or more experts,
national associations or organizations or any other law enforcement related
entities for purposes of advice, counsel or recommendations on any issues
that may properly come before the Committee. Any such consultations shall
be at the MBA's sole expense, behest and behalf.

A. The MBA may not state in any form or manner that it represents or is
authorized to contract on behalf of the City, the Chief, or the HPD.

B. The City does not expressly waive any privilege. No confidential
information may be provided to any third parties (experts, consultants,
organizations, etc.) without the express written authorization of the
Chief.

Work Time Compensation. Members of the Committee, representing the
Union, shall be allowed time from their regular duties to attend Committee
meetings or other official Committee business but must utilize MBA Union
business leave pool time. Members of the Committee, who work evenings or
nights, will be allowed to schedule shift changes to allow the member to attend
meetings on duty time. Overtime shall be authorized to attend Committee
meetings or other Committee business at the discretion of the Chief for
members eligible for overtime. Attendance at any other activity that is
considered official Committee business, other than Committee meetings, shall
require the authorization of the Chief.

ARTICLE 18: MINIMUM ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS
FOR PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATION

1.

Police officers shall not be eligible to take the promotional examination for the
rank of Sergeant until they have completed at least 4 1/2 years of service
calculated as1,644 days from sworn date to the final sign-up date. The
service period calculation excludes all temporary suspensions of ninety (90)
days or more.

Before a classified empioyee may participate in any phase of the promotional
examination process, the employee must have continuous service at the
current rank for two years immediately prior to the final sign-up date for
participation in the promotional process, calculated from the date of the
vacancy which the candidate filled. The service period calculation excludes all
temporary suspensions of ninety (90) days or more.

As a condition of eligibility to take the promotional examination for Lieutenant,
candidates for promotion must have obtained an associate's degree or higher,
or 65 hours of coursework (excluding credit granted for life experience or
training hours when no degree has been conferred) from an accredited college

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -16-
or university prior to the final sign-up date. Proof must be provided by the date
indicated in the exam notice.

As a condition of eligibility to take the promotional examination for Captain,
candidates for promotion must have obtained a bachelor’s degree or higher
from an accredited college or university prior to final sign-up date for the
promotional examination. Proof must be provided by the date indicated in the
exam notice.

ARTICLE 19: PROMOTIONAL PROCESS

The parties each agree that this Article has been created with the joint goal of
implementing promotional processes that avoid employment practices which
discriminate or result in discrimination on the basis of protected class, are consistent
with applicable legal standards, and are consistent with validation standards
generally accepted by the psychological profession.

Section 1. LRC Test Subcommittee

1.

For each promotional exam, the Labor Relations Committee shall appoint a
Test subcommittee of no more than eight members with four members each
selected by the HPD and the MBA respectively.

A. Members should be of at least the rank being tested or higher and have
at least two years in the rank.

B. Membership of the subcommittee should be as balanced as possible as
to gender, race, age, rank, etc. All members must vote either in person
or by proxy for selection of the vendor.

C. Any tie vote or impasse on an issue of the subcommittee shall be
broken by a vote of the Labor Relations Committee.

Whenever an independent vendor or other qualified test developer is expected
to be selected to administer and/or develop a promotional examination, the
LRC shail be responsible for reviewing ali bids and recommending a vendor(s)
to the Chief.

The Test subcommittee shall be responsible for monitoring testing and
assessment procedures, determining a course of action whenever a
procedural question arises, unless otherwise specified by the Agreement.

The Test subcommittee shall review appeals of the written exam. The decision
of the Test subcommittee shail be final.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -17-
Section 2. Examination Notice

1.
2.

Examinations shali consist of written and assessment components.

Notice of the examination is sufficient if posted prior to the ninetieth (90")
calendar day before the scheduled date of the examination. Exam study
sources shall be posted between forty-five (45) and fifty (60) calendar days
before the scheduled date of the exam, excluding the exam date and the
announcement date.

Notwithstanding any requirement of the TLGC, at the time the test is
announced, the Chief need not declare the number of existing and anticipated
openings to occur aver the life of the list.

Candidates shail be required to sign up to take the examination and to verify
eligibility and supplemental points and to abide by other procedural
requirements according to the terms specified in the notice of the examination.
Candidates who fail to comply with the requirements as noticed will not be
permitted to take the examination.

The actual date of the examination may be rescheduled for up to sixty (60)
days in the event of circumstances beyond the City's control, including but not
limited to, extraordinary weather events or other emergencies, or loss of test
venue. In the event of a rescheduling, no further notice of the examination is
required other than the new time, place, and date of the rescheduled
examination, notwithstanding Chapter 143.029 and 143.107. Notice shall be
provided at least thirty (30) days prior to the rescheduled examination date,
unless otherwise approved by the LRC,

The written examination component shall be administered before the
assessment center.

The City may schedule exams at its discretion so that examination of
candidates does not impose operational or financial burdens upon the
Department.

Examinations, orientations, and appeals must be conducted on the officer's off
duty time.

Section 3. Exam Source Materials

1.

The Test subcommittee shail be responsible for recommending exam sources
to the Chief of Police including those suggested by the test developer. The
Chief of Police will make the final decision regarding sources.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -18-
No more than three source materials that are related to the job duties and
responsibilities of the rank are to be tested.

For purposes of this section ‘three source materials” may include, but are not
limited to, any combination of the following: 1) City policies/ Department
policies / General Orders; 2) this Labor Agreement; and, 3) professional
publications, which could include a textbook or a compilation of professional
articles.

Section 4. MBA Observation

1.

Process safeguards shall be implemented by the test administrator to identify
and correct technical problems at their earliest possible instance and to
manage, with the input of at least one (1) MBA representative and one (1)
Department representative, such technological complications in a systematic
and fair approach. Prior to scoring by the assessors, the Test subcommittee
shail be responsible for determining whether to score an assessment exercise
in the event an exercise must be eliminated.

Both the Department and the MBA shail each be entitled to have one (1)
observer present during the administration of the Assessment Center, but shall
not be permitted to observe any candidate's actual assessment exercises.
Observers shall be subject to the security and safeguard procedures as
determined by the test administrator and may be ejected by the test
administrator for non-compliance with the same or for otherwise disrupting the
assessment.

Both the Department and the MBA shall each be entitled to have one (1)
observer present during any meetings with and during the training of
assessors.

Section §. Written Exam

4.

Prior to and after testing, the finalized examination shall be kept in a safe and
secure manner by the test developer.

The written exam component shall be graded immediately and a written score
provided to the participant immediately whenever practicable, but not more
than 48 hours after the exam.

A pre-appeal list of test scores shall be prepared and posted in a conspicuous
place as identified in the exam notice.

Any officer who has taken a written promotional examination may review
his/her examination results and file an appeal of any question(s) on the test
and/or a rebuttal of any other candidate’s appeal to the Test subcommittee.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -19-
A. Candidates for Sergeant must appeal and rebut within five (5) business
days after the day of the posting of the pre-appeal list.

B. Candidates for Lieutenant must appeal and rebut within four (4)
business days after the day of the posting of the pre-appeal list.

Cc. Candidates for Captain must appeal and rebut within three (3) business
days after the day of the posting of the pre-appeal list.

All appeals and rebuttals shail be filed with the Test subcommittee at the
location designated in the exam notice.

The appeals will be given to the test developer who shail respond to the
appeal(s) and rebuttal(s) within five (5) business days and make a
recommendation for a resolution of the question at issue to the Test
subcommittee.

Within five (6) business days after receiving the test developer's response, the
Test subcommittee shall determine the action to be taken, if any, on the
question. The decision of the Test subcommittee shall be final.

Following the Test subcommittee’s determination, a Preliminary List of test
scores shall be prepared and posted within three (3) business days in the
location as provided in the exam notice.

Section 6. Assessment

1.

Assessments shall be used to test the knowledge, skills, and abilities of the
candidates. The test developer shall establish assessment criteria using
principles of validity. Assessments shall be video recorded for scoring
purpose, although in the event of technical difficulties that impair the video
recording, but do not impair the audio recording, then the audio alone will be
scored,

The test administrator shall conduct assessments in the following manner:

A, Sergeant: The candidates shall be ranked in order of the highest ranked
test scores on the written exam. The top 250 candidates on the
Preliminary List shail be eligible to be assessed first, regardiess of
score. Tie breaker protocals as described in this Article shall apply.
Additional assessments may occur in groups of 100 candidates in order
of the Preliminary List. The Department may elect to assess multiple
bands simultaneously as long as the bands are ranked separately.

B. Lieutenant: all candidates shall be eligible to be assessed.
Meet & Confer

Agreement
Page -20-
c. Captain: all candidates shail be eligible to be assessed.

The Department may require candidates to sign up for assessment prior to the
assessment date in order to verify attendance at the assessment.

Assessors shail score the assessment without regard to the candidate's race,
color, gender, ethnicity, religion, age, disability, sexual orientation, genetic
information, gender identity, pregnancy, national origin, or other legally
protected characteristic. Each assessor shall receive written and oral
admonitions regarding this point prior to commencing assessment scoring.

The assessment may include a variety of exercises including, but not limited to
the following exercises:

In-Basket; Problem Solving/Analysis;

Oral Resumes/Structured interviews;

Role-Playing

Memo/Report Writing;

Oral Presentation/Plan Preparation;

Staff Meeting;

Special event/Operations; and,

Others as they are established and determined to be reasonably valid
predictors of job related characteristics.

TOMMOODyY

The test developer is not required to utilize all of the exercises above, but may
select the exercises or combine the listed exercises into one or more
exercises that are best suited for the particular rank.

The test developer shail also select the assessors to grade the assessment
component who shall meet the following criteria:

A. Equivalent rank to the promotion, or above, with service from cities with
a population of 200,000 or greater;

Shail not reside in the Houston Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area;
Shall not be related to any candidate for promotion;

Shall not be personally known to any candidate for promotion;

Shall have at least two (2) years of experience in the rank being
assessed or an equivalent rank; and,

Shall not be a current or former employee of the City of Houston, HPD,
the MBA or any other HPD employee group.

moog

m

The test developer shall conduct one or more orientation sessions for
candidates prior to administering the assessment. Attendance at the
orientation is strictly voluntary.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -21-
A. Candidates eligible to be assessed shall be permitted, at their request,
to attend one orientation session off-duty. Efforts should be made, and
schedules changed if necessary, in order to allow off-duty attendance at
orientation.

B. Those officers who are working a shift just before the orientation shall
attend in their off-duty time, but shall be permitted to use appropriate
leave for time off to rest in advance of the orientation.

Nothing in the assessment process may be appealed either to the
Commission or to District Court. The final Assessment Center grade reached
pursuant to this subsection shall be final and shall not be appealabie.

Section 7. Review of Exam Materials

1.

After the approval of the final official rank order eligibility list a candidate may
review only his/her own written exam and recorded assessment:

A. No copies shall be provided, nor shall an individual copy or attempt to
copy the recording by any manner;

B. No candidate may view or copy another candidate's recording or
examination grading; and

c. No candidate may have any other individual present during the viewing
session.

Any other right of access to exam material afforded by Chapter 143 is hereby
preempted.

Section 8. Final Scores

1.

2.

The written examination shall be no more than 100 questions.

The test developer shall determine the point value for each exam item,
provided that the points available for the written examination shall be one
hundred (100) points and the points available for the assessment components
shall be one hundred (100) points. If any written exam question is eliminated
each candidate will receive full credit for the eliminated test item.

The exam components during the term of this contract shall be weighted as
follows:

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -22-
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Rank Written Assess Score

SGT 50% 50% 100 x 50%

LT 50% 50% 100 x 50%

CAPTAIN A0% 80% 100 x 40%; 100 x 60%

 

After adding the final written examination score and the assessment score, the
vendor shall add the supplemental points, as described below, to create a final
Official rank order eligibility list. The maximum a candidate can score is 113
points. The City will post a final official rank order eligibility list pending
certification by the Commission. The final official rank order eligibility list shall
then be forwarded to the Commission for certification.

The Department shall accept documentation of supplemental points up to, and
including, the date of the written test. No proof of supplemental points will be
accepted after such date. Candidates who do not provide documents required
for supplemental points or do not timely provide such documents will not be
awarded supplemental points.

Seniority, education and military points shail be calculated as of the date of the
final sign-up for the promotional process.

A maximum of 13 supplemental points shall be awarded as follows:

A. Seniority Points to a maximum of 10 points; 1 point per completed year
of classified service from Hire Date; and

B. Education Points to a maximum of 3 points: 1 point for a Bachelor's
Degree, or 2 points for a Master's Degree, or 3 points for a Doctorate
Degree; or

Cc. 1 Military Point (but not both Education and Military) for minimum 24
month’s service or honorable discharge from the United States Armed
Forces or National Guard. Honorable Discharge from United States
Armed Forces or National Guard must be reflected on DD214, or proof
of active U.S. Armed Forces reservist or active National Guard Service
reflected by unit assignment orders.

Any tie scores shall be broken by the tie-breaking procedures as follows in
descending order:

A On the basis of seniority in rank;
B. On the basis of seniority, calculated from employee's Hire Date;

c. By overall cadet class ranking;

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -23-
D. Alphabetically, using the last name of the employee.
Section 9. Promotional Lists and Appointments

41. For all promotional examinations, a final, official rank order eligibility list shall
be created in accordance with Chapter 143 of the TLGC, as amended by this
Article, and shall be certified by the Commission.

2. Eligibility lists shall remain in effect for two (2) years beginning on the date of
the administration of the first exam component. Eligibility lists shall expire at
11:59 p.m. central time on the last day of the two (2) year life of the list (for
example: Written exam component given on January 1, 2012. List expires on
December 31, 2014, at 11:59 p.m.).

3. Promotions shall be made from the final eligibility fist in effect at the time a
vacancy occurs.

4. The 60 and 96 day provisions of Chapter 143 for promotions from vacancies
with and without an existing list respectively shall remain in effect unchanged.

A. No back pay shall be awarded where a delay occurs in filling a
promotion due to a delay in assessment or as a result of an appeal of
the written test questions.

B. Back pay eligibility shall be unaffected by bypass procedures.
Section 10. Captain Promotions

The parties agree to negotiate in good faith during the next contract negotiation to
consider adding an additional component to the Captain's promotional process.

Section 11. Effective Date

The above provisions of this Article become effective upon ratification of this
Agreement and apply only to those promotional examinations that are announced
after the date of ratification. Eligibility lists in effect at the time of ratification shall be
unaffected by any timeline or process altered by this Agreement.

Section 12. Preemption.

To the extent that any provision of this Article conflicts with or changes any provision
in Chapters 141, 142 and 143, including Sections 143.029, 143.030, 143.032,
143.033, 143.036, 143.107, 143.108, of the TLGC, or any other statute, executive
order, local ordinance, or rule, this Article shall supersede such provisions, as
authorized by Chapter 143.361 of the TLGC.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -24-
ARTICLE 20: BYPASS PROTOCOLS

1.

Chapter 143.036 (f) & (g), TLGC are hereby incorporated by reference; but is
hereby preempted by the specific terms of this Article related to bypass
decisions.

As to Captains, the following selection protocols shalt apply:

A. The Chief may fill a Captain vacancy from the top five (5) candidates of
a certified list.

B. The standard of review for a bypass exercised in a Captain’s list is “just
cause”.

1. The statutory provisions of §143.036(f), TLGC to the contrary are
hereby overridden by Agreement.

Cc. If a bypassed candidate chooses not to appeal the bypass, that
candidate shall retain his or her position on the certified list for as long
as the list remains active and the candidate has not been bypassed five
times.

D. If the candidate chooses to appeal a bypass, and the Chief's decision is
sustained following the appeal process, the officer shall be removed
from the list at that time and no longer eligible for consideration off of
that list.

As to Sergeants and Lieutenants, the following selection protecoi shall apply:

A. The Chief may fill a Sergeant or Lieutenant vacancy from the top three
candidates of a certified list.

B. The standard of review for a bypass exercised in a sergeants or
lieutenants list is “Just cause”.

1. The statutory provisions of §143.036(f), TLGC to the contrary are
hereby overridden by this Agreement.

If an eligibility list exists on the date a vacancy occurs, the Chief must exercise
the bypass authority over the promotional candidate no later than the 60" day
after the vacancy occurs. If an eligibility list does not exist on the date a
vacancy occurs, the Chief must exercise the bypass authority over the
promotional candidate no later than the 150" day after the vacancy occurs.

If a candidate is advised by the Chief in the bypass letter that he/she is being
bypassed more than once and the candidate desires to appeal the bypass
decision by the Chief, there shall be only one appeal even though the bypass
letter may contain more than one bypass action.

The above listed bypass provisions shall apply to any promotional list certified
after the ratification date of this Agreement.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -25-
ARTICLE 21: CLASS B AND C OFFICERS

All Class B Officers have been converted to the “Class A” position
configuration.

Any former Class B personnel transferring out of their current assignment
within the Houston Forensic Science Center (“HFSC") or non-uniform
administrative assignment within the HPD to a patrol or investigative function
shall adhere to the following:

1.

A.

Police Officers and Senior Police Officers (former Class B Identification
Officers and Master identification Officers) and Sergeants (former Class
“B" Senior Identification Officers) desiring an assignment to a uniform or
investigative division must also successfully complete the applicable
field training program and any other departmentaily mandated selection
process.

Lieutenants (former Class “B” Deputy Administrators) will be assigned
at the discretion of the Chief of Police, based on the Chief's
assessment of the overall needs of the department.

Any officer previously classified as a Class B Police Officer, Senior
Police Officer, or Sergeant who does not complete the Field Training
Program, or for whatever reason does not successfully complete the
Field Training Program, shall not be allowed to transfer to an
operational field assignment in patrol or investigations, unless
authorized by the Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee.

The parties acknowledge that the time it takes to transfer an employee
will be governed by the hiring and training processes, both of which
should be done as effectively and efficiently as possible.

Any former Class B personnel promoting to the next higher classified rank will
adhere to the following:

A.

Officers promoting to the rank of Sergeant will be reassigned within the
HPD for a minimum of one year wherever a current vacancy exists.

Sergeants promoting to the rank of Lieutenant will be reassigned to a
position within the HPD organizational structure at the sole discretion of
the Chief of Police for a minimum of one year.

Lieutenants promoting to the rank of Captain will be reassigned to a
position within the HPD organizational structure at the sole discretion of
the Chief of Police.

No employee will be allowed to remain within the HFSC upon
promotion, unless approved by the Chief of Police. If a classified
position of the same rank becomes available within the HFSC and the
employee has completed the minimum assignment period stated

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -26-
above, then the employee may apply for the position and return if
selected to fill the vacant position.

Positions limited to Class C officers shall be civilianized through attrition. All
current Class C officers shall continue to enjoy promotional opportunities
afforded under Chapter 143. This provision, if the need arises, will specifically
authorize the number of promotional candidates to be less than three (3).

ARTICLE 22: DEPARTMENT DIVISION MANAGERS

1.

Departmental Division Commanders shall hold a minimum rank equivalent to
Captain of Police.

The following existing units may utilize non-classified ful-ttime employees of
the department to serve as unit or division managers, such as: ADR, Legal
Services, Jail, Planning, Psychological Services, Records, Fleet, Property
Division, and Technology Services.

All other divisions and units currently supervised by classified officers shall
remain under the authority of the Department and supervised by classified
police officers.

Any licensing fees or fines currently collected by the Department shall remain
in departmental accounts.

Classified personne! working within these divisions/units are subject to being
supervised by civilian personnel as it relates to non-police related matters.
Classified officers assigned fo the above listed divisions shall not be directed
by a civilian manager as to any police related matter where the police officer is
required to use his authority as a police officer to accomplish the assignment.
All police related matters, orders, or directives to subordinate classified
members of any division shall continue to be handled or issued by other
classified members of a higher rank.

A. Further, §143.103(b), TLGC is hereby modified to the extent that any
classified officer of any classification may report to a higher ranking
classified officer of any classification.

ARTICLE 23: TRANSFER OF CERTAIN FORENSIC FUNCTIONS TO
HOUSTON FORENSIC SCIENCE CENTER

1.

Employees who report to the Houston Forensic Science Center (“HFSC”) shall
be treated consistently with the Interlocal Agreement between the City of
Houston and the HFSC in effect at the time of the ratification of this
Agreement.

Positions within the HFSC can be designated as civilian or classified and the
following will apply:

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -27-
A. Positions will remain filled by existing classified personnel until such
time as the person voluntarily vacates the position, is promoted, or is
removed from that position on a for cause basis.

B. Upon becoming vacant, the management of the forensic operation can
opt to convert that position to a civilian one or leave it as a classified
position.

  

3. Any classified person working in a forensic position may be subjected to being
supervised / managed by civilian forensic supervisors / managers working
within the forensic operation.

A, The nature of the forensic operational supervisory / management
responsibilities is restricted to direction involving how forensic
responsibilities are to be performed and who will perform them.

1. Direction regarding when forensic responsibilities will be
performed should primarily be determined by the civilian forensic
supervisor / manager;

2. Direction regarding what type of evidence will be collected at a
scene will be governed by the on scene criminal investigator.

8. When the need arises, classified investigators and supervisors /
managers and forensic personnel (classified and civilian) should work
together to avoid confusion when directing forensic employees at the
scene of a criminal incident.

c. Civilian forensic supervisors / managers do not have the authority to
direct classified personnel, not assigned to the forensic operation, at
crime scenes.

D. Civilian forensic supervisors / managers will also be responsible for all
HFSC administrative responsibilities associated with classified
personnel working within the forensic operation.

4, The Chief may designate classified led entities within the Department to be
responsible for classified administrative requirements, including but not limited
to, internal affairs investigations, mandatory in-service training, job
performance ratings in consultation with HFSC supervisors, grievances,
integrity checks, notification of drug testing, extra employment, and tracking in
HPD personnel systems such as PPS, SAP, KRONOS, PRE, LMS.

ARTICLE 24: HEG CENTER

1,

Houston Emergency Communications (HEC) Center. The HEC Center will
continue the civilianization process, but will continue to maintain Houston
Police Department Command Control and Oversight over the dispatching of
police calls for service.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -28-
The Houston Police Department will maintain a classified presence in the HEC
Center at ail times.

Communications Management — Class C Officer. In addition to the provisions
of the Meet & Confer Agreement, the Chief of Police may direct the highest
classified Class C officer to report to and be supervised by a non-classified
member of the Department.

DISPUTE RESOLUTION SYSTEMS AND PROCEDURES

 

ARTICLE 25: POLICE OFFICERS’ CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION

1.

The City shall continue to maintain and utilize the previously established
Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission (‘POCSC’).

The POCSC shali continue to succeed to all the authority, responsibilities and
duties previously reposed in the Fire Fighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil
Service Commission for the City of Houston as it relates to Police Officers.

The POCSC will have jurisdiction, some concurrent with IHEs, over appeals of
disciplinary actions, Step [V appeals of grievances, and all other duties
associated with the classification system, promotional system, and medical
and psychological (fitness for duty) separations, set out in the City Charier, the
Code of Ordinances, and Chapter 143, TLGC.

All disciplinary appeals from temporary suspensions of one or two days and/or
written reprimands are exclusively within the jurisdiction of the POCSC, except
as specifically otherwise provided in Chapter 143.129, as may be amended.

A. The LRC shall have the exclusive authority to amend and implement
revisions fo this section. All members of the LRC must vote either in
person or by proxy for any proposed revisions to this Article.

The Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission shall be composed of a
minimum of twelve and a maximum of fifteen commissioners.

A. The Mayor of the City of Houston shall appoint the members of the
Commission.

B. Members will serve three year terms or a term concurrent with the
duration of this Agreement, whichever is shorter.

Cc. If a vacancy occurs or if an appointee fails to qualify within twenty
calendar days after the date of appointment, the Mayor shall appoint
another person to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.

D. A person appointed to the POCSC must meet the following minimum
qualifications:

i. Be of good moral character;
ii, Be a United States citizen;

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -29-
vi.

vii.

vill,

Be a resident of the City of Houston or live within 30 miles of the
City limits;
Be at least 30 years of age;

Not have held a municipal public office within the preceding three
(3) years;

Not have been an employee of the City of Houston or the Union
within the preceding ten (10) years; and,

Not have a direct conflict of interest with the Union or the City of
Houston (Note: A lawyer employed with a firm of over thirty (30)
licensed attorneys will not be disqualified or considered to have a
conflict of interest just because someone in his/her firm
represents the Union or the City).

No previous member of the Fire Fighters’ and Police Officers’
Civil Service Commission for the City of Houston or the
Municipal Employees Civil Service Commission for the City of
Houston is eligible to serve on the POCSC,

The POCSC will be an autonomous and independent
Commission of the City of Houston.

The City’s HR Director shall serve as the Secretary of the
Commission to administer this procedure in accordance with
these provisions and state and local law.

At the first called meeting of a newly appointed POCSC, the initial
Commissioners shall elect a Chair and a Vice-Chair who shall serve one year
terms of office. Each January thereafter, the Commissioners shall elect a new
Chair and Vice-Chair.

A.

At the same meeting, in the presence of a representative of the MBA
and the City Attorney's Office, the HR Director will randomly draw the
names of the Commissioners to create a roster of Commissioners
numbered from 1 through the entire compliment of appointed
Commissioners.

Once established, this official roster of POCS Commissioners will be
used to select panels of three Commissioners each to hear appeals and
consider ali other matters to be reviewed by the Commission at each
meeting.

Upon receipt of an officer's appeal to the PFOCSC, the HR Director shall
assign the appeal to the first three names on the official roster to hear
the appeal.

i. There will be no deviation from the order of selection from the
official roster. After the three-member panel has been selected
and assigned, if a member of the panel notifies the Director of

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -30-
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

his/her inability to be present at the hearing for any reason, the
Commissioner will be replaced by the next available
Commissioner on the official roster.

ii. Once a panel of three has been confirmed and empanelled, a
meeting date will be set to hear one or more pending appeals.

The first Commissioner selected for the panel and is present shail serve as the
presiding officer.

A. At least two members of the assigned panel must be present to conduct
the meeting and establish a quorum.

The party with the burden of proof must have an affirmative vote of at least two
(2) panel members to prevail.

A. In the event of a split vote of only two Commissioners present, the party
with the burden of proof dees not prevail.

The City shail provide to the Commission adequate and suitable office space,
staff and resources necessary to conduct official Commission business.

A POCS Commissioner shall be subject to removal pursuant to the mandates
of Chapter 143.007. However, Chapter 143.007(c) does not apply to the
POCSC.

The City Attorney's Office will not serve as a legal advisor and/or consultant to
the POCSC.

A Rules Subcommittee of the LRC (comprised of 3 officers representing the
City and three officers representing the MBA) is hereby authorized to
establish, modify, or amend, a set of rules and procedures to be adopted by
the POCSC.

All members of the LRC Subcommittee must vote either in person or by proxy
to adopt and recommend the rules and procedures. Once adopted by the
POCSC, the rules and procedures are to be followed on all appeais to the
POCSC and to grievance examiners.

Attorneys representing aggrieved officers and/or the City shall be authorized to
issue subpoenas pursuant to Chapter 143.010(d).

A All subpoenas issued must be filed with the Commission and served
upon the opposing party within 48 hours of issuance and not later than
72 hours before the scheduled Commission meeting.

B. Any motion to quash a subpoena shall be heard by the panel assigned
to hear the appeal.

The Rules Subcommittee will also develop a training curriculum for orientation
of POCS Commissioners and the grievance examiners.

The HR Director shall cause to be created and maintained a complete,
accurate and legible record of the appeal hearings of officers before the

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -31-
17.

18.

19.

POCSC. This record shall be made by a certified court reporter or a reliable
recording system that provides a complete, accurate and legible/audible
record of the appeal hearing.

A. If recorded, the recording shall be provided at cost to the officer and
shall be accompanied by a certificate attesting to the accuracy of the
transcript of the record.

B. If a court reporter is utilized and the matter is appealed to district court,
the cost of a transcript shail be shared equally by the parties.

If an officer is dissatisfied with any Commission decision, the officer may file a
petition in district court asking that the decision be set aside.

The petition must be filed within 10 calendar days after the date the final
Commission decision is:

A. sent to the officer by certified mail, return receipt requested; or,

B. the officer receives the decision as indicated by the receipt on the
return receipt form.

c. In the event the officer does not claim the certified mailing of the
decision or the post office is unable to deliver the decision, the officer
must file his appeal no later than 30 calendar days after the decision
was mailed,

The Commission shall also mail a copy of the decision fo the officer's legal
counsel by certified mail, return receipt requested at the same time the
decision is mailed to the officer.

A. This mailing to the officer's legal counsel is a courtesy copy only and
shail not serve as a notice to the officer, nor will it serve as grounds for
an appeal if not received by the officer's legal counsel.

ARTICLE 26: PANEL OF INDEPENDENT HEARING EXAMINERS

1.

The Labor Relations Committee (LRC) shall have the sole and exclusive
authority to select and maintain twelve (12) qualified independent hearing
examiners (IHE’s) to preside over all appeals of discipline in which an
aggrieved officer has elected to appeal his discipline to an tHE instead of the
Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission.

A new roster of IHE’s shall appointed by the LRC for a term of two (2) years.
All members of the LRC must vote either in person or by proxy.

A, This new roster must be created no later than ninety (90) days after
ratification of this Agreement. Until such time, the current roster shail
remain in effect.

B. The City and MBA shail each select six (6) candidates for the roster.
An IHE may be reappointed by the LRC and may serve consecutive

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -32-
two-year terms. Each party has the power to veto one (1) selection by
the other party. The party losing a candidate by veto will then select a
different candidate, with no right of veto by the opposing party.

Cc. if it is found during the selection process that a selectee is unwilling or
unable to serve, then the nominating party shall choose another
candidate.

D. Each party may remove, at their discretion, their appointee and
nominate another candidate, for appointment by the LRC, for the
remainder of the term. The candidate nominated may not have been
vetoed during the selection process for that term.

To qualify for appointment, an IHE must:

be a resident of Texas;

reside within 325 miles of the city limits of the City of Houston;
be of good, moral character

be a United States citizen;

be at least thirty (30) years of age;

have previous arbitration experience; and

be a member of the American Arbitration Association (AAA) labor panel
or Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS).

In order to establish the order of the rotating pane! of independent hearing
examiners, the LRC will alternately select names in a blind drawing and
individuals selected will be assigned in the order of their random drawing.

Upon receipt of an officers appeal, as authorized herein, to an independent
hearing examiner, the HR Director shall assign the appeal to the first hearing
examiner on the established roster and each successive examiner thereafter.
There will be no deviation from this selection and assignment procedure.

A. Once established, the list of hearing examiners and a record of the
assignments of examiners will be maintained by the HR Director for
inspection and/or review during normal business hours. Any deviations
from strict compliance with this roster assignment procedure shall be
brought to the attention of the LRC for review and appropriate action.

B. If a selected examiner notifies the parties of an inability to conduct the
hearing for any reason within 120 days after selection, the appeal shail
be reassigned to the next independent hearing examiner on the roster.

If at any time the number of permanent members of the panel falls below the
minimum number of twelve (12), the LRC may be convened by either party.
The party that initially recommended the panel member shall select a
candidate to be appointed by the LRC. The candidate nominated may not
have been vetoed during the selection process for that term.

ommoo w >

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -33-
For each assignment, the IHE will be paid for ail time spent conducting the
hearing, for travel, and preparation of an cpinion.

A. The IHE’s daily rates shall be established annually by the Labor
Relations Committee based upon an average of the daily rates of the
members of the AAA and FMCS labor panels who meet the above
eligibility requirements.

B. All reasonable, out of pocket expenses including travel and lodging will
be included in the award.

C. All costs and fees of the independent hearing examiners will be equally
paid by the officer and the City (one-half each).

The LRC may establish a rules subcommittee comprised of three officers
representing the City and three officers representing the MBA as may be
needed to review and recommend changes to the rules and procedures to be
followed by the IHEs.

ARTICLE 27: CONTRACT GRIEVANCES

1.

A challenge to any term of this Agreement either by interpretation and/or
application which applies to an officer or to the MBA may be filed only by the
HPOU, in its capacity as the MBA or the City.

The City may not adopt the grievance of any member of the bargaining unit or
any police employee groups.

Phase | -- Formal Challenge Process

The parties acknowledge that it is advisable for those who establish a working
relationship to try to resolve any breach or perceived conflict relating to such
Agreement at the earliest possible time and without judicial intervention.
Therefore, even before a challenge is filed, the MBA or the City (represented
by the Chief) shail file with the responding party, a “Notice of Intent to
Challenge” (Notice) pursuant to this Agreement on an approved form provided
by the Department specifying the factual and/or legal basis for the alleged
challenge, which must have occurred or been discovered, whichever is later in
time, but no later than thirty (30) days prior to the Notice being fited.

A. if the MBA or City files a challenge, it will be presumed that the MBA or
City has fully reviewed the matter and finds that there is merit to the
challenge and that any internal measures to determine whether to
proceed with the challenge have been exhausted before the Notice of
Intent to Challenge was filed.

i. Officers who are not members of the HPOU shail be required, at
the discretion of the HPOU, to reimburse the HPOU for costs,
expenses and fees related to prosecuting a challenge to this
Agreement. Such costs shail include, but are not iimited to,
personnel costs based upon salaries and benefits, support staff,

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -34-
copying, research, and other expenses associated with an
Agreement challenge.

ii, The responding party shall have a twenty-one (21) day grace
period from the date of filing of the Notice to amicably resolve
any challenge without the moving party having to initiate the
formal challenge set out in this Article.

iii. If the matter is not amicably resolved within this grace period, the
moving party shall have an additional nine (9) days (Phase | may
take only a maximum of thirty days from the date the Notice is
filed and may extend the contract grievance to only 60 days from
the date the grieved action arose or was discovered.) to file a
formal challenge in accordance with the procedures set forth
herein below.

iv. Participation in Phase { is encouraged, but not mandatory.

Phase II Formal Challenge Process

Uniess Phase | is instituted, a contract grievance must be brought within thirty
(30) days of the occurrence of the act(s) which is (are) the basis(es) for the
challenge, or the date of discovery, if the act was not readily apparent or
discernable.

A.

If the informal resolution process above is utilized and the moving party
files a timely “Notice of intent to Challenge”, this thirty day period is
extended for an additional thirty days (maximum of sixty days) from the
date the grieved action arose.

Any contract grievance must be filed on an approved form provided by
the Department, in the same place and manner as a grievance brought
pursuant to Chapter 143.127 and must specify with sufficient detail, the
law, the allegations and/or facts that form the basis of the grievance.

At each phase of the grievance, each party may be represented by up to two
representatives and an attorney. The grievant (officer or Chief) may, but is not
required to be present.

Once a contract grievance is timely filed, the following procedures shail apply:

A.

If applicable, the Assistant Chief responsible for the function in
connection with which the grievance has arisen shall have up to
fourteen days to investigate the facts and gather information. If the
actual fact gathering responsibility is delegated to a designated
representative, the Assistant Chief is responsible to ensure that all
tasks are timely accomplished.

The Assistant Chief will schedule a meeting with the MBA's designated
representative(s), within twenty-one days of the date of filing of the
challenge. The purpose of the meeting is to candidly discuss the
issue(s) which serve(s) as the basis for the challenge and determine

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -35-
whether any possible resolution is feasible and could be recommended
to the Chief. The Assistant Chief may include in the meeting any
resources (for example: Employee Services, Legal, etc.) that may assist
in resolving the challenge.

Following the conclusion of the meeting, the Assistant Chief shall have
up to ten days to provide to the Chief a surmmary of the challenge, its
factual basis, and a recommended resolution cr course of action.

The Chief shall have up to an additional ten days to issue a proposed
resolution to the challenge. The resolution proposed by the Chief shall
be served on the MBA as expeditiously as possible, but may not
exceed five days.

i. If the Chief fails fo timely propose a resolution within this fifteen
day period, the MBA may automatically elect to proceed to the
next step, but must do so within ten days of the receipt date, as
described above.

Following receipt, the MBA shall have up to ten days to accept or reject
the proposed resolution by means of a written notice of acceptance or
rejection filed with the Chief.

i. If accepted, the Department shall implement the proposed
resolution as expeditiously as possible.

li. If rejected, the MBA must concurrently elect whether to proceed
to mediation or arbitration.

Phase Ili - Arbitration or Mediation

If the MBA elects to proceed to mediation or arbitration, a Request for
Mediation or Arbitration shall be filed on a form approved by the Commission
with the Director of the Human Resources Department who shall schedule a
session with the next on the list of IHE’s.

A.

The arbitration or mediation shall occur within forty-five days of the date
the Phase ii! Request is filed with the Director at a time mutually
convenient to the parties.

Only one continuance may be granted per side and only for good
cause. Each continuance may not exceed an additional fourteen days.

This period may be extended if the IHE's schedule cannot
accommodate scheduling within forty-five days, but may not extend
beyond an additional thirty days.

If the selected IHE's cannot accommodate scheduling the mediation or
arbitration within seventy-five days, the next IHE’s on the official roster
shall be appointed in order of selection.

If arbitration is the elected preference, the IHE must issue proposed findings of
fact and conclusions of law and a recommended award within ten (10) days of

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -36-
40.

41.

the close of the hearing. The [HE’s decision is final. No appeal lies to a District
Court for either party except for fraud, collusion or unless the IHE exceeded
his/her jurisdiction.

lf the matter is resolved through mediation, or if arbitrated and neither party
appeals the recommended award, the Department shall implement the
resolution as expeditiously as possible.

If the matter is referred to mediation and cannot be resolved, the mediator
shall determine when such impasse occurs and shall inform the parties of
such determination. Either immediately thereafter or upon a mutually agreed
time, the mediator shali switch to arbitration mode and receive evidence,
testimony and argument. The mediator (now) IHE must issue proposed
findings of fact and conclusions of law and a recommended award within ten
days of the close of the arbitration hearing. The mediator/arbitrator’s decision
is final. No appeal lies to a District Court for either party except for fraud,
collusion, or if the arbitrator exceeds his/her jurisdiction.

In the event a challenge is filed by the City, the above described timelines and
procedures shall apply adversely to the MBA (and its President in the stead of
the Chief) and shall be condensed to steps 4(d) through (i) only.

ARTICLE 28: GRIEVANCE EXAMINERS AND PROCEDURE

1.

The Human Resources Department shall also be responsible for maintaining a
roster of grievance examiners who shall be responsible for adjudicating officer
grievances brought pursuant to Chapter 143.127, et. seq., TLGC and this
Agreement.

Grievance examiners shall meet the following minimum eligibility
requirements:

must be a resident of Texas;

be a United States citizen;

be at least thirty (30) years of age;

reside within 325 miles of the city limits of the City of Houston;
be of good, moral character; and,

have previous experience in the labor field.

Compensation of the grievance examiner shail be determined by the Director
of Human Resource Department at competitive market rates for such work.

7m OO BP

Grievances are limited to the following issues:
A. Transfers (involuntary or denials)

B. Denial of overtime actually worked

C. Written Reprimands

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -37-
D. Permanent change in days off and/or duty hours

—. Semi-annual Job Performance Reviews (JPR) in which the officer's
Overall Rating is reduced to less than effective. Grievances shall not
be filed if the officers JPR is reduced only in specific performance
factors and which does not result in a reduction of the Overall Rating to
less than effective.

Any officer who files a grievance regarding a written reprimand may elect to
waive his/her Step | meeting and proceed directly to the Step II grievance
procedure. The employee may make this election on a form provided by the
Police Department and/or may notify the Commission of his election through
his designated attorney of record,

ARTICLE 29: MEDIATION OF CERTAIN DISCIPLINARY APPEALS

1.

HPD intends to continue to develop and implement an alternative means of
resolution of officer discipline and training through a program of mediation. In
order to retain the benefits of such an effective alternative approach, all timing
for dates and deadlines for the imposition of discipline (§143.117 or §143.119,
TLGC) for appeals to independent hearing examiners (§143.120; §143.127;
§143.134 or §143.1016, TLGC, etc.) or to the Commission shall be tolled for
the period of time from the date the matter is received by the alternative
dispute resolution unit until its completion with or without a written resolution or
its referral to another investigatory/grievance process, but no more than 60
days, whichever occurs first. All other time frames and deadlines remain
unchanged as required by Chapter 143, TLGC or this Agreement.

All mediations shall be conducted as required by Departmental rules and
guidelines and state law. Accordingly, all discussion and contents of
mediations shall be confidential. Mediations that do not result in an amicabie
resolution may not be disclosed to any third parties in any form or fashion by
any of the parties or participants. Mediations that are resolved to agreement
will be confidential to the extent allowed by law.

Any letter, memorandum, document, notes or other communication (oral or
written) disclosed in the mediation process shall be confidential and not be
made public nor shall it be included in the officers personnel of other
departmental files.

Any neutral third party who participates in the mediation shall not be required
to testify at any subsequent proceeding or disciplinary action nor be required
to disclose any communication (oral or written) which was disclosed in the
mediation,

Any oral or written communication disclosed during mediation, is discoverable
in other, proceeding, only if such oral or written communication would be
discoverable or admissible independent of the mediation.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -38-
6.

From inception through completion, all meetings or other procedures are
exempt from the 48 hour or other notice requirements mandated in Chapter
143 or in other provisions of this Agreement relating to investigations.

INVESTIGATION DISCIPLINARY PROCESS & APPEALS

ARTICLE 30: INVESTIGATION OF OFFICER MISCONDUCT

1.

The following provisions shail apply to the investigation and interrogation of an
officer. If any portion of this procedure shall conflict with any provision of
Chapter 143, TLGC, the language of this Agreement shall control.

"Interrogation" shall mean the process by which the Department through its
supervisors or other persons assigned to conduct an investigation, presents
oral or written inquiries to an officer under investigation, and requires the
officer to respond orally or in writing.

A. interrogations shail be conducted in compliance with the provisions of
Chapter 143 and this Agreement;

B, See supervisor's rights for pre-investigative questioning contained in
the Supervisory Intervention Article of this Agreement.

The officer being interrogated shall be provided a copy(ies) of the
statement/affidavit/compiaint that serves as the basis for the complaint by the
complainant at the time the 48 hour notice is given.

A. if the Complainant's statement/affidavit/complaint is not provided to the
officer at the time of his/her 48 hour notice, prior to his/her interrogation,
the statement/affidavit/complaint may not serve as the basis for any
discipline for the Class | or II violation.

An officer is entitled to and shail be provided written statements or affidavits
received or gathered by the investigative authority fron witnesses, officers or
supervisors obtained during the investigation before the officer's interrogation,
if the interrogation is based in whole or in part upon such witness’
statement(s).

A lf an officer is not given the witness’ statement(s), any such statement
may not be used to support an administrative action or discipline
against the officer;

In addition to the requirements of Chapter 143.1017(h), no later than the 180th
day after the Department discovers an officer may have committed a felony,
including a state jail felony, the Chief may send a letter to the Attorney General
which shail include at a minimum, the date the alleged criminal activity under
investigation occurred, the general category of offense (e.g. felony, etc.), the
date of discovery, and the date the investigation was commenced.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -39-
A. This notice to the Attorney General shall only be required if the Chief is
considering an indefinite suspension.

A copy of the letter to the Attorney General shall be furnished to the officer
under investigation at the time of interrogation, or at the time of issuance, if
issued after the initial or subsequent interrogation.

An officer under investigation for a Class |i violation investigated at the
divisional level by an IAD investigator shail be required to receive only one (1)
Notice of Interrogation at least 48 hours prior to the first interrogation in any
form.

A Any subsequent interrogation(s) of the same Officer on the same
complaint (or any extension or collateral issue(s) related to the same
complaint) shall only require a reasonable opportunity to consult with
his counsel or representative before responding to such subsequent
interrogation.

B. A reasonable opportunity shall always depend on the time and
circumstances, but shall generally be construed to allow sufficient time
to locate such counsel or representative and review the interrogatories,
allow for review of related documents and obtain advice.

The provisions of §143.124, TLGC and related case law authority shall apply
whenever the department utilizes the polygraph examination for an internal
investigation and the department shall utilize only outside polygraphers for
administrative IAD investigations.

ARTICLE 31: DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE

1.

The Chief, or in his absence from the City or disability, his designee, may
impose a disciplinary suspension upon an officer for a violation of civil service
and departmental rules.

A. A “Notice of Disciplinary Suspension” for purposes of this Agreement
refers to both temporary suspensions and indefinite suspensions. The
“Notice of Disciplinary Suspension’ is the letter in which the Chief lists
the rules alleged to have been violated and the facts supporting the
rules alleged to have been violated.

B. In the case of a Temporary Suspension, the Chief may suspend an
officer for disciplinary reasons for a reasonable period not to exceed 15
calendar days. A temporary suspension may not be imposed later than
the 180" day after the department discovers or becomes aware of the
rule(s) violation, except as otherwise provided by this Agreement and/or
state law.

A. In the case of an indefinite Suspension, the Chief may suspend an
officer for disciplinary reasons for an indefinite time period. An
Indefinite Suspension may not be imposed later than the 180" day after

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -40-
the date of the occurrence of the rule(s) violation, except as otherwise
provided by this Agreement and/or state law.

The Chief may indefinitely suspend an officer for a felony or state jail felony
that occurred more than 180 calendar days prior to the imposition of the
indefinite suspension if the officer has been charged with such felony by
indictment or information.

If the Chief or officer offers a suspension of 16 to 90 calendar days for
violations of civil service rules in lieu of an indefinite suspension, the officer
may agree in writing to voluntarily accept the suspension with no right of
appeal.

A. The officer must accept the offer within 5 working days after the date
the offer is made.

B. if the officer refuses the offer and wants to appeal, the officer must file
an appeal within 15 calendar days after the officer is served as
described herein above.

A disciplinary suspension is deemed to have been imposed and becomes
effective on the date the Notice of Disciplinary Suspension is filed with the
Director of the POCSC.

A. This shall be true even if the period within which the disciplinary
suspension is to be served, or the date on which it begins, is at a later
time.

B. To the extent that the foregoing protocol conflicts with or supplements
the provisions of Chapter 143, TLGC, these provisions shall control.

Service of Disciplinary Suspensions on the Officer

A. Personal service of the Notice of Disciplinary Suspension within the 180
day period is not required to implement the disciplinary suspension
order; provided, however that the officer is entitled to receive actual or
constructive service of the Notice of Disciplinary Suspension so that the
officer can timely exercise any appeal rights that the officer may have.

4. If personal service is not possible or ineffective after a
reasonable attempt at such service, the Notice of Disciplinary
Suspension may be mailed to the officer by certified mail return
receipt requested, with delivery restricted to the officer, at the
last known address provided to the department by the officer.

2. Service shail be considered to be complete as of the date the
Notice was mailed by deposit into the U. S. Postal Service.

3. Constructive Service. If Notice is not deliverable because the
officer has not provided the department with the most current
address or the officer fails to pick up or timely receive the Notice
when presented by the Postal Service, the Notice is deemed

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -41-
served upon deposit into the U.S. Postal Service and no
affirmative defense to timely service shall be allowed.

4. If the U.S. Postal Service fails to timely serve the Notice of
Disciplinary Suspension through its fault, totally without fault or
negligence on the part of the officer, the officer may assert an
affirmative defense alleging untimely service for purposes of
lodging a timely appeal under the appropriate provisions of
Chapter 143.

A. _ After the Notice of Disciplinary Suspension has been served, the
City shall file a receipt with the POCSC that documents service
on the Officer.

1. The City is not required to file the Notice of Disciplinary
Suspension with the receipt.

2. The receipt shall be filed within five (5) business days
after the day service has been completed.

3. To the extent that the foregoing protocol conflicts with or
supplements the provisions of Chapter 143, TLGC, these
provisions shall control.

Appeal Deadline. The officer has 15 calendar days to file an appeal from the
date of actual or constructive service upon the officer as specified in these
provisions.

The Chief and an officer may mutually agree to waive any of the time
limitations imposed by this Agreement or Chapter 143, TLGC so tong as the
agreement is in writing and signed by the officer and his/her legal counsel, if
he/she is represented by counsel, and the Chief or his designee.

A The POCSC or an IHE is required to honor any such agreements if
placed into the record.

In an appeal. of any indefinite or temporary suspension, the department shall
have the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence.

A. By a preponderance of the evidence, the department must show the
truth of the charges and that just cause exists for the imposition of the
discipline imposed.

In addition to the authority provided by Chapter 143, TLGC, the parties hereby
agree that the POCSC or an IHE appointed pursuant to the provisions of this
Agreement shall have the authority to consider a disciplinary suspension
period covering any time period, including time already served between
imposition of the discipline and the appeal decision.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -42-
10.

41.

It is the intent of the Parties under this provision to override the judicial
gloss imposed on the statute by the case styled Waco v Kelley, 309
S.W.3d 536 (Tex. 2010) which restricted the authority of the
Commission and !HE’s to modify discipline within the parameters of
anything over fifteen (15) calendar days and an indefinite suspension.

Provided further that it is not the intent of the Parties to modify any right
or privilege of further appeal or appellate review that is otherwise
authorized by law to review the decision of the Commission or the |HE.

If a disciplinary suspension is overturned or otherwise modified and reduced,
the HPD shall administratively classify the decision as having been overturned
or otherwise modified on its merits, or based on a procedural default.

A.

If the decision is classified as having been made based primarily on its
merits, then the alleged misconduct at issue shall be considered to
have been nullified and may not be used by the Department in
evaluating the officer for future transfers or promotions

If the decision is classified as having been made based primarily on a
procedural default, then the alleged misconduct at issue may still be
considered as relevant to the evaluation of the officer for transfers or
promotions.

The administrative classification shall be made within a reasonable time
by HPD Legal, confirmed by the Chief of Police, and communicated to
the officer. The officer may challenge the classification to the Chief of
Police, but the Chief's decision shail be final.

Any officer whose discipline is reduced or overturned after ail appeals
are exhausted, shall be paid the amount previously docked within thirty
(30) days or will be entitled to two times the amount due.

lf the disciplinary action is overturned in its entirety on appeal by the
Commission, an IHE, or a court of competent jurisdiction, the Human
Resources Director promptly shall order that the records of a disciplinary
action that was taken against an officer be expunged from each file maintained
on the officer by the department.

A.

Documents that must be expunged under this subsection include all
documents that indicate disciplinary action was recommended or taken
against the officer, such as the recommendations of a disciplinary
committee or a letter of suspension.

This subsection does not apply if the disciplinary action was only
reduced and not overturned, or if the officer is charged with excessive
force that results in a death or injury and the charge is being
investigated by a law enforcement or criminal justice agency other than
the department.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -43-
12.

13.

14.

C. Nothing contained herein shall require that internal Affairs Division
records be expunged under any circumstances.

in any cause of action, civil or criminal, ne file, or any part thereof, maintained
pursuant to §143.089(g) shall be released to any party to the action until
relevancy is judicially determined and an application for a protective order
limiting the use of such file in that cause of action has been filed.

A. Prior to any release of any file, the Human Resources Director shall
ascertain that an application for a protective order limiting the use of the
records to the immediate litigation has been filed each time such file is
sought in a civil or criminal action.

B. The City cf Houston Legal Department, or its designee, shall be
responsible for all legal representation related to the preparation, filing
and prosecution of any order required to carry out the purpose of this
section.

c. Nothing herein shall prevent the HPD from releasing such documents to
another law enforcement agency or District or U.S. Attorney's Office
working on a mutual investigation as currently provided by
§143.1214(b).

Except for internal Affairs Division files, nothing in this Article shall be
construed to prevent an officer from having access to his/her personnel file
maintained anywhere by the department.

POSITIVE DISCIPLINE. In addition to the provisions in §143.122, Texas Local
Government Code, after the Chief of Police has issued a disciplinary
suspension, an officer may elect to have the period of suspension deducted
from his/her PTO banks.

A. The deduction shali be in increments of the officer's normal shift hours
(i.e., eight (8), ten (10), twelve (12) hours), as the case may be, for
each day of disciplinary suspension up to ninety (90) days.

B. Within 5 days of receipt of a disciplinary suspension, the officer must
submit to the Chief of Police a written offer to waive his right of appeal,
accept responsibility and agree to have the equivalent hours of
suspension deducted from one of his cash valued PTO banks. The
Chief of Police will then have 5 days to accept the offer. If the offer is
hot accepted within 5 days, the offer shall be deemed rejected.

C. The offer shail be considered “settlement negotiations” and may not be
introduced or offered for any purpose in any disciplinary proceedings. In
order to allow sufficient time for this process to take place, suspension
shall not commence until 15 days from the date the officer receives the
disciplinary suspension. Nothing herein extends the 15 days an officer
has to file an appeal of a disciplinary suspension.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -44-
15.

MINOR DISCIPLINE AND GRIEVANCES. The Chief of Police, at his sole
discretion may delegate his authority to issue final discipline in the form of
written reprimands, and 1 or 2 day temporary suspensions to classified
officers. Such delegation will be to a rank of no lower than a Captain of Police
who is in the officer's chain of command and has reviewed the administrative
investigation that is the subject of the discipline.

Any delegated person who issues a written reprimand or an officer of higher
rank within that chain of command may also be delegated by the Chief of
Police, at his sole discretion, to conduct a Step Il, or combined Step | and It
hearing related to that written reprimand. In such cases where the Step | and
Step |! hearings are not combined, and the Step II has been delegated by the
Chief of Police, the Step | hearing may be conducted by a Lieutenant within
that same chain of command. This provision supersedes any contrary
provision of State Law listed in Chapter 143, TLGC

ARTICLE 32: SUPERVISORY INTERVENTION

1.

The Chief shail continue a program known as Supervisory Intervention as an
alternative to the formal discipline process associated with Class | and Class II
complaints as currently defined by HPD. Supervisery Intervention shall be
utilized to correct infractions of administrative rules and procedures of a less
egregious nature specifically excluding ali Class | compiaints.

A supervisor has the right, duty and responsibility at any time to inquire as to
the facts of a circumstance or situation in order to make management,
operational, administrative or organizational decisions. No 48 hour notices are
tequired before discussing the original infraction with an officer.

A. If the inquiring supervisor becomes the complainant in a Class { or tI
complaint, the same inquiring supervisor may not further investigate
such alleged violation.

B. If the inquiring supervisor becomes the complainant in a Class | or It
complaint, the same inquiring supervisor may not participate in the
process of recommending discipline for the violation.

An officer's immediate supervisor or a supervisor discovering an infraction
shall determine whether to proceed through the formal complaint process as a
Class | or If complaint or as a Supervisory intervention.

A An immediate supervisor is not authorized to proceed with a
Supervisory Intervention if the violation constitutes a Class | infraction
or any violation not listed in the Supervisory Intervention handbook
found in the Department's Corrective Action Manual.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -45-
B. lf a Supervisory intervention is elected, no formal
complaint/affidavit/statement is required as defined by Sec. 143.123
and may be based solely upon the unsworn statement of an officer or
supervisor. The Supervisory Intervention must be documented, but
need not be in the form of a compiaint.

4, Infractions which may be included in this informal procedure include, but are
not limited to:

1. Improper or incomplete uniform;

2. Failure to keep proper personal appearance including hair
length, jeweiry, efc.;

3. Incomplete work or assignment (excluding failure to complete
offense report);

4. Failure to wear or improper use of safety equipment;

5. Failure/negligence in the care or handling of city provided
property/equipment in an officer's care, custody and control that
results in the loss or theft of such issued property (restitution
may be required per GO#400-18);

Failure to or late return of city property when due;

Untimely submission of extra employment application;

Failure to report current address and phone number;

Improper ticket/citation;

10. Improper or untimely response to call;

11. Violation of beat integrity;

12. Tardiness at beginning of the shift or returning back to service;
13. Failure to control or improper control of prisoner;

14. — Improper demeanor while testifying;

15. — Improper, incorrect, or untimely inventory of any property valued
at less than $100.00 (Does not apply to money, narcotics,
weapons, or evidence.);

16. Improper completion of property disposition forms;
17. Discourtesy to citizens;

18. Refusal to identify self upon request by giving name or badge
number including removal, obscuring or failure to wear name
badge;

19. Improper use, abuse or improper language when using MDT;

20. Disrespect for fellow officers;

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -46-
21. Tardiness at in-service training;

22. Excessive breaks or unavailable for service:
23. Unauthorized breaks;

24. Unauthorized passenger(s) in city vehicle.

HPD shall maintain and update a standardized form for infractions requiring
Supervisory Intervention.

An officer may refuse to allow an infraction covered by this article to proceed
as a Supervisory Intervention; in such a circumstance, the supervisor shall
determine whether to refer the infraction to the proper authority as a Class | or
it complaint.

An infraction which is to be handled as a Supervisory Intervention shall be
handled as follows:

A. Identification of the infraction and fact gathering of the underlying facts
and/or details; and,

B. Informing the officer of the alleged infraction and request for the
officer's position; and,

Cc. Analysis of the facts and evidence to determine whether the infraction,
in fact, occurred; and,

D. Supervisor discusses the infraction with the officer including what was
wrong with the act/actions of the officer, what act/actions would have
been appropriate, and what resolution is recommended; and

E, Officer acknowledges that the infraction occurred and the officer's
culpability, the conduct/acts which would have been appropriate as well
as the proposed resolution; (If the officer does not acknowledge that the
infraction occurred and/or his/her culpability, the officer must. still
acknowledge that if the conduct/actions had occurred as alleged, in the
future, the matter should be handled in the manner indicated by the
supervisor); and,

F. Once the proposed resolution is completed, the officer acknowledges
the completion of the proposed resolution e.g. training, education etc.

Supervisory Intervention shall be non-punitive and is not to be considered
discipline in any form or fashion. It is intended to correct or modify
actions/behavior through positive encouragement, counseling, training, or
reeducation. it is not intended to punish or harm an officer in any way.

A As a result, a Supervisory Intervention may result in one or more
counselings, and/or training, and/or reeducation efforts such as reviews
of General Orders, SOPs, Academy lesson plans, and/or repeat task
performance, classes or exercises.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -47-
B. Since Supervisory Intervention is not discipline, it is neither grievable

nor appealable.

9. Decumentation of a Supervisory Intervention shall be retained exclusively at
the divisional level in the employee's divisional file and used for evaluating the
officer's performance during that evaluation period only.

A. _ A Supervisory Intervention may not be used in any other evaluation
period.

B. The documentation relating to a Supervisory intervention shall not be
placed in the departmental file or the officer's official file at Human
Resources.

10. Once a supervisor decides to proceed to handle a designated matter in the
form of a Supervisory Intervention, he may not later refer the matter out as a
Class | or il complaint unless a different, collateral or intervening infraction
requires a referral as a formal Class | or I! complaint. Whenever this occurs,
the Supervisory Intervention may continue to completion on the designated
infraction while the new and intervening, collateral matter is concurrently sent
to the appropriate forum for Class | or Class Il compiaints, or is also handled
as a Supervisory Intervention.

A. Once referred, HPD shail follow the appropriate procedures for the
resulting Class of complaint.

B. lf evidence of unrelated infractions is discovered during this process,
the supervisor may, depending on the severity of the infraction, elect to
utilize the Supervisory Intervention process or may formalize the
complaint on the unrelated infraction. Any statements made relating to
the unrelated infraction may be utilized in any later proceeding or
process.

c. Failure to follow traditional Chapter 143 investigative or interrogation
procedures during the Supervisory Intervention phase of the review
process, shall not be considered an impediment nor jeopardize the
Class | or li complaint so long as the Class | or Il complaint is handled
in compliance with the procedures in Chapter 143 or the procedures
included elsewhere in this Agreement.

11. The Chief shall have the option to reduce any discipline to a Supervisory
Intervention if the circumstances warrant such a reduction.

SALARY ~ PAY ~ BENEFITS

ARTICLE 33: SALARY, PAY, AND BENEFITS

4.

BASE AND SENIORITY PAY COMPENSATION

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -48-
E.

Base pay increases for each classification are reflected in Exhibit A to
this Agreement, which is hereby incorporated by reference.

The 2015 base pay adjustments (4% across the board) set out in
Exhibit A shall become effective the first full pay period after June 1,
2015 for the ranks of police officer and higher.

The 2015 base pay change for probationary officers, which is effective
in the first full pay period after July 1, 2015, is effective only for those
hired on or after July 1, 2015 (Class 224 and forward). For those hired
on or after July 1, 2015, the Department shail pay probationary police
officers only the base rate as reflected in Exhibit A and any applicable
education pay. In addition, probationary police officers with qualifying
prior law enforcement experience will continue to be compensated in
accordance with City ordinance.

All other base pay adjustments set out in Exhibit A shall become
effective the first full pay period on’ or after July 1, of each year
thereafter.

The year of service step increases reflected in Exhibit A for each fiscal
year indicated shall continue throughout the term of this Agreement.

HPD TRAINING PAY

A.

The HPD Training pay for all officers shall be calculated from the
officer's sworn date in accordance with the following chart.

 

 

 

 

Level One 4* - 5 Years $53.85 Bi-Weekly
Level Two 6-11 Years $129.25 Bi-Weekly
Level Three 12+ Years $318.55 Bi-Weekly

 

 

 

 

1. *For Officers hired as Cadets after July 1, 2015, the training pay
for Level One shall begin in the first full pay period after the
completion of the probationary period.

Officers are responsible for reporting training and education received
outside the Department to ensure their training and education records
are current and accurate.

The Department shall update training and education records when
officers receive training and education by or through the Department.

1. The Department shall timely report to TCOLE the training and
education completed by each officer and approved by the HPD
Training Division for state certification purposes.

The Department shall timely update training and education records
and/or report same to TCOLE.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -49-
E.

The Department shall be required to pay any training certification
incentive pay as of the date the officer qualifies for the training pay.

SENIOR POLICE OFFICER

A.

An officer who is classified as a Grade Il! Officer and presently holds or
obtains a certificate of Master Police Officer from the Texas
Commission on Law Enforcement (TCOLE) and who has a minimum of
twelve years (12) of service with the Houston Police Department shall
be designated as a Grade IV classification of Senior Police Officer for
Classes A and C. The caiculation of sixteen year and under SPO pay
shall be computed using the qualifying officer's Hire Date.

ASSIGNMENT PAY

A.

All assignment pay ordinanced and/or in effect on the date of ratification
of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect, unless modified
by this Agreement.

Effective in the first full pay period after July 1, 2015, Field Training
Officer (‘FTO”) Pay shall increase from $69.30 biweekly to $119.30
biweekly only for officers who are field training instructors and
evaluators who work the Officer FTO program training new officers.

All other positions currently receiving the $69.30 biweekly shall continue
throughout the term of this Agreement.

1. All officers and sergeants are presumed to be continuously
training unless the department specifically notifies the affected
employee, Employee Services Division and Classified Payroll to
the contrary.

Mentoring pay shall continue to be $69.30 biweekly.

1. LRC will revise, as appropriate, the mentoring responsibilities for
entitlement to Mentoring Pay.

2. All officers and sergeants are presumed to be continuously
mentoring unless the department specifically notifies the affected
employee, Employee Services Division, and Classified Payroll to
the contrary.

WEEKEND PREMIUM & SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL PAY

A.

Weekend Premium pay will continue to be paid according to the
following:

1. Weekend Premium Pay will be paid to officers assigned to
weekend shifts as defined herein.

2. Officers will receive an additional $34.62 bi-weekly for one
regular weekend shift or $69.23 bi-weekly for two regular
weekend shifts. This pay will be received as long as the officer
is regularly scheduled to work that shift, regardless of whether or

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -50-
B.

c.

A.

D.

A.

4,

not the officer “actually” works.

Weekend Premium days for Day and Evening shifts will be
Saturday and Sunday.

Weekend Premium days for Night shift will be Friday and
Saturday.

Shift Differential pay will continue to be paid according to the following:

1.

Officers who are permanently assigned to work a regularly
scheduled shift that begins at 1200 hours or later and/or ends no
later than 0700 hours shall receive $69.23 bi-weekly as
additional compensation.

Shifts will be determined according to the following: Day Shifts:
are those shifts beginning between 0500 hours and 1159 hours
Evening Shifts: are those shifts beginning between 1200 hours
and 1959 hours Night Shifts: are those shifts beginning between
2000 hours and 0459 hours

Shift differential pay shall only be included in an officer's
overtime pay calculation during the period authorized by this
subsection.

Officers hired as Cadets on or after July 1, 2015, are ineligible for
weekend premium or shift differential pay while probationary officers.

6. EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE PAY

Any officer who has or is awarded a degree by an accredited college or
university, the incentive pay biweekly shall be $140.00 for a Bachelor's
Degree; $240.00 for a Master's Degree; $340.00 for a Doctorate
Degree.

These amounts are cumulative for advanced degrees so that only one
biweekly award may be paid based upon the highest degree awarded.

Acceptable certification of the award of a degree must be provided
before the Educational Incentive Pay shall be paid.

1.

Should there be any delays in confirmation such that
implementation of this pay does not begin as of the next full pay
period after submission, the officer shall nonetheless be entitled
to receive any backpay for the period of administrative delay.

Any disputes over delays in payment of this benefit shall be directed to
the LRC.

7. COLLEGE TUITION REIMBURSEMENT

Officers shall be entitled to receive tuition reimbursement for the
successful completion of credit hours at an accredited college or
university in which an officer enrolls during his/her employment as a

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -51-
police officer with the Department.

As a condition of accepting tuition reimbursement for successful
completion of coursework, an officer must remain employed with the
Department for a minimum of three (3) years upon completion of the
degree program. The three (3) year work requirement applies to
officers who begin a degree program after the effective date of this
contract.

1. if the officer separates employment voluntarily (for example,
retirement or resignation) within three (3) years of completing the
degree program, the officer must refund the City all college
tuition reimbursement costs he/she received from the City in the
three years preceding the separation date.

2. If at the time of the officers voluntary separation the degree
program is not finished, the officer must refund the City all
college tuition reimbursement costs he/she received from the
City in the three years preceding the separation date.

3. If the officer is involuntarily separated from employment (i.e.
indefinite suspension or termination and not reinstated) while
he/she is working on a degree program or has completed a
degree program, the officer shall reimburse the City the value of
tuition reimbursement, if any, of what he/she received in the one-
year period prior to the date of the involuntary separation.

in the event the officer is required to reimburse the City, this Agreement
shall constitute the written authorization to deduct such reimbursement
costs via payroll deduction and the value of any accrued paid leave.
The foregoing payback provisions do not apply to an officer separated
by the Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission for fitness for duty, or
killed in the line of duty.

Tuition reimbursement shail be at a flat rate reimbursement for
successful completion of coursework in the following five levels of
study: Bachelor (B.A.), Master (M.A.), Master of Business
Administration (M.B.A.), Doctorate (PhD.), and Juris Doctor (J.D.). The
initial reimbursement schedule is as follows:

STUDY LEVEL REIMBURSEMENT RATE PER CREDIT HOUR

Undergraduate $417.00

Masters $456.00

MBA $838.00

Doctorate $456.00

JD. $7,020.00

E. Officers hired after ratification of this Agreement who request J.D.

tuition reimbursement shall be reimbursed only at the MBA rate. The flat

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -52-
rate tuition reimbursement shall be reviewed and adjusted annually by
the LRC before the fall semester of each academic year based on the
five levels of study at the University of Houston Main Campus tuition
and fee schedule.

An officer MUST seek tuition reimbursement for successful completion
of courses within 180 days of the posting of grades for each course.
Successful completion of bachelor courses (B.A.) and law school
courses (J.D.), means grades equivalent to a "C” or better, will be
reimbursed. Successful compietion of graduate courses (M.A., M.B.A.,
and PhD.), means grades equivalent to a "B" or better, will be
reimbursed. Lower grades for undergraduate, graduate, and law school
courses will not be reimbursed.

Tuition reimbursement DOES NOT apply to correspondence, web
based, or other distance learning courses unless they are taken from an
accredited schoo! or university as part of a degree program. Tuition will
only be reimbursed for coursework credits (i.e. not for credits granted
for life experience, training credits, or other credit granted without
coursework).

Officers are entitled to reimbursement for eligible costs as stated herein
which are not covered entirely from other sources such as VA/GI Bill,
LEEP, 100 Club, scholarships, grants, etc. Under no circumstances will
an officer be eligible to receive tuition reimbursement for more than
100% of his/her actual tuition costs.

Should an officer receive tuition reimbursement from the City and also
receive additional funding from a third party so that the total
reimbursement exceeds 100% of the officer's actual costs, the officer
must reimburse the City all funds which exceed 100% of the actual
costs.

At the completion of a course for which a letter grade is not given, the
City will reimburse on a passing or satisfactory rating or grade. On a
multi-semester course in which a grade is not given or awarded until
final completion of the entire course, reimbursement will not occur until
completion of all components of the multi-semester course.

EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE

A.

Each police officer hired as a Cadet before July 1, 2015, shall receive
an equipment allowance (not included in overtime rate calculations)
payable in equal bi-weekly payments based on an annual rate of
$2,000.00

Each police officer hired as a Cadet after July 1, 2015, upon completion
of the probationary period shall receive an equipment allowance (not
included in overtime rate calculations) payable in equal bi-weekly
payments based on an annual rate of $2,000.00

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -53-
40.

CLOTHING ALLOWANCE PAY

A.

G.

Officers in the Houston Police Department who qualify for a clothing
allowance shall receive $800 annually. This amount shall be paid in
accordance with past practices and shall not be included in an officer's
overtime rate of pay calculations.

Clothing Allowance shali be paid to those positions in which business
attire is required on a regular basis (for example, 3 of 5 days per week).

Clothing Allowance shall also be paid to those positions in Criminal
investigations and Special Investigations, in which dress for under-
cover assignments must be worn as a daily standard dress
requirement, provided the following requirements are met:

1. Mandated by the division commander;

2. Necessitated by the investigative or administrative function to be
performed;

3. Worn more often than not (for example, 3 of 5 days per week);
and

4, The objective sought by the investigation cannot reasonably be
achieved by officers in uniform.

Clothing Allowance shall also be paid to those officers assigned to

Divisional Tactical Units (DTU).

Questions regarding eligibility

1. Questions regarding eligibility for this benefit shall be resolved
administratively by the Clothing Allowance Committee.

2. If the employee disagrees, the employee shall have thirty (30)
days from the date the officer receives notice of denial to appeal
to the LRC.

3. The LRC will make a final and binding decision.

Those individuais who are receiving the Clothing Allowance on the date
of the ratification of this Agreement and remain in the same assignment
will continue to receive the Clothing Allowance as long as they remain
in that assignment.

The Maintenance of Standards provisions related to clothing
allowances shail apply for the duration of this Agreement.

TEXAS POLICE TRUST

A.

Beginning with the first full pay period following the effective date of this
Agreement, the City/HPD shail continue to pay $48.00 (forty-eight
dollars) per month to the Texas Police Trust, as the agent for the MBA,
for every insured officer covered by the Texas Police Trust for disability
benefits pursuant to a Trust Agreement administered by the MBA.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -54-
44,

12.

413.

Additional benefits may include accidental death and disability (AD&D)
and a gun-shot rider. Terms of coverage are determined by the MBA.

B. The City/HPD shall also be authorized by the Plan Administrator/MBA
to withhold an amount from each officer's biweekly salary equal to the
difference between a sum certain (to be supplied by Trustee) necessary
to pay the remaining premium due for that officer's level of participation
in the Plan through the officer's payroll deduction authorization request.

c. All premiums payable and/or withheld and any monies due pursuant to
this Article shall be paid directly to the Texas Police Trust on a monthly
basis on the date of processing by wire transfer to an account
designated by the Texas Police Trust. Premiums shall be paid in
advance by the 15th of the month for coverage for the following month.

D. The City/HPD shail amend the Department's personnel information
form to include a provision to enable all officers to authorize the release
of information contained on the form to the MBA/Plan Administrator.

E. THE MBA/PLAN ADMINISTRATOR AGREES TO HOLD THE
CITY/HPD/CHIEF HARMLESS AGAINST ANY AND ALL CLAIMS,
DEMANDS, SUITS OR OTHER FORMS OR LIABILITY THAT MAY
ARISE, WHETHER NOW OR IN THE FUTURE, OUT OF OR BY
REASON OF ANY ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE HPOU IN VIOLATION
OF THIS SECTION OR THAT MAY ARISE DUE TO THE CITY/HPD'S
COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PROVISION, THE WITHHOLDING OF
SUMS DUE AND PAYABLE HEREIN, OR ANY CLAIMS FOR
BENEFITS OR COVERAGE OF ANY KIND.

PARKING

A. Each officer will be provided free parking at a City owned or leased
parking facility when reporting to work at his/her primary duty
assignment.

HPD VEHICLE USE FEE

A During the term of this Agreement, any classified officer who is required
to pay a HPD vehicle use fee will pay no fee greater than any other city
employee who is required to pay a city vehicle use fee.

PATROL OFFICER INCENTIVE PAY

A. This incentive pay is intended for police officers and sergeants
permanently assigned to the patrol call for service loop in a patrol
division, Airport Division, Special Operations Division, Mental Heaith
Division, and the Vehicular Crime Division as described herein and
approved by the LRC.

B. Officers and sergeants in the patroi call for service loop will receive
Patrol Officer Incentive Pay. This pay will be paid to those in uniform
whose primary responsibility is responding to calls for service by

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -55-
14.

G.

routinely using either a marked police car, or are routinely responding
on foot, and who are listed on the Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) as
available for dispatch.

4. This pay will be paid to all Officers and Sergeants who qualify
even if they occasionally have other assignments.

Officers and sergeants permanently assigned to administrative or
support functions in a patro! division, or in the divisions listed in 13A
above are not eligible to receive patrol incentive pay.

Controversies regarding eligibility will be resolved by the LRC with no
right to grieve or appeal.

There are three steps to the program, as follows:

1. Step 1 -— achievement of four years of department seniority;
2. Step 2 - achievement of six years of department seniority
3. Step 3 - achievement of eight years of department seniority
4.

For purposes of this provision, the years of department seniority
are calculated using the hire date.

The pay stipend for this patrol incentive pay shall be structured as
follows:

4. Step 1- $600.00 annually
2. Step 2 - $1,200.00 annually
3. Step 3 - $1,800.00 annually
4.

The foregoing pays are pro-rated in accordance with the City's
usual and customary payroll schedule.

No individual receiving Patrol Officer Incentive Pay may aiso receive
Investigator Pay.

INVESTIGATOR INCENTIVES

A.

Investigator Pay

1. Beginning in the first full pay period after July 1, 2016, qualified
investigative personnel from the following divisions may be
eligible to receive Investigator Pay at the rates and in
accordance with the eligibility criteria reflected in Schedule A of
Exhibit E: Auto Theft, Major Offenders, Narcotics, Vehicular
Crimes, Vice, Burglary & Theft, Homicide, Juvenile, Robbery,
Special Victims, Gang, and Criminal Intelligence.

2. Beginning in the first full pay period after July 1, 2018, qualified
personnel in the Investigative First Responder Division, the
Crime Reduction Unit of the Gang Division, and Drug
Recognition Experts (DREs) may be eligible to receive

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -56-
assignment pay at the rate listed in Schedule B of Exhibit E.

3. No individual receiving Investigator Pay may also receive Patrol
Officer Incentive Pay.

4, Exhibit E is hereby incorporated by reference.

B. The Chief of Police shall establish criteria and procedures allowing the
placement of the term ‘Detective’ on Department identification cards of
investigative personnel.

15. BILINGUAL PAY

A. Pursuant to City Ordinance and Department policy, certain Officers are
already eligible for receipt of bilingual pay. During the term of this
Agreement the LRC shall evaluate existing levels of departmental
demand upon those receiving bilingual pay, and shall also evaluate
whether there is. demand for specific languages other than those
currently approved for bilingual pay. The LRC shall make a
comprehensive recommendation to the Chief regarding the
department's bilingual need, qualifications, pay rate, and qualifying
languages

ARTICLE 34: PAID TIME OFF

1. The Department uses a leave program designated as Paid Time Off, (‘PTO’).
The PTO program became effective on September 1, 2001. PTO shail
continue to incorporate and replace the present sick and vacation leave banks
but shall specifically exclude the compensatory time off bank and holiday
leave. A complete description of the PTO program is set forth in Exhibit B
attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein as though set forth
verbatim.

2. Benefits under the PTO program shall begin to accrue for new employees in
the first full pay period after the employee becomes a probationary police
officer. Any leave, other than compensatory time, accumulated while in the
CSL Pian will convert on an hour for hour basis to the officer's PTO bank on
the officer's sworn date.

3. PTO leave shall be based upon a benefit year.

4. if an officer, whose bank is approaching or has exceeded the applicable PTO
cap, timely requested leave to prevent a loss of accruals and the Department
did not allow the officer to take the leave, the officer shall be allowed to carry
over the 120 hours plus any additional hours of leave he requested but was
not allowed to utilize by the Department.

A. Since accruais are bi-weekly, this may result in a subtraction of hours
from an officer's PTO bank.

B. In order to avoid any forfeiture of hours, the officer must request time off
Meet & Confer

Agreement
Page -57-
from the Department at least ninety days before the end of the benefit
year in which the PTO Hours were received.

Officers may schedule and take up to 320 hours of PTO within a benefit year.
An officer may schedule and take up to 720 hours of PTO in a benefit year
with the approval of the Chief of Police.

A leave event is unscheduled, regardless of leave type, if the leave is
requested less than 24 (twenty-four) hours prior to the start of the leave being
requested unless there is an open position in the Red Book or approved by a
supervisor.

A. More than 8 (eight) unscheduled leave events in a benefit year may
require a physician's statement to be compensated.

B. In the event that a supervisor requires a physician’s statement prior to
the eighth event, the supervisor shall be required to immediately
document in an email to the division commander, with a cc to the
officer, detailing the reasons for the request prior toe the end of the shift.
Failure to send the email prior to the end of affected shift shall void the
order.

C. If a single day of leave is taken for any reason, the leave event is
considered a single event.

D. if the leave is requested for any reason and extends beyond one day,
including two or more consecutive days up to a maximum of three days,
the total amount of time taken during that absence shall be considered
a single event.

E. If the leave time requested extends beyond one day and the dates are
not consecutive and include regular days off or holidays, then each day
that unscheduled time is requested may be considered a separate
unscheduled event.

PTO taken for health related reasons require notification to the supervisor that
there is an underlying health related basis for the leave requested. If there is a
serious health condition of an officer or a member of his/her family such that
FMLA leave would be appropriate, when requesting PTO for such protected
leave, the Officer should indicate any FMLA or ADA related basis for such
leave.

A. Notification of a serious health condition requiring FMLA leave is
mandatory so that the officer may receive the statutory and other
notices and be sent any documentation/certification necessary to
qualify for such protected leave.

PTO is not a short or long term disability program and is not meant for
extended absences.

A. lf an officer needs to take an extended leave of absence, the same
authorization requirements apply under the Code of Ordinances

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -58-
10.

whether such leave is paid or unpaid and whether or not ultimately
compensated under the officer's PTO balance or any other form of
benefits or unpaid.

All other leave currently authorized by city ordinance and departmental policy
will remain in effect unless modified by city council.

The City may exercise the option to offer to purchase officers’ PTO Hours. It
shail be the officer's sole discretion to accept or reject any offer from the City
te purchase their PTO Hours.

ARTICLE 35: EXEMPT EMPLOYEE ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION TIME

1.

Exempt officers are considered exempt from overtime compensation for all
intents and purposes under the Fair Labor Standards Act. Ail compensatory
time balances that exempt officers had on December 31, 2001 were frozen in
a reserve bank at the officers rate of pay (all pay except equipment and
clothing allowance) on that date and may be utilized in the normal course of
business, paid at retirement or utilized in the Phase Down Program.

See definitions Article of this Agreement for identity of exempt officers.
Lieutenants & Captains ~ Qualified Exempt Status

A. Even though Lieutenants and Captains are currently exempt under
FLSA regulations, the City agrees to authorize Exempt Time
Compensation or Exempt Time Credit (ETC) for hours worked in
excess of the regular duty hours on a daily basis.

B. The Department shall determine whether Exempt Time will be
compensation or credit.

Cc. For Lieutenants, Exempt Time Credit shali be earned at one and one-
half hours for each hour actually worked. Exempt Time Compensation
for pay shall continue to be earned on an hour-for-hour basis.

D. For Captains, Exempt Time Compensation for pay and for Credit shall
continue to be earned on an hour-for-hour basis.

Exempt Time Credit earned and accrued shall have no cash value. Utilization
of exempt time credit shall be on an hour-for-hour basis.

Beginning on the date of the ratification of this Agreement, Exempt Time
Credit banks will be capped at 480 hours. Employees with more than 480
hours of exempt time credit on the date of ratification shail not be allowed to
accrue additional Exempt Time Credit until their bank is below the cap.

Exempt Time Compensation will be considered assignment pay. Straight time
rate of pay includes base pay and longevity pay only.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -59-
ARTICLE 36: NON-EXEMPT OFFICER COMPENSATORY TIME ACCRUAL.

1.

All non-exempt officers may accumulate up to a maximum of 480 hours of
compensatory time. Any hours accumulated in excess of 480 shall be paid
automatically as overtime in compliance with all state, local and federal laws.

All compensatory time balances that non-exempt officers had on 12-31-2001
were frozen at the officer's rate of pay (all pay except equipment and clothing
allowance) on that date and may be utilized in the normal course of business,
paid at retirement or utilized in the Phase Down Program.

Compensatory Time Use. An officer who requests to take accrued
compensatory time off shail be allowed to do so, provided:

A. the request is made no less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the
beginning of the shift during which the time off is to be used; and,

B. ho timely request to use compensatory time off shall be refused unless
the refusal is preceded by an effort to find a replacement officer in
accordance with the following procedure:

1. The “Red Book” currently used to sign up for time off is full under
Department established minimum staffing levels. It is expressly
agreed and presumed that operation of the Department below
these levels would create an undue burden on the delivery of
police service during the shift.

2. If the “Red Book’ is full, the officer requesting the time off may
find a qualified officer desiring to work as a replacement.

i. An officer may use a replacernent for compensatory time
off a maximum of two times a month. See SOSP Article
for guidance on a replacement officer.

3. Any request more than twice a month may be approved or
denied by the Department at its sole discretion.

4. If no replacement is found the request may be refused but not
solely on the basis of pre-established staffing levels. A refusal
under these rules will constitute a valid determination that
without the officer, the delivery of necessary police services on
the day and during the shift would be jeopardized.

The equipment and ciothing allowance is a reimbursement and shall not be
included in the FLSA regular rate of pay for any purpose including overtime
calculations.

Mandatory Overtime or Court Attendance.

A. Any non-exempt officer who is ordered to work overtime or to attend
any court or judicial proceeding in his/her off-duty time as required
because of his/her duties as a Houston Police Officer, will be paid
overtime at the officer's election in either cash and/or compensatory

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -60-
time.

B. A non-exempt officer, if qualified, may volunteer to work overtime at
straight time (as assignment pay) and/or compensatory time at the
officer's election in either cash and/or compensatory time.

ARTICLE 37: STRATEGIC OFFICER STAFFING PROGRAM (SOSP)

4.

The provision of an 86 hour 14-day pay period overtime trigger for
replacement reimbursement time will be treated under the Texas Local
Government Code, Chapter 142.0017, as a provision of the Meet and Confer
Agreement, and as such, an exception for the 40-hour rule set forth in the
Code of Ordinances.

A. Any leave time taken during a 14-day pay period will not count as actual
time worked for purposes of calculating FLSA overtime in the Strategic
Officer Staffing Program.

An officer may not volunteer as a replacement officer for time during which he
or she is otherwise scheduled to work. At the Department's option, time as a
replacement officer shall be paid at straight time (base, longevity and training
only) as an assignment pay; or will be credited to an officer's compensatory
time bank at time and one-half.

No officer may volunteer as a replacement for another officer for whom the
replacement has volunteered in the previous pay period unless specifically
authorized by the shift commander. Replacement officer volunteers are not
qualified for straight time pay unless the replacement officer works less than
86 hours in a 14-day pay period.

The 86 hour 14-day pay period will apply only to volunteer replacement
officers’ time. The Meet and Confer Agreement will continue fo set the
overtime compensation rules for all other work.

SOSP compensation in the form of pay for police officers and senior police
officers and sergeants will include Base Pay, Longevity Pay and HPD Training
Pay.

A. The HPD Strategic Officer Staffing Account will continue to be funded at
a minimum of one million dollars with no mandatory increase for any
fiscal years following.

Officers participating in the Phase Down Program are not allowed to work any
HPD SOSP programs without the prior written approval of the Chief of Police.

ARTICLE 38: OFFICER HEALTH BENEFITS

1.

During the term of this Agreement, the following conditions will apply to the
medical benefits and contribution levels for employees covered by this
Agreement.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -61-
2.

Employees covered by this Agreement will continue to be eligible to enroll in
the health plans offered to city employees, at the same benefit levels that are
in effect as of the effective date of this Agreement with the following
conditions:

A. Hf the health benefits plan design changes are required in order to keep
the plans reasonably priced during this Agreement, those plan changes
that are applicable to other city employees will apply to the employees
covered by this Agreement.

This Agreement in no way limits the scope or type of plan design changes that
the City may implement for its covered population of employees, retirees, and
dependents, nor does it prohibit the City from exercising Termination For
Cause procedures with the vendor or changing vendors, if necessary.

The City shall contribute no less to employee's health coverage than it
contributes to other city employees’ health coverage.

A. This City's contribution includes premiums, claims, prescription
payments, and the administrative/internal fees currently included in the
calculation.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -62-
B. This current contribution rate/ratio does not include any future cost
increase that is a result of any actions by any other governmental
bodies which would result in a legislative change in benefits that the
City does not anticipate.

Eligible employees covered by this Agreement shall pay no premium or
component higher than any other city employee group.

As of the City’s revised health plan implementation date, the ratio that is
established between active and retiree health insurance premiums for officers
and dependents of comparable plans shall be no greater than the initial ratios
established by the City with respect to such plans for the duration of this
Agreement.

A For additional related information bearing on Phase Down Officers
eligibility for active rates, refer to the applicable provisions contained in
the Phase Down Article contained in this Agreement.

For the term of this contract any employee/spouse/dependent who opts out of
any of the City's Health Benefit Plans is guaranteed a one (1) time option to
opt back into any of the City’s Health Benefit Plans in existence at the time of
their desired reentry so long the employee/spouse/dependent has
continuously maintained health insurance during their absence from the City’s
Health Benefit Plans.

ARTICLE 39: CONVALESCENT OFFICER LEAVE POOL

4.

The City agrees to maintain the convalescent leave pool established in the
prior contract.

Any PTO hours that would be lost as a result of officers exceeding the number
of hours that may accumulated and carried forward in a benefit year will be
donated and rolled into the convalescent leave pool.

Hours in the convalescent leave pool are not tied to the rate of pay of the
officer donating such time.

The LRC is empowered to review and approve officers who are eligible to
utilize the convalescent hours consistent with the Department's existing policy.

Any inability of the LRC to agree to an officer's entitlement to utilize the pool
will be determined by the Chief, whose decision will be final and binding.

Article 40: PERSONAL DAYS (PD)

4.

The award of any Personal Fitness and Training hours (“PFT”) pursuant to the
2011 Meet and Confer Agreement shall cease effective August 31, 2015.

The following shall apply beginning on September 1, 2015: All PO’s and
SPO’s sworn before March 30, 2011, shall receive 160 hours of PD per benefit

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -63-
year. All Sergeants and above sworn before March 30, 2011, shall receive 80
hours of PD per benefit year. All PO's and SPO’s sworn on or after March 30,
2011, shall receive 120 hours of PD per benefit year. All Sergeants and above
sworn on or after March 30, 2011, shall receive 64 hours of PD per benefit

year.

A.

c.

The PD hours shall be credited to each officer on September 1 of each
benefit year after the execution of this Agreement.

Any officer who becomes eligible for PD hours after the beginning of a
benefit year shall receive a proportional number of PD hours for the
remaining months in the benefit year.

PD hours may be used for personal reasons and for any approved
Family Medical Leave absence.

Despite passage of the PAT, the award of PFT pursuant fo the 2011 Meet and
Confer Agreement shall cease. Instead, one-time adjustments for transition to
PD program shail be as foliows:

A.

As a one-time adjustment, those officers sworn before March 30, 2011,
that have taken and passed the PAT between September 7, 2014, and
August 31, 2045, will receive eight hours of additional time in the form
of PD hours on September 1, 2015.

As a one-time adjustment, those officers sworn between March 30,
2011 and July 1, 2013, that have taken and passed the PAT between
September 1, 2014, and August 31, 2015, will receive 48 hours of
additional time in the form of PD hours on September 1, 2015.

As a one-time adjustment, those officers sworn after July 1, 2013, that
have taken and passed the PAT between September 1, 2014, and
August 31, 2015, will receive 48t hours of additional time in the form of
PD hours on September 1, 2015.

Accordingly, no individual shall receive PFT. All Officers and Senior
Police Officers will receive a maximum of 168 hours of PD days on
September 1, 2015. All Sergeants and above will receive a maximum of
88 PD hours on September 1, 2015.

All PD Hours must be utilized during the benefit year in which they were
received, otherwise they will be forfeited.

A

In order to avoid any forfeiture of hours, the officer must request time off
from the Department at least ninety days before the end of the benefit
year in which the PD Hours were received.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -64-
B. If the officer timely requested the PD Hours to prevent the loss of time
and the Department did not allow the officer to take the leave
requested, the officer shall be allowed to carry over the PD Hours they
were not allowed to utilize by the Department.

5. PD Hours shall have no cash vaiue on termination and shail not be counted as
time worked for the purposes of non-exempt employees voluntarily working
Strategic Officer Staffing Program assignments.

6. The City may exercise the option to offer to purchase officers’ PD Hours. it
shall be the officer's sole discretion to accept or reject any offer from the City
to purchase their PD Hours. if the officer accepts the City offer to purchase
their PD Hours, the following guidelines apply:

A. The City must notify officers of its decision to exercise its option to
purchase PID Hours from officers at least thirty days prior to the
beginning of the benefit year in which the PD Hours will be received.

ARTICLE 44:

PHYSICAL FITNESS & AGILITY PROGRAM

1, Physical Agility Test

A, Officers covered by this Agreement, except for those in Phase Down,
may participate in a Physical Agility Test (PAT) at least once in a 12
month period.

B. The test shail include the following with the corresponding minimum
requirements to be met in order to obtain the Physical Agility Test
benefit described below:

1.

1.5 mile run - To be completed in a maximum time of 17:00
minutes

i. Alternate test Bike Test with score of 31.9 or higher
according to the Astrand fitness test

300 meter run - To be completed in a maximum time of 71
seconds

Agility run - To be completed in a maximum time of 18.2 seconds
Push-Ups - Must be able to complete 22 push-ups

i. Alternate test B Bench Press a minimum of .63 times
body weight

Vertical Jump of 18.5 inches
i. Alternate test B Leg Press 2.1 of body weight

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -65-
Cc. Exhibit “C" attached hereto sets forth the detailed requirements which
are incorporated by reference herein as though set forth verbatim.

D. PAT attempts shail be completed off-duty. Officers while participating in
the PAT or training at an HPD authorized {ocation will be covered by the
provisions of the workers compensation law unless excluded by the Act
and/or court decisions.

2. Beginning on September 1, 2015, depending on sworn date, officers are
eligible to be awarded either PD hours or PAT award money for passing the

PAT in accordance with the terms below. No officer is eligible to receive both

PAT awarded PD hours and PAT award money under any circumstance.

A. PAT award for officers sworn on or after March 30, 2011: Officers who
take and pass the PAT during the Benefit Year (September 1—August
31) shall be awarded 40 additional hours of Personal Days (PD) at the
beginning of the following Benefit Year on September 1°£ No officer
shall be awarded PD hours more than once per Benefit year for passing
the PAT.

B. PAT award for officers sworn prior to March 30, 2011: Beginning
September 1, 2015, as announced by the Department, officers may
voluntarily take the PAT during each fiscal year (July 1 — June 30). The
first 1250 officers who pass the PAT in each fiscal year shall be
awarded, via payroll, $800.00, no later than 60 days after the officer
passed the PAT. No officer shall be awarded more than once per fiscal
year for passing the PAT. Notwithstanding the number of officers who
actually pass the PAT, the City shall have no obligation to award more
than a total of $1 million dollars in PAT award money per fiscal year on
a first come first pass basis. In its sole discretion, the City may choose
fo award more than $1 million dollars in PAT award money in any fiscal
year if the City determines that additional funding is available for this
purpose.

ARTICLE 42: FORCE REDUCTIONS
1. If the City/HPD implements a force reduction resulting in the demotion or
dismissal of officers, the City/HPD shall utilize the procedures specified in the

§143.085, TLGC except that any reinstatement list created as a result of such

force reduction shall remain in effect until exhausted.

2. The reinstatement list shall exist for three (3) years during which no positions
may be filled by any other method or process.
3. If an officer is demoted as a result of force reduction, that demoted officer shall

be promoted to his former position before any other officer is placed in his
vacant former position as a result of any appointment or promotional process.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -66-
ARTICLE 43: POLICE MEMORIAL DUTY

Effective upon ratification of this Agreement the Police Memorial shall be guarded by
uniformed classified personnel 24-hours per day. The Department shail assign
personne! accordingly.

VOLUNTARY SEPARATION & RETIREMENT

ARTICLE 44: PHASE DOWN PROGRAM

1.

10.

11.

The Phase Down Program (PDP) provides officers an option to the current
lump sum cash distribution of paid time off, sick, vacation and compensatory
time leave balances. Phase Down will allow officers with an election to take
leave and extend the payment of their accrued PTO leave bank balance and
compensatory leave bank over a period of time up to and including the total
amount of leave in their banks.

There are four (4) options in Phase Down: Option A, Option B, Option C and
Deferred Cash-Out Option (DCO)

Officers entering phase down shall be entitled to pay active employee
insurance rates for up to four (4) years.

The caiculation of the years shall commence from the officer's actual date of
entry into phase dawn,

Officers who entered phase down on or prior to June 30, 2011, shall be
governed by the health insurance provisions in the phase down program as
contained in the 2001 Meet and Confer Agreement with the 2003 and 2004
Amendments.

The officer's Leave Bank shall be valued and paid on their final full pay period
immediately before entering the PDP for Option A, B, and C only.

PFT and PD Hours shall be usable in the Phase Down Program (PDP) and
shail be burned before ail other time.

lf an officer cashes out early he/she will not have their pay rate adjusted as
described above. The final rate of pay shall be recalculated to include the
officer's Base Pay, Longevity Pay, HPD Training Pay and Education incentive
Pay the officer would be receiving on the same date had he/she not elected to
participate in the PDP.

During the time an officer is participating in Phase Down, the officer shall not
accrue PTO leave.

The first day of the officer's participating in Phase Down shall not be deducted
from the officer's leave bank and shall be designated as a processing day.

Hf an officer in Phase Down dies, the balance of his Phase Down bank shall be

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -67-
12.

13.

paid to his designated beneficiary. The value shall be determined based upon
the value at which it was accrued.

The leave in an officer’s Phase Down bank shall be utilized in accordance with
the accounting principle of “first in - first out". An exception to this principle is
stated above, specifically, that PFT and PD hours shall be burned first.
Another exception is the 75% of up to 1040 hours in an officer's No Value
Leave (NVL) bank shall not be utilized unless the officer is suffering a long-
term disability and has exhausted all other leave and the incident which
caused the long-term disability was not a work related incident for which the
officer would or is receiving workers compensation benefits.

A. Except that for officers entering phase down after March 30, 2014 will
be entitled to utilize a portion of the hours listed above in the following
manner:

4.

All officers with less than fifteen years of service (sworn date) on
March 30, 2011, will be entitled to use up to 150 hours of NVL
time in phase down.

All officers with fifteen years of service (sworn date) or more but
less than twenty years of service (sworn date) on March 30,
2011, will be entitled to use up to 250 hours of NVL time in
phase down.

All officers with twenty years or more of service (sworn date) on
March 30, 2011, will be entitled to use up to 150 hours of NVL
time in phase down.

Officers who elect to participate in the Phase Down Program will be subject to
the following conditions and privileges:

A. ELECTION PROCEDURES FOR OPTIONS A, B AND C

1.

Officers may elect to participate in PDP based upon total
classified police departmental seniority. Seniority shail be based
upon the seniority list produced by HPD Employee Services
Division in accordance with Departmental policy in effect when
this Agreement is ratified and thereafter. Priority election periods
are June 1 to June 20 and December 1 to December 20,

in the event there are unfilled positions after the “priority election
period” as described above, those positions shal! be filled on a
daily basis by those seeking to participate in the PDP. After the
“priority election period”, unfilled positions in the PDP will
continue to convert to police officer positions, Grade Ill and !V,
within the last ten (10) days of a phase down period. The Chief
of Police may, at his discretion increase the number of phase
down positions in any rank.

After the “election priority period” seniority will be used as a

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -68-
tiebreaker for employees signing up on the same business day.
The filling of vacancies in the PDP after the “priority election
period” will be with regard to when the employee signed the
Irrevocable Election Form, not when the employee chooses to
begin phasing down. The employee must have completed 20
years of classified service before he/she may sign up in the
election process.

Once an officer has been notified of his selection, the officer will
execute a written IRREVOCABLE election to commence his
participation in Phase Down. The form utilized to commence an
officer’s participation in Phase Down shail contain at least the
following information:

i, Officers name, address, phone number and payroll
number;

ii. Date the form is completed;

iti. Effective date of the election to commence participation in
Phase Down which must be within the current election
period;

iv. Language as may later be agreed upon by the MBA and
the Department advising the officer his election to
commence participation in Phase Down is
IRREVOCABLE. Such language shall be in all caps and
underlined so as to be conspicuous;

v. The designation of a beneficiary;

vi. Whether the officer is suffering from an incapacitating
injury, as described herein; and

vii. Officer's Signature.

Upon the effective date of an officer's IRREVOCABLE election to
commence participation in Phase Down, that officer’s position in
the Department is vacant as a matter of law. The vacancy shall
be filled in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Texas Locat Government Code, to include §143.108, and as the
Code or this section may be amended from time to time, and the
relevant case law.

The officer's election to commence participation is
IRREVOCABLE, except under the following conditions:

i. When the officer, on the effective date of his election to
participate in Phase Down, is suffering an injury in the
course and scope of his duties which occurred on or
before the effective date of the election. If the officer is
returned to full duty by his treating physician, the officer

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -G9-
14,

15.

16.

47.

18.

shall immediately be placed into Phase Down effective on
the date of his release to full duty.

ii. If the officer's injury is an incapacitating injury, the officer
shall have 30 (thirty) days from the date he is returned to
full duty to decide whether to enter Phase Down
immediately or he may choose fo enroll during the next
scheduled sign up period.

ii. An incapacitating injury is defined as an injury which in the
opinion of the treating physician would prevent the officer
from returning to full duty within 60 (sixty) days of the
election date to commence participation in Phase Down.
The opinion of the treating physician shall be based upon
@ reasonable degree of medical certainty.

7. In the event an employee removes his name from a Phase Down
list, or for whatever reason does not enter into the Phase Down
Program, no Phase Dewn vacancy will be created by such a
withdrawal/situation.

8. Once a vacant Phase Down position is assigned an employee, it
will not be reopened for any purpose.

9. Phase Down periods shall be January 1 through June 30 and
July 4 through December 31.

10. The enrollment list created under each election period shall
expire at the end of the respective Phase Down period.

Officers who participate in Option A or Option B will receive additional limited
compensation for certain actions performed in the course and scope of their
employment by the Houston Police Department.

Officers will be compensated at straight time (base pay and longevity pay only)
in one-half hour (1/2 hour) increments, for such things as court attendance (as
a factual witness) and other duties performed or actions taken in an official
capacity as a Houston Police Officer, and approved by the Chief of Police.

The police department will establish criteria and procedures outlined in
General Order 300-35 whereby an officer may subrnit requests for and receive
such approved additional compensation.

An officer participating in either Phase Down Options A or B who assumes and
office of civil emolument will have the remaining balance of his Phase Down
bank converted to Option C or the Deferred Cash-Out Option at the officer's
election, effective on the date the officer takes the oath of office, or assumes
the job duties, whichever comes first.

The value of the Phase Down bank or the Deferred Cash-Out Option will be
determined based upon the value at which it was accrued.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -70-
19. There is no recalculation or re-evaluation of an officer's Phase Down bank
when changing from one Phase Down Option to another or changing to the
Deferred Cash-Out Option, regardless of the reasons for change.

20. OPTIONA

A. The number of participants for Option A are as follows with 37
participants in the June priority election period and 38 in the December
priority election period:

June Priority Period:

 

Assistant Chief or above 1 or less

 

Captain, Class C-Grade X 2 or less

 

Lieutenant, Class C-Grade Vill | 3 or less

 

Sergeant/Class C-Grade VI 8 or less

 

23 plus the remainder of the 37 not
Police Officer Grades IIl and IV | filled by the ranks of sergeant,
lieutenant, captain or assistant
chief within the last 10 days of the

 

 

 

 

 

 

| phase down period
December Priority Period:
Assistant Chief or above 1 or less
Captain, Class C-Grade X 3 or less

 

Lieutenant, Class C-Grade Vill | 4 or less

 

Sergeant/Class C-Grade VI 7 or less

 

23 plus the remainder of the 38 not
Police Officer Grades II] and IV | filled by the ranks of sergeant,
lieutenant, captain or assistant
chief within the last 10 days of the
phase down period

 

 

 

 

B. Officers in Option A are considered actively employed as a classified
member of the City of Houston Police Department.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -71-
Officers shail be paid base, longevity, training and education pays on a
bi-weekly basis for 80 hours.

Not eligible for pay increases.

May work departmentally approved extra jobs and SOSP with a
combined maximum of 40 hours per week.

Officers shall receive credit day for day for each city holiday.

With approval from the Chief of Police an officer may work overtime but
will be paid for fongevity and base pay only and at one-half hour
increments.

An officer may withdraw from Option A and elect to participate in DCO
at any time. In the event an officer accepts an offer of civil emolument,
he may elect to participate in DCO or Option C at his discretion. There
will be no fump sum payout.

The officer shall observe and be paid for City Holidays, as designated
by City Council, except fer the floating holiday. Such holiday
observation shall not cause a deduction in the officer's Phase Down
bank.

Officers are permitted to obtain gainful employment of a police and/or
hon-police related nature. Extra employment shall require approval of
the Department, Approval of extra employment shall be in accordance
with the General Orders of the Department. The Chief of Police, at his
sole discretion, may revoke an extra employment permit without any
right of appeal.

in the event of the death of an officer participating in Option A, the
balance of this Phase Down bank shall be paid to his designated
beneficiary or estate. The lump sum value shall be determined based
upon the value at which it was accrued.

Each officer participating in Phase Down shall maintain all rights,
benefits, incentives, allowances, privileges and immunities as provided
for by statute, ordinance, agreement and/or common law that the officer
enjoyed prior to entering Phase Down, except as expressly noted
herein.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -72-
21.

OPTION B

A.

B.

The number of participants for Option B are as follows with 75
participants in the June priority election period and 75 in the December
priority election period:

June Priority Period:

 

Assistant Chief or above 2 or less

 

Captain, Class C-Grade X 5 or jess

 

Lieutenant, Class C-Grade Vill | 7 or less

 

Sergeant/Class C-Grade VI 16 or less

 

46 plus the remainder of the 75 not
Police Officer Grades {ll and {V | filled by the ranks of sergeant,
lieutenant, captain or assistant
chief within the last 10 days of the
phase down period

 

December Priority Period:

 

Assistant Chief or above 3 or less

 

Captain, Class C-Grade X 5 or less

 

Lieutenant, Class C-Grade Vill | 8 or less

 

Sergeant/Class C-Grade VI 15 or less

 

44 plus the remainder of the 75 not
Police Officer Grades Ill and IV | filled by the ranks of sergeant,
jieutenant, captain or assistant
chief within the last 10 days of the
phase down period

 

 

 

 

An officer electing Option B shall have the following privileges and
benefits:

1. The officer shall receive his base pay, longevity pay, training pay
and education pay equal to the number of hours in his cash

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -73-
valued leave banks;

The pays, as described in (a) above, shall be paid at the rate of
forty (40) hours per two week pay period:

Officers who begin participation in Option B, and who have not
switched from another pian will receive all subsequent bi-weekly
base pay increases scheduled to take effect during that same
fiscal year. Such pay increases, regardless of the date
scheduled to take effect during that fiscal year, will appear on the
last full pay check prior to the first day the officer begins
participation in Option B;

During the time an officer is participating in Option B, he will be
allowed to work a combined fotal of 60 hours of extra
employment and/or Strategic Officer Staffing Program (SOSP)
approved by the department per week. The number of extra
employment hours, and/or approved SOSP hours allowed for
each week is applicable only to officers participating in Option B.
All officers participating in Option B are responsible for
compliance with all other provisions of the department's extra
employment policy and policies regarding SOSP. Failure to
comply with such policies may result in the officers extra
employment privileges being revoked with no right of grievance
or right to appeal;

During the time an officer is participating in Option B the officer
shall observe and receive one-half (1/2) days’ pay (4 hours) for
City Holidays as designated by City Council, except for the
floating holiday.

An officer, regardless of rank, may elect to revoke his
election/participation in Option B in favor of participating in
Option C or the Deferred Cash Out Option. An officer who
selects Option B may not revoke his election in favor of receiving
a lump sum cash payment;

Seniority earned while participating in Option B will be a one-half
(1/2) the rate earned by an active employee;

During the period of time an officer is participating in Option B,
the officer is considered actively employed as a classified
member of the City of Houston Police Department; and

In the event of the death of an officer participating in Option B,
the balance of this Phase Down bank shall be paid to his
designated beneficiary or estate. The lump sum value shall be
determined based upon the value at which it was accrued.

Each officer participating in Phase Down shall maintain all rights,
benefits, incentives, allowances, privileges and immunities as provided

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -74-
22.

23.

for by statute, ordinance, agreement and/or common law that the officer
enjoyed prior to entering Phase Down, except as expressly noted
herein,

REQUIRED TRAINING FOR OPTIONS A & B

A.

Officers in Phase Down must obtain sufficient in-service training to
comply with training standards as promulgated by the Texas
Commission on Law Enforcement (TCOLE).

This training shall be completed on the officer’s own time and expense.
The Department will make available facilities for officers to receive the
required TCOLE training at the Academy. Training availability shall be
posted on the Department's Web site. An officer may also elect to
obtain the required TCOLE training at the officer's expense from
another source.

lf the Department requires an officer in Phase Down to attend an in-
service course other than those required by TCOLE, the time spent by
the officer at the mandatory training shal! not be deducted from the
officer's Phase Down bank. The officer must be notified by the
Department of this requirement by certified mail return receipt
requested mailed to the officer's last known address as provided at the
time of entry into Phase Down.

Officers, on their own time, must also qualify with their primary duty
weapon pursuant to standards established by the Department except
that an officer in Phase Down must qualify during his/her birthday
month,

Proof of participation in or attendance at in-service training at a provider
other than the HPD Academy shall be forwarded by the officer to the
Houston Police Department Certification Office. Such information shall
be forwarded in such form as required by the Houston Police
Department Certification Office in order that the training and
qualification information may be forwarded to TCOLE.

Failure to fulfill these requirements may result in disciplinary action and
affect the officer's peace officer license status and/or removal from the
PDP.

RETURNING TO ACTIVE SERVICE FROM OPTIONS A &B

A.

lf a person of the rank of police officer or senior police officer wishes to
withdraw from participation in Options A or B and return to active
service, the officer must submit a written request to the Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police, at his sole discretion, may approve or deny the
request. If the Chief of Police approves the request the officer will
return to duty with no break of service for purposes of tenure with the
Houston Police Department. Such person will continue to be governed
by any and all statutory and Meet & Confer provisions associated with

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -75-
the employee's pension plan (Note: current law for an HPOPS member
is that he is locked in at the rate he entered DROP);

if a person of the rank of Sergeant or higher wishes to withdraw his
election to participate or his participation in Option A or B and
remain/return to active service, the supervisor must submit a written
request to the Chief of Police.

1. The Chief of Police, at his sole discretion, may approve or deny
the request. However, if the request is granted by the Chief of
Police the person shall remain/return to active duty at the rank of
police officer or senior police officer, and only if such a vacancy
exists for a police officer or senior police officer.

2. In such a case, there shall be no break in service for purposes of
tenure with the Houston Police Department. Such person will
continue to be governed by any and all statutory and Meet &
Confer provisions associated with the employee’s pension plan
(Note: current law for an HPOPS member is that he is locked in
at the rate he entered DROP);

A person returning from participating in Options A or B will not be
eligible to take a promotion exam for 2 years from date of his
withdrawal of election/participation.

24. INJURY IN COURSE AND SCOPE — REMOVAL FROM OPTIONS A & B

c.

If an officer in Phase Down Options A or B is injured in the course and
scope of his employment as a police officer, as defined by statute and
case law, and the officer suffers an incapacitating injury which endures
for sixty days or more, the officer's election to participate in Phase
Down may be voided and the officer may elect to receive a lump sum
payment for the balance of his leave bank.

1. This election shall be at the discretion of the officer. Such
payment of the lump sum shall be made to the officer in a timely
manner.

2. This voiding of the election and the receipt of a lump sum
payment shall not affect any worker's compensation mecical or
indemnity payments or any other related benefits to which the
officer may be entitled.

3. There shall be no salary continuation benefits, as provided for by
Sec.142.008, TLGC after the date the Phase Down election is
voided due to the incapacitating injury and the lump sum
payment benefit is paid.

25. INVOLUNTARY REMOVAL FROM OPTIONS A &B

D.

in the event an officer who is in Phase Down A or B has committed a
serious act of misconduct, the Chief of Police, at his sole discretion,

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -76-
26.

may revoke the officer's participation in Phase Down and tender to the
officer a lump sum payment calculated in accordance with this
Agreement. A limited appeal may be taken by the officer. The appeal
will be heard by the same arbitrators who have been selected to hear
contract grievances. The decision of the arbitrator shall be limited to
upholding the Chief of Police's decision to revoke the officer's
participation in Phase Down or returning the officer to the same Phase
Down option. The Department shall have the burden of proof by a
preponderance of the evidence.

In order to appeal such a decision by the Chief of Police, the officer
may refuse the tender of the lump sum payment and file a written
appeal indicating he disagrees with the decision of the Chief of Police.
This appeal shall be filed with the HR Director within fifteen calendar
days of the date the officer receives written notification from the Chief of
Police that the Chief has elected to revoke the officer's participation in
Phase Down.

The hearing shail be held within sixty days and a written opinion shall
be tendered to the parties within fifteen days of the close of the hearing.
Only one continuance may be granted per side that may not exceed
fifteen days for good cause shown or for unavailability of the arbitrator.

1. In no event may a continuance be granted for more than fifteen
days. The officer shall continue in Phase Down during the
pendency of the appeal.

2. The decision of the arbitrator is final and binding on the parties.
Costs shail be divided equally between the Department and the
appealing officer.

OPTION C

G.

The number of classified employees allowed to sign up for participation
in Option C will be limited to 37 each priority election period, not
including those officers switching from another Phase Down Option.
There will be no structured sign up for Option C based on rank. Any
ties in seniority will be broken in accordance with the department's
established policy and practice regarding tie-breakers.

An officer electing Option C shal! have the following privileges and
benefits:

4. Officers electing Option C shall be considered retired;

2. The officer shall receive only his base pay and longevity pay
equal to the number of hours in his cash valued leave banks,
except for compensatory time banks which will be paid in
accordance with applicable FLSA guidelines;

3. The pays, as described above, shall be paid at the rate of forty

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -77-
(40) hour per two week pay period;

4. Officers who begin participation in Option C, and who have not
switched from another plan, will receive all subsequent bi-weekly
base pay increases scheduled to take effect during that same
fiscal year. Such pay increases, regardiess of the date
scheduled to take effect during that fiscal year will appear on the
last full paycheck prior to the first day the officer begins
participation in Option C;

5. An officer electing to participate in Option C may not return to
active duty with the Houston Police Department. The Houston
Police Department will notify TCOLE of the officer's change in
status upon his entry in Option C;

6. An officer, regardless of rank, may elect to revoke his
election/participation in Option C in favor of participating in the
Deferred Cash Out Option. An officer who selects Option C may
not revoke his election in favor of receiving a lump sum cash
payment commonly referred to as “drag up” pay; and,

7. In the event of the death of an officer participating in Option C,
the balance of his Phase Down bank shall be paid to his
designated beneficiary or estate. The lump sum value shall be
determined based upon the value at which it was accrued.

27. DEFERRED CASH-OUT OPTION AND ROLLOVER ELECTION

A.

Prior to the Meet and Confer Agreemenis, officers electing to retire
outright rather than enter one of the Phase Down Options received the
traditional lump sum cash payout typically referred to as “drag up pay”
in accordance with §143.115, §143.1155, and §143.116 of the Texas
Local Government Code.

The Deferred Cash-Out Option will now become the default method for
all officers retiring from the department. As such, there are no
designated sign up periods or limitations on the number of officers
allowed to participate in the Deferred Cash-Out Option. Officers
participating in this Option shall have the following privileges and
benefits:

1. An officer's cash value leave banks shall be valued in the same
manner as currently calculated for officers electing the lump sum
payment commonly known as “drag up” pay;

2. After the value of the leave banks have been determined, and
the interest rate listed in 3) below has been calculated, then an
amortization schedule will be developed and 130 equal bi-weekly
payments of principle and interest shall be paid to the office over
a period of five (5) years;

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -78-
28.

29.

4.

Officers shall earn interest at a rate equal to that of the 5-Year
Federal Treasury Note as published in the Capital Treasury
Department's Daily Yield Curve Rates at the “Daily bid yield” rate
that was in effect on the date the officer signed this election
option, plus 1%; and

An officer will be considered retired.

In the event an officer does not wish to participate in the Deferred
Cash-Out Option, upon separation from the Department the officer will
have a one-time opportunity io have his “drag up” pay rolled over into
his HPOPS DROP/PROP, 457, or 457b accounts to the extent allowed
by the plans and law. This election must be made in writing and done
prior to the officer's separation date.

1.

There will be no lump sum payment made te the officer unless
required because of an inability of the Houston Police Officers’
Pension System (HPOPS), a 457, or 457b plan to accept all of
the “certain additional pre-tax employer contributions” made on
behalf of members who have separated from service and are
having payments made into HPOPS as authorized by the Meet
and Confer AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE HOUSTON POLICE
OFFICERS’ PENSION SYSTEM AND THE CITY OF
HOUSTON.

For each such member identified above, the CITY shall indicate
the member's DROP/PROP Account that shall receive these
employer contributions. In such an event any funds which could
not be accepted by HPOPS, a 457, or a 457b account will be
paid to the officers in a Lump Sum Pay-Out Option as described
below.

NOTE: ALL OF THE ABOVE LISTED PAYMENT PLANS (PHASE DOWN
OPTIONS A, B, C, AND DEFERRED CASH-OUT) WILL BE PAID IN THE
TRADITIONAL W-2 FORMAT AND ON THE POLICE DEPARTMENT'S
BIWEEKLY PAYMENT SCHEDULE.

LUMP SUM PAY-OUT OPTION

A.

B.

The Lump Sum Pay-Out Option commonly referred to as “drag up” pay
will now be repiaced with the Deferred Cash-Out Option.

A Lump Sum Pay-Out Option will only be received under the following
circumstances:

1.
2.

an officer resigns before completing 20 years of service;

termination or is involuntarily removed from the Phase Down
Program by the Chief of Police in accordance with this Meet &
Confer Agreement;

Deductions for health care and coverage would be greater than
Meet & Confer

Agreement
Page -79-
the officer’s bi-weekly payment;

4. Deductions for health care and coverage, for whatever reason
ever increase to an amount greater than that of the officer's
equal bi-weekly payments, the officer will be removed from the
Deferred Cash-Out Option and will receive a final lump sum
payment for the remaining principal and any accrued interest;
and,

5. In the event of the death of an officer participating in the
Deferred Cash-Out Option, the remaining value, including
principal and any accrued interest shall be payable to the
officer's designated beneficiary or estate as a lump sum;

6. For any funds unable to be paid by the employer into either a
HPOPS, DROP/PROP Account, a 457, or 457b account
described in the Deferred Cash-Out Option/Rollover Election
provisions of this Agreement.

MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS

 

ARTICLE 45: DEFERRED 457(b) COMPENSATION PLAN

1.

The City of Houston Council previously authorized (at no cost to the City of
Houston) the Majority Bargaining Agent (MBA) to develop the details for
implementation and rules for participation in one or more 457(b) deferred
compensation plans and will continue to do so for the duration of this
Agreement.

2. This authorization includes the selection of a vendor to administer the plan(s)
from a pool of candidate vendors exclusive of the current City of Houston 457
vendor.

ARTICLE 46: ADDITIONAL TERMS

4.

The City/HPD agrees to:

A. Provide every officer with a copy of the General Orders and provide
copies of Special Orders, Training Bulletins and Rules and Regulations
at each work site.

B. Make an electronic copy of this Agreement available by posting a copy
of the executed Agreement on the department's intranet.

c. Not to engage in the following:

1. interference with, restraint, or coercion of officers in the exercise
of rights granted in this Agreement;

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -80-
2.

2. Domination, interference, or assistance in the formation,
establishment or administration of any employee organization or
contribute financial support, other than dues and payroll
deductions permitted by law, to any such organization;

3. Discharge, retaliation or discrimination against any officer
because he/she has filed any affidavit, petition, grievance, or
complaint, or given any information or testimony alleging
violations of this Agreement, or because he/she has formed,
joined, or chosen to be represented by any employee
organization or union; or,

4. Making or permitting any agreement, understanding, or contract
with any person, including a member of the bargaining unit,
which in any manner circumvents, alters, amends, modifies, or
contradicts any provision of this Agreement.

The parties agree that after the ratification date of this Agreement, no contract
grievance shail be filed related to any previous Agreement more than thirty
(30) days after discovery of such.

ARTICLE 47: PHYSICAL AND MENTAL FITNESS PROCEDURES AND
PROTECTIONS

4.

This Article preempts TLGC 143.1115 and provides the exclusive procedure
for separating an officer who is determined pursuant to this procedure to be
physically and/or mentally unfit to perform the essential functions of his or her
duties. The procedure in this Article may be used if the Chief or the police
officer questions the report of the police officer's personal physician,
psychiatrist, and/or psychologist as it relates to the police officer's current
medical and/or mental ability to perform the essential functions of his or her
duties.

On receiving a written order by the Chief to submit a medical questionnaire,
the officer shall request his or her personal physician, psychiatrist, and/or
psychologist, as appropriate, io submit to the Chief a report establishing
whether the officer is physically and/or mentally qualified to perform the
essential functions of the officer's duties. An officer ordered as such must
authorize, in writing, the release of the report to the Chief.

If the report reflects that the police officer is unable to perform the essential
functions of the officer's duties, and the Department is unable to make a
reasonable accommodation, if applicable, then the Department shall make a
written recommendation to the Commission that the Commission enter a final
order removing the police officer from active employment with the City. This
provision shall apply only in the event that neither the officer nor the
Department questions the report.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -81-
if either party questions the report, the Chief or the police officer shall submit a
request in writing to the Commission to appoint a physician, psychiatrist,
and/or psychologist, as appropriate, to examine the police officer and to
submit a report to the Commission. The police officer shall authorize, in
writing, the release of the report. Upon receipt, the Commission shall provide
a copy of the report to the Chief and the police officer.

If the report of the appointed physician, psychiatrist, and/or psychologist
conflicts with the report of the police officer's personal physician, psychiatrist,
or psychologist, the Commission shall appoint three independent physicians,
psychiatrists, and or psychologists or any combination thereof, as appropriate,
to examine the police officer. Each board member shall submit to the
Commission a written report of his or her findings regarding whether the police
officer is physically and/or mentally fit to perform the essential functions of the
officer's duties. The reports shall be provided to the Chief and the police
officer. If the reports reflect that the police officer is unable to perform the
essential functions of the officer’s duties, and the Department is unable to
make a reasonable accommodation, if applicable, then the Department shall
make a written recommendation to the Commission that the Commission enter
a final order removing the police officer from active employment with the City.

The Commission, at its next regularly scheduled meeting after the date it
teceives the reports and Department recommendations submitted pursuant to
paragraph 3 or 5 above, shall determine the police officer's employment
status. The police officer and his or her representative may appear and be
heard at this hearing as prescribed by the rules of the Commission.

If the Commission determines that the officer cannot perform the essential
functions of the officer's duties and the Department has determined that it is
not able to provide a reasonable accommodation, if applicable, then the
Commission may enter a final order removing the police officer from active
employment with the City. Such order shall not prejudice the police officer's
ability to seek re-employment with the City in the future, should there be a
change in the police officer's physical or mental condition. The order of the
Commission is final and not appealable. The Order of the Commission and the
Department's written recommendation to the Commission shall be provided to
the officer after the hearing.

The police officer shall pay the cost of the services of the person's personal
physician, psychiatrist, and/or psychologist, as appropriate. The Department
shall pay the costs of the services of any other physician, psychiatrist, and/or
psychologist required by this Article.

The Commission may not appoint a person to serve on a board appointed
under paragraph 4 above, if the person receives any compensation from the
City, other than compensation for the person's services as a board member.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -82-
10.

11.

12,

if at any time the officer desires a copy of the report of any physician,
psychiatrist, and/or psychologist, received pursuant to this Article the officer
shall be provided such copy within three (3) business days of a written
request.

The Commission shall promulgate rules and procedures necessary to
implement this section.

Complaints of discrimination or retaliation may not be heard by the
Commission and shall instead be handled in accordance with Federal or State
law and/or City policy.

ARTICLE 48: DONATED PTO

1.

4,

Officers may request to donate up to 480 hours of accrued PTO to a family
member who is also a classified employee of the Houston Police Department
and who has been approved for family medical leave. This provision does not
apply to an individual who is in Phase Down, whether as a donor or recipient.

A. Family member shall include a parent, spouse, son or daughter as
defined by the Family Medical Leave Act and interpretive regulations.
The determination of whether an individual is a qualified family member
will be made by the City of Houston Legal Department.

The Chief may approve such a request regardless of whether the receiving
family member has exhausted or will exhaust all their personal accrued leave
hours to which they are entitled.

Any donated leave must be deducted from the most recent accruals prior to
the benefit year in which the donation was made. An officer who donates
accrued PTO who has reached or exceeded the allowable PTO cap at the
time of the donation is prohibited from carrying over more than the 120 hours
referenced in Exhibit B, Section E (6) in any year thereafter. An officer who
donates accrued PTO and who is within 480 hours of the applicable PTO cap
at the time of the donation shall be limited to accruing 120 hours in any year
thereafter.

All other terms of the City’s Accrued Leave Donation Program administrative
procedure will control.

ARTICLE 49: OFFICER RESIDENCY INCENTIVE PROGRAM

During the term of this Agreement the LRC shall review and evaluate the feasibility
and scope of an officer residency incentive program in which the City may choose to
provide additional compensation for certain officers living within the limits of the City
of Houston, but under no condition may pay and benefits provided for in this
Agreement be diminished for officers living outside the limits of the City of Houston.
The LRC shall make a report and recommendation to the Chief of Police by
November 1, 2015.

Meet & Confer
Agreement
Page -83-
SIGNATURE AND APPROVAL PAGE

This Agreement being made under Subchapter J of Chapter 143, shall
become effective and shall be enforceable and binding on the parties only if the
Parties ratify and approve their respective participation and assent to the terms of this
Agreement through the ratification process mandated by Chapter 143, or by local

law, whichever applies.

It is agreed that the signature of the respective parties certifies that the
persons indicated have the express authority to bind the organization and that the
authorization has been accomplished in compliance with state or local law.

Agreed to be effective on the date set forth in the City Ordinance approving

and authorizing the City's participation in this Agreement.

HOUSTON POLICE OFFICERS’ UNION (HPOU)
as the Sole and Exclusive Majority Bargaining Agent

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

President Date First Vice President Date
Second Vice President Date Secretary Date
CITY OF HOUSTON, TEXAS
Mayor Date City Controller Date
City Attorney Date Chief of Police Date
City Secretary Date

SIGNATURE PAGE

CITY ~ HPOU MEET & CONFER AGREEMENT
29/2015 POLICE DEPARTMENT ORDINANCE

 

 

 

 

  

 

(CLASSIFIED)
CIVIL SERVICE CLASS A 2015 Rate increase = 4.00% per 2011 MCA
HE HCE
Effective as of June 6, 2016 except for PPOs as noted below
Classification Base Pay (Biweekly)
GRADE It
Police Officar, Probationary 1,083.43 {BIW pay changes to $1,645.38 effective with the first pay perlad following July 4, 2018, for
‘those officers hired as cadets-on or after July 1, 2015.)
Years of Service Beginning
ist 2nd 3rd & ath Sth oth 7th - 9th 40th Year
GRADE It Year Year Year Year Year Year & Over
Police Officer 1,670.88 174149 4,932.71 1,946.98 2019.76 2,193.19 2,321.03,
GRADE IV asthYear 47th Year
& Under & Over
Senlor Police Officer 2,970.90 2,562.08
GRADE V (Vacant)
3rd-sth —0th- 46th 47th Year
GRADE VI Year. Year & Over
Sergeant 2,085.02 2.96445 3,124.88
‘6th - Sth 18th - 16th
GRADE Vil Year
Lieutenant: 3,218.96 3,328.22
GRADE VII (Vacant)
7th - 9th 10th - Teth 17th Year
GRADE IX Year & Over
Captain 3,683.93 3,907.74 4,017.50
GRADE X {Vacant}
GRADE Xi (Vacant)
ist & and ‘rd - 6th 6th Year
GRADE Xi Year Year & Over
Assistant Chief 5,188.54 5,207.95 5,429.40
Ast & 2nd ‘rd - 6th 8th Year
GRADE Xilt Year & Over

 

Executive Asst Chief 5,972.34 6,124.63 6,274.68
219/208 POLICE DEPARTMENT ORDINANCE
(CLASSIFIED)

CIVIL SERVICE CLASS C
COMMUNICATIONS CLASS-POLICE SERVICE

Classification Base Pay (Biweekly)

Years of Service Beginning

Sth-Sth {Oth 16th 47th Year
GRADE Vit Year Yoar & Over

Police Communications Specialist It 3,216.96 3,320.22 3,506.98

7th-Sth = f0th- 16th 47th Year
GRADE Vill Year Yes & Over

 

Police Communications Speciallst 3,649.26 9,778.68 3,979.64

Tth-Sth = 40th- 16th 47th Year
GRADEX Year Year & Over

Administrator of Communieations 3,973.28 4,110.91 4,333.23
2/9/2018

POLICE DEPARTMENT ORDINANCE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(CLASSIFIED)
GIVIL SERVICE CLASS A 016 Exhibit A
UNIFORMED GLASS-POLICE SERVICE
Effective first full pay period beginning on or after July 1, 2016
BAW pay rates changed vs prior year on position by position basis
Classification Base Pay (Biweekly)
GRADE II
Police Officer, Probationary 1,616.38
Years. innin
tet 2nd 3rd & 4th &th 6th 7th-9th 40th Year
GRADE Ill Year Year Year Year Year Year & Over
Police Officer 4,785.81 4,914.77 1,088.34 2,083.13 2196.46 2,230.38 2,418.28
GRADE IV 46th Year 17th Year
& Under & Over
Senior Police Officer 2,466.98 2,882.32
GRADE V (Vacant)
Sth-9th — foth- 16th 47th Year
GRADE VI Year Year & Over
Sergeant 2,971.91 3,070.54 3,184.28
7th-sth —10th- 46th = 47th Year
GRADE Vir Year Year & Over
Lieutenant 3,923.05 3,434.31 3,571.62
GRADE Vil (Vacant)
7th-sth 40th - 46th = 17th Year
GRADE IX Year Year & Over
Captain 3,816.55 4,040.38 4,150.12
CIVIL SERVICE CLASS C
Classification Base Pay (Biweekly)
Boginnin
Sth-th 10th 46th «17th Year
GRADE Vii Year Year & Over
Police Communications Specialist I 3,313.47 3,428.07 3,612.18
Tth-Sth = 40th- 46th = 17th Year
GRADE Vill Year Year & Over,
Police Communications Specialist Ill 3,788.74 3,888.95 4,098.93
7th-9th —40th- 46th 17th Year
GRADE X Year Year & Over
Administrator of Communications 3,973.38 4,110.91 4,333.23
2rar2015.

CIVIL SERVICE CLASS A

POLICE DEPARTMENT ORDINANCE
(CLASSIFIED)

2017

Exhibit A

Effective tirst full pay period beginning on or after July 1, 2047
BAW pay rales changed vs prior year on position by position basis

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Classification Base Pay (Biweekly
GRADE Ih
Police Officer, Probationary 4,816.38
nin
dst and ded & 4th Sth 6th 7th - Sth 40th Year
GRADE itl Year, Year. Year Year Year Year & Over
Police Officer 1,919.92 2,716.97 2,169.87 2,242.00 2,272.63 2,343.86 2534.76
GRADEIV 46th Year 17th Year
& Under & Over
Senior Police Officer 2,577.80 2,022.62
GRADE V (Vacant)
40th-46th 17th Year
GRADE VI Year & Over
Sergeant 3,085.71 3,194.34 3,253.88
7th-th — 40th-46th 17th Year
GRADE Vil Year Year & Over
‘Lieutenant 3,448.85 3,558.11 3,646.83
GRADE Vill (Vacant)
7th-9th 10th 46th 47th Year
GRADE IX Year Year & Over,
Captain 3,971.29 4,195.10 4,304.86
CIVIL SERVICE CLASS C
COMMUNICATIONS CLASS -POLICE SERVIGE
Classification Base Pay (Biweekly)
Years of Service Beainning
Sth-9th —f0th- 16th 17th Year
GRADE Vii Year Year, & Over
Police Communications Specialist i 3412.87 3,530.94 3,720.56
7th - Sth 10th - 16th 47th Year
GRADE Vill Year. Year. & Over
Police Communications Specialist i 3,871.50 4,005.62 4,221.90
7th-sth 10th. 46th 47th Year
GRADE X Year Year & Over
Administrator of Communications 3,973.38 4,110.91 4,333.23
219/201

CIVIL SERVICE CLASS A.
UNIFORMED CLASS-POLICE SERVICE

POLICE DEPARTMENT ORDINANCE
(CLASSIFIED)

2018

Exhibit A

Effective first full pay pertod beginning on or after July 1, 2048
ACB = 3.480% (Excludes PPO and Class C)

 

 

 

Classification Base Pay (Biweekly)
GRADE It
Police Officer, Probationary 1,616.38

Years of Service Beginning

 

 

 

 

 

ist and 3rd & 4th Sth 6th ‘7th - Sth 10th Year
GRADE I Year Year. Year Year, Year Year & Over
Police Officer 1,988.73 2,190.64 (2,245.38 2,320.02 2,354.72 2,425.43 2,818.87
GRACE IV 46th Year 17th Year
& Under & Over
Senior Police Officer 2,887.51 2,920.85
GRADE V (Vacant)
Sth - 8th 10th - 16th A7th Year
GRADE Vi Year Year & Over
Sergeant 3,203.44 3,305.50 3,367.13
7th - 9th 10th - 16th 47th Year
GRADE Vi Year Year & Over
Lieutenant 3,566.80 3,681.93 3,773.74
GRADE Vill (Vacant)
7th - 9th 40th - 18th 17th Year
GRADE IX Year Year. & Over
Captain 4,109.48 4,341.09 4,454.67
CIVIL SERVICE CLASS C
RVICE
Classification Base Pay (Biweekly)
fears of Service Bi
Sth - 9th 10th - 16th 17th Year
GRADE VE Year. Year. & Over
Police Communications Specialist li 3,515.26 3,636.84 3,832.18
7th-9th —W0th- 46th 47th Year
GRADE Vit Year Year & Over
Police Communications Specialist til 3,987.65, 4,125.79 4,348.68
7th-9th 40th-46th 47th Year
GRADE X Year. Year & Over
Administrator of Communications 3,973.36 4,110.81 4,333.23
Exhibit B
HPD CLASSIFIED PAID TIME OFF (PTO) PROGRAM
PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

 

 

 

A. PTO replaced current MSP and CSL Sick Leave and Vacation Plans
B. PTO became effective September 1, 2001.
C. Program Initialization

1. Officer who were in CSL Plan

a. Received an initial balance based on the number of hours in his/her CSL
balance plus any matching hours ta which entitled September 1, 2001.
Balance became available after year-end processing, which was done the
first full pay period commencing in October.

b. CSL hours were distributed as follows:

The CSL Frozen Balance includes 25% of CSL hours up to and including
4,040 hours, plus all hours over 1,040. The value was calculated using
hourly rate on September 1, 2001. Hourly rate in this case is defined as
average of Base plus Longevity rates during period employee was in CSL
Plan.

NVL Balance, comprised of the 75% of the original CSL hours (1,040 and
under) was not included in the CSL Frozen Balance. Except as otherwise
provided in this Agreement, these hours have no value and may only be
used for sickness or injury when all other PTO and prior plan hours have
been exhausted.

c, Personal Leave days will be accrued as Personal Leave, as under the
current CSL Plan; they will not be added to the CSL Frozen balance.

2. Officer who were in MSP Plan

a. Value of MSP hours for Benefit Year 2001 was frozen. All MSP balances
temain unchanged.

3. All Officers

a. Vacation hours were assigned a frozen value of average rate of pay (Base
+ Longevity) for GO days prior to September 1, 2001. If the Officer had
received a higher average rate of pay for a different 60 day period, that
rate was used.
Balances will not be converted to PTO; each type (MSP, CSL, VAC, LTD) will be frozen
and maintained separately to identify correct frozen value.

D. New Employees
1. Trainees (cadet) currently participate in the CSL plan.

2. PTO Accruats begin in the first full pay period after the employee is sworn as
a probationary police officer.

E. Accruals

1. Accruals will be biweekly. Accrual per pay period will be determined by
Classified Payroll

2. Rate of Accrual for officers sworn before March 30, 2011:

Hours Accrued per

Years of Service Benefit Year

Up to 5! year 120 hours

5" — 9" years 160 hours

40" — 14" years 200 hours

45" year 240 hours

16" year and over 8 additional hours for each year to a maximum of 320

hours per year

3. Effective September 1, 2015, the Rate of Accrual for officers sworn on or after
March 30, 2011:

Hours Accrued per

Years of Service Benefit Year

Up to 9" year 460 hours

10!" — 14" years 200 hours

415" year 240 hours

16" year and over 8 additional hours for each year to a maximum of 320

hours per year
4. Years of service for PTO are calculated from Compensation Date (“C.D.”).

5. Accruals are per pay period, as shown, regardless of the number of hours in
an Officer's work day.
6. At the end of the leave year, no later than the 1" pay period commencing in
October, balance of unused hours accrued during the previous Benefit Year
(9/1 — 8/31) will be assigned a frozen value in the same way MSP rates are
frozen now [average base + longevity during Benefit Year|.

7. HOWEVER, if an Officer's Leave Balance (MSP+CSL+Vacation+PTO)
exceeds the applicable cap, the accrual for the year being valued will be
limited to (120 hours). For an Officer with a balance over the applicable cap
who attempted but was unable to use leave prior to the end of the Benefit
Year, a manual entry will be prepared by the Department's Payroll staff for the
accrual adjustment.

a. The cap for officers sworn before March 30, 2011, is 5,000 hours.
b. The cap for officers sworn after March 30, 2011, is 2,500 compensable
hours.
F. Usage
1. Usage will be taken from the earliest year frozen balance, proceeding to the
next earliest year until all frozen balances have been exhausted (FIFO). Only
after all frozen, valued accruals have been exhausted will usage be taken
from any LTD balance.
G. Payout at Termination
4. An Officer will be entitled to payment for all unused PTO, prior vacation, and
prior sick pian time at the frozen rate(s) based on years of service from Hire
Date. Payment will be 10% of total value for each completed year of service
through 10" year, at which time payment will be at 100% of value.

1 complete year of service will be paid at 10% of frozen and current value
2 compete years of service will be paid at 20% of frozen and current value

Through
10 compete years of service will be paid at 100% of frozen and current value

Example: employee hired 7/1/2001 would be entitled to 10% of total value of
balances on 7/1/2002.

Reference Sections C1b, C2a, C3, and D3 for calculation of frozen values

2. Value of current year accruals will be Base + Longevity at time of termination.
3. Frozen and current balances are payable at 100%, regardless of length of
service, for an Officer who goes on Disability Retirement or who dies in the
line of duty.
EXHIBIT C
For 2015 Meet and Confer Agreement

PHYSICAL FITNESS TEST

Test Requirements

A five-event physical fliness test is the tool designed to test for the minimum strength
and endurance needed to successfully accomplish the duties of a Houston police
officer. The minimum acceptable standards are:

Agility Run 18.2 seconds,

Vertical Jump 46.5 inches or Leg Press 2.1 x body weight
300 Meter Run 71 seconds

Push-ups 22. «oor Bench Press .63 x body weight

1.5 Mile Run 47:00 minutes

Test Procedures

Or

1, Warm-up and streiching (5 min.)

2. Agility Run — Individuals will complete the course as fast as possible. The course

is 30 feet long with four traffic cones placed 10 feet apart and has a start line and
a base line on opposite ends of the course. The starting position is lying flat on
the floor with the hands on the start line. When the command “Go” is given, the
individual gets up, sprints to the base line and back to the start line, turns left
around the cone at the start point, zigzags around all cones to and from the base
line, then sprints to the base line and back to the start line. Timing starts on the
command “Go” and stops as the individual crosses the start line after completing
the course. Individuals will be given the best score of two attempts. A member
of the test staff will demonstrate the event prior to testing.

. Rest min.)

. Vertical Jump ~ individuals will jump as high as possible. The exercise will begin

by the individual standing adjacent to a wail and jumping and placing a mark as
high as possible with the fingertips without stretching. The exercise will begin by
the individual using a rocking, one-step approach, and jumping as high as
possible placing a second mark on the wall with the fingertips of one hand. The
difference in inches between the two marks will be used to determine the score
for the jump. The individual's score will be the best effort of three jumps. A
member of the test staff will demonstrate the event prior to testing.

. Leg Press ~ The test will be done using the Universal Leg Press Machine. The

test will start with the individual seated on the machine with feed on the push
Or

plate and knees bend te a 90° angle. The number in the left column will be used
for the test. When ready the individual will have to extend the legs until straight,
maintaining a seated position, and return to the starting position. Individuals will
be allowed up to four warm-up lifts before attempting to lift 2.1 x body weight. A
member of the test staff will demonstrate the event prior to testing.

6. Rest (10 min.)

7. 300 Meter Run — The 300 meter run can be dene on a % mile oval track or
driving track. Personnel being tested are expected to complete the run as fast as
possible.

8. Rest (15 min.)

9. Push-ups - Individuals will cormplete as many push-ups as possible, with no time
limit. The push-ups will be done in the front leaning rest position with back
straight and head held up. The exercise will begin from the up position and one
push-up.willibe'scored every ‘time ithe ‘body/is!lowerediuntilitheelbows /areiS/90°
and returned to the up position. Individuals may rest in the up position, but the
hands and feet must remain in the start position. A member of the test staff will
demonstrate the event prior to testing.

Bench Press — The test will be done using an Olympic style weight set and
bench. The test will start with the individual lying flat on the bench. The test staff
(spotters) will position the bar above the individual. When ready the individual
will lower the bar until the elbows are 90° and return it the starting position. The
spotters will assist the individual in returning the bar to the bench supports,
Individual will be allowed up to three warm-up lifts before attempting to lift .63 x
body weight. A member of the test staff will demonstrate the event prior to
testing.

10. Rest and stretching (30 min.)

11.1.5 Mile Run ~ The 1.5-mile run is done on a % mile oval track or a driving track.
Personne! being tested are expected to complete the run as fast as possible,
Walking is permitted during the test but consideration should be given to the
additional time walking will require
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

“AoepUeU TIOOL Aue Buipnjour “AoyepUaW BIOOL Aue Guypnjout ‘aor, isquewasnbay
oN oN “BOkD GuiUIesL SOO 2k-z ain Suunp Buuren | Suwiest SIOOL eekZ alg Sump BuuwA |g :
JO SINCH gp ‘UoReoMenb uuesy enuuy | Jo suNoL! OF “uoNeoueNb wwe jenUUY HuHesL STOOL
“S1284 OM} JO} {SE} UOROWCAT BYE} 0} 21G!511
you ‘Buyuumyas auokuy “s}sixe ADUBDEA H Od
ON US 10 Od se Ainp anor o LuMaL EM BAoge on ssuopipuog ng
pus 36s “Ainp aayoe oF WuNjed ium SAOgE @atoy 0} UINIOY
“eBueuo snyeys no jo peygou | pue 76g Ainp aayoe oO} wes Od 3S PUe
[94 ils 3100.2 pue paigar pasapisuod ‘ON | Od “sO/lOs UI yeasq OL IeAoddY dOD 'SeA
wauikeg ung duny weukeg ung dum y
LOW 40) inoked aneoots “Low soy ;nofed ydaoxe wauteg wing | ON Quawinjowa HAND {0 BOUO 3 COG 10 “.dO | ON yUsUIN|OWIS JAD Jo SOMO BOO JO“ sSuORIPUOD
oN duit] ON -AlUD INO USED paUajed ‘se, | 'S8A INO USED PaUIE!EG 10 2 uORdO OL ‘seA | idg ‘SAA “eWHAUE INC YseD PaUAEG ‘seA Suyyoums
“yeadde ou um uojouiep KeIUNIOA “yeedde ou Guam uonouTep “yadda Ou Up LOROWEp AIEWUNIOA
‘sxe fougoes pue payyend a ‘Od 16 | Amjunjon sXe AouRDeA pue payyend | ySK@ AoURDeA pue poNENd 31 ‘Od JS -suomipucg
on 40 Od Se TuawAodusa enugucD qa ancay | J1 ‘Od JS JO Od Se Weuikoyduss anunuCS | 10 Od Se jSUKoIdWE AAUNLOD yr BACTY ai
pue 18g “Od IS 40 Od Se WaWhodus anogy ple 38S “Od WS © Od Se | PUE 18S “Od JS 10 Og SB jaUKo}UIS BIGESOnaLy
ANURUCO MN Od JS _BUE Od ‘SBA | juewAoIdwie anuAUCD Jim Od YS DUB O” ‘SA | SMUGUOD LW Oct 4S DUE Od ‘SBA
‘Tenaudde dOD UM ‘syuaLwerout Teaoudde gOS ULM ‘sluauBIOU |
on oN snow 4 “five AunaBuoy bue ssea "S83, | nou % ‘Aue Aywsbuoy pue aseg ‘so, | VOHPSUAdUICD LO
Breen jo pr 8 Be sopuy som, JajN0D 8 WON 10 pp BBE SeOHIY cag, J9{U0D BOON JO FP PE SAOMY 28g, | J8]UOD "PIRI IO by Bee SOPLVSES, | :eqURINSU] Nee
oN ON BUC 40) JHE} BUQ ‘SEA BUD 40} BUC ‘SBA rSAepyoH
ON on +dSOs
eu) YOaM Jod S3NOL OB 'S2A “ew yeom Jad SiNOU OF 'S2A | _/SGOT BAN HORA,
oad 1eyioue ‘vondo 221j0ue
on oly PSYOWMS #1 PApM|U! FON “9 UORdO | Woy PaYoHMs YB Papniout JON “g UORdO on

 

BurwuyBaq 0} soud yosuoed sinj 182] “seeK
[20Sy 32u9 30 eseauoul Aed uodn peseg ‘se,

BujuwBeq 9, JoUud yosysked yj yse) Yeah
fEOSY JEU} 40} eseesoU, Aed uodn peseg ‘sa,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bb Sid WaT
4BaK g 4Saza|U) ‘sjuawAed Apeanig Apysemig pred anjea wanna “Aysemig pied enienwaung |, hs
lenbe Q€i 4800 pieg ‘peuyep se Apjaaeng pied enjes juaino sunoy ab © voweonpy puy Sunoy 08 © Loneonpy pue aunoury MEIeS
yseuawu| snid ‘eyes paruooe ye panren | sinou oF © ‘Auo AynsGuoy pue seq “Buyyes “Aynebu07 ‘eseg *Bunwesi “Aya@Buoy ‘aseg
on oN eA S84 TSAHOY PaLEpISUCD
‘uonde seujOUe
ponuiun Wo. Suryoyas saekoduis GuIpnisur YON ‘uoRde seujouR Woy GuryoUMS seakoidwe “Aqsoques jueuedsp ‘siequinu ssquedsjoqied
“Kuojues juawyedep Ag ‘syues ity | Burpnjou: jou ‘Ajoiwes yueusiedap Aig | Jo) sajuog g WAN JO Pr APILY 28g, go saquinn
(ze) ~98q pue (ze) ~sune (g2)—98q pue (g2) ~ aunr (gg) ~ 98 pue (ze) ~ eune
‘yeuy saye dn ubis Aeq ‘yeu saye dn ubis Ajeg Teuj seye do ubis Keg
auighuy 0g ~ b equieceg pue og ~ 5 aunt ‘oz ~ 4 z2quisceg pue og — } aunt ‘oe ~ 1 Jaquasag pueoz—Laune | :poued dn ubis.
{AO SpoLid UOHDAIS AyoUd sspoveg uowpaly Aioug 'SPoUsej UOHOBIAL AMONG
LNG HSYS GSYuus3a0 ONOidO G@NOUdO I V NOLO SNOLO.

 

 

 

 

 

"HEYO Sup 480 [OJ}00 EUS YOM TUBLISEIBY 10D 8 TS8W Bip UF S8/OILy JUBAZIS! aup MapAd/ ASBA/A ‘SABUEYO 18470 PUB UMOG BSEYc} UO SHEIEP ej6}0uI09 10},
Quawsaby Jajucg % Jee $1.0z 03. G HANKS)
SNOLdO WVUSOUd NMOG SS¥Hd LNSWLYVdaG ForiOd NOLSNOH

 
EXHIBIT E
Investigator Incentive Pay

. The available funding allocated for Investigator Incentive Pay (both Schedule A and
Schedule B) is limited to the following per year:

© $562,000 beginning July 1, 2016;
o $727,000 beginning July 1, 2017;
© $970,000 beginning July 1, 2018.

. The number of Schedule A positions authorized for alt affected divisions is 402 positions.
if the City determines that the funding amounts set out above allow for additional
Schedule A positions, the City in its sole discretion may increase the number of Schedule
A positions.

. All tenure is based from Hire Date.

. Officers or Sergeants who have a permanent Take Home Vehicle are not eligible under
any conditions to receive Investigator Incentive Pay.

. Officers that may be eligible for Investigator Incentive Pay must apply for the pay by
submitting correspondence with supporting documentation to an Assistant Chief to be
designated by the Chief of Police. It is the responsibility of each officer to apply for each
step when they believe they are eligible.

. No backpay will accrue due to an officer's delay or inability to apply for the pay.

. In the event the number eligible for the incentive exceeds the number authorized, the
incentives will be awarded to the individuals with the cumulative longest tenure in the
division.

. All challenges to eligibility will be handied by the LRC using existing protocols established
by the LRC. In the event of a departmental reorganization, the LRC shall determine
which newly organized divisions are eligible for the pay.

. Investigator Incentive Pay, both Schedule A and Schedule B, is considered an
assignment pay and will be paid bi-weekly.
SCHEDULE A
investigative incentive
Pay Schedule

 

Step Levels July2016 July 2047 July 2018

 

Step $1,100.00 $1,500.00 $1,900.00

       

Requirements for Investigative Personnel
To Receive Schedule A Incentive Pay

1. Officers and Sergeants are eligible to qualify if their primary job assignment is to investigate
cases a majority of the time. Personnel who periodically investigate cases do not qualify,
Sergeants who carry a significant caseload in addition to supervising casework are eligibie.
“Significant” is defined in terms of being very similar to caseload carried by their respective
officers.

2. Personnel must successfully meet the eligibility requirements for each requirement within the
Step Incentive Pay Structure they are seeking before they will be eligible for the pay.

3. All Investigative Training Courses must be approved by the Houston Police Department
Training Division. Every attempt will be made to offer investigative training courses on a
regular basis. Personnel are not restricted to taking investigative training courses relevant to
their assigned division.

A, Where applicable, personnel must pass the course completion requirements to receive
credit for said course.

B. Courses previously taken by employees during their HPD tenure can be applied to satisfy
this eligibility criteria.

4, The following assignments qualify to fulfill the required years of “cumulative HPD
investigative experience”:

a. Divisions: Auto Theft, Burglary & Theft, Homicide, internal Affairs, Investigative First
Responder, Juvenile, Major Offenders, Narcotics, Robbery, Special Victims, Vice

b. Other assignments: Crash Reconstructionist investigators and the Hit & Run
Investigators of VCD, the Threat Management Investigators of CID, and the dayshift gang
investigators assigned to the Gang Division.
5. The Investigative Performance Worksheet must be completed once every six months in
accordance with the HPD’s regular JPR schedule. To satisfy the eligibility requirements, the
employee must attain the score during each previous six month grading period,

8. Steps 2 and 3: If an investigator's total average score on the Investigative Performance
Worksheet falls below the applicable Step requirernent, the investigator's Step pay shall drop
to a lower Step pay that matches the applicable total average score for a period of at least
six (6) months. The investigator must re-qualify for the pay by receiving the applicable total
average score. (For example, an investigator receiving Step 3 pay who receives a total
average score of 4.0 in a grading period shall drop to Step 1 pay for at least six [6] months.
During the next grading period, if the investigator receives a 4.5 or higher, then the
investigator may apply to receive Step 3 pay.) Any officer dropped to a lower Step may
appeal the decision to a designated Assistant Chief. The decision of the designated
Assistant Chief is final.

Minimum qualification requirements:

Step 1

Minimum of 4 years Department seniority

One year of cumulative HPD investigative experience
Complete Basic Investigator Training course
Complete 1 additional investigative training course

Step 2

Minimum of 6 years Department seniority

Three years of cumulative HPD investigative experience

Complete Basic Investigator Training course

Complete 4 additional investigative training course

Achieve a minimum 4.25 total average score on Investigative Performance Worksheet

Step 3

Minimum of 8 years Department seniority

Five years of cumulative HPD investigative experience

Complete Basic Investigator Training course

Complete 7 additional investigative training course

Achieve a minimum 4.5 total average score on Investigative Performance Worksheet

Schedule B:

The below are eligible to receive a maximum of Step | ($600) per fiscal year, beginning in the
first pay period after July 1, 2018:

1. Investigative First Responder Officers - must have 2 years tenure within the division
Crime Reduction Officers (Gang Division) — must have 2 years tenure within the division

Drug Recognition Experts - must have 2 years tenure as a “DRE”, be certified, have an
operational assignment (not support or administrative), and be regularly called to work
fatalities, Failure to Stop and Render Aid, among other assignments (1.e., DWIs).
