THE CITY OF SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS

THE SAN ANTONIO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

September 1, 2016
Through

September 30, 2021
 

Preamble

AR TICE: LT Dirtesthte tesco sceacess vse cacao cacctve teen coin sooo Harty ora Solpanvann svn coca enahonhvoneveebueeiee See aroveennseties 9
ARTICLE 2: Detihitions:..cnina-arancniinnacnnniinnhebunpnngwmolaaannaammmannnahe 9
ARTICLE'S Associa tiote Rights: 5545 scrvvcseevieetives-vioewtenay sete neiesvieenSpiensess gn cadpntarctancsecedensreeteneerarwn? 10
Section Ty. “Recomnnton, vases scnaracntinmedentee nse iene Ganeemetatanannnnr 10
Section:2). Payroll Deductions ii ntinincnctedntadiainehdinaandindinhnindndeatadnmaicinniad 11
Section 3. Time Off for Association BUusiness........-sssssesssesssssssssssesssssnesssesssessssessnesssenseceaveesess 12
Section 4. Bulletins Boards. sg5 esses cie tayitycsGeseiacniersiov shes sthavenncGnsttvavioysGeersvsetioivendnscovesiwveoehvee 13
Section 5. Members of the Board of Directors. .........::sssesssssesssecssessiesssessusessessseeessesesseesneesnes 14

Section 6. Addressing of Shift Roll Call Meetings, In-Service Training and Police Academy
Cadet Classes ...

 

ARTICLE 4 Management Duties to the Association .........cc.csesssssessessessesseeseesecssesssesseseesecerenveeses 15
ARTICLE 5 Non-Discrimination by the Association.........c.cccessssessseseesesestenssessestesesteseeneneeneen 16
ARPICLE.6-No Strike: CG] aise 5. eve-isysasnsetaseveseeacstosevecedecWorsdonvevessesde setae vert neds onzvosinsaphenyicienyaesie 16
ARTICLE 7 Mamaeritestat Riggtats 5. sss.305 cash casi cveenvsssasvoudacoar Rovee vr eraniyn sieve edesseoneee steer os idnveaniaiaray 16
ARTICLE 8 Maintenance of Stesd ands «.:csssvevuses oro sicasisciened-veasavei canes tics eiedaees ees team MTT 18
ARTICLE 9 Labor Relations: Conuntttee...s..essereseserseveverssveryverovesisosevevonsedsredeveusosdgratyogsacatasesedste 18
Section 1. Labor Relations: Committees, sst secasides toate eotsoatecy teas taacdangtyasvys ty icascsopedcgiatisgsyaavaaasa 18
Section 2. Labor Relations Subcommittees. ............ccscsesssssestesesscseeseseeaeseesesssesesssucsnensssenee 19
Becton 3. ‘Detensh GF OMietils, sss scsascrsscsssctascpessssscanecascpapchasabusicesdaaishaesbessgessisateaaphatpasiboagoasee 19
ARTICLE 10 Safety and Equipment -5.2::.:::0:s:.cteccsscstsvotesscoscsssssesseescussasecsscscaescoscstasssasedssedecadesacs 19
Section 1. GRETA ya ay-repe erg een yeey etn en tyenchensiies erie ee Atop oN AERO IRE 19

 

Section 2. Preventive Vehicle Maintenance Program......
1
Section 3. Ta OHOMe: C ges ins ayssnn ens asiensn inset esernie sevens and ge bias acto ND DMA RSOD 21
SOTO sry RCS ashy Da sits sc seasgce Sas sade satat ae castes ccat ogacoea sSesssscodpttnashastorbeneeteomeneuN TU TERA 21
Section 5 Sof Bod wAtmiots cxtiscacnsrrcor ccs casssessssuarupessnetnsmErauts 21
Section G2) sAmminnithon sccsesassscsscosssssstansanescuosevaeenersuasinsasssanass nasaasacagsceaasaopéntssaiedesecamsetseassewsbioe 22
Section 7. Labor Relations Committee as Equipment Advisory Committee..........cccseeeeeees 22
Section 8; | Reithbursemient Procedures: sacaussssssassasecsssesscssascausoscssanssanpesdsoscboosscsssas tssazsbavsertssvocese 22
Section 9. Standardized Installation of Equipment. .............ssssssesssesseesseesseesseesseesseesseessseessense 23
ARTICLE WUBI Oti On oss csssssssouacsssossassstpasnsnssssseszespisscossscupstesonesndsspeaspossconsabatstabneesntsiecciathscite 23
Sections We Deets sisi sissssscasisessccvnsonssencoesnsssssssseessusasussnnassvesenvasnoasssatpaatavanpnateuayerasavapihsetpietsies 23
Section 2}: > Stuy Materials. jaccc-snscsccasssois qysscsscsncssuc coxtconavsceuntivavevadldacocataananant vara vantnakionvavneees 24

++ 26

 

Section 3. Promotion to Detective Investigator, Sergeant, Lieutenant and Captain...

Section'4: Requirements A ftet Promiotions:s.inisisisssssesscsscessdadensisassbcststsisaatadvadcveveaiasehdisstiissctscvdiins 30

 

Section 5. Appointment to Deputy Chief.

Section, 6; Appoimtment of Assistant Chich,, :...:.:.iscsisavevvscassesivesasstssasaes sssraltosssdsvatsncsstienbelvassesceces 32
Section 7. Uniformed Evidence Detective Initiative ...c.cccsossssssssssusssssssnesanssssssssssssssnete 33
ARTICLE 12 Seniority ...........ccssscsssssssssssssssesssssssssssssssessseeesecsseesssecseeesceseesseesscenseeneeeueeeneeeneeensense 34

Section 1. GMO EY DSTNOD 80345 ,<c retin ie at anietinaoinaoemdnmnnasadaaaemanee

Section 2. SX Momithy Rec ini eansenntes fos srsssscsssssasscscassscscdosistcisssasttavsossbeosadpsuctvadbasssdeth sadeazsbvens 34
Section 3. “All Other Things Being Equal” Defined. ............csscsssssssesseesseesseessessssessseesseenneenee 35
Section 4. Military or Duty-Connected Disability. ......0.....c.ccssssssssssesssssssessecssescssseseeseeseeaee 35
Section 5. SGnNOE TY” Tie-B reall 2.52525. 1ansavcrcecestbspeoubnschowrspaatersdeavinsainssdnscisatporcenadonsbeanansiponty 35
Section 6. Gertam Officer Transfers a ptitss ictys seca iss cucetepassccswvens odues eovteavnsavaocs epost reoatseksd 35
ARTICIE 13 Hotars Of Wot sissuissssssecngistusstesonscncsaneounssstetsanyonssobt stasbiaseustenassagsesnhiditaasteapciadeoost 36
Section 1. General Provisions cncnccnnicsi ain ananaanunis Tanne eis din aie ay 36
Section 2. Local Government Code Section 142.0015 Overtide..........ssccssssessesessseseseseeseeseennes 37

 

Section 3. Non-Shift Schedules
Seotion 4. Brewks Beciodss, sa-seespinrsiente-wnadecsbesbersbesesyoateceMosariostesetensCseatinaeyachas tvesteenthe venir 37

Section 5. Hours for Certain Patrol Division Units. ............ssssssessessessessessesseessenseesenseescesseneesnes 38

 

Section 6. Hours for Certain Units.
Section 7). .Adjustinent.of Working: HOUurs.....:.iresiswesovwerriesciessinsedosmrerterstenstvesbooedyedansdbieteris 40

IS RELOTL Bscyov peg oe vce pez dasz¥yentecghas sons etaoaseosbased Beech enttan es eaoiliresOs eats alis tty cathea inca aby ete seen ectnsat ear hanaeata 40

 

ARTICLE 14 City Property/Off-Duty Employment Office
Section Ts, « Tiabrpdrcth ts ss, 2652585-et5catstakgsstysetac ates ats satecatesatssetasesscatestbs.thaccbacdsooeeosesradlpiabeitoosttaaaaasa’ 40

Seotion2; “OE Ditty Ole. 5s:sretecatenetessseaatasstesatescbasesedadestecsbotstesuasasetestbsstscastcslecabotatsteasatnenpontad 41

 

Section 3. Use of Sworn Personnel at City Facilities. ..

ARTICLE US: Griewancé Procedure c.sasic.siscassiacesasassvessnsassoussvocteanssipapipansnaatonssasaataataageatabaasipesspabens 44

 

Sestion Ts «Scope OL PROCEMITE: iss ouss iis astacase.assuaks sobs cabeane cndsipsospaniaspanhoseaocncanbnodshaasidasengiiad

 

Section 2. Time Limits.

Section 3. OUR eda eapahi sdk aah nua aappapaaaposavcacpanabas ence thagsega taassigane nada veaatesapseisagneees 45
Sections: Ash itr sisscsasas ass scssacssasscasscasacasscasscassnabecossssscoariassccsetsrssetenasnveriaarairenssudeieeedeasy 46
Hection:S;: ‘Miscellancous Provistoms..:..0jissieseecosscevsoysvesovesnandstedederstecegudsayeayennsevayovedenomneqensevesten 46
ARTICLE 16 Wea ges sscasssasccaszsasatdsnccasesanesesspssareciientsestctatgestabetctatatstetvictitebihsbotstotsboletudeles dfideasinn’ 47
Section 1. Wage SChEAIO..ccissnssssssescnsnsscestessbsncsobancbebaagianadsdptanasarsscececaapanpaasinngiodadasasadododsénana, 47
Section 2. PYF Sareea ys acases sascsscsacenansesecsccsscicecscscuasoatsssssaagssaivcseeaderaavecaseasiistuigaecaramibinbside 49
Section 3. Shift Ditterential PA. snie casromemih mah aan aadanaenk 49

 

Section 4. Longevity Pay.
 

Section 5. Stearate Pa oer caste ecovesevteveter RVG oeteenGivh iaareato arta onde snbevedo ieee vineteanteowh aware 50
Section 6,- i Lanisudpe Skills Pay ..cicsaaiisitrin case imacnyenennnnaniinmnnenadacebyds 50
Section 7. Helicopter Assignment Pays io...6:nsysstoscdevesonsiasssevievasssedevvieonseonsesesesedeadaaseasivieaeinse 50
Section:s; Drup Recopnition Experts .ag.c, cs. sc ays sae ienniuancarnaniniannnnned 31
Section 9. Voluntects In Policiny, c.cissvateivininainnannsenhuananasnnemnawannt: 51
Section 10, | Overtime, Regular Rate, and other Pay Calculations. ..........c:csessessessesseseesteeteenes 51
ARTICLE 17 Death in Family Leave 353

 

ARTICLE 18 Court:and Call-Back Pay... :scscscsczsccssssecssoosssossssasvosessssbnsvenssssveoscbacassnaesvisedeasvssienssves 54
ARTICLE 19: Clothing Allowantce «...csssccsssssssusesesssceseosesassesessavesassesvsscsosaessonssssosibasssossossasaasbsaaesine 57
ARTICLE 20 Holidays

Seetion: 1; Holidsy’ Accertual ss 55 sieisccssceinssinsezscesaccsscespcascansscsbesudeanhsassanahtosdson)sosdsapsscoesccosdsssgpaacaps 58
Section D;. Hotes. OF Holidays, sisivissvesseivansciecsicinsaasgacstasazasscspeyebssapscssssunscbasonasseaaasaacaeshaapeMaawodnas 58

 

Section 3. Staffing of Holidays.
Section Ae Pineeanypptsen ss iaiaie-eppadesedescdapsceastedacspapsSaasd cpascaatucadapssibsoauscaha ates Wea mpasdocabesdpasasasetcriaisins 59
AR TICU EE ZEW Ga thong a5 sisiah pds sadsaadsesdei dora deaaaaatasssbccteselaag oan an donesbietgio east Hate EESE 59

ARTICLE 22 Miscellaneous Leave Provisions.

 

Section 1. ESR PONICIOS: 4s aisssascnasapcaspansscsscerasansracadassdlstdapeds esp sospsecatospusiessheasts ciloalassbstenaspens 60

Section 2. Leave: Pay Upon Separations ..is.scsecisesusosasssssssasocstsestossesescsasqassesssseasesassissssassazaaniss 60

 

Section 3. Leave Buy Back.
Section 4. Bd rivis Hours Leave ccs c-..5ia034c5davsireeisvperesdeay adoueysleicit spe olan aipeae atone 61

Section 5. Mompensatory: THA A CCGA v.ceevaa;vauay-tncetsosoi vevdeniciveih ol vielysecednaaeoadiasatedenae 61

 

Section 6. Holiday Leave Accrual
Section 7. Weave Com veersitiins 5s sviasvcasscasnseaian by iphvsagpspasiccscansadsaac aniashannssdnasnbonsbacctgbcebaaelsd 61

4
Section 8. SAVANE CLANSC 5S aha asetadetaditacaiadsdetuaptacetesnsnsaeagesstiisiudgsacatstevetatdstaiateinisencudsbaiagan 62
Section9: Hex RelieP Days syicinacgacninecquatimooupeiagananaqnatatae omnia ogassniiey 62
Section.10;° -Toyuwy-on-Diity Lea ves.cssscosacesceoescossscranvsarapipxsa conansvoevovernvprsvaonenceencietvopessghasewvead 62
SECTIONS oe PII Y ENG ccacvsrsi sp csotecssecoes cease seteteiscesraovsceedtr ila ates eee Seat RD Roe 63

SECHOMMDs “Sick sBeave POO, x: cccessessessssoessoasssdsivasabeveenvessondbeconsaceo oghy she nedevenssntboss oossseas gd vata OD
Section 13s 5 Leaves OF Absences. cfevczestrasssvnsisrenssacsesesesortonsesstdnardnordeerdosgdecgaveday ctanedaeay gies 65
SECELOR IGE Aa WI RRCRRNINAONT 16.5. capasssessespacsase ti evade econo acai eons ecian te PAE ee PLEO

ARTICLE 23' Working ina Higher Classification ,.::,,..ssessscsesssvecenessessovsesveseasesbuoqeengvosteseacebyones 66

 

Section 1. Definitions.
Section:'2:, © “Acting In A Higher Positions cisscaccssssescsthsssscagsetescsjsesasshyteavbededgvesenrbesnentitesnseseeaseave 66

Section 3. Temporary Investigative/Undercover Assignment. .........:sseeseseseseseeseestenreees 06

Section 4. EXC HONS atid COV ADIL sat csccscscsccsoseesc ays ssysstetgunpsotgdsdedgpesebenpeacasenizentadenst 67
Section 5. Gesamte sobs sce 5ce ss c5 tesa cots tets sets setsctstotazcastetysaeg tee ot bese deda seaa stra tase sieeons tei apeaoeee 67
ARTICLE 24 Police Cadet Hiring Guidelines.................c:scesssscosssscoseessessnssescsssoosseceocosssersasesosnors 68
Section 1. Submission of Proper Application. ..........c.sssssessessesssessseesseesseesseesueesneesseesseeeaness 68
Section 2. Mesting OL A pplCants ses. cacccovccaracsnn oososuescaussacssscasecassesds4saihtpTeseGsseGhseassegeeeeossartey 68
Section 3. Background Investigation: 2 ccsscciscacascsscussonssessceatscsteestecnsscsssostetossacsravsreoggaqeap tied 69
Section 4. Assessment Board Interview sas.asyssscesesssscisussassssassisbsinissestiosicsusesvseastvassbansbandatseea 70
Section 5. Medical, Polygraph, and Psychological Examinations. ..............cccssssesseseeseeneseeees 70
Section 6. PASSOMINETINENNES ors asicecnetens tEcatboatsasdbeatbasinasepetslassts aststtssbesnelase¥edesbetscdatetpectetades 70

Section 7. Local:Gov't Code Section 174.006.1.i0..:c:s:css.cossscescctstesccsizesscqutessesesictasctssssaiesseines 10)

 

Section 8. Legacy Preferences. ............sessessessessesseeeeee

ARTICLE 25 Initial Probationary Period............+...svcsssssssssnssossssososssossssvonsnssseniosenioseresossesersabasases 71
 

Section 1, «Police Cadet: ..<.:.isicsisiscessassrescosssas

Section 2. Exclusions from the Police Initial Probationary Period.............::ss:sssssessesseeseseees 71
SEction’S, “Specisl Assisted sinsssasssissasscssavsvvcasscescscssuspectaasacaseccspassscciyactpenseastocisesmancavssssasaessas 71
Section 4: Note Stapp aetna a. scsssscsscssscesstctsetesctoeensvcesvenvosascaxssiiscibsiinedivcktsontcassaseartabaviaaasensese 71
Section 5. Probationary Dismissal s:sssisissssssssssissssssscasscsssnsssasvasavasssssgsasassssasansaaasssesassasasseesonse 72

ARTICLE 26 Field Training Officers.

 

 

Section 1. Field Training Officer Progratit wisississsssssassasssssssssscncssesssossssssassssassassssasassassitansil 72
Section 2. FTO Minimum Requirementts...........s.sssesssesssssssessssessssssssssesssssesversseesveessessnseaseenss 72
Section 3. Hours and Assignment, Emblem, and Voluntary Service. ...........-

Section 4. FUG Coord tmnt iy incase csincasscstscsassasacaacsdeascsateosessesazectscnasssascaasoscastsssadscaiiaiaastsiaze’ 72
Section 5. Field Training Officer Pay, sasicisssssssisssaesesssssasspsssosscasssssssgessasscisacabacts casiadsavapaapesaas 73
ARTICLE 27 Promotional Probationary Period ...........ccccescesesesessesesesessesesseeneseeseseensseeneaneneeneeees 73
ARTICLE 28 Disciplinary Actions .:.isisisasccsscssssssicsoscoscesstssodsteisuatsssusssaisortsssssasaseatsasesoussoaabaasactas 2B
ARTICLE 29 Internal Security Interview Procedure ..........sccssssssesesesseseseseeseeesesasseensseeneateneneees 80

 

Section 1. Investigations Through The Chain Of Command..
Section 2. Enternat Affairs Investigations, ..cy:stazsvvadiscyssvndepnnrinastychieonsnsnduestecnsaovsneeshdesssiierets 81

Section 3. Chief’s Advisory Action Board. .........sssssscssssssssssessessnesennsessssesscssecesesssssessnsanesssoesses 83

 

Section 4, Chief's City Vehicle Accident Advisory Action Board.

ARTICLE 30 Health Benefits: sssissssssssscsssssssassssssssssssosscatsssssnassdaoazssesasssossesosasessasssssssuassinasasiaits 86
ARTICLE 31 Retiree Health Bemesits:.;cieyssssncivesiyescyssdeoessossastrocerasasacataserucusssrssasussssessssaescgesstvst 89
SAR TIGIEE Oo scxgzusasss crasseositovnanneaKteass bent esadesscesaBeesisiszes tara dosbcn awe aon doa ev edad ces ege deter eeieneravteavnaier 90
Biapplemierital Beste fits 5.5 cee sosseseccavcssvosisourvctseessssusvenscopesedcossecsesasasaaqnaapiocsenevivacs cancun: Sapiapiaua 90
Section 1. Parking sasssassoesisnsssnscassespacsssscesetsscscssatssecsesssscassantscosstastsaaizasizoaieaniaavascaseasgsbajsoaastaaseaase 90

6
 

Sechon/ 2 Other Bevehts. coe cada esau vated dutrundwsaritenaesenisetite Me easesitess 90
ARTICLE 33: Educational Incetitive Pay.isccssois octeosiessiecsesosboqagsosepossiodtiesesosbscidesapssaaseaneaapescasopaie? 92
ARTICLE 34 Certification and Instructors Pay..........:sssssessssssessesseesscseessessessssssesssessssensnseseeseense 93
ARTICLE 35 Psychological and/or Medical Examination ............cscssssssessssseseseessssesessssesnesessees 94
ARTICLE 36 City Protection for Police ORC eIg 55:5. cissaicad, scccisissacstncncndss atassccipasdsiaapapasioa ep apaaie 97
ARTICLE 37 Employee Personnel Systems: sissis.ssssisssssassssssvcveverasossvosavonssasanssnsoassaanscasaaasvsasssoeass 97
Section 1. Police Pensomtiel Writes ssssisisesssisicssccessossscasiciscassisiasnevaasaizsaascascavssensseneriasaaaagasinds 97
Section 2. Thirty (30) Day Requiticmienttssisissiisisassssccaissssscsesctuscssscsassissaiscsesnstoszazeassesazsnsoeaeesy 97
Section 3. Nepotisnnlsssccssccscesssscscectstccvectcreseistussseiostivcsnisaisoadssainaedisanscatttainitstctennanesdisnteatnrnges 98
Section 4. Petsonnhel Career Activity System 'sisisasivicvesecsssesessescesscisesiescorveeovenessvetereniseticestiies 98
ARTICLE 38 Miscellaneous Provisions..........:.s:sssssesssesssssssssssssssssscesesneessesssssessessessssnssssseeseneessees 99
Section 1. Service Handgun/Badge Upon Retirement. ...........::sssssssessseesseesecsseesseesseesseeseeenee 99
Section 2. Service-Commected Deetht, icsvvvsevciscevsseensvereetin dovececessveetnarteerun Wes emnetaneameanney 99
Section 3. Speeciial Astute era tein 0, +-5s s3ssstuveveva surat ccewunsvnveshovnneeovevvaveshanevebebslnistyvadeua ins ednes 99
Section 4. (Peemianenit Peersoravel Pile ace sit izeresecsosassecsencsbyvscerteceseseserscevilveetiteseneedluavass veer 100
Section 5. Exception to Open Records Act (Officer File Photo).........::ssessessssessesseseeeseesees 100
Section 6. PAY SUID, .ss0:ssectesetasosctssesatassancedasoseseteénsben st abut os ssssassseasstascsssnasetgaitisesenitetebutedean 100
Section 7. Family Assistance Off Cer ssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssasasssasvsctesnscacasinasocasoassacaascessiaasssea 100
Section 8. Reimbursement for Lost, Damaged, or Stolen Items...........c.csssseeeseeseeeeeee 100

 

Section 9. Physical Fitness.
Section TO: “Preeaption sicisascascasssasties.savestsssscstewtisacarscacsonsoaieigiytsinsatesstasgiqestoneteeeyatacetesteeeeas 102

Section 11. Preemption of Civil Service Chapter 143 Claims for Public Safety and Police
PPERSOTIEL,  caxeircessacinyssy esc Nc es aps deueosssndl one de tede dere datehestcesetee dhe eesdehen ded ee eee iON 102

ARTICLE 39 Civilianization

 
ARTICLE 40 Savings Clause...

 

 

ARTICLE:41 Closing Statements; :.2iicasssnovnawnvesinsrersveravewaeaensomieateerbeoeereeditetacasters 105
Section 1. Slability oF A preeaenthe sci cadeecvosGesseasvsvcwvos iva cudieen crontadiovstecapeertreetoeaes eae Rani 105
Section 2. CEVA Servs. scexstasesstecenesnsaayestveorneesicateenn enor vont an coo a tunve ee cees evento PNA, 105
Section 3. Full and Final Scope of the Agreement, ............sessessssssssssssesseeseeseessessenseseensesnene 105
Section 4. Tinpasse Provedare.: nian acnndsanienoneinananhunnhcaimindiddestad 105
Section 5. NG Bypass Agreement, sceisecisessinsacesssnsssosussosessssoscsasceseissvassasscsancstescivcscssesssateassie 106
Section 6. TREN EGIEY 2 vs ssasasests cases osetevernn cite verehrsesokisveristntacesen cash GENIN ETE: 106
ATTACHMENT | EXPEDITED LABOR ARBITRATION RULES.......:ssecssessseesseesseesseesseess 108
ATTACHMENT 2 WAGES.. ~ 110

ATTACHMENT 3°CIPY ORDINANGE S1838 sissccsspsssoscsedsssaessanssassscssodeagsssnsseetuntises¥coaseettnvsied 112

ATTACHMENT 4 CITY ORDINANCE 83927

 

ATTACHMENTS BENEEIDS 5 scsscivsrinestnnSnvaiensinnsSnsdiresdeser aud saves recveniorriustuttenicenieuren isin 129
ATTACHMENT 6 MASTER CONTRACT DOCUMENT. ......:scsssssssssssseessessuessssessssnssesssenneesee 132
ATTACHMENT 7 TEXAS CIVIL STATUTES ANNOTATED ARTICLE 6243q.......:.0:-s000 194
ATTACHMENT 8 ORGANIZATIONAL CHART Wiisesvessvscceesessrosesasaseensovoroncescavoossonsencetecbsasvons 210
Preamble

The following Agreement by and between the City of San Antonio, Texas, hereinafter referred to
as the City, and the San Antonio Police Officers' Association, hereinafter referred to as the
Association, is recorded, in accordance with the Fire and Police Employee Relations Act of the
State of Texas. The City and the Association agree that the efficient and uninterrupted
performance of the municipal police function is a primary purpose of this Agreement, as well as
the establishment of fair and reasonable compensation and working conditions for the Police
Officers of the City. The Agreement has been reached through the process of collective
bargaining with the objective of serving the aforementioned purposes and with the further
objective of fostering effective cooperation between the City and its Police Officers. Therefore,
this Agreement is intended to be in all respects in the public interest.

ARTICLE 1
Duration

This Agreement shall be effective upon ratification of the membership and approval of the City
Council. All pay increases, leave, or changes in benefits, shall be implemented in accordance
with the respective timelines outlined herein. The provisions of this contract shall only apply to
those members who are City employees at the time of the signing of this agreement or hired after
the signing of this agreement. This agreement shall remain in effect until the 30" day of
September, 2021, or until such time as it is superseded by a new agreement between the parties,
whichever occurs later provided however, that in no event shall this Agreement continue in
effect after September 30", 2029.

The City agrees that negotiations for the contract beginning October 1, 2021 will commence no
later than January, 2021. The City and the Association agree to make good faith efforts to reach
an agreement before October 1, 2021.

ARTICLE 2
Definitions
A. “Association” means the San Antonio Police Officers' Association.
B. “Board of Directors” means those members of the Association who are duly elected, or

appointed and serve as members of the Board of Directors of the organization pursuant to
the Constitution and By-laws of the Association. The Board of Directors shall include
those members of the Executive Board as defined below, and in no event shall more than
twenty (20) be allowed to attend meetings in an on-duty status.

ic. “Calendar days” means each day inclusive of weekends and holidays.

Dz. “Chief” means the Chief of Police of the City of San Antonio.

E. “City” means the City of San Antonio.
“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of San Antonio.

“Commission” means the Fire Fighters and Police Officers Civil Service Commission of
the City of San Antonio.

“Days” as used in Article 28 and Article 29 for disciplinary action shall be defined as an
eight (8) hour day.

“Department” means the Police Department of the City of San Antonio.
“Employee” means an employee of the City of San Antonio.

“Executive Board” means those six (6) members of the Association who are elected, or
appointed to fill the offices of President, Vice President, Secretary, Treasurer,
Parliamentarian, and Sergeant-at-Arms of the Association.

“Gender” Reference to the male gender throughout this Agreement shall have equal force
and include reference to the female gender.

“Grievance” means any and all disputes arising under the Grievance Procedure in Article
15.

“Longevity” means time in service in the Department from the date the employee became
a probationary Police Officer.

“Member” means either member of the Association or member of the bargaining unit.

“Officer” means any sworn Police Officer employed in the Police Department of the
City, with the exception of the Chief of Police.

“Strike” means, whether done in concert or individually, a failure to report for duty, the
willful absence from one's position, the stoppage of work, or the abstinence in whole or
in part from the full, faithful, and proper performance of the duties of employment
(including, but not limited to, "slowdowns", "sickouts", and the intentional failure to
make arrests), for the purpose of inducing, influencing, or coercing a change in the

conditions, compensation, rights, privileges, or obligations of employment.
“Working days” means each day exclusive of weekends and holidays.

ARTICLE 3
Association Rights

Section 1. Recognition.

The City hereby recognizes the Association as the sole and exclusive collective bargaining agent
for the unit consisting of all sworn Police Officers, except the Chief.

10
Section 2. Payroll Deductions.

A. The City shall deduct monthly Association dues from each individual member
who has voluntarily authorized Association dues deductions. The letter requesting Association
dues deduction shall be signed by the President of the Association.

B. The City shall deduct monthly CLEAT dues from each individual member who
has voluntarily authorized CLEAT dues deductions. The letter requesting CLEAT dues
deduction shall be signed by both the President of CLEAT and the President of the Association.

Cc; The City shall deduct monthly POLPAC dues from each member who has
voluntarily authorized POLPAC dues deductions. The letter signed by the President of the
Association requesting POLPAC dues deductions shall declare that the request has been
approved by a majority vote of the Board of Directors and of the membership of the Association.

D. Any individual member of the bargaining unit wishing to voluntarily withdraw his
authorization for Association, CLEAT, or POLPAC dues deductions and not in uniform, must
identify himself and personally sign the appropriate form in the Police Department Accounting
Office at Headquarters.

E. On October Ist of each year the City shall deduct six (6) hours from each officer’s
credited vacation time and credit the time deducted to a pool for use by the Association, Any
officer not desiring the deduction shall notify the Accounting Office in the same manner as in
subsection D above during the month of September of each year for the following fiscal
year, Requests for leave under this section shall be made in writing by the Association President
to the Chief. The Association President shall annually submit a list of the names of ten (10)
members who shall have the right to use Association Leave with a minimum notice of twenty-
four (24) hours. This list of members eligible for expedited use of Association Leave may be
amended no more than once in each calendar quarter. All others using Association Leave shall be
required to submit the leave request no less than five (5) calendar days in advance of the
anticipated date of leave. Such request will be granted, except in the case of emergencies or
where the same would impair the operations of the Department or where the granting of the same
would adversely affect the welfare of the citizens of San Antonio.

F, The City shall notify the Association and/or CLEAT in writing of any member
who revokes or adds his authorization for dues deduction including POLPAC within thirty (30)
calendar days from the revocation or addition of the deduction.

G. The amount of dues or assessments shall be the amount set forth in the letter or
request signed by the President of the Association and/or CLEAT.

H. The City shall not be obligated to deduct dues or deduct any sum provided for
herein until the respective organization provides a legal and binding letter from the President or
legally authorized agent of the Association and/or CLEAT agreeing to indemnify, defend and
hold the City harmless against any claims, demands, suits, or any other form of liability that shall

11
arise out of or as a result of any action taken by the City for purposes of complying with the
provisions of this Article.

L All amounts deducted pursuant to this Article shall be paid to the legally
designated representative of the Association and/or CLEAT in accordance with the procedures
established by the Finance Director.

I Whenever an Association member dies, and the City is notified as provided
herein, the City will automatically deduct twice the amount of dues from each Association
member’s payroll during the month immediately following the Association member’s death. In
the case of multiple applicable deaths in a month the Association may have the double
deductions spread over a period of months upon reasonable notice to the City. As with other
deductions, said amount will be forwarded directly to the Association, provided, however that
the Association will reimburse the amount of the increased deduction within fourteen (14)
calendar days to any member who makes a written request for such reimbursement to the
President of the Association. The Association will disburse the additional dues collected to the
designated beneficiary or beneficiaries of the deceased member. Any member may designate or
change beneficiaries as provided by policy or rule of the Association. Any Association member
who requests reimbursement of dues collected from benefits after another member dies, and
officers who are not Association members, shall not be eligible for the benefits provided in this
Section. The Association shall be responsible to notify the City before the deduction of the
double dues occurs.

Section 3. Time Off for Association Business.

A. The Executive Board shall have the right to visit the premises of the Police
Department for the purpose of administering this Agreement. Such visits shall be conducted in a
manner so as not to interfere with the functions of the Department.

B. The Association's negotiating team, not to exceed six (6) members, shall be
permitted to meet with the Association President or to attend negotiating sessions with City
representatives, where such sessions or meetings are scheduled during working hours, without
loss of pay; or shall be given time off without loss of pay for the scheduled Dog Watch “C” shift
immediately preceding such negotiating sessions.

C. The City agrees that the President of the Association will be placed on special
assignment during the term of his presidency. The special assignment will give the Association
President the latitude to deal with the duties of his presidency while retaining the privileges of
his employment, while the Chief of Police retains the right to recall him to duty during an
emergency or special event involving overriding need for the protection of the citizens of San
Antonio.

For the purposes of accounting, the President of the Association will be assigned to the

Accounting Office. It will be the responsibility of the President of the Association to notify and
submit proper paperwork to the Accounting Office accounting for all personal leave time to

12
include but not limited to compensatory, vacation, holiday, bonus day, military leave, and sick
time.

The Chief of Police reserves his existing authority to revoke special assignment for the
Association President during emergencies or when the welfare of the citizens of San Antonio is
placed in jeopardy. The Association President, as part of his Association duties, reserves the
right, as in the past, to mitigate grievances at all informal and formal levels in order to reduce the
number of complaints and, in all cases, reserves the right to speak, visit with the men and women
who are members of the Association, as well as to tour existing police facilities and to inspect
equipment that will improve the quality of work life for the police officers of the City of San
Antonio whom he represents. In addition, he will participate as the duly elected representative of
those men and women of the Association in any discussion that may affect the quality of
worklife, health, and well being of any Association member. It is understood that the President of
the Association shall suffer no loss of longevity, seniority, pension, days off, or any other
benefits as a result of and during the term of such special assignment. When the term of the
President expires, the President shall be eligible to return to his previously assigned shift and
duty assignment.

D. The City shall grant Association leave paid in accordance with Article 3,
Section 2(E) to a maximum of ten (10) Officers at any given time at the request of the
Association President. Such request will be granted, except in the case of emergencies or where
the same would impair the operations of the Department or where the granting of the same would
adversely affect the welfare of the citizens of San Antonio. An additional five (5) members shall
be eligible for Association Business Leave for conferences, occasions, events or meetings when
the need for such additional personnel is legitimate, no more than five (5) times per year. It is
understood and agreed that a request under this exception shall be subject to modification or
denial by the Chief where a reasonable basis exists, taking into account the staffing needs of the
Department.

Section 4. Bulletin Boards.

A. The Association may maintain one (1) bulletin board at each of the decentralized
stations or other police facilities and two (2) bulletin boards at the headquarters
building. Bulletin boards may be located at the assembly room and the lobby of the headquarters
building and in similar conspicuous locations at the other police stations and/or facilities. The
Association may utilize Department e-mail and video technology to disseminate bulletin board
information subject to the following terms. All e-mail transmissions shall have prior approval of
the Chief. The use of video equipment is limited to the playing of Association provided
videotapes in compliance with Section 6 of this Article. The Association representative who
accompanies the video is responsible for its content complying with Section 6. In the event no
Association representative is present, the Association President is responsible. The President of
the Association shall have off-site access to the City mainframe computer and SAPD intranet.

B. The bulletin boards, e-mail, and video presentations shall be used only for the
following notices:
() Recreation and Social Affairs of the Association.

(2) Association Meetings.

(3) Association Elections.

(4) Reports of Association Committees.

(5) Rulings or policies of the State or National Association.

(6) Legislative Enactments and Judicial Decisions Affecting Public Employee Labor
Relations.

K Notices or announcements shall not contain anything political, or anything
reflecting on the City, any of its employees, or any labor organization among its employees.

Section 5. Members of the Board of Directors.

Members of the Board of Directors who are on duty shall be permitted to attend the two (2)
regularly scheduled board meetings each month, and up to two (2) specially called Board of
Directors meetings per fiscal year. Such members of the Board of Directors who are on duty
shall be subject to emergency recall, and the Association shall insure the immediate response
capability of these Officers.

Section 6. Addressing of Shift Roll Call Meetings, In-Service Training and Police
Academy Cadet Classes.

Members of the Executive Board, members of the bargaining team, persons appointed by the
Association to represent the Association and Board of Directors shall be permitted to speak at
shift roll-call meetings about Association business for a period not to exceed ten (10) minutes.
Prior to speaking at such roll calls, the Association representative shall notify the appropriate
supervisor that he intends to speak.

Members of the Executive Board, members of the bargaining team, persons appointed by the
Association to represent the Association and Board of Directors shall be permitted to speak at in-
service training for a period not to exceed one (1) hour. The President of the Association shall
notify the Academy Commander in writing in November of the preceding year of the
Association’s intent to use a one (1) hour block with the yearly in-service training beginning in
January of each year. The Academy Commander shall schedule the one (1) hour block and notify
the Association in writing of the dates and time to appear.

Members of the Executive Board, members of the bargaining team, persons appointed by the
Association to represent the Association and Board of Directors shall be permitted to speak to
each Police Academy cadet class for a period not to exceed three (3) hours. Unless mutually
agreed upon, such speaking shall be scheduled in no less than two (2) one (1) hour thirty (30)
minute blocks. The Association shall provide a lesson plan to the Academy Commander and
shall permit staff monitoring to assure compliance under this section.

14
Discussion by Association representatives shall pertain only to the recreation and social affairs of
the Association; Association meetings; Association elections, reports of Association committees;
activities of the State or National Association with whom the Association is affiliated; and
legislative enactment, judicial decisions affecting public employee labor relations, legal
assistance plans, and contract benefits and rights. Discussions by Association representatives
shall not contain anything political or anything reflecting on the City or any of its employees or
any labor organization among its employees. There shall be no prior restraint or censure by shift
supervisors of Association representatives during roll-call discussions. In the event an
Association representative allegedly violates this section, such alleged violation shall be subject
to the Grievance Procedure.

ARTICLE 4
Management Duties to the Association

Section 1.

The City shall provide the following materials to every officer:

A. A copy of special orders, general orders, training bulletins, rules and regulations,
Texas Penal Code, Traffic Laws and Code of Criminal Procedure; and

B. A copy of this Agreement.

Section 2.
The City shall not engage in the following practices:

A. Interfere with, restrain, or coerce Officers in the exercise of rights granted in this
Agreement.

B. Dominate, interfere, or assist in the formation, existence or administration of any
employee organization; or contribute financial support to any such organization.

C. Encourage or discourage membership in any employee organization by
discrimination in hiring, tenure, training or other terms or conditions of employment.

D. Discharge or discriminate against any Officer because he has filed any affidavit,
petition, grievance, or complaint; or given any information or testimony alleging violations of
this Agreement; or because he has formed, joined, or chose to be represented by any employee
organization.

E. Make or permit any agreement, understanding, or contract with any person,
including a member of the bargaining unit, which in any manner circumvents, alters, amends,
modifies, or contradicts any provision of this Agreement. For example, condoning a practice of
Officers volunteering to circumvent this Agreement on job assignments, relief days, hours
worked, or compensation would obviously violate this provision.

15
F. Discriminate against any Officer protected under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act
or the Texas Commission on Human Rights Act or because of association, or non-association, or
affiliation; or discriminate in the application or interpretation of the provisions of this
Agreement.

Section 3. Consistent Interpretation.

The City recognizes its responsibility to a consistent interpretation and application of Department
Rules and Regulations, Special Directives and Administrative Orders, which govern the conduct
of Officers on the job.

ARTICLE 5
Non-Discrimination by the Association
Section 1.

No action shall be taken by the Association or any Officer in the bargaining unit which
constitutes discrimination under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act or of the Texas Commission on
Human Rights Act. The provisions of this Agreement shall be applied equally to all Officers
covered by the Agreement.

Section 2.

The Association shall not cause or attempt to cause an Officer to discriminate against another
employee or Officer because of the employee’s or Officer’s membership or non-membership in
any employee organization; or discriminate against any employee or Officer because he has
signed or filed an affidavit, petition or complaint or given any information or testimony alleging
violations of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 6
No Strike Clause

The Association shall not cause, counsel, or permit its members to strike, slow down, disrupt,
impede or otherwise impair the normal functions of the Department; nor refuse to cross any
picket line by whoever established, where such refusal would interfere with or impede the
performance of the Officer’s duties as an employee of the City. The City shall not lock out any
Officer.

ARTICLE 7
Management Rights

Section 1.
Subject to the terms of this Agreement, the Association recognizes the management of the City

of San Antonio and the direction of the Police Department are vested exclusively in the City, and
nothing in this Agreement is intended to circumscribe or modify the existing right of the City to

16
 

operate and manage its affairs in all respects. The Association recognizes the City's statutory and
Charter Rights to:

A. Direct and schedule the work of its Officers, to include the scheduling of overtime
work in a manner most advantageous to the City. Officer work schedules shall not be changed
solely to avoid or curtail overtime pay. The City shall have the right to reschedule up to eighty
(80) hours of training per Officer per year. These hours shall include required TCOLE training
and may include in-service hours but the City is not required to use the entire eighty (80) hours
each year.

B. Hire, promote, demote, transfer, assign and retain Officers in positions with the
City.

C. Discharge, demote, or suspend Officers, pursuant to the requirements of Chapter
143 Local Government Code and further and fully agreed to in Article 28, Disciplinary Actions,
of this Agreement.

D. Maintain the efficiency of governmental operations.

E. Lay off Officers from duty because of lack of work, consistent with Civil Service
Regulations, City ordinances and State laws.

F. Determine the methods, processes, means, and personnel by which operations are
to be carried out.

G. Transfer any City operation now conducted by it to another unit of government, and
such transfer shall not require any prior negotiations or the consent of any association, group,
organization, union or labor organization whatsoever.

H. Contract and subcontract when it is in the best interest of the City.

Ti Use security personnel, which include, but are not limited to, such job
classifications incorporated within the Classification Manual as Airport Police Officer, Park
Police, Life Guard, School Crossing Guard, Municipal Guard, which require training in law
enforcement, safety and security duties, firefighting skills, emergency medical treatment, water
safety, and other similar related skills.

J. Use of civilians in the Police Department to perform duties which do not require a
Commissioned Officer or the power of arrest. The scope of such duties include, but are not
limited to, communications, information systems, records, community services, clerical support,
maintenance, school safety crossing, and jail operations. Civilians performing such duties are
not subject to the terms of this Agreement. This subject is covered in detail in Article 39.

K. _ Establish classifications, job descriptions, and standards which provide the basis for
recruiting and assignment. It is also understood that every duty connected with operations
enumerated in job descriptions is not always specifically described. It is, nevertheless, intended

17
that all duties relating to the present mission of the Police Department, as a public safety
organization, shall be performed by the Officers.

L. The Association recognizes the City's existing right to establish and enforce rules
and regulations, special directives, administrative orders, and amendments for the conduct of the
mission of the Department subject to the terms of this Agreement. The Chief has the right to
amend, suspend, and/or alter such rules and regulations subject to the terms of this Agreement
and approval of the Commission.

M. Any person, whether sworn or unsworn, wishing to address Police Officer roll calls
on any subject (except bargaining unit members who are running for Association office or shift
representative and wish to make a statement concerning an election within the Association) must
receive written permission from the Chief of Police or President of the Association. When
permission is granted by the President of the Association, the restrictions involving subject
matter and time outlined in Article 3, Section 6, shall apply.

Section 2.
Subject to review by the City Manager, the Chief shall have the exclusive right to:
A. — Establish Departmental rules and regulations.

B. ‘Transfer Officers within the Department to accomplish the mission of the
Department in the most efficient manner.

Section 3.

Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Agreement, the City, acting through the City
Manager and the Police Chief, shall retain all rights and authority to which, by law, it is its
responsibility to enforce.

ARTICLE 8
Maintenance of Standards

All standards, privileges, and working conditions enjoyed by the City of San Antonio Police
Officers at the effective date of this Agreement, which are not included in this Agreement, shall
remain unchanged for the duration of the Agreement.

ARTICLE 9
Labor Relations Committee

Section 1. Labor Relations Committee.

The City and the Association, having recognized that cooperation between Management and

employees is indispensable to the accomplishment of sound and harmonious labor relations, shall

jointly maintain and support a Labor Relations Committee. The Labor Relations Committee shall
18
discuss the working conditions of Officers, including, but not necessarily limited to, safety and
specifications for equipment, discipline, Departmental policies and procedures, uniform
specifications and other areas of common Officer interest. The Committee shall recommend to
the Police Chief changes in any of these working conditions where necessary, and the Chief shall
communicate his decision to the Committee in writing. The Committee has no independent
authority to bind either party with respect to any individual grievable topic. The Labor Relations
Committee shall consist of four (4) members who shall serve at the direction of their appointing
authority. The Association shall designate two (2) members, and the Police Chief shall designate
two (2) members. There shall be a written agenda of matters to be discussed. Officers desiring
items placed on the written agenda shall forward the matter in writing to the Office of the Chief
of Police with a copy to the President of the Association. The Committee shall make its
recommendations in writing to the Chief with copies to the Association and the City
Manager. The Chief shall thereafter respond to the Committee's recommendations in writing
within fourteen (14) calendar days from receipt thereof. A copy of the response will be sent to
the Association and to the City Manager. An extension of the Chief's response of an additional
fourteen (14) calendar days shall be granted by the Committee upon request of the Chief. No
matter within the jurisdiction of the Committee shall be discussed by the Association at a higher
administrative level until it has been discussed by the Committee.

Section 2. Labor Relations Subcommittees.

The Labor Relations Committee may appoint subcommittees as necessary. Such subcommittees
shall report to the Labor Relations Committee and the Labor Relations Committee shall make
final recommendations in writing to the Chief of Police as outlined above.

Section 3. Defense of Officials.

It is understood and agreed that individual city employees serving on the Committee are acting in
the course and scope of their employment, even though designated by the Association, and as
such are entitled to defense and indemnity under the terms of the City’s existing risk
management, insurance and defense programs, in the event that the recommendations of the
Committee become the basis of claims or litigation.

ARTICLE 10
Safety and Equipment

Section 1. General.

The City shall maintain at all times an adequate quantity of modern, marked and unmarked
vehicles, radios, and other essential equipment in sound working condition to ensure a safe work
place for each Officer and to maximize the Department's prime objectives of crime prevention,
suppression, and detection. Such vehicles, radios, and other essential equipment must be replaced
during periods of repair. Any recommendations by the Labor Relations Committee in Article 9,
above, for the purchase and use of advanced technological improvements in equipment (e.g., EO
Tech electronic sight; tire spikes), shall be considered evidence that such improvements

19
contribute to a safe work place for each officer. Any recommendations by the Labor Relations
Committee shall take into consideration City budget cycles and priorities.

Section 2. Preventive Vehicle Maintenance Program.

The City shall ensure that all police vehicles assigned to the Officers are in safe condition and
shall maintain a preventive maintenance program for police vehicles. The Chief shall assign a
supervisor to the vehicle maintenance shop for the purpose of inspecting the safety of police
vehicles. The Chief may assign either a sworn Officer or civilian to this position, except that in
the event that a civilian is assigned, there shall be no reduction or loss of sworn positions in the
Police Department as a result of the assignment of a civilian. If at the discretion of an Officer, an
assigned vehicle is not in safe condition, said Officer shall notify the supervisor assigned to the
vehicle maintenance shop that the vehicle is not in a safe condition. The supervisor assigned to
the vehicle maintenance shop shall make the decision as to the safety of the police vehicle. In
the event that the supervisor assigned to the vehicle maintenance shop deems the police vehicle
to be in a safe condition, and the employee disagrees with the supervisor's decision, said Officer
may protest the supervisor’s decision in writing. The supervisor assigned to the vehicle
maintenance shop shall acknowledge the officer’s protest in writing and forward all copies to the
Officer's Division Commander for final disposition.

The Vehicle Maintenance Supervisor shall maintain records on the maintenance of all police
vehicles. When a vehicle reaches the 30,000 miles odometer reading, a review of the vehicle's
maintenance record will be conducted. If deemed necessary, the Vehicle Maintenance Supervisor
may request an exhaustive mechanical evaluation be performed on the vehicle. Any Officer may
request an exhaustive mechanical evaluation of police vehicle when the vehicle reaches the
30,000-mile mark. This inspection will be accomplished in a timely manner or another vehicle
will be provided for the Officer.

Chevrolet Tahoe and Ford Crown Victoria_marked vehicles having 100,000 miles on their
odometers and assigned to the uniform division, must be retired from the uniform division
fleet. An Officer will not be required to operate a marked Chevrolet Tahoe or Ford Crown
Victoria vehicle assigned to the uniform division having 100,000 miles or more on its
odometer. Additionally, an Officer will not be subject to disciplinary action for refusing to
comply with an order to drive marked Chevrolet Tahoe or Ford Crown Victoria vehicles in the
uniform division which had 100,000 miles or more on its odometer. Prior to 100,000 miles, a
Chevrolet Tahoe or Ford Crown Victoria vehicle may be retired from the uniform division fleet
if considered unsafe by the head of the vehicle maintenance unit or a Division Commander. No
Officers in the uniform division may be ordered to drive a Chevrolet Tahoe or Ford Crown
Victoria patrol vehicle which has in excess of 100,000 miles. Any vehicle retired from use in the
uniform division pursuant to this agreement may be used by the Department in other divisions,
provided that the vehicles are sound and safe to operate.

Ford Explorer Police Interceptor marked vehicles will be retired at 70,000 miles pending the
results of a pilot program test group. The City and the Association agree to a pilot program to
evaluate a test group of 56 Ford Explorer Police Interceptors (8 at each substation and traffic
bureau) with a replacement life cycle of 100,000 miles. The Labor Relations Committee,

20
outlined in Article 9, will monitor the test group and evaluate the relevant data. At the conclusion
of the pilot test group, the Labor Relations Committee will recommend to the Police Chief a new
Ford Explorer Police Interceptor replacement schedule based on the evaluation. For the purposes
of this pilot program the decision of the Police Chief will be implemented only if the Chief
follows the recommendations of the committee.

Section 3. Take-Home Cars.

The City shall provide to Officers occupying the rank of Lieutenant or above a City-owned
vehicle for the Officer's use during his employment on active duty status and for the Officer's use
in driving to and from home. In lieu of a take-home vehicle, the Department may offer said
officer a monthly car allowance of $300 per month. An eligible officer may initially opt for a
City-provided, unmarked vehicle (with less than 10,000 miles on its odometer) or the allowance
as previously noted. During the period of June | to July 1 of each calendar year, the Officer may
elect to change from his car or car allowance. If an eligible Officer opts for a vehicle, and the
same is unavailable, such officer may draw the $300.00 car allowance until the vehicle is
furnished. The use of a City vehicle by an Officer may be revoked by the Chief if the individual
assigned the vehicle is not insurable per state minimum requirements. Each Officer assigned a
vehicle shall be required to use the vehicle in a manner consistent with Department policies. Any
Officer assigned a vehicle shall not be eligible to receive any car allowance, as otherwise
provided by the City. The Chief has the sole discretion whether to assign or not assign or to
remove a vehicle from any other officer in any rank below Lieutenant. Assignment by the Chief
of a vehicle to another Officer below the rank of Lieutenant shall not be grounds for filing of a
grievance based upon the equal pay standards of Chapter 143 of the Local Government Code or
any provision of this Agreement.

Section 4. Radios.

The City shall provide to each Officer, one (1) hand-held police radio and charger. These
radios will be replaced in accordance with Department policies and regulations. However, in the
event the radio needs to be replaced or repaired due to negligence or intentional abuse on the part
of the Officer to whom the radio is issued, the Officer shall be required to reimburse the City for
the costs. The cost of said radio shall be, for purposes of the Section, based upon its actual value
at the time of loss. Negligence or intentional abuse and the actual value (considering depreciation
value) of the radio shall be determined by the Labor Relations Committee outlined in Article 9.

Section 5 Soft Body Armor.

The City shall provide to all Officers the option of selecting soft body armor with a minimum
standard of Threat Level III-A or Threat Level II. Such vests shall meet the highest levels of
specifications as determined by the Labor Relations Committee outlined in Article 9. Vests shall
be provided to all new Officers prior to the end of their first week as Officers. Vests shall be
replaced every five (5) years by making a proper request to the Division Commander, or at any
time when obvious damage to the vest requires replacement. However, if it is determined by the
Labor Relations Committee outlined in Article 9, that the damage done to the vest was caused by
neglect or misuse on the part of the Officer, then the Officer shall pay the actual value

21
considering replacement costs, depreciation, utility value, and market value of the vest as
determined by the Labor Relations Committee at the time of the loss. One free fitting per year
will be provided by the City.

Section 6. Ammunition.

In addition to the ammunition provided by the Department for mandatory in-service firearms
training, each Officer is entitled to one hundred (100) rounds of .40 caliber ammunition per
year. The Department shall provide all initial and annual ammunition required for annual
qualification with a rifle or shotgun, regardless of whether the weapon is Department issued.

Section 7. Labor Relations Committee as Equipment Advisory Committee.

A. The Labor Relations Committee as outlined in Article 9, in addition to its other
duties, shall serve as the Equipment Advisory Committee, This Committee shall meet for the
purpose of reviewing specifications, testing, and making recommendations to the Chief as to the
purchase of all police-related equipment. For purposes of this Section, police-related equipment
includes, but is not limited to, communications equipment, vehicles, vehicle light bars, weapons,
specialized or technical investigative equipment, training aids, and computer-related equipment
and materials. Police-related equipment does not include chairs, desks, office supplies,
maintenance supplies, or other non-specialized equipment or materials purchased on a City-wide
basis for all departments.

B. When an Officer loses and/or damages equipment assigned for purposes of
employment the Labor Relations Committee shall cause to be conducted an investigation
surrounding the facts causing the loss or damage. Upon completion of its investigation, the
committee will make a determination as to the cause of the loss or damage and to what extent the
Officer is responsible for such loss and/or damage. The Committee shall write a report of its
findings which shall be forwarded to the Chief. An Officer who disagrees with the findings of
the Committee may appeal the Committee’s recommendation to the Chief. The Chief may adopt,
in whole or in part, or reject the Committee's recommendations. The actions of the Chief in this
regard shall not be subject to grievance and arbitration as provided for herein, if the Chief
concurs in the recommendation of a majority of the Committee or reduces the Officer’s
responsibility for such loss or damage below the recommendation of the majority of the
Committee.

Section 8. Reimbursement Procedures.

A. — Officers may utilize payroll deductions to reimburse the City for lost or damaged
equipment. Payroll deductions must be set at fifty dollars ($50.00) per payday unless the Officer
agrees to higher payments. It shall be the obligation of the officer to coordinate such repayment
with the Police Department Accounting Office.

B. Officers desiring to reimburse the City for lost or damaged equipment outside of
payroll deductions may do so as long as such mandatory payments are no less than fifty dollars
($50.00) per pay day. Nothing herein prohibits the Officer from agreeing to higher payments. All

22
reimbursements paid outside of payroll deduction are due within five (5) calendar days of the
payday.

C. Regardless of the method of payment, all payments must begin no later than the
second pay day after the final ruling by the Chief.

D. After all administrative appeals are exhausted; Officers failing to reimburse the
City or who fail to pay according to the selected pay schedule above shall be deemed
insubordinate to the Chief of Police and may be disciplined up to and including termination.

Section 9, Standardized Installation of Equipment.

The City agrees it will standardize the location of all equipment in all marked vehicles whenever
possible.

ARTICLE 11
Promotions

Section 1. Definitions.

A. Seniority - For purposes of this Article, each Police Officer shall be given one
(1) point on a promotional examination for each year as a classified Police Officer in the San
Antonio Police Department. In no event shall the number of such seniority points added to a
passing score exceed ten (10). In addition, Patrol Officers who are testing for Detective
Investigator shall receive an additional point for holding a Master Peace Officer Certification; an
additional point for fifteen (15) years of time in rank as a Patrol Officer; and an additional point
for twenty (20) years of time in rank as a Patrol Officer not to exceed a total of thirteen (13)
points with the total to be added to the overall final passing score of the promotional examination
for Detective Investigator. Detective Investigators who are testing for the rank of Sergeant will
also receive in addition to the one (1) point on a promotional examination for each year as a
classified police officer up to ten (10) points of seniority, an additional point for holding a
Master Peace Officer Certification; an additional point for five (5) years time in rank as a
Detective Investigator; and an additional point for ten (10) years time in rank as a Detective
Investigator not to exceed a total of thirteen (13) points with the total to be added to the overall
final passing score of the promotional examination for Sergeant. “Classified Police Officer” is
meant to include service as an initial probationary Police Officer and probation after promotion.
Seniority is defined as all years of service, whether interrupted or uninterrupted, on the San
Antonio Police Department, and not merely the last continuous period of service.

B. Eligibility - Police promotional examinations shall be open to all Police Officers
who have held a classified position with the San Antonio Police Department for two (2) years or
more, immediately below the rank for which the examination is to be held. Promotional
examinations to the rank of Detective Investigator shall be open to only those officers within the
classification of a Class C or higher patrol officer; no Officer shall be permitted to take a
promotional examination to the rank of Detective Investigator until being in the classification of
a Class C or higher Patrol Officer.

23
C. Seniority in Rank - Time Within a Classified Police Officer Rank. The Officer
with the most time in a classified rank shall be considered the senior. Officers promoted on the
same day shall be promoted at least one minute apart to establish seniority in rank. Seniority in
rank for newly hired Police Officers shall be determined by their ranking on the eligibility list
and effective with their appointment to probationary Police Officer.

D. Return From Military Service - Effective with the signing of this Agreement,
officers who were serving on active military duty as members of the armed forces and who were
eligible promotional candidates according to the rules as set out by USERRA when a Department
promotional exam was offered, who did not take the exam, may apply within 30-calendar days
after notice by the City of their rights and obligations under this subsection upon their return to
the Department from active military duty, to take the next available promotional exam given for
that rank for which they are currently eligible. If the Officer's score would have resulted in a
promotion if it had been achieved on the exam(s) missed due to active military service, the
Officer must be promoted to the next available vacancy in that rank. Seniority in rank and
retroactive back pay owed will be established as of the date the Officer would have been
promoted based on the score made at the time, as if he or she had not been on active military
service. This provision is intended to comply with requirements of the federal Uniformed
Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA), and to supersede the terms of
Section 143.032(b) of the Texas Local Government Code. This Agreement does not prevent the
City from taking steps to comply with USERRA under unique or special circumstances

Section 2. Study Materials.

A. Study Materials Committee - The Chief shall establish a separate committee for
the selection of proposed study materials for each promotional examination by rank (written
and/or Video Recorded Assessment). This committee will be comprised of two members
appointed by the Chief and two members appointed by the President of the San Antonio Police
Officers Association and shall be facilitated by the Training Academy Commander. This
Committee will consult with the test consulting company to assure support from the job analysis
throughout the materials selection process. Each member of the Committee will sign a pledge of
confidentiality, agreeing to not release any information pertaining to any study materials selected
by the Committee to be forwarded to the Chief in order to maintain the security of the selection
process. Members of the Committee shall rank the material collectively and forward their
recommendations to the Chief. Study materials for all ranks shall not be the same for any two
(2) consecutive years. The exceptions include, the Texas Penal Code, the Code of Criminal
Procedures, the General Manual, the Collective Bargaining Agreement and if developed, the
promotional study book for the Department.

This Committee will also make recommendations for the Video Recorded Assessment criteria
based on job relatedness, responsibility and consistent with the recommendations for legal
compliance, of the consulting company. After reviewing the recommendations, the Chief shall
consult with the test consulting company to assure support from the job analysis. After his
consultation, the Chief shall make the final decision and forward his selections and/or changes to
the consulting company hired by the City to create the test. The committee membership will be

24
changed after each testing cycle. The committee members appointed by both the Chief and the
President of the Association will hold the same rank or higher as the position being tested for.

Failure to comply with the confidentiality pledge may result in disciplinary action ranging from
a written reprimand to indefinite suspension.

B. Promotional Text Materials - The City shall limit the promotional material for all
ranks to two hundred (200) pages of text except for text taken from the Texas Penal Code, the
Code of Criminal Procedures, the General Manual, and the Collective Bargaining Agreement.
For purposes of this section, two hundred pages of text shall be defined as text that averages
approximately 750 words per page. An Officer may not file any grievance or appeal based on the
limitations involving pages of text and words. In the alternative to the 200 page limitation from
one or more textbooks, the City may develop a promotional study book with advice by the
Testing Consulting Company and input from the Association, which shall not be subject to the
200 page limitation. Once the SAPD promotional study book is implemented, the City shall not
use any other text books other than the Texas Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedures, the
General Manual, and the Collective Bargaining Agreement. The promotional study book may be
revised annually. The City shall attempt to obtain the publisher’s permission to duplicate and
distribute to the candidates the study materials without incurring any fee, cost, penalty or liability
to the publishers, and if it does obtain this permission, the City will bear the expense of the
printing or reproduction of the study materials for distribution to eligible candidates. However,
the City will not be required to perform the aforementioned printing, reproduction, and
dissemination of the study materials if the permission of the publishers to do so cannot be
obtained without any cost, penalty, or liability to the publishers. Where the City cannot obtain
such permission, the City will make arrangements to ensure that all of these study materials (e.g.,
textbooks) are available at one or more locations within the City for purchase by the candidates.
Candidates who purchase study materials and who score seventy percent (70%) or higher on
each of the examinations applicable to the promotion sought will be reimbursed for the price of
the study materials.

After the Chief has made his selections, the City Human Resources Department will pick up the
study materials. The study materials will be printed and/or reproduced under circumstances
which will promote security. The Human Resources Department will verify the completeness of
the packets. No question will be included in the written examination unless it derives its source
from the study material.

Until the adoption of the SAPD promotional study book(s) the date and location that the study
materials will be made available for candidates to pick up or the location where the study
materials may be purchased will be announced in the Daily Bulletin for five (5) consecutive
working days. Until the adoption of the SAPD promotional study book(s) in accordance with this
Section, the study materials shall be either announced as to location for purchase or provided to
eligible candidates during a period which is not less than ninety (90) calendar days prior to the
examination. If the City has developed a promotional study book for the Department, the
announcement and provision of such materials shall be not less than 365 calendar days prior to
the examination. Once the study materials are provided to the candidates, the material will not
be altered in any manner, other than to update change in law and Department policy.

25
The City may provide notice of a promotional examination and the study materials before an
eligibility list has expired, and prior to the existence of any vacancy, and no Officer shall have
any right or claim based on eligibility dates as a result, provided that the City complies with all
Chapter 143 requirements.

Section 3. Promotion to Detective Investigator, Sergeant, Lieutenant and Captain.

A. The City shall engage an outside bonded consultant to prepare written
promotional examinations for each rank.

Beginning at least one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days before the administration of the
examination, the City will announce in the Daily Bulletin the date of the examination and the
location and dates that any eligible officer may register for the examination. This announcement
will run for five (5) consecutive working days. Candidates for the promotional examinations
shall register for the examination between one hundred and fifteen (115) and one hundred and
five (105) calendar days before the written examination.

Except as provided in Section 1(D), all eligible candidates for promotion to a particular rank
shall be given the identical written examinations applicable to that rank in the presence of each
other, The written examinations will consist of multiple choice written questions, which shall
have predetermined correct answers to enhance the objectivity of the written examination.

The preparer of the written examination shall deliver the examination sealed and numbered to the
Civil Service Director who is charged with the responsibility for the security of all written
promotional examinations. The written examination shall remain sealed until opened in the
presence of the participants.

All of the questions asked on the written examination must be prepared and composed in a
manner that the grading of all examination papers can be completed immediately after the
examination is held. All written examination papers shall be graded as they are completed, at the
place where the written examination is given, and in the presence of any candidates who wish to
remain during the grading. Written examination grading will be performed within fifty (50) feet
of any entrance or exit from the examination room in open view of all candidates. A minimum
passing score of seventy percent (70%) out of a possible one hundred percent (100%) (unless a
qualified consultant shall determine a different cut off score, based on the statistical validity of
the test, which shall be subject to Commission review and approval) is required on each
promotional examination (written or written plus assessment) applicable to the rank to which the
officer seeks promotion.

Each eligible promotional candidate shall have the opportunity to examine written test source
materials and their own graded examination paper and answers within five (5) consecutive
working days after the examination. The candidate may see the above material, but may not
remove the graded examination paper from the Human Resources Department.

Candidates arriving after the appointed starting time of the examination will not be admitted or
allowed to participate in the examination.

26
All questions formulated by the outside consultant for the written examination (and their correct
answers) shall be derived from the materials selected by the Chief as study materials in
accordance with Section 2. Matters relative to the construction of any promotional written
examination which are appealable to the Civil Service Commission pursuant to Chapter 143,
Local Government Code, shall continue to be appealable and the decision of the Commission
shall be final.

B. In addition to meeting the requirements as set forth in Subsection A, promotional
examinations for Detective Investigator and Sergeant shall consist of one (1) written examination
which shall not exceed either one hundred (100) multiple choice questions or two (2) hours in
length. If the City complies with the conditions in subsection (D) below, the promotional
examination during 2013 for Sergeant may include an assessment portion in accordance with the
provisions below.

Cc; In addition to meeting the requirements as set forth in Subsection A, promotional
examinations for Lieutenant and Captain shall consist of a written examination which shall not
exceed one hundred (100) multiple choice questions or two (2) hours in length and a Video
Recorded Assessment which shall be weighted as set forth below.

D. Sergeant Assessment

qd) In order to commence a sergeant assessment, the City agrees to the
following:

. To successfully complete and implement an SAPD Promotional Text for
each rank;

. To implement a Supervisory Leadership Training Program for all
candidates for promotion to a civil service supervisory tested rank; and

. To implement a mentorship program for all new supervisors.

(2) Upon successful completion of the above requirements, the City shall be
entitled to implement each of the provisions of this Agreement concerning Video Recorded
Assessment which shall become applicable and shall apply that to the Sergeant examination,
with the sole exception that the Video Recorded Assessment shall be weighed at twenty percent
(20%) and the written examination shall be weighted at eighty percent (80%) which is set forth
below (subparagraphs E, F, G, H, L, M, N, and O). The Consulting Company will conduct three
(3) orientation sessions for candidates at least one month in advance of the written examination.
The orientation component will be designed to familiarize eligible candidates on the Video
Recorded Assessment requirements and process. The Consulting Company or the City may not
deem the orientation mandatory, since participation in the orientation is totally voluntary. The
City will schedule at least three (3) orientation sessions at different times, and will provide a
DVD copy of all three (3) orientation sessions upon request to any eligible promotional
candidate.

Zt
E, The Consulting company hired by the City will design the Assessment cadre
using a variety of exercises that may include: In-Basket; Problem Solving/Analysis; Oral
Resumes/Structured Interviews; Leaderless Group Presentation; Role Playing; Memo/Report
Writing; Oral Presentation/Plan Preparation; Staff Meeting; Special Event/Operations; and others
as they are established and determined to be reasonably valid predictors of job related
characteristics. The Consulting Company is not required to utilize all of the exercises above, but
may select the exercises or combine the listed exercises into one or more exercises that are best
suited for the particular rank and as recommended by the Study Materials Committee.

F. The Consulting Company shall also select the assessors who shall meet the
following criteria:

1. Equivalent rank to the promotion, or above, from a municipal police
agency from cities with a population of 200,000 or greater;

2. Shall not reside in the San Antonio Standard Metropolitan Statistical
area;

3, Shall not be related within the second degree to any candidate for
promotion;

4. Shall not personally know any candidate for promotion;

5. Shall have at least two (2) years of experience in the rank being assessed

or an equivalent rank; and

6. Shall not be a current or former employee of the City of San Antonio,
SAPD or any other entity legally related to or controlled by the City of San Antonio.

G. The Consulting Company will conduct three orientation sessions for candidates at
least one month in advance of the written examination. The orientation component will be
designed to familiarize eligible candidates on the Video Recorded Assessment requirements and
process. The Consulting Company or the City may not deem the orientation mandatory, since
participation in the orientation is totally voluntary. The City will schedule at least three (3)
orientation sessions at different times, and will provide a DVD copy of all three (3) orientation
session, upon request to any eligible promotional candidate.

H. The assessors selected by the Consulting Company will assess the candidates for
the rank being tested.
I The total score for the rank of Lieutenant shall be calculated by the Consulting

Company as follows:
Written Test Score maximum of 100 x .40 40 Pts. plus

Video Recorded Assessment Score maximum of 100 x .60 60 Pts. plus
28
Seniority Points maximum of 10 @ 1 / year 10 Pts.

Maximum Possible Points 110 Pts

J. The total score for the rank of Captain shall be calculated by the Consulting
Company as follows:
Written Test Score maximum of 100 x .30 30 Pts. Plus
Video Recorded Assessment Score maximum of 100 x .70 70 Pts. Plus
Seniority Points maximum of 10 @ 1 / year 10 Pts.
Maximum Possible Points 110 Pts.

K. After the Video Recorded Assessment scoring has been completed for the
Sergeant examination under this Agreement, the total score shall be calculated by the Consulting
Company as follows:

Written Test Score maximum of 100 x .80 80 Pts. Plus
Video Recorded Assessment Score maximum of 100 x .20 20 Pts. Plus
Seniority Points maximum of 10 @ 1 / year 10 Pts.
Other Points (Section 1(A)) maximum of 3 3 Pts.
Maximum Possible Points 113 Pts.

L. A final official rank order list shall be created of all eligible candidates in

accordance with all the promotional procedures set forth herein. The final list of eligible
candidates for the rank of Lieutenant and Captain shall remain in effect for eighteen (18) months.
The final list of eligible candidates for the rank of Detective Investigator and Sergeant shall
remain in effect for twelve (12) months. When the Sergeant assessment is initiated, the final list
of eligible candidates for the rank of Sergeant will increase from twelve (12) to eighteen (18)
months.

M. The Video Recorded Assessment may be appealed using a Second Review Process as
established and overseen by the Consulting Company. The decision of the Consulting Company
regarding appeals using the “Second Review Process” shall be final and binding.

N. The consulting company will be responsible for the security of the Video
Recorded Assessment process.

29
Section 4. Requirements After Promotion.

A. Officers promoted to Detective Investigator, Sergeant, Lieutenant or Captain shall
attend a mandatory investigator (Detectives), supervisory or management (Sergeant, Lieutenant
and Captain) training program designed for that rank of no less than 40-hours prior to or after
being promoted. Officers who are promoted to the rank of Detective Investigator, Sergeant,
Lieutenant, or Captain and who have not attended the mandatory training program shall be
required to attend the required training within sixty (60) calendar days of promotion.

B. Officers promoted to Detective Investigator, Sergeant, Lieutenant or Captain shall
be assigned to one or more Officers of equal rank for on-the-job field training for a period of no
less than one (1) calendar month during their probationary period. Officers promoted to the rank
of Captain shall be required to complete their on-the-job field training assigned to and physically
working with a Captain assigned to the Patrol Division at a police substation.

G: Within forty-eight (48) months after being promoted, Officers promoted to
Lieutenant shall be required as a condition of maintaining the rank to complete with a passing
grade at least sixty (60) hours of college credits or achieve an Associate’s degree from an
accredited college or university. Officers who have already satisfied this requirement shall
present proof to the Chief of Police. Officers who fail to complete this requirement within the
specified time period shall be demoted to their previous rank and seniority.

D. Within sixty (60) months after being promoted, Officers promoted to Captain shall
be required as a condition of maintaining the rank to obtain a Bachelor’s Degree from an
accredited college or university. Officers who have already satisfied this requirement shall
present proof of completion to the Chief of Police. Officers who fail to complete this requirement
within the specified time period shall be demoted to their previous rank and seniority.

E, If the Officer fails to complete the mandatory college requirements within the
prescribed time period after promotion, the Officer will be allowed to appeal the demotion only
if exigent circumstances or an emergency situation occurred which would have prevented the
Officer from completing the requirements.

F. If an Officer is promoted to the next higher rank before completing the
educational requirements for his previous rank, the time requirements remain in effect for
completion of the appropriate educational requirements for that previous rank. For example, an
Officer is promoted to Lieutenant on January 1, 2001 and has forty-eight (48) months to
complete sixty (60) hours of college credits or achieve an Associate’s degree. The Officer is
promoted to Captain on January 2, 2004 without achieving the college hours or the degree. The
Officer will have until December 31, 2004 to obtain sixty (60) hours of college credit or an
Associate degree.

Section 5. Appointment to Deputy Chief.

The Chief of Police shall have the right to appoint a total of six (6) Deputy Chiefs which shall be
one rank immediately above the rank of Captain and one rank immediately below the Assistant

30
Chief in the chain of command. This Article shall create no positions within the rank of Deputy
Chief other than by this Article. As vacancies occur in the rank of Deputy Chief, the Chief of
Police shall either appoint an Officer or permanently abolish the position within ninety (90)
calendar days in accordance with this Section. Should the Chief of Police fail to appoint and the
position is permanently abolished, the position of Deputy Chief shall revert to the rank of
Captain or Lieutenant, whichever is applicable. Appointments to the rank of Deputy Chief shall
be by the Chief of Police at his sole discretion, provided that the Officer promoted is a Captain or
a Lieutenant provided the Lieutenant has a minimum of two (2) years in rank.

Officers appointed to this rank shall be subject to overall City policies and regulations and while
appointed to this rank shall not be subject to the provisions of Chapter 143, Local Government
Code, or any provision of this Agreement, unless specifically so provided by this Article.

Officers appointed to the rank of Deputy Chief shall be required as a condition of maintaining
the appointed rank to obtain a Master’s Degree from an accredited college or university within
forty-eight (48) months after being appointed. Deputy Chiefs who have already obtained a
Master’s Degree prior to being appointed to the rank of Deputy Chief, shall present proof of
completion to the Chief of Police within seven (7) calendar days of being appointed to the rank.
Deputy Chiefs who have not obtained a Master’s Degree, must complete and make a passing
grade on at least nine (9) hours of Master’s Degree requirements in an approved Master’s Degree
program every twelve (12) months after being appointed to the rank of Deputy Chief until such
time as a Master’s Degree is awarded. Deputy Chiefs will submit proof of the completion of the
required hours to the Chief of Police and the Association on their annual promotion date until
such time a Master’s Degree is obtained. Deputy Chiefs who fail to complete this requirement
within the specified time periods shall be demoted within ten (10) calendar days after verification
by the Chief of Police of the Officer’s non-compliance. Officers shall be demoted to their
previous civil service rank and seniority.

Any Officer appointed to the rank of Deputy Chief may be demoted to their last tested civil
service rank at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police without appeal to the Commission and/or
Arbitration. Any Officer appointed to this rank may, further, voluntarily return to their last
tested rank at any time. Upon demotion or voluntary return to the previously-held rank pursuant
hereto, the Officer shall receive thereafter the full benefits provided in Chapter 143, Local
Government Code, and this Agreement as if he had served in that rank on a continuous basis
throughout his tenure as Deputy Chief, and any other non-tested appointed rank. An Officer
appointed to the rank of Deputy Chief may be terminated for cause, provided that such
termination shall be subject to appeal in the same manner as applicable to all classified
uniformed Officers in the Department.

Except for the position of Deputy Chief, nothing in this Article shall be construed to require the
City to create the rank or establish and fill the maximum number of positions authorized herein.
Further, nothing in this Article shall be construed to limit any existing right of the City to create
ranks and establish positions in accordance with State law and City Charter.

Deputy Chiefs appointed by the Chief of Police pursuant to this Section of this Agreement, may
receive administrative leave for work performed in excess of their regularly scheduled duties.

31
Said leave time may be granted at the discretion of the Chief of Police, subject to the scheduling
and manpower contingencies that may arise.

Officers appointed to the Deputy Chief position by the Chief of Police as provided for in Article
11, Section 5, supra, of this Agreement, shall be compensated at an annual salary of not less than
fifteen percent (15%) above the rate of a 30-year Captain’s base pay at Step B plus longevity.
The Officers so assigned shall be entitled to all benefits as contained in the following specified
Articles of this Agreement: Articles 1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 9; 10 Section 3; 11 Section 6; 14 Section
1; 16 Sections 2; 17; 19; 20 (without premium pay); 21; 22 Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and
11; 23; 29; 30; 31; 32; 33; 34; 35; 36 Sections 1, 2, 4, 5, 6; 37and 38.

The City agrees to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the Association and its Officers, agents,
representatives, and Officers from any action, at law or in equity, brought by any Deputy Chief
or other member(s) of the unit regarding this Section.

Section 6. Appointment of Assistant Chief.

The Chief of Police shall have the right to appoint two (2) Assistant Chiefs which shall be one
rank immediately above the rank of Deputy Chief and one rank immediately below the Chief of
Police in the chain of command. This Article shall create no positions within the rank of
Assistant Chief other than by this Article. As vacancies occur in the rank of Assistant Chief, the
Chief of Police shall either appoint an Officer or permanently abolish the position within ninety
(90) calendar days in accordance with this Section. Should the Chief of Police fail to appoint and
the position is permanently abolished, the position of Assistant Chief shall revert to the rank of
Captain or Lieutenant, whichever is applicable. Appointments to the rank of Assistant Chief
shall be by the Chief of Police at his sole discretion, provided that the Officer promoted is a
Deputy Chief, Captain or a Lieutenant provided that the Lieutenant has a minimum two (2) years
in rank).

Officers appointed to this rank shall be subject to overall City policies and regulations and while
appointed to this rank shall not be subject to the provisions of Chapter 143, Local Government
Code, or any provision of this Agreement, unless specifically so provided in this Article.

Effective October 1, 2005, as to Officers appointed thereafter only, Officers appointed to the
rank of Assistant Chief shall be required as a condition of maintaining the appointed rank to
obtain a Master’s Degree from an accredited college or university within thirty-six (36) months
after being appointed. Effective upon the execution of this Agreement, if a Captain or
Lieutenant is appointed to Assistant Chief they shall have forty eight (48) months in order to
obtain a Master’s Degree from an accredited college or university. Assistant Chiefs who have
already obtained a Master’s Degree prior to being appointed to the rank of Assistant Chief, shall
present proof of completion to the Chief of Police within seven (7) calendar days of being
appointed to the rank. Assistant Chiefs who have not obtained a Master’s Degree must complete
and make a passing grade on at least one-third of any Master’s Degree requirements they have
left to obtain in an approved Master’s Degree program every twelve (12) months after being
appointed to the rank of Assistant Chief until such time as a Master’s Degree is awarded.
Assistant Chiefs will submit proof of the completion of the required hours to the Chief of Police

32
and the Association on their annual promotion date until such time a Master's Degree is
obtained. Assistant Chiefs who fail to complete this requirement within the specified time
periods shall be demoted within ten (10) calendar days after verification by the Chief of Police of
the Officer’s non-compliance. Officers shall be demoted to their previous civil service rank and
seniority.

Any Officer appointed to the rank of Assistant Chief may be demoted to their last tested civil
service rank at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police without appeal to the Commission and/or
Arbitration. Any Officer appointed to this rank may, further, voluntarily return to their last
tested rank at any time. Upon demotion or voluntary return to the previously-held tested rank
pursuant hereto, the Officer shall receive thereafter the full benefits provided in Chapter 143,
Local Government Code, and this Agreement as if he had served in that rank on a continuous
basis throughout his tenure as Assistant Chief, and any other non-tested appointed rank. An
Officer appointed to the rank of Assistant Chief may be terminated for cause, provided that such
termination shall be subject to appeal in the same manner as applicable to all classified
uniformed Officers in the Department.

Assistant Chiefs appointed by the Chief of Police pursuant to this Section of this Agreement,
may receive administrative leave for work performed in excess of their regularly scheduled
duties. Said leave time may be granted at the discretion of the Chief of Police, subject to the
scheduling and manpower contingencies that may arise.

Officers appointed to the Assistant Chief position by the Chief of Police as provided for in
Article 11, Section 6, supra, of this Agreement, shall be compensated at an annual salary of not
less than eight percent (8%) above the rate of a Deputy Chief's base pay plus longevity (a 30
year Captains base pay at Step B + .18 times that base pay). The Officers so assigned shall be
entitled to all benefits as contained in the following specified Articles of this Agreement: Articles
of this Agreement: Articles 1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 9; 10 Section 3; 11 Section 6; 14 Section 1; 16
Sections 2; 17; 19; 20 (without premium pay); 21; 22 Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11; 23;
29; 30; 31; 32; 33; 34; 35; 36 Sections 1, 2, 4, 5, 6; 37and 38.

The City agrees to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the Association and its officers, agents,
representatives, and Officers from any action, at law or in equity, brought by any Assistant Chief
or other member(s) of the unit regarding this Section.

Section 7. Uniformed Evidence Detective Initiative

In the 2009 — 2014 Agreement, the Chief implemented an expansion in the Detective
Investigator classified job description in accordance with the provisions of this Article to include
154 Detective Investigator positions. Even if they are on an existing eligibility list, Officers
promoted to Detective Investigator after the classification change shall be subject to assignment
in both the traditional Detective Investigators positions and in Uniformed Evidence Detective
(U.E.D.) patrol assignments. Should they choose to waive their "grandfathered" status, Detective
Investigators currently assigned to the Crime Scene Unit may be assigned by the Chief to
Uniformed Evidence Detective Patrol assignments. Additionally, all other Detective
Investigators promoted prior to the amended Detective Investigator job classification, who do not

33
opt into the initiative, shall not be ordered to accept assignments to U.E.D. positions, but any
Detective Investigator who voluntarily opts into the initiative and a U.E.D. assignment, shall be
subject to such assignment from that point forward and shall be subject to the new classified job
description for the Detective Investigator rank. Officers on a current Detective Investigator
eligibility list will be subject to a promotion with assignment to a U.E.D. slot upon the
implementation date of the initiative. When a detective investigator promotion is accepted, the
Officer is subject to the new Detective Investigator classification and all assignments including
U.E.D. assignments. Given the full implementation of this change in the classified Detective
Investigator position, sole control over staffing levels in all positions and ranks shall be within
the authority of the Chief and the City Council in accordance with the Provisions of Chapter 143.
As implementation of the UEDI is completed the 70%-30% civilian to uniform balance, as per
Article 39, of the current CSI unit will be phased out on a pro rata basis with the departure of
uniformed officers from the unit. Any new Major Crimes CSI or similar unit that is created in
the future will retain sworn supervisors for civilians.

Section 8.

Any promotional exam approved by the Civil Service Commission prior to the signing of this
Agreement will be handled in accordance with the previous Agreement, except as specifically
provided for Detectives on any current eligibility list in Section 7 above.

Section 9. Preemption.

It is expressly understood and agreed that all provisions of this Article shall preempt any statute,
Executive order, local ordinance, City policy Civil Service Commission rule or other City or
tule, which is in conflict with or is inconsistent with this Agreement and the procedures
developed hereunder, including for example and not by way of limitation any contrary provisions
of Sections 143,028, 143.029, 143.031, 143.032, 143.033, 143.034, 143.35 and 143.036.

ARTICLE 12
Seniority

Section 1. Seniority Defined.

Seniority in this Article shall be defined as the length of service by an officer within his civil
service classification. All other factors being equal, seniority is the determining factor in the
assignment of relief days and vacation days and operates within a section, unit, or detail for
purposes of this Article. Assignment of sections or districts shall not be subject to the provisions
of this Article, except in Section 6.

Section 2. Six-Month Requirement.

When an Officer transfers from one section, unit, or detail to another, there shall be no bumping
of a less senior officer out of relief days or vacation days to which the less senior officer has
been assigned. However, when premium relief days become open, the incoming officer,
including Officers newly-promoted, may, after serving in the section, unit, or detail for six (6)

34
months, then exercise his seniority in bidding for the premium relief days e. Vacation shall be
handled in the same manner in that no Officer shall be denied vacation already scheduled; but,
during the next round of vacation assignments, the senior officer chooses before the junior
officer. In the event of a simultaneous transfer, i.e., one Officer is moved out at the same time
another Officer is moved in, the incoming Officer is not entitled to assume the relief days and
vacation days of the outgoing Officer, even though his seniority is greater than other officers in
the section, unit, or detail; otherwise, the incoming Officer is placed in his respective position as
to date of rank and bids with others as the next days and dates become available. *

Section 3. “All Other Things Being Equal” Defined.

“All other factors being equal” is intended to relate to the total performance of an officer. In the
event an Officer is denied premium relief days because of "unequal factors", it shall not be for an
isolated instance of poor or substandard performance, but it may come about because of a
consistent pattern of overall substandard performance.

Section 4. Military or Duty-Connected Disability.

Time spent in the Armed Forces on military leave of absence and other authorized leaves and
time lost because of duty-connected disability shall be included in length of service.

Section 5. Seniority Tie-Breaker.

Seniority shall be a factor in promotions and layoff or recall consistent with State law and City
ordinances and regulations. In the event of a tie in the seniority of two or more officers, the
officer placing highest on the hiring or promotional list shall be the senior.

Section 6. Certain Officer Transfer Rights.

This Section applies only to those Officers holding the rank of Patrol Officer, Detective
Investigator or Sergeant assigned to the Day (A Shift), Evening (B Shift), Dog Watch (C Shift),
or the T shift of the Patrol Division. To the extent that this Section differs with Sections 1, 2, 3,
4, or 5 above, this Section shall prevail so far as the affected shifts are concerned.

When an assignment is declared vacant in a section of the Day (A Shift), Evening (B Shift), Dog
Watch (C Shift), or the T shift of the Patrol Division, the opening shall be awarded to the most
senior officer on that shift of the applicable rank who voluntarily requests that assignment. In the
event no officer of the applicable rank from that shift requests the assignment, any officer of
applicable rank from the remaining shifts may request the position and it shall be awarded to the
most senior officer. If the only officers voluntarily requesting the assignment have not been
assigned to one of the Patrol Division shifts for six months (and therefore have no seniority
rights), the position shall be awarded to the officer whose seniority rights will be reinstated
soonest, regardless of their actual seniority on the Department. Detectives assigned to the Patrol
Division as Uniformed Evidence Detectives shall participate in a separate SCHARDS system.

35
Once an officer has been transferred, he will then be able to exercise his seniority based on the
next available opening on that shift; provided, however, that officers transferring from outside
the affected shifts shall not be eligible to exercise their seniority rights until six months have
expired from entry into the affected shifts with the sole exception that officers transferring from
one of the Patrol shifts to another Patrol shift shall be entitled to use his seniority in bidding on
vacancies in conformance with this Section immediately.

Officers transferring from one of the Patrol shifts to another shift or to another unit or division
shall lose their vacation request time and will have to put in for a new vacation schedule based
on available openings on that shift.

Any officer covered by this Section may be removed from a position he occupies to another
position within the specified shifts, provided such is done on the basis of reverse seniority (i.e.,
beginning with the least senior person). Probationary officers have no protection under this
article. The Manpower Allocation Detail or the FTO Coordinator controls probationary officer
assignments.

Nothing in this Article shall be construed to limit in any fashion any right currently vested in the
City by virtue of this Agreement, except as explicitly modified by this Article and such
modification shall be limited solely to the specific provisions of this Article. These rights
include, but are not limited to, the right to determine when a vacancy exists, to determine the
number of positions to be assigned to a division or shift, to transfer any person from the shifts
covered by this Article to any position outside of those shifts, to make assignments of officers
not covered by this Article, and to make assignments of officers affected by this Article in
conformance with the provisions contained herein.

ARTICLE 13
Hours of Work

Section 1. General Provisions.

A. Work Period. Officers will continue to work a seven-day work period in
accordance with past practice, as opposed to other work periods under the Fair Labor Standards
Act. A “work period” means a regularly repeating seven day calendar cycle that consists of five,
8 hour or four 10 hour days.

B. Contractual Overtime Provision. By past practice and through this Agreement,
the City has established a pay pattern that allows Officers to receive overtime payment in pay or
compensatory time for any hours outside of the Officer’s regularly scheduled shift or
workday. Nothing in the Agreement including Section 1(C) below is intended, designed, or will
change this practice. The City agrees it will continue to pay Officers for overtime in pay or
compensatory time in accordance with this Agreement for any hours outside of the Officer’s
regularly scheduled shift or workday.

Cc. FLSA 207k Partial Exemption. The City and the Association agree, that under the
federal Fair Labor Standards Act, the City is entitled to the 43-hour exemption from payment of

36
FLSA statutory overtime compensation. This means that the City is not required by federal law
to pay overtime to Officers until after the Officer has worked 43 hours in a workweek. Within
the context of this Agreement however, the City shall continue to pay all contractual
compensation in accordance with Article 8 Maintenance of Standards, and in accordance with
Section B above, which is enforceable by the grievance procedure of this Agreement. However,
the City retains the right under Article 7, Management Rights, to change any process, accounting
procedure, forms, periods, or other aspects of accounting practices if it reasonably determines
that such change is necessary to comply with state or federal overtime law. The City and the
Association agree that the City shall not be obligated in any FLSA enforcement lawsuit to pay
overtime until a 43-hour threshold is reached.

Section 2. Local Government Code Section 142.0015 Override.

Section 142.0015 of the Local Government Code provides among other things, that officers may
not be required to work over 40 hours in a week unless an “emergency” has been
declared. Texas law, including but not limited to Section 174.006(a) of the Local Government
Code, allows the parties to this Agreement to override and change that standard, and the parties
expressly agree to override it. Accordingly, the Chief or any supervisor shall continue to be
entitled to require work by officers beyond the regularly scheduled shift hours in a day, and over
and above the 40 regularly scheduled hours within a seven-day work period. This practice, which
the parties agree is both legal and proper without the need for a declaration of “emergency,” will
continue as a benefit to both the City and the Association, as a contract provision which has been
continuously in effect under all previous collective bargaining agreements. Any claim for
additional wages based upon Section 142.0015 is expressly waived in consideration of the
finalization of this agreement.

Section 3. Non-Shift Schedules

Officers who are not subject to shift work, or covered by other provisions of this Agreement,
shall work eight (8) consecutive hours except for interruptions for lunch periods. The workday
shall conform to those hours set by the City Manager for the other City employees who work
regular non-shift work. The hours presently prescribed are from 7:45 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with
forty-five (45) minutes for lunch.

Section 4. Break Periods.

City policy has for some time permitted two fifteen (15) minute coffee and/or rest breaks per day
when they can be taken without serious interference with the work at hand. Such breaks are
normally taken mid-morning and mid-afternoon for Officers working non-shift, and for shift
workers at comparable time during the shifi. This policy shall continue to apply to the
Department; however, the missing of any coffee and/or rest breaks because of the press of
business shall not be grounds for overtime payment or for a grievance.

Notwithstanding this provision for compensation as to lunch, coffee, and/or rest breaks, Officers
remain within full coverage and benefits, not limited to life insurance, health insurance, and
Texas Workers’ Compensation Act. if the Officers are traveling to or from lunch or breaks or

37.
during lunch or break time and are performing activities that are in furtherance of the affairs or
business of police work. This shall apply unless the activities are specifically excluded by the
provisions of the Texas Worker's Compensation Act and the rules of the Texas Workers’
Compensation Commission, or are excluded by the standards set forth in Article 36 of this
Agreement.

Officers who have by practice worked an eight (8) or ten (10) consecutive hour workday, which
included a thirty or forty-five minute lunch break, and are not specifically covered by the
sections below will continue to do so.

Section 5. Hours for Certain Patrol Division Units.

Patrol Officers working on the Daylight (“A” Shift), Evening (“B” Shift), or Dog Watch (“C”
Shifi), or on the “T” shift of the Patrol Division shall work a seven (7) day work period, with
daily hours compensated at straight-time according to assignments as follows:

Patrol Officers on the Patrol Daylight “A” Shift shall work from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., with
thirty (30) minutes for lunch and two fifteen (15) minute coffee breaks. Supervisors for this shift
shall work from 5:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m.

Patrol Officers on the Patrol Evening “B” Shift shall work from 1:30 p.m. to 9:30 p.m., with
thirty (30) minutes for lunch and two fifteen (15) minute coffee breaks. Supervisors for this shift
shall work from 1:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m.

Patrol Officers on the Patrol Dog Watch of Night “C” Shift shall work from 10:30 p.m. to 6:30
a.m., with thirty (30) minutes for lunch and two fifteen (15) minute coffee breaks. Supervisors
for this shift shall work from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.

Patrol Officers on the Patrol “T” Shift shall work from 5:00 p.m. to 3:00 a.m. with thirty (30)
minutes off for lunch and two fifteen (15) minute coffee breaks. Supervisors for this shift shall
work from 4:30 p.m. to 2:30 a.m. There shall be an overlapping shift change with one roll call.

The Downtown Foot/Bicycle Patrol Unit officers shall be assigned to work one of two (2) ten-
hour shifts per day, daylight shift 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. or 5:30 p.m. until 3:30 a.m., with thirty
(30) minutes off for lunch and two fifteen (15) minute coffee breaks.

All supervisors assigned to patrol shifts shall report thirty (30) minutes prior to their shift and
complete the shift thirty (30) minutes prior to scheduled shift hours with the exception of Bike
Patrol.

If an Officer requests a thirty (30) minute meal break and is denied such request because of press
of business a second time within such shift, and as a result thereof requests thirty (30) minutes of
compensatory time or pay at straight time, said officer must submit an "incident report" to the
Section Sergeant as to the reasons why the officer could not take said meal break. The granting
of or the refusal to grant the compensatory time or pay at straight time by the Section Sergeant

38
 

shall be final and binding on the officer, with no rights of appeal to the Commission and/or
grievance and arbitration as provided elsewhere in this Agreement.

The City will continue to compensate Officers who work shifts for the thirty minute lunch,
coffee and/or rest breaks; however, the time permitted by this article for those time periods shall
in no event constitute time actually worked by an Officer unless that Officer is ordered by a
supervisor to resume duties, or obtains supervisory authorization to do so.

Section 6. Hours for Certain Units.

Officers working on the daylight or night shift of CID or who are assigned to positions
equivalent to those assigned to CID and who investigate criminal cases, file charges and
dispositions, or who work in an undercover capacity shall work a seven (7) day work period with
daily hours compensated at straight-time as follows:

A. Officers below the rank of Lieutenant assigned to the daylight shift in CID or
equivalent as described above may work from 7:45 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., with thirty (30) minutes off
for lunch and two fifteen (15) minute coffee breaks.

B. Officers below the rank of Lieutenant assigned to the night shift in CID or
equivalent as described above may work from 7:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m., with thirty (30) minutes off
for lunch and two fifteen (15) minute coffee breaks.

18 Officers above the rank of Sergeant in the units operating under the ten (10) hour
work day shall continue to work a tour of duty consisting of eight (8) hours and forty-five (45)
minutes, with forty-five (45) minutes for lunch and two fifteen (15) minute coffee breaks, and
shall be entitled to Saturday and Sunday as their regularly assigned relief days.

D. All existing schedules for units or Officers not specifically provided for in this
Article remain under the discretion of the Chief.

E. Officers subject to the ten (10) hours, four (4) day workweek shall include, but not
be limited to, the following or successors in function:

Off-Duty Employment
Property Crimes

Homicide

Robbery

Sex Crimes

Night C.I.D. Detectives
Repeat Offenders Program
Technical Investigations Detail
Financial Crimes

Vehicle Crimes

Wrecker Service

39
Officers assigned to the above units will continue to work the hours currently prescribed for
those units and with lunch and break hours currently provided. It is not the intent of either the
City or the Association to delete any unit currently operating under a four (4) day workweek as
of the effective date of this Agreement.

Breaks are normally taken midway through the first half and midway through the second half of
a tour of duty. The missing of any coffee and/or rest breaks because of the press of business shall
not be grounds for overtime payment or for a grievance.

Section 7. Adjustment of Working Hours.

The Chief shall have the right to adjust the working hours, and starting and ending time of any
shift, or the units of C.I.D. covered by the ten (10) hour work day provided that such change does
not cause an employee to work in excess of an average forty (40) regularly scheduled hours in
a work period. In no case shall any changes in starting and ending times of shifts covered by
Section 5 and 6 above exceed one hour in each calendar year. In the event the Chief decides to
exercise his rights pursuant to this section, he shall notify the President of the Association in
writing of the anticipated adjustment at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to
implementation. The Association shall have fourteen (14) calendar days from the date so notified
to submit any comments or objections to the proposed change in writing to the Chief. If
objection is expressed by the Association, representatives of the Association and the Chief shall
meet to discuss the anticipated adjustment within the next succeeding seven (7) calendar
days. This right shall not be subject to appeal pursuant to the grievance procedure contained in
Article 15 of this Agreement, with the sole exception that the issue of regularly scheduled work
in excess of the average forty (40) hours in a workweek may be appealed pursuant to the
grievance procedure. Nothing in this section shall be construed in any fashion to limit the Chief's
right to establish the working hours of units not covered by Sections 5 and 6.

Section 8.

Both parties to this Agreement have a mutual interest in the maintenance of a “T” shift in the
Patrol Division in order to accomplish better Officer availability and coverage during peak
periods for police response and patrol activity. The “T” shift was created and fully implemented
in the 2009 — 2014 Agreement. The parties agreed that after full implementation of the “T” shift,
at or above 226 allocated positions, the Chief shall have the final authority to determine any later
reallocation of Officers among the four shifts, and to manage staffing based upon the need for
service, call loads, and other demands on shift personnel. It was further agreed that no grievance
would be authorized after full implementation was achieved.

ARTICLE 14
City Property/Off-Duty Employment Office

Section 1. Introduction.

The existing policies for off-duty employment shall prevail, except that on matters involving
jurisdiction or conflict of interest, the Chief shall have the right to amend the existing policies,

40
subject to grievance procedure outlined in Article 15 of this Agreement. Provided, however, this
article shall no longer permit a distinction between public and private events nor between for-
profit and non-profit entities.

Section 2. Off Duty Office.

The City shall establish an office staffed with a minimum in rank of one Sergeant, sworn support
personnel, on-duty transportation and office equipment necessary to handle requests of officers
to work at City facilities. Such office shall be located in the Convention Center complex. Office
space only, without additional staffing, shall be provided at the Alamodome.

Section 3. Use of Sworn Personnel at City Facilities.

A. _ The City shall utilize only sworn Officers for the purposes of providing security,
crowd control, and other police-related activities at all City facilities. This shall not include ticket
takers, badge checkers, or individuals whose duty is to enforce house rules. The Association
recognizes that the City has legitimate reasons to work with performers or entertainer’s special
security needs. The City shall include in every contract for the use of City facilities that any
vendor or lessee using said facility shall use only sworn Officers procured through the off-duty
employment office for security, crowd control and other police-related activities while using the
facility, and that number of Officers determined to be necessary by the off-duty employment
office shall be paid by the vendor or lessee.

For the purposes of this article, City facilities shall include only the following:

(1) The Convention Center Exhibit Halls and Banquet Halls or
future expansions

(2) The Lila Cockrell Theater
(3) Market Square

(4) Market Square’s Centro de Artes Ballroom; Fiesta Room;
and Farmers Market

(5) La Villita
(6) The Alamodome

(7) Municipal Auditorium (unless and until it is transferred to
another entity, public or private, as to its ownership or
operation)

B. All Officers assigned to work at City facilities on an off-duty basis shall be
compensated as follows. Police Officers, regardless of seniority or other compensation, shall be
paid at 1.2 times the officer’s straight time rate (not including longevity) for an Officer at Step C
of the salary schedule found in Attachment 2 of this agreement. All supervisors, regardless of

41
rank or seniority, shall be paid at 1.2 times the straight time hourly rate for a Sergeant at Step A
of the salary schedule (not including longevity) if working in a supervisory capacity for the
vendor. The straight time rate shall be computed by multiplying the Officer’s appropriate
monthly rate from Attachment 2 by twelve (12) months and dividing that product by 2080 hours
in a work year. All payments will be made utilizing the Officer’s bi-weekly payroll check.

C. _ The office of the Chief of Police shall have the responsibility of staffing all City
facilities with sworn Officers. The number of officers needed at any one such property or facility
shall be within the exclusive prerogative of the Chief. The Chief shall establish and maintain a
Department Procedure for administering this Section. The Procedure shall include sign-up,
notification on a rotating basis, and other policies necessary for the administration of this
Section.

D. _ The City agrees to pay Officers who work any Fiesta events and related activities
in an off-duty capacity at Fiesta Pay, which shall be base plus longevity, times two (2). The City
agrees to maximize the use of off-duty personnel who have signed up on the volunteer roster,
and to minimize the use of on-duty personnel, subject to the other provisions herein. Fiesta
activities and events will be those that are defined in the Official Fiesta Calendar published each
year by the City and the Fiesta Commission. Events such as basketball games, concerts, or trade
shows unrelated to Fiesta during the calendar days of Fiesta shall be paid at the regular overtime
rate unless insufficient volunteers sign up for such events, then all volunteers whether or not
from Fiesta volunteer roster shall receive Fiesta pay. Easter Sunday will not be covered under
this Section but is covered under Article 20, Holidays, Section 1.

E, _ The City and the Association shall not grant any exceptions to this Article, with the
sole provision being that Officers who “volunteer” their time without remuneration, of any type,
may work charitable events. “Volunteers” are not exempt from the requirements for off-duty
employment at City facilities, even where such volunteers under this paragraph are working on
City facilities, and written permission for volunteers to work at City facilities must be approved
by the Office of the Chief or his designee.

F. Nothing in this Article precludes the City from utilizing personnel from private
security companies to provide day-to-day security for any of the facilities listed in paragraph A
above.

G. The City shall first be required to call or otherwise make available the opportunity
for off-duty placement to SAPD personnel, and then to non-SAPD certified peace officer City
employees. After having done so, the City may fill any remaining need for certified personnel
with employees of other agencies outside the City organization.

H. The Association, on behalf of the Department, will apply and coordinate any
paperwork necessary to comply with the Private Security Act of Texas.

I. Section 7(p)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act makes special provisions for
Officers of public agencies that, at their own option, perform off-duty employment. This FLSA
section provides that the City may facilitate the employment or affect the conditions of the

42
Officer's off-duty employment. Additionally, the City may keep a roster and select from the
roster, negotiate the Officers pay, retain a fee for administrative expenses, require the individuals
who are hiring the officers to pay the costs directly to the City and establish procedures for the
Officers to receive their pay, and require Officers to observe normal standards of conduct during
their off-duty employment and enforce such requirements through disciplinary action

Since the off-duty employment provision was placed into the Agreement in 1988, the City and
the Association have worked together to assure compliance. The Agreement of 1988 established
an off-duty employment office and established off-duty compensation at the rate of 1.5 times an
Officer’s overtime rate in accordance with the Officer's rank. This was renegotiated in 1994 and
reduced to 1.2 times the straight time for an Officer at Step C. Additionally in 1994, the City
agreed to provide Officers the opportunity to take compensatory time instead of pay for off-duty
purposes. This was considered a pass through of the pay benefit and was not intended or
designed to impugn the separate and independent employer relationship outlined in Section 7.
This Agreement removes the compensatory time payment allowance to eliminate any challenge
to that relationship. In furtherance of the Agreements, the City has paid Officers in the rare
instances where vendors did not pay. This was considered an important benefit to Officers and
not designed or intended to alter the separate and independent status of outside interests utilizing
City facilities. The City and the Association have a continued relationship within the scope of the
Agreement that allows the City to negotiate Officer pay rates and conditions of off-duty
employment while maintaining a separate and independent status from the individuals
contracting to utilize City facilities and off-duty Police Officers.

J Officers participating in the off-duty employment opportunities provided through
this Agreement are working off-duty for the lessees of city facilities and not for the City or the
Department. In the event of any ruling or holding by a Court or any determination by the
Department of Labor that non-payment by vendors makes the City liable for FLSA overtime as
the employer of Officers, the City may require that officers sign an agreement agreeing to look
solely to the vendor for payment; provided, however, that the City will implement reasonable
practices for collection of accounts in order to achieve collection of such amounts in a
commercially reasonable manner

K. In the event of any ruling or holding by a Court or any determination by the
Department of Labor that results in altering or changing the benefits provided by this Agreement
under this Article or challenges the ability of the City to determine compensation under this
Article, the Association agrees that the City shall not be subject to provide additional wages,
compensation, or incentives of any kind beyond that which is specified in this Article for purpose
of off-duty employment at City facilities. To assure this outcome, the City and the Association
agree to meet within ten (10) calendar days of the ruling, holding, or determination in an effort to
resolve any conflicts with this Agreement. In the event that a compromise cannot be reached
within the ten (10) calendar day window period, the City and the Association will submit all
unresolved issues within thirty (30) calendar days before a neutral arbitrator selected by the
parties. If the parties are unable to agree on an arbitrator, the parties will each submit the name of
a qualified neutral person with DOL, judicial, or litigation experience in overtime and FLSA
compliance in matters involving law enforcement officers. The two neutrals will select a third
qualified neutral with the same experience who shall serve as the chairman of the arbitration

43
panel. The dispute shall be submitted to the arbitration panel within ten (10) calendar days of
their appointment. The hearing shall be conducted under Rules 5-10 of the Expedited Labor
Arbitration Rules appended hereto as Attachment |. The arbitration panel shall determine a
decision within thirty (30) calendar days of their appointment. The arbitration panel’s authority is
limited to all claims or issues under this section; however under no case shall the arbitration
panel issue a ruling that has the effect of changing compensation rates provided by this
section. The decision shall be final and binding on all parties, and this process shall be exclusive
for all claims or issues relating to the ruling, holding or determination which initiates the
process. Officers seeking redress for off-duty employment grievances not relating to such issues
shall do so on an individual basis and in accordance with the Grievance procedure of this
Agreement.

L. Officers shall be paid, in addition to the compensation for hours worked for
lessees using City facilities, the City “special event” parking rate, which shall be an additional
cost charged to the lessee as a part of total Officer security costs. This parking reimbursement
shall be paid for one parking rate per day.

ARTICLE 15
Grievance Procedure

Section 1. Scope of Procedure.

The City and the Association agree that the purpose of this grievance procedure is to provide a
just and equitable method for resolving disagreements between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the provisions of this Agreement. Only matters involving the interpretation,
application, or alleged violation of a specific provision of this Collective Bargaining Agreement
shall be subject to this grievance procedure. Disciplinary matters which are subject to the
jurisdiction of the Commission pursuant to Chapter 143 Local Government Code are not subject
to this procedure but are covered in Article 28 of this Agreement. Where a statutory claim is
asserted before any administrative agency or court, which claim(s) arises from the same factual
occurrence made the basis of a grievance, the grievance shall be abated until final disposition or
settlement of such claim(s), unless the Officer agrees with the employer and the Association to
submit all claims arising from the same factual occurrence, including statutory claims, to the
grievance procedure herein. Any alleged violation(s) of Article 4, Section 2(F), of this
Agreement shall not be the subject of a grievance unless there is an Agreement between the
parties hereto and the officer to submit such issue(s) to the grievance procedure.

Section 2. Time Limits.

The parties shall adhere to the time limits as set forth in the procedure. In the event the officer or
Association fails to meet the time limits at any step of the procedure, the grievance shall be
considered satisfied and no further action shall be taken. Failure by the City to meet the time
limits at any step shall be considered an unsatisfactory response and shall automatically allow the
grievance to proceed to the next step. Such time limits may be waived, however, by mutual
consent of the parties in writing.
Section 3. Steps.

A grievance within the scope of this procedure as defined in Section 1 above shall be handled as
follows:

Step 1. Any Officer having a matter which is felt to be a grievance, first must within twenty-one
(21) calendar days of the actual or constructive knowledge of the occurrence or the event causing
the problem submit such grievance in writing to the Association with a copy to his immediate
supervisor. Said determination of whether a grievance exists shall be made by an Association
Grievance Committee. The Chief may appoint one (1) non-voting member of the
Committee. The Committee may exclude the Chief's appointed member from deliberations. If
the Association exercises this right, the Chief of Police shall be entitled to exclude Association
representatives from any administrative meeting, procedure, or process, where their presence or
participation has been allowed, notwithstanding the provisions of Article 8. The Association
Grievance Committee shall meet and render its decision in writing within thirty (30) calendar
days of the receipt of the written grievance by the officer.

In the event that the Grievance Committee decides that a grievance exists, the Association,
representing the aggrieved officer, shall prepare a formal written grievance on behalf of the
aggrieved Officer and proceed to Step 2. Nothing herein prohibits the City from challenging
whether a grievance is timely.

It is the intent of the parties to attempt to resolve disputes and grievances over the application,
interpretation and enforcement of the Agreement at the lowest level. Nothing herein shall prevent
the Association from meeting and conferring with the City, Chief or their designees in an attempt
to resolve the alleged grievance before the time limits in Step 1 expire.

Step 2. If a grievance is believed to exist, it shall be presented in writing to the Chief. The Chief
shall have fourteen (14) calendar days to act on the grievance and render a decision in writing.

Step 3. If the grievance is not resolved at Step 2, the matter shall be submitted in writing to
the Human Resources Director within seven (7) calendar days from the decision at Step 2.

The Human Resources Director shall within five (5) calendar days submit the matter to the City
Manager who shall review the matter and shall render a decision in writing within fourteen (14)
calendar days. The Human Resources Director shall obtain the response from the City Manager
or his representative and notify the President of the Association of the response and results
within five (5) calendar days.

Step 4. If the grievance has not been settled at Step 3, the parties shall have seven (7) calendar
days from the date the Human Resources Director notified the President of the Association, in
which to appeal the grievance to arbitration for adjustment. An appeal from the Association shall
be submitted in writing to the Human Resources Director. Since the City may also grieve against
the Association, any grievance by the City against the Association will be filed directly with the
President of the Association; and, if not settled within seven (7) calendar days, may be submitted
to arbitration for adjustment.

45
Section 4. Arbitration.

If a grievance is submitted to arbitration, within fourteen (14) calendar days, the City and the
Association shall agree upon an arbitrator. The parties may mutually agree to elect to use a panel
arbitrator or expedited process pursuant to the provisions in Article 28 (Disciplinary Actions).
For this purpose, the parties may agree in writing to utilize one or more arbitrators for a specified
period of time, provided that either party may request selection on any specific matter as follows:
If the parties fail to agree upon an arbitrator, a list of seven (7) qualified neutrals shall be
requested from the American Arbitration Association (AAA), Within fourteen (14) calendar days
from receipt of the list, the Association and the City shall alternately strike names on the list and
the remaining name shall be the arbitrator.

The conduct of the hearing shall be governed by the standard rules of the American Arbitration
Association. The parties, by mutual agreement, may request that the hearing be held in
accordance with the Expedited Labor Arbitration Rules which are found as Attachment | to this
Agreement and are incorporated herein by reference.

Upon written request delivered at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, a
party to the proceeding shall provide to the opposing party the names and addresses of witnesses
expected to be called at the hearing. In the absence of good or excusable cause, the arbitrator
may exclude the testimony of a witness upon the failure of a party to disclose such a
witness. The parties, in writing, may request discovery from each other concerning the
grievance. Should the opposing party not agree to provide the requested information within
seven (7) calendar days of the request; the request shall be deemed denied. The requesting party
may then apply to the Arbitrator, who shall order such discovery as is appropriate to the nature of
the case, consistent with, but not bound by, the rules of discovery in Texas civil cases, In
considering the application, the Arbitrator shall consider the burden and expense of producing
the information, the need of the requesting party, the amount of time available prior to the
hearing, and such other matters as he may deem material. In no event shall discovery be
requested within seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing.

The arbitrator shall not have the power to add to, amend, modify, or subtract from the provisions
of this Agreement in arriving at his decision on the issue or issues presented and shall confine his
decision to the interpretation of this Agreement. The arbitrator shall confine himself to the
precise issue submitted for arbitration and shall have no authority to determine any other issues
not so submitted to him. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding upon the City
and the Association.

The City shall bear the expense of any witnesses called by the City. The Association shall bear
the expense of any witnesses called by the Association. The City and the Association shall share
equally the fees and expenses of the arbitrator.

Section 5. Miscellaneous Provisions.

A grievance contesting action by the City Council or City Manager shall be filed at Step 3
instead of Step 2.

46
The President of the Association may file a class action grievance on behalf of bargaining unit
members similarly situated at Step 1 within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the officer or
officers’ actual or constructive knowledge of the occurrence or event causing the problem.

The Chief's representative to the Association Grievance Committee may submit for the
Committee’s consideration any evidence that the grievance has been addressed or resolved in a
previous grievance or an arbitrator’s award. If the current grievance, or an issue of the current
grievance, is determined by the Grievance Committee to have been previously resolved, the
current grievance, or the issue of the current grievance, will be deemed as denied by the
Grievance Committee and the grievant will be bound by the previous resolution.

With the exception of all grievances filed prior to the date of execution of this Agreement, if a
grievance has not been finally resolved within three hundred and sixty five (365) calendar days
from the date of appeal to arbitration, and no mutually agreed time extensions exist or are
requested by either party to the grievance, the grievance will be deemed to have
expired, Grievance extensions will not be unreasonably denied under this paragraph.

ARTICLE 16
Wages

Section 1. Wage Schedule.

Effective October 1, 2016 and to be paid the week of October 10, 2016, a 3% lump sum
payment.

The lump sum payment will be based on each bargaining unit employee’s total compensation
earned during the twelve month period ending September 1, 2016. Total compensation includes
base pay, longevity, supplemental pay and overtime pay. Total compensation does not include
compensation earned through off duty employment assignments.

Effective October 1, 2017, an across-the-board 3% wage increase.
Effective October 1, 2018, an across-the-board 3% wage increase.
Effective October 1, 2019, an across-the-board 3% wage increase.
Effective October 1, 2020, an across-the-board 2% wage increase.
Effective April 1, 2021, an across-the-board 3% wage increase.

If the members of the fire fighters’ bargaining unit reach an agreement on a contract that
provides a base pay increase which is greater than 14% over the term of their Agreement (which
shall include the full period from expiration of their last agreement, whether or not pay changes
apply to all or any portion of prior or “retro” periods), the members of the police officers’
bargaining unit will receive an across-the-board increase equal to the amount over 14% afforded
to fire fighters. This provision shall only apply during the primary term of this agreement, and
not to any extension or “evergreen” periods.
47
The average base pay calculation for the fire fighters’ bargaining unit outlined above will be
determined after offsetting the value of any base pay increase to the fire fighters agreed to in
exchange for health benefits or other economic concessions. There shall only be an offset for
purposes of this formula if there is a direct correlation between concessions on current economic
benefits and base pay. Accordingly, if any potential across-the-board increase to the police
officers’ bargaining unit under this provision is determined to apply, it will be equal to the
average afforded to the fire fighters minus the offset.

A. Police Officer Rank Step Schedule.

Wages shall be paid in accordance with the schedule outlined in Attachment No. 2, and
incorporated herein. A Police Officer shall serve one (1) year in Step A and then will be moved
to Step B of the pay schedule, upon completion of the education requirements contained in
Article 33, Section 2. Upon completion of five (5) years of commissioned service, an Officer is
moved from Step B of the pay schedule to Step C.

Police Officers with at least ten (10) years seniority in rank and forty (40) accredited college
hours or fifteen (15) years seniority in rank shall be eligible for Step D which shall be two
percent (2%) increase above a Step C.

Police Officers with at least fifteen (15) years seniority in rank and sixty (60) accredited college
hours or twenty (20) years seniority in rank shall be eligible for Step E which shall be two
percent (2%) increase above a Step D.

Police Officers with at least twenty (20) years seniority in rank and sixty (60) accredited college
hours or twenty-five (25) years seniority in the rank shall be eligible for Step F which shall be
two percent (2%) above a Step E.

Those Police Officers who have achieved Step D, E or F may be identified by an appropriate
insignia approved by the Chief to be worn on the sleeve of the uniform shirt and/or jacket.

B. Detective Rank Step Schedule.

Detectives with at least five (5) years seniority in rank and forty (40) accredited college hours or
ten (10) years seniority in rank shall be eligible for Step B which shall be three percent (3%)
increase above Step A, i.e., entry level into the Detective rank.

Detectives with at least ten (10) years’ seniority in rank and sixty (60) accredited college hours
or fifteen (15) years seniority in rank shall be eligible for Step C that shall be three percent (3%)
increase above Step B.

Detectives with at least fifteen (15) years seniority in rank and sixty (60) accredited college

hours or twenty (20) years seniority in the rank shall be eligible for Step D that shall be two
percent (2%) above Step C.

48
ec. Sergeant Rank Step Schedule.

Sergeants with at least five (5) years seniority in rank and sixty (60) accredited college hours or
ten (10) years seniority in rank shall be eligible for Step B which shall be two percent (2%)
increase above Step A, i.e., entry level into the Sergeant rank.

Sergeants with at least ten (10) years seniority in rank and sixty (60) accredited college hours or
fifteen (15) years seniority in the rank shall be eligible for Step C which shall be two percent
(2%) increase above Step B.

D. Lieutenant Rank Step Schedule.

Lieutenants with at least five (5) years seniority in rank and sixty (60) accredited college hours or
ten (10) years seniority in rank shall be eligible for Step B which shall be two percent (2%)
increase above Step A, i.e., entry level into the Lieutenant rank.

Lieutenants with at least ten (10) years seniority in rank and sixty (60) accredited college hours
or fifteen (15) years seniority in the rank shall be eligible for Step C which shall be two percent
(2%) increase above Step B.

E. Captain Rank Step Schedule

Captains with at least five (5) years seniority in rank and a Bachelor's degree or ten (10) years
seniority in rank shall be eligible for Step B which shall be two percent (2%) increase above Step
A, i.e., entry level into the Captain rank.

Captains with at least ten (10) years seniority in rank and a Bachelor’s degree or fifteen (15)
years seniority in the rank shall be eligible for Step C which shall be two percent (2%) increase
above Step B.

Section 2, Pyramiding.

Where an Officer is eligible for more than one rate of overtime pay, he shall receive only one of
those rates at a time, though it shall be the higher rate.

Section 3. Shift Differential Pay.

A. All Police Officers permanently assigned to begin work after 12:00 p.m;
including but not limited to shifts currently referred to as the Evening “B” "Dog Watch" “C” or
“T” shifts are to receive $350 per month differential pay.

B. Only Officers permanently assigned to or on Special Assignment approved
through the offices of Division Commanders to begin work after 12:00 p.m. shall receive shift
differential pay. Officers on special assignment must work an applicable shift for eighty (80)
hours or more of any calendar month to be entitled to differential pay for that assignment for the
full month.

49
C, Officers who are permanently assigned to begin work after 12:00 p.m. and who
by assignment have the discretion in their working hours must work an applicable shift for eighty
(80) hours or more of any calendar month to be entitled to differential pay for that assignment for
the full month.

Section 4. Longevity Pay.

In addition to wages as set forth in the pay schedule, each Officer's base pay shall be increased
by three percent (3%) for each five (5) years of his longevity, to a maximum of thirty (30) years,
i.e., a thirty year veteran would receive an additional eighteen percent (18%). On each Officer's
anniversary date which is not a multiple of five, he shall receive an eight dollar ($8.00) increase
in his longevity pay per month, provided, however, that he shall no longer receive monthly
longevity pay of $4.00 per year of service, to a maximum of twenty-five (25) years as is set forth
in State law, and that the eight dollar ($8.00) interim monthly adjustments will not increase any
fifth year level.

Section 5. Standby Pay.

All qualified Officers assigned to S.W.A.T., K-9, Bomb, Bomb alternates, Meth Lab Certified
Detectives, and Crisis Negotiating teams shall receive One Hundred Fifty-Seven Dollars
($157.00) per month standby pay during each month of active assignment. All Officers assigned
to the K-9 Detail shall receive three (3) hours of overtime compensation per workweek and an
additional hour-and-one-half (1-1/2) hours of overtime compensation per workweek for each
additional animal. Such overtime compensation shall be provided for the housing and feeding of
assigned canines. The parties agree that an accurate computation of hours of work caring for a
police dog is difficult or impossible to determine and that the compensation provided herein is a
fair and reasonable agreement considering all pertinent facts and circumstances. If a police dog
is retired (taken out of service by the City) the Chief of Police shall award the police dog to the
Officer if the Officer so desires. The City shall have no further obligation for the care,
maintenance and support of the police dog.

Section 6. Language Skills Pay.

Each Officer shall be entitled to Language Skills Pay upon satisfactory completion of the testing
requirements for proficiency as set forth in Administrative Directive 4.38. The amount shall not
be less than the amount payable to other City employees. Any Officer who has not taken or
passed the proficiency test shall not be assigned to or required to use second language skills on
the job, provided that any Officer whose personal judgment indicates that using a second
language is appropriate to the safe and expeditious handling of police business should be willing
to do so. No discipline may be imposed for differences in the exercise of such judgment.

Section 7. Helicopter Assignment Pay.

All Officers who are assigned to the Helicopter Unit shall be compensated at One Hundred Fifty-
Seven Dollars ($157.00) per month of active assignment. The City shall pay the costs of all
required training and seminars needed to maintain the Officer’s flight eligibility, certifications

50
and licensing. The City shall continue to provide all safety equipment, including flight helmets,
flight suits, and gloves.

Section 8. Drug Recognition Experts.

Officers who are certified by the Sam Houston State University program, and recertified
periodically as required by Department policy, and who are assigned by the Chief to provide
drug recognition expertise to other members of the Department, shall receive One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) per month for each month of active assignment.

Section 9. Volunteers in Policing.

Officers (not to exceed the rank of Sergeant) assigned as Volunteers in Policing coordinators, up
to a maximum of seven (7), shall receive One Hundred Fifty-Seven Dollars ($157.00) per month
for each month of active assignment. The Chief may at his discretion cancel (or reactivate) the
Volunteers in Policing assignment pay at any station should the number of civilian volunteers
actively participating in the program drop to a number no longer justifying the Volunteers in
Policing assignment pay.

Section 10. | Overtime, Regular Rate, and other Pay Calculations.

A. Overtime, pension, Fiesta pay, court and call-back pay, holiday pay, longevity,
education, shift differential, FTO, incentive pay (i.e. SWAT, helicopter, VIP, crisis negotiation,
K-9, instructors and bomb tech), certification pay and language skills pay will be paid in
accordance with this Agreement and past practice.

B. The Association agrees that, for the term of this agreement (including any
extension period), all past pay practices under the terms “regular rate of pay,” “rate of pay,” or
“regular pay” in the previous agreement, including those which have been calculated and paid
based on base pay or base pay plus longevity (examples below) are deemed as proper pay
practices under the prior agreement and will remain proper under this agreement. Should any
grievance contesting the definition or calculation of pay or “regular rate of pay” be filed after
August 1, 2003, contesting such “regular rate of pay” issues, it is the position of the Association
that said grievance is without merit and will be immediately resolved in accordance with the
agreed and accepted past pay practice. This provision is intended to assure that the City will have
no such retroactive liability for such pay practices, and has been relied upon by the City in
accepting and approving this agreement. This agreed condition is essential to this agreement.

Cc Therefore, in the event of any successful Officer(s) claims, by grievance or
lawsuit, under the terms “regular rate of pay,” “rate of pay.” or “regular pay’” the Association
agrees to share in the liability by special assessment and pay for such claims at the ratio of 50%
Association, 50% City. To the extent that any such matters are asserted by suit, the Association
shall provide and pay for cooperating joint defense counsel, or pay 50% of the City’s cost of
defense.

51
D. In accordance with arbitration rulings, sick leave buy back and sick leave upon
separation pay shall be calculated to include all incentives as used in that calculation for an
individual Officer. For purposes of Section 9 of this Article, incentives are defined as those pay
additions that apply to an individual Officer. This would include but not be limited to the various
assignments pays such as FTO, SWAT, helicopter, SAFFE, and VIP. Also included would be
any applicable educational pay, shift differential pay, language skills pay, and certification pay.

E. Should this Agreement create any new pay categories, such categories shall be
included for overtime, pension, and leave upon separation computation unless specifically
excluded by wording within the applicable section.

F. This section does not have the effect of altering the duty to pay overtime when
required by the FLSA at 1.5 times the “regular rate of pay” as defined by federal law; the parties
recognize, however, that this agreement, portions of which predate the FLSA, has not used the
term “regular rate of pay” in the manner defined by the statute.

G. The computation for the calculation of longevity pay will be base pay at the
officer’s appropriate step multiplied by the percentage increase of the Officer’s longevity
position plus $8 for each additional year up to a maximum of 4 years.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 Years 3%

10 Years 6%

15 Years 9%

20 Years 12%

25 Years | 15%

30 Years | 18%
H. Pay Examples

Longevity: A 22-year patrol officer in step E would make $4,912for base pay times 12% for
longevity plus an additional sixteen dollars total for years 21 and 22. (($4,912* .12) +16 =
$605.44).

Fiesta Pay shall be double time: Base plus longevity times two (2).

All Past Pay Practices in relation to Court and Call-Back shall continue, except as changed and
modified by this agreement.

Court and Call back shall continue to be paid at one and one-half (1.5) x “regular rate of pay” for
actual time worked. However, Court and Call back shall never be paid in an amount less than 3
hours x 1.5 x base pay plus longevity. The officer will be given whichever amount of pay is
higher but not both.

The Holiday and Premium Holiday rate of pay shall be as follows: Holiday pay shall be
compensated at double time, which is the regular rate of pay (inclusive of all the subject officer’s

52
incentives or add-on pays) for the day worked, plus credit for the holiday, which is accrued
additional leave time; and double time and one half (2.5) on a Premium Holiday, (which is pay
for the day worked and accrued additional leave time or payment), depending on which type of
Holiday was worked. This is inclusive of all incentive pays for calculation of regular rate of pay
for this article.

Example: Regular Holiday: An officer works Memorial Day, 2010, the officer gets paid his
regular compensation for the work day and has already been paid incentives for the month. An
additional day is credited for accrued leave, and not as pay.

Example: Premium Holiday - a step E patrol officer on dogwatch with a Bachelor’s degree
making $4,912 per month base with 20 years would receive $589.44 per month in longevity, He
will receive $350 per month for shift-differential and $315 per month for a Bachelor’s degree.
$4,912 + $589.44 + $350 + $315 = $6,166.44 per month times 12 months = $73,997.28 divided
by 2080 hours worked per year = $35.58 per hour.

In this example for a premium holiday, the officer would receive 20 hours (8 hrs. X 2.5 rate)
compensation for an 8 hour day. (20 X $35.58= $711.60), which may be taken as follows:

1. Eight hours regular day wages plus 12 hours compensatory time.
yl Eight hours regular day wages plus 12 hours at $35.58per hour,

Dy Eight hours regular day wages plus 8 hours compensatory time and 4
hours at $35.58per hour.

4. Eight hours regular day wages plus 4 hours compensatory time and 8
hours at $35.58 per hour In the event that an officer works a ten (10) hour
work day then the same logic would apply in calculating their
compensability.

ARTICLE 17
Death in Family Leave

In the event of a death in the immediate family of an Officer, the Officer shall be
granted consecutive working days off with pay according to the following schedule:

Officers working a five-day forty hour week will be granted four (4) consecutive working days
off.

Officers working a four-day forty hour week will be granted three (3) consecutive working days
off.

The immediate family shall be defined as mother, father, legal spouse, child, brother, sister, half-
siblings, grandparents, spouses’ grandparents, great-grandparents, spouses’ great-grandparents,

53
mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandchildren, step-parent, step-children and other members of the
immediate household residing with the Officer.

Unless exclusive permission is received from the Chief of Police, the working days as outlined
by this Section shall be taken within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of the death of the
family member.

Officers on military leave during the time of death of an immediate family member shall not be
entitled to the provisions of this Article.

In the case of a death of friends or relatives outside the immediate family, or if an Officer wishes
to perform service as a pallbearer, an Officer may request other types of accrued leave. The leave
must be approved in advance by the Officer's supervisor.

ARTICLE 18
Court and Call-Back Pay
Section 1.

"Call back" as used in this Article means an Officer having been released from duty for fifteen
(15) or more minutes and called back to report to duty by an appropriate supervisor or
authority. Officers failing to complete assigned duties and/or tasks within their assigned tour of
duty and are called back or held over to complete the assigned duties and/or tasks within fifteen
(15) minutes from being released from duty are not subject to “call-back” as outlined in this
Article. Additionally, Officers who voluntarily report to duty prior to roll call and are ordered to
perform a duty and/or task are not subject to “call-back” as provided in this Article. However,
Officers may submit for time and a half (1-1/2) overtime extending from the end of their tour of
duty until such time the assignment has been completed (including court time) and they are
released by the appropriate supervisor or from the time they are ordered to perform a duty and/or
task upon reporting early to work until the beginning of the tour of duty.

Off-duty court time and call back shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half, with a three (3)
hour minimum and paid at double time with a three (3) hour minimum on vacation and relief
days.

An off-duty Officer who attends court or a pretrial conference and is dismissed for the remainder
of the day before three (3) hours time has elapsed is entitled to three (3) hour minimum. An off-
duty Officer who attends court or a pretrial conference in the morning, is released for lunch, and
returns to complete his attendance in court or the pretrial conference, is compensated for the
actual time spent in court or conference, inclusive of the time he initially reported until final
dismissal by the appropriate authority. For example:

© Off-duty Officer Jones attends 150" District Court or Municipal Court 6 at 1000 hours.
The judge releases Officer Jones for lunch at 1200 hours with instructions to return at
1300 hours. Ultimately, Officer Jones is dismissed from court at 1400 hours. Officer
Jones submits one card for four (4) hours compensation.
54
When an off-duty Officer attends one court and is released or dismissed prior to the expiration of
the three (3) hour time frame and is required to attend a second court immediately after the
expired three (3) hours, the Officer will be compensated for two (2) separate three (3) hour court
callbacks, For example:

* Off-duty Officer Sanchez attends 150" District Court or Municipal Court 6 at 0800 hours
and is finally released at 0900 hours. He then attends 130" District Court or Municipal
Court | at 1100 hours and is dismissed at 1130 hours. Officer Sanchez submits two (2)
cards, each for a three (3) hour minimum.

When an off-duty Officer is requested in more than one court/pretrial conference on the same

day, he will be compensated for attending only one (1), if the other appearance times are within
three (3) hours of the first one. For example:

© Off-duty Officer Jones attends 130" District Court or Municipal Court | at 1000 hours
and is dismissed at 1100 hours. He then appears in County Court 2 at 1130 hours and is
finally dismissed at 1200 hours; Officer Jones submits one card for three (3) hours
compensation.

This provision applies to the following courts in work-related matters or the course of
employment only:

A. _ District Courts.

B. County Courts-at-Law.

C. Grand Juries.

D. Justice of the Peace Courts.
E. Municipal Courts.

F. Civil Service Commission or Arbitration Hearing (when an officer is
subpoenaed by the City),

G. Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission hearings.
Federal Court.

L Administrative License revocation Hearings (ALR).

J. Pre trial conferences.

K. Pardon and Parole hearings.

For purposes of this Article, a vacation period shall be defined as any three (3) consecutive days
of paid leave (comp. time, holidays, annual leave) and any relief days occurring within that time

55
period which has been previously scheduled in accordance with regular Departmental
policies. Relief days shall not be counted as a part of the three (3) day minimum specified above,
provided, however, any relief days occurring during the scheduled vacation period which covers
the time from the last hour worked before the start of the vacation period and continues until the
first hour worked after the scheduled vacation period shall be considered a vacation day for the
purpose of this Article. Relief day shall be defined as covering the time from the last hour
worked before the start of the relief day and continues until the first hour worked after the
scheduled relief day for the purposes of this Article unless it occurs within one and a half (1 2)
hours of the end of the Officer’s duty shift on the last day the Officer worked.

An off-duty Officer who is subpoenaed for and participates in a telephone ALR Hearing set by a
judge will be compensated for one (1) hour at a rate of time and one-half and paid at double time
rate if he is on vacation or on his relief day. In the event the telephone ALR Hearing exceeds one
(1) hour, the Officer will be compensated for the actual time spent testifying in the ALR Hearing.

When an Officer is subpoenaed by the respondent to a Civil Service or Arbitration hearing he
will be granted compensatory time at the rate of one hour per hour required to satisfy the
subpoena to a maximum of three (3) hours.

Section 2.

It is understood that the Chief is responsible to deliver subpoenas issued by Bexar County and
District Courts at an appropriate time to insure that Officers are in court only when their presence
is required. To accomplish the above, the Chief may place Officers on a stand-by not to exceed
one (1) hour in the morning and/or one (1) hour in the afternoon. An Officer must receive
specific notification from court liaison personnel, District Attorney personnel, County Court or
District Court personnel, to be on afternoon standby. The "a.m." time is set at 10:00 a.m, to
11:00 a.m. The "p.m." time is set at 1:30 p.m. to 2:30 p.m. Officers placed on stand-by shall be
compensated as follows:

A. Stand-by, off-duty on regular work day is one-hour compensation at time and one-
half.

B. Stand-by, off-duty on vacation or relief day is one-hour compensation at double
time.

Cy When an Officer is placed on standby, the Officer must be available by his phone
during the specified time period. If the Officer is not available by his phone during the specified
time period, the Officer will not be compensated.

D. For an Officer to be placed on standby, he must receive specific notification from
Court Liaison Detail personnel, from a judge, or from a district/county prosecutor or District
Clerk. When an Officer is placed on standby by a judge or district/county court prosecutor or
District Clerk, he must notify the Court Liaison Detail.

56
EB, Officers who are notified by court liaison to appear in court and are subsequently
canceled by a proper authority will receive the following:

1; If canceled after 4:30 p.m. of the day before the assigned court appearance
date, compensation will be paid according to Section 2, A or B above.

2. If canceled upon arrival at the assigned court, Section 1 of this Article
applies.
Section 3.

When an Officer on off-duty status is required to be on stand-by for several days in succession
on the same subpoena, compensation may be claimed as in Section 2 above for each successive
day on standby at the applicable rate. Approval for standby for more than three (3) days must be
received from the Court Liaison prior to being on standby.

Section 4.

Officers who are subpoenaed by other jurisdictions and have received compensation from those
jurisdictions shall not be entitled to compensation as provided in this Article unless the Officer
turns over all funds received from the other jurisdiction to the office of the Chief of Police and
validates his attendance by completing the necessary forms.

Section 5.

For purposes of this Article, an Officer shall be paid for all hours worked, including travel time,
when traveling to courts outside a sixty (60) mile radius of the city.

ARTICLE 19
Clothing Allowance

Each new Officer shall receive an initial clothing allowance of $480.00.

Effective October 1, 2016 the clothing allowance shall be $1,840.00 per year. The clothing
allowance will be payable monthly at $60.00 per month. In addition, a one-time payment of
$1,120.00 will be paid during the first pay period after October 1, 2016.

Effective October 1, 2017 the clothing allowance shall be $1,940.00 per year. The clothing
allowance will be payable monthly at $60.00 per month. In addition, a one-time payment of
$1,220.00 will be paid during the first pay period after October 1, 2017.

Effective October 1, 2018 the clothing allowance shall be $2,040.00 per year. The clothing

allowance will be payable monthly at $60.00 per month. In addition, a one-time payment of
$1,320.00 will be paid during the first pay period after October 1, 2018.

57
Effective October 1, 2019 the clothing allowance shall be $2,140.00 per year. The clothing
allowance will be payable monthly at $60.00 per month. In addition, a one-time payment of
$1,420.00 will be paid during the first pay period after October 1, 2019.

Effective October 1, 2020 the clothing allowance shall be $2,240.00 per year. The clothing
allowance will be payable monthly at $60.00 per month. In addition, a one-time payment of
$1,520.00 will be paid during the first pay period after October 1, 2020.

ARTICLE 20
Holidays

Section 1. Holiday Accrual.

Each Officer shall be credited with one day of accrued holiday leave for each holiday adopted by
the City Council for each year. Any Officer whose start time for the work shift is on a premium
holiday shall receive regular pay plus one and one-half times their base pay plus longevity (with
the accrued holiday plus 4 time in pay or compensation time, or without the accrued holiday in
pay or compensatory time, at the Officer’s discretion). Any overtime accrued in excess of the
Officer’s regular duty hours, during the premium holiday, shall be at one and one half (1 4)
times their base pay plus longevity (in pay or in compensatory time at the Officer's discretion).

Premium Holidays include:

1. New Year’s Day,

2. Easter Sunday,

3. Independence Day,
4. Thanksgiving Day,
3 Christmas Eve Day,
6. Christmas Day,

7. New Year’s Eve Day

Section 2. Hours of Holiday.

For purposes of this Article, holiday pay and premium holiday pay shall be paid to the Officer if
the start time for the Officer’s work shift begins during the holiday or premium holiday. Holiday
and premium holiday pay shall be paid according to Article 16.

Section 3. Staffing of Holidays.

The Chief has sole discretion to staff the Department on scheduled City holidays in accordance
with Article 7, Section 1(A), of this Agreement. Such assignments are not subject to grievance or
arbitration procedures. Any decrease in staffing on these days will be done by reverse seniority
within the details of the unit. Article 12, Seniority, Section 2, applies to this section in that no

58
junior officer will be bumped out of working a premium holiday, if the senior Officer has not
been assigned to the section, unit, or detail six months prior to the premium holiday.

Section 4. Preemption

It is expressly understood and agreed that all provisions of this Article shall preempt any statute,
Executive Order, local ordinance, City policy or rule, which is in conflict with or is inconsistent
with this Agreement and the procedures developed hereunder, including for example and not by
way of limitation, any contrary provisions of Chapters 141, 142, and 143 of the Texas Local
Government Code, including but not limited to Sections 141.032 and 142.0015 and Sections
143.041 through 143.047.

ARTICLE 21
Vacations

Section 1. The City shall provide Officers vacation time on the basis of the following
schedule:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Years of Service [ Vacation Time
| through 10 | 126 working hours
11 through 15 166 working hours
More than 15 206 working hours
Section 2. Vacation time shall be accrued and credited as follows:
A. Officers shall accrue vacation at the rate of ten (10) hours per month, plus an

additional six (6) hours on each anniversary date thereafter.

B. On the date an Officer completes ten (10) years of service and on each
anniversary date thereafter, he will be credited (on a lump sum basis) with forty (40) additional
hours of vacation time.

C. On the date an Officer completes fifteen (15) years of service and on each
anniversary date thereafter, he will be credited (on a lump sum basis) with forty (40) additional
hours of vacation time for a total of eighty (80) hours.

D. _ For purposes of this Article, anniversary date is defined as the annual anniversary
of the officer's beginning probation with the Department.

Section 3. Preemption

It is expressly understood and agreed that all provisions of this Article shall preempt any statute,
Executive Order, local ordinance, City policy or rule, which is in conflict with or is inconsistent
with this Agreement and the procedures developed hereunder, including for example and not by
way of limitation, any contrary provisions of Chapters 141, 142, and 143 of the Texas Local

59
Government Code, including but not limited to Sections 141.032 and 142.0015 and Sections
143.041 through 143.047.

ARTICLE 22
Miscellaneous Leave Provisions

Section 1. Leave Policies.

All other leave policies in effect at the beginning of this agreement year shall remain in effect for
the duration of the Agreement.

Section 2. Leave Pay Upon Separation.

A Police Officer who leaves the classified service for any reason shall receive a lump-sum
payment in the full amount of his ending salary for the period of his accumulated compensatory
time, holiday hours, sick leave hours (as provided by statute), bonus hours, and vacation hours,
provided that such payment, in the case of vacation hours, shall be based upon not more than
seven hundred and twenty (720) hours of accumulated vacation leave. The beneficiaries of any
police officer who loses his life as the result of an injury or illness in the course and scope of
employment or while employed as an Officer shall be paid the full amount of his salary for the
total number of his hours of accumulated leave.

Section 3. Leave Buy Back.

The City will buy back or convert either in “pay” or in “other forms of leave,” at the officer’s
discretion up to 120 unused sick leave hours on a one-for-one basis provided that the officer
requests same in writing on a form provided by the City by the end of the first pay period in
October; and the officer has a balance after the buy back of not less than 400 hours accumulated
sick leave, Sick leave buy back will be paid at the regular rate of pay, which includes the
incentive pay used in overtime calculations, applicable to the officer at the time the payment is
actually paid to the officer for the leave buy back.

Each October, the City will buy back or convert either in “pay” or in “other forms of leave,” at
the officer’s discretion up to 8 unused bonus leave hours on a one-for-one basis provided that the
officer requests same in writing on a form provided by the City by the end of the first pay period
in October; and the officer has a balance after the buy back of not less than 400 hours
accumulated bonus leave. Bonus leave buy back will be paid at the regular rate of pay, which
includes the incentive pay used in overtime calculations, applicable to the officer at the time the
payment is actually paid to the officer for the leave buy back.

The City shall distribute funds in cash or as other forms of leave. The City agrees to allow
Officers to adjust their paycheck the pay period before or after the sale of leave hours in order for
the officer to make contributions to their deferred compensation plan.

The Accounting Unit will run in the Daily Bulletin during the month of September notification to
the Officer to file, in writing, for the leave buy back. The City will pay the Officer his amount

60
due at the same time as other City employees are paid for their leave buy back but not later than
Christmas Eve day.

Section 4. Bonus Hours Leave.

Each Officer shall be entitled to 8-hours of leave for each quarter of a calendar year (beginning
January 1) of "perfect attendance." Officers off from duty for one of the following reasons are
not eligible to receive the 8- hour perfect attendance bonus: time off for sick leave; off-job injury
leave; military leave in excess of 120 hours in a calendar year; leave without pay; stress leave;
and suspensions. Full vacation days, holidays, and/or compensatory time usage that has not been
scheduled and documented by the supervisor prior to the end of that officer's preceding day's
shift will disqualify an Officer from receiving the perfect attendance bonus. Holidays, relief
days, special assignments, administrative leave (with or without pay), and time restored by the
Commission or an Arbitrator shall not affect the officer's entitlement to the perfect attendance
bonus.

An officer may accumulate no more than 400 hours of perfect attendance bonus hour time.

In the event that an officer has reached the maximum number of Bonus Hours that may be
accrued, the excess Bonus Hours may be converted to vacation leave or holiday leave at the
discretion of the officer.

Section 5. | Compensatory Time Accrual.

Each Officer may accumulate 480 hours of compensatory time.

Section 6. Holiday Leave Accrual.

Each officer may accumulate up to a maximum of three hundred and twenty (320) hours of
holiday leave at the rate of at least eighty (80) hours per year.

Section 7. Leave Conversion.

For purpose of clarification only, the following chart details the type of leave and what amounts
over the accumulated maximum may be converted into at the discretion of the officer. Officers
who have maximum accumulation in leave accrual that cannot be converted into other categories
because of maximum accumulation in those categories are subject to Section 8 of this Article.

Holiday (320 maximum hours) into Vacation

Vacation (720 maximum hours) into Holiday

Bonus (400 maximum hours) into Vacation/Holiday

Sick (1:1) (as applicable per Section 3 above) into Compensatory Time/Holiday/Vacation

61
Section 8. Savings Clause.

No officer covered by this agreement shall lose any holiday, vacation, compensatory or bonus
hours he accumulated during the duration of this agreement that exceeds the maximum permitted
accrual amount allowed by this Agreement, unless, after being given written individual notice to
take the holiday, vacation, compensatory or bonus hours within a specified period not less than
thirty (30) calendar days, the officer fails to do so.

Section 9. Flex Relief Days

Armed Forces Reserve or National Guard members will be entitled to flex relief days, (RDs),
once a month for the purpose of meeting their two-day reserve/guard training commitment. This
benefit is in addition to the annual fifteen (15) day military leave policy IAW Federal law.

Section 10. Injury-on-Duty Leave.

Any Officer may be granted Injury-on-Duty (IOD) Leave by the Chief of Police after three
hundred and sixty-five (365) calendar days from the original date of injury if:

A. Medical documentation from the Officer's physician is provided showing
additional medical treatment or procedures are needed and are as a result of the original injury.

B. When presented with such medical documentation, the Chief shall have the right
to require the Officer to be evaluated by a physician as designated by the City for confirmation
of the findings of the Officer's physician. Should the determination of the City's designated
physician be different than that of the Officer’s designated physician, the two of them shall select
a third physician who shall be supplied all pertinent and relevant records of the officer. This third
physician shall evaluate said records and, if necessary as determined by him, conduct an
additional medical evaluation of the Officer involved. The determination of this third physician
shall be final and binding on parties and not subject to appeal to the Commission and/or
grievance and arbitration as provided for in this Agreement. Should the determination of the
third, independent physician agree with the Officer's physician, the City shall bear the cost of this
third physician's evaluation.

If this third physician's evaluation agrees with the evaluation of the City's designated physician,
the cost of the third physician's evaluation and examination shall be borne by the Officer,

Cc. The Officer will not be charged any sick leave during any second or other
occurring period of an original IOD incident, but will be granted immediate IOD leave.

D. If it is determined by licensed physicians that the second or subsequent treatment
period is not a result of the original injury, the Officer will have the IOD time rescinded and
charged sick time. In the event the Officer has no sick time on the books, he will forfeit any other
type of accumulated leave on the books to equal this IOD time taken off. In the event the Officer
has no time on the books, he or she shall pay back the time at one-half of all vacation, holiday,
and sick time accumulated until all IOD leave is satisfied.

62
E. The Chief of Police shall have the final authority and it will no longer be
necessary to submit such requests to the City Manager's Office, or City Council, for approval and
extended IOD leave. In the event such additional IOD leave is denied, the employee will retain
the right to appeal the denial to the City Manager and City Council.

Section 11. Jury Duty.

A leave of absence, without loss of regular pay, shall be granted to an Officer upon his actual
jury duty service, unless excused there from; provided, however, that such Officer waives or
remits to the City his jury fee and provides proof of jury service verified by the court liaison
section and submitted to Police Accounting.

Section 12. Sick Leave Pool.
Each officer shall accumulate 120 hours of sick leave, with pay, per calendar year.

When the total number of sick leave pool hours drops below 5,600, 8 hours of sick leave with
pay from each officer participating in the program shall become part of the sick leave pool, and
any remaining hours shall continue to be credited to the individual officer.

Officers having opted not to participate will not, under any circumstances, be allowed to enter
the pool at any later date. Any Officer who voluntarily drops out of the pool may not, under any
circumstances, be allowed to re-enter the pool. Notification to the Accounting Unit must be
provided, in writing, by the Officer who drops out of the pool. The Accounting Unit shall include
a copy of this report in the Officer's file, and must forward a copy to the Chief's Office for
inclusion in the Officer's permanent "201" file. A copy must also be sent to the Association
within thirty (30) calendar days of the date the Officer requests to drop out of the sick leave
pool. No Officer shall be eligible to draw sick leave pool days until one (1) of his sick days is
credited to the pool.

Upon completion of the initial two-month period of employment after graduation from the
Academy, each Officer shall have 12 hours of sick leave credited to the pool. In the event of
separation from employment prior to completion of the probationary period, the City may adjust
the pool for any sick leave hours not actually earned by the contributing probationary Officer.
When an Officer retires or dies, any sick leave accumulated by the Officer that would have
otherwise been forfeited shall be credited to the sick leave pool.

The Chief of Police and the President of the Association shall each appoint an equal amount of
officers to a committee in rank to administer the sick leave pool. The Committee shall then elect
a chairman. The resulting vacancy will be filled by the opposite appointing officer from that
receiving the chairmanship. Example: If the Chief of Police appointee is elected chairman, the
Association President shall appoint for the created vacancy.

The Chief of Police will select one Sergeant, one Detective and one Patrol Officer. The
Association President will select one Detective and two Patrol Officers. In cases where an officer
applies for sick leave pool benefits and holds a rank higher than sergeant, the Chief and President

63
of the Association will each appoint one person of rank equal to or higher than held by the
requesting Officer.

All committee members shall be appointed on or before October | of each year and shall serve
one-year terms. Any vacancies occurring during the course of the term shall be filled within
twenty-one (21) calendar days. No person shall be allowed to serve more than one (1)
consecutive term. The City shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless each committee member.

The following requirements determine when a committee may consider when sick leave pool
hours may be drawn. A decision by the committee shall be final.

A. — Officers may be considered for sick leave pool hours after taking off 120
consecutive working hours of continuous non-job-related illness or injury. The 120 consecutive
working hours used for eligibility shall be from an Officer's own accumulated leave and will not
be refundable by the Committee or otherwise. The Department shall reimburse the Officer for
any type of leave hours used in excess of the 120 consecutive working hours, if reimbursement is
approved by the Sick Leave Committee,

B. No officer shall be permitted to use more than 1440 pool hours for a single illness
or injury.

C. Pool hours may not be used for injuries or illnesses sustained in the line of duty.

D. The number of hours in the pool shall be solely for the benefit of officers with
extended injuries or illnesses, and such hours shall not revert to the accumulated sick leave of
individual officers.

E. Pool time may only be used for disability, which is defined as a non-job-related
injury or illness, which prevents an Officer from fully performing assigned duties in all major
divisions of the Department.

F. The Committee Chairman may at any time or at the request of the Chief of Police
reconvene the Committee for further consideration should evidence come forward that would
affect the outcome of a Committee decision after a decision has been reached. The Committee by
majority vote may extend, reduce, approve, cancel, or deny a pool usage, as the evidence
requires.

G. Officers desiring consideration for pool usage may be required to submit to medical
examination by a City doctor and may be required to produce medical records, doctor's orders,
and any other material necessary to render a decision by the committee.

H. Upon any Officer being absent from duty 18-work weeks as a result of a single
illness or injury, the Chief may require the Officer to submit to a medical examination to
determine whether the officer is permanently disabled. When it is determined that an Officer is
permanently disabled, the Chief shall be entitled to terminate or retire the officer, whichever is
applicable, according to law existing.

64
L Officers applying to the Sick Leave Pool Committee for reimbursement of hours
used in excess of 120 hours must do so within one year of return to duty, following the illness or

injury.
Section 13. | Leaves of Absence.

The Chief may grant a leave of absence, without pay, to a maximum of five (5) officers, which
granting shall not be unreasonably withheld. The primary purpose of this leave shall be to
provide the officer with additional education in law enforcement related areas. Request for leave
under this section for the purpose of the Officer continuing full-time formal education at an
institution of higher learning shall be given priority. The duration of the leave shall be for a
period of time as determined by the Chief, but in no event for a period to exceed three (3)
calendar years. Should the leave be for the purpose of pursuing continued formal education at an
accredited college or university of higher learning, the leave shall be granted on a semester-by-
semester basis.

A leave of absence under this Section shall not be considered a break in service for promotional
or seniority purposes. Officers on leave of absence shall not be eligible to apply for or take
promotional examinations while on such leave.

An Officer on an approved leave of absence under this Section must return to regular
assignment with the City for a period at least equal to the length of his leave. Should an officer
fail to return to his regular assignment for such period, the leave taken shall be considered as a
break in service for purposes of promotion, seniority, pay, and/or pension.

The Chief of Police may recall an Officer from a leave of absence granted under this Section in
the case of an emergency for the duration of the emergency.

Officers on leave of absence may continue pension payments, and the City shall match such
payments according to the requirements of state law. However, all other forms of compensation
shall be withheld until such Officer returns to full-time status with the Department.

Section 14. Preemption

It is expressly understood and agreed that all provisions of this Article shall preempt any statute,
Executive Order, local ordinance, City policy or rule, which is in conflict with or is inconsistent
with this Agreement and the procedures developed hereunder, including for example and not by
way of limitation, any contrary provisions of Chapters 141, 142, and 143 of the Texas Local
Government Code, including but not limited to Sections 141.032 and 142.0015 and Sections
143.041 through 143.047.

65
ARTICLE 23
Working in a Higher Classification

Section 1. Definitions.
“Vacancy” is an encumbered position that is not currently filled.

“Absence” is a position that is currently filled but the individual currently occupying that
position is not currently present for duty.

“Investigative assignment” is any assignment that requires investigation where that individual, as
part of his job assignment, is from time to time responsible for filing a charge and disposition if
one is necessary.

“Undercover assignment” is any assignment that requires investigation where that individual, as
part of his job assignment, will work in plainclothes without revealing his identity or occupation
in furtherance of an assigned police function and is working for a unit within Criminal
Investigation and Intelligence.

Support and assistance functions shall include telephone answering, transport of materials or
property, initial or follow-up information intake, or filing or copying functions.

Section 2, Acting In A Higher Position.

When an absence occurs in the positions of Sergeant, Lieutenant, Captain, Deputy Chief or
Assistant Chief, and said absence continues from day to day for a period in excess of seven (7)
calendar days, the Chief shall assign an Officer to act in the capacity of the absent position. If it
is determined that an absence will continue in excess of seven (7) calendar days, and said
position is determined by the Chief to be of critical importance, he may, at his sole discretion, fill
said absence by appointing from the first day of absence. If another Officer of the equivalent or
higher rank is in a position to assume the responsibilities of the absent Officer’s position, then
the Chief is not required to assign an officer to such position. During service in the acting
capacity, the Officer so assigned shall be compensated at the base salary of the higher position,
plus his or her own longevity or seniority pay beginning on the rate of such acting assignment by
the Chief. Excepted from this provision is any absence created by operation of Article 3 of this
agreement.

If a vacancy is not filled within thirty (30) calendar days in the rank of Sergeant, Lieutenant,
Captain, Deputy Chief or Assistant Chief, and the position is not eliminated, then the Chief shall
appoint temporarily from the next lower rank some Officer to fill that position until a permanent
officer is assigned to fill said vacancy.

Section 3. Temporary Investigative/Undercover Assignment.

A. — When an Officer holding the rank of Patrol Officer is temporarily assigned to
perform investigative or undercover work outside his/her regular duties in the Criminal

66
Investigative Division, the Traffic Investigation Unit, or Intelligence Unit (or its successors in
function) said Officer shall be compensated at the base salary of a Detective Investigator with the
longevity or seniority pay of his/her permanent rank for all hours worked in that
assignment beginning on the date of such acting assignment.

B. _ The City is entitled to assign Patrol Officers to support and assistance functions in
criminal investigative divisions without paying higher classification pay. The City may also
assign Patrol Officers within the Department for support and assistance functions as workload
requires, without paying higher classification pay.

C. It is understood and recognized that the City may assign Patrol Officers to
undercover functions within the Department or with outside agencies, provided that higher
classification pay shall be applicable.

Section 4. Exceptions and Grievability.

A. All appointments to a higher classification position shall be done in writing with
the approval of the Chief of Police. No Officer will be paid for the performance of higher level
work without prior written authorization. The Chief of Police shall unilaterally determine the
guidelines for working in a higher classification position and the procedures for which such
authorization will be obtained.

B. Any Officer who works voluntarily in an assignment for which sole compensation
is in an overtime capacity shall not be eligible to receive higher classification in addition to the
overtime pay. (i.e. Patrol Officer working overtime vice assignment will only receive their
normal overtime rate for hours worked in said assignment).

Section 5. General.

A. A position may not be occupied by Officer(s) of lower rank, as described above
for a period in excess of one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days except for officers working
for or assigned to outside agencies (i.e. Drug Enforcement Administration, Federal Bureau of
Investigation, etc.) or Officers working temporary undercover assignments for the Police
Department.

B. An Officer who works in the acting capacity of a higher position will only be
compensated for the hours or days that the Officer actually works in that position and is present
to carry on the duties of the higher position. Officers will be compensated in whole hours with a
minimum of one-hour. Any hours actually worked over four (4) shall be compensated for a full
day.

C. If an Officer requests in writing the assignment of appropriate supervision and his
request is unreasonably denied, the Chief of Police shall review such request and make the
determination if appropriate supervision is available and make such adjustment as deemed
necessary to rectify the situation. This may be accomplished by making a temporary higher

67
classification appointment, a reassignment or any other action as determined by the Chief of
Police. The determination by the Chief of Police shall be final and not subject to a grievance.

ARTICLE 24
Police Cadet Hiring Guidelines

Any individual wishing to be considered for employment as a cadet in the San Antonio Police
Department must complete the following application and examination process.

Section 1. Submission of Proper Application.

To be considered for the position of police cadet, each applicant must first submit a proper
application as defined by the Department. A proper application will include, but is not limited to,
a questionnaire that solicits information on an applicant's personal information/history, criminal
history, driving record, financial history, employment history, and academic background. The
information submitted shall be used by the Department to determine whether the applicant meets
both the minimum qualifications and suitability requirements as set forth in the Fire and Police
Commission Rules and is therefore eligible for processing, to include testing and potential hiring.
Nothing in this article precludes the Department from finding a candidate unsuitable or
unqualified after the testing phase. Applicants who are disqualified for failing to meet minimum
qualifications per Civil Service Commission Rule VII may appeal the disqualification to the
Civil Service Director. Applicants found unsuitable per Civil Service Rule IX may appeal to the
Fire and Police Civil Service Commission.

Section 2. Testing of Applicants.

a) The Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities exam (“KSA exam”) will be administered to
each applicant who is deemed eligible for processing to take the KSA exam, in
accordance with Section 1 above. The examination may include testing for
counterproductive work behaviors or other similar tests which are job related and
validated. KSA exams shall be conducted as needed at a suitable time and location
as determined by the Department and may be administered by the Human
Resources Department or the Police Department. Each applicant must take the
KSA exam and the physical fitness evaluation to continue processing. The City
may also utilize a reading comprehension test as a condition for taking the KSA
exam. Applicants will be tested to measure the same knowledge, skills and
abilities. However, all examinations are not required to be identical.

b) Applicants may be administered exams individually or in a group, at different
times and different locations, and the order of the various exams may be changed.

c) An applicant undergoing the physical fitness evaluation must meet or exceed each
fitness standard during a single evaluation, practice or final, to successfully
complete the evaluation. Applicants will be afforded the opportunity to attend a
candidate orientation. Applicants will be allowed two (2) practice evaluations and
a final evaluation. In the event an applicant fails the two (2) practice evaluations

68
qd)

e)

Section 3.

the applicant will be allowed to take one (1) final retest within twenty eight (28)
days of the first evaluation. If an applicant is found unsuitable during the fitness
evaluation, the applicant will be ineligible to reapply for six (6) months from the
date of their KSA exam.

An applicant who fails to pass the KSA exam may retake the exam after a period of
six (6) months from the date of their KSA exam. Applicants will be required to
restart the process at Section 1. Submission of Proper Application.

Under no circumstances will an applicant be eligible to take a KSA exam within
six months of the applicant’s most recent examination. Applicants currently
processing or on an eligibility list who wish to retest, must first withdraw their
current application.

A maximum of five (5) additional points will be awarded to the score of the KSA
exam of a qualified applicant with a cut off score of 70% (unless a qualified
consultant shall determine a different cut off score, based on the statistical validity
of the test), if the applicant provides sufficient proof prior to the exam, as follows:

1) Honorable Discharge from the military with at least 180 consecutive
days of active duty service. The recently separated or Active Duty,
Active Reservists or National Guard member will be awarded five
points after receiving a letter from the military members’ last/current
Commander stating that the military member will receive an
Honorable Discharge based on current conditions and has served at
least 180 consecutive days of active duty. (5 points)

2) TCOLE peace officer certification of Intermediate or higher or five (5)
years experience as a full-time licensed peace officer/law enforcement
officer. (2 points)

3) Bachelor’s Degree or higher from an accredited learning institution of
higher education. (2 points)

4) Associates Degree from an accredited learning institution of higher
education. (1 point)

5) Local Resident (an individual residing within the corporate city limits

of the City of San Antonio for 180 days or more at the time of taking
the KSA examination(! point)

Background Investigation.

A complete background investigation will be conducted by sworn SAPD officers into the
applicant’s general personal reputation, education, military history, driving record, arrest record,
drug usage, employment history, and financial history. The background investigation will be

69
conducted by of the Police Department to determine suitability in accordance with the Fire and
Police Commission Rules.

Section 4. Assessment Board Interview.

A panel composed of three (3) sworn trained assessors selected from sworn personnel of the
Department will assess the applicant’s character and qualifications. The assessment panel may be
done in person and video taped, or done on video and assessed by the panel from the video
record, The assessment interview process and structure shall be reviewed, developed and
validated from time to time by a qualified consultant. The assessment will be conducted to
determine suitability in accordance with Fire and Police Commission Rule IX, Section 10.

Section 5. Medical, Polygraph, and Psychological Examinations.

Applicants who receive a conditional offer of employment will be required to pass a medical
examination, polygraph examination, and psychological examination as required by the
Personnel Rules of The City of San Antonio Fire Fighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service
Commission.

Section 6. Appointment.

Once applicants successfully pass all phases of the process as described in Sections 1-5 of this
Article they will be added to an eligibility list based upon their ranking from the KSA exam
(including any additionally awarded points as listed above). In the event that the City’s testing
consultant provides a scored assessment board interview, the City may combine that score with
the KSA exam score for candidate ranking purposes. The eligibility list shall be dynamic and
remain continually active. In the event of equal scores, the date and time of application will be
the tie-breaker, with the earliest date and time being given preference. The City’s testing
consultant may determine a statistically valid band of scores, and all scores falling within the
valid statistical band shall be treated as the same score for purposes of processing and selection.
The Fire and Police Commission shall receive reports on the progress and status of the eligibility
list. No certification of the list prior to processing or hiring shall be required. Appointments to
the position of police cadet are made by the Department Head (Chief of Police) based upon
candidates who have completed processing. If not otherwise disqualified, found unsuitable or
appointed to a cadet class, the application shall expire twelve months from the date added to the
eligibility list. These applicants will be eligible to reapply and complete processing as outlined in
Sections 1-5 of this Article. The Chief may hire a candidate to begin an academy training class at
a date in the future.

Section 7. Local Gov’t Code Section 174.006.

Pursuant to Section 174.006 of the Texas Local Government Code, the parties to this Collective
Bargaining Agreement intend for the terms of this Article to prevail over any conflicting terms of
Texas Local Government Code Chapter 143, Subchapter B, Sections 143.021, 143.022, 143.023,
143.024, 143.025 and 143.026 and over any conflicting terms in the Personnel Rules of the
Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission of the City of San Antonio. The

70
Civil Service Commission will no longer be required to approve the exam, or to publish or post
an exam notice, or to certify an eligibility list or persons from the list for review and selection.
Selections shall be made by the Police Chief and not by the city’s Chief Executive.

In superseding these Sections of Chapter 143, the parties recognize the need for more flexibility
in the hiring process to meet the needs of the Department and believe it improves the selection
process while providing all candidates a fair opportunity for consideration.

Section 8. Legacy Preferences.

Each applicant who is either a natural-born or adopted child of a police officer who previously
suffered a line-of-duty death shall be ranked at the top of any eligibility list in which said
applicant receives a minimum cut off score on that respective eligibility exam. The applicant
who is the child of a deceased police officer must otherwise satisfy all of the requirements for
eligibility for a beginning position in the Police Department as outlined in Sections 1-5 of this
Article.

ARTICLE 25
Initial Probationary Period

Section 1. Police Cadet.

Prior to becoming a Police Officer (probationary), Class 601, an employee is a Police Cadet
(602) (civilian) and is not in the bargaining unit. Upon successful completion of the
requirements of Police Cadet, the employee becomes a Police Officer (601) (Probationary), On
becoming a Probationary Police Officer (601) he/she shall serve a fifty-two (52) week
probationary period.

Section 2. Exclusions from the Police Initial Probationary Period.

Periods of twenty-one (21) continuous calendar days or more during which the Officer is on sick
or injury leaves, vacations, suspensions, and/or light duty shall be excluded from determining
whether or not the Officer has completed the fifty-two (52) week probationary period.

Section 3. Special Assignment.

During the fifty-two (52) week initial period, the officer will be assigned to performing actual
police patrol duties and shall not be eligible for any other special assignment during the term of
this initial period.

Section 4. Non-Supplanting.

In no event shall probationary patrol officers supplant assigned positions or relief
days. Probationary officers may only assume the Field Training Officer’s relief days while
actually riding with the Field Training Officer or temporary RD’s as assigned by the Patrol
Assignment Coordinator for training and review procedures.

71
Section 5. Probationary Dismissal.

Following graduation from the Police Academy, during the Officer’s probationary period an
Officer may be disciplined or discharged without written notice and/or without cause at the
discretion of the Chief. Such action shall not be reviewable by an arbitrator, the Commission, or
any court. An Officer does not become entitled to protection against discipline or discharge by
the provisions of the civil service law or this agreement, except upon completion of said
probationary period. Upon successful completion of the probationary period, the Officer shall be
eligible for all rights under this agreement.

ARTICLE 26
Field Training Officers

Section 1. Field Training Officer Program.

The Chief shall continue the Field Training Officer Program (FTOP) as a section of the Police
Academy. The FTOP function will be to reinforce and update training given in the Academy in
field operations. The primary purpose of the Program is to complete the education and training of
probationary Officers. Additionally, the program may be used to conduct continuing or remedial
education or training for other Department personnel. While patrol officers may be used as Field
Training Officers (FTO's) to conduct such training and education, they may not be used to
supervise, investigate, or perform other duties performed by higher-ranking Officers.

Section 2. FTO Minimum Requirements.

The minimum requirements for FTO's shall be established by the Chief, and any Officer meeting
such requirements shall be considered for a position in the program. Positions will be filled from
qualified Officer applicants based upon the standards enunciated by the Chief. The selection and
removal of an Officer from the FTO program shall be at the discretion of the Chief and not
subject to the grievance procedure. There shall be a minimum of eighty (80) Patrol Officer
FTO’s in the Department.

Section 3. Hours and Assignment, Emblem, and Voluntary Service.

The hours and assignment of FTO's shall be at the discretion of the Chief, realizing the need to
accomplish the training and education of bargaining unit members as the primary purpose of the
program. Officers assigned to the program shall be identified by an appropriate badge and/or
emblem. Service as an FTO shall be voluntary.

Section 4. FTO Coordinator.

The program will be headed by a "Coordinator" who shall hold the rank of Lieutenant or

above. The Coordinator shall have the power to recommend to the Chief the dismissal of any
officer from the program on the basis of the Officer's record while serving as an FTO.

72
Section 5. Field Training Officer Pay.

All Officers permanently assigned to the FTO program, including the Coordinator, shall receive
a $265.00 per month pay supplement, in lieu of any compensatory time as previously provided.

ARTICLE 27
Promotional Probationary Period

Section 1.

There shall be a six (6) month probationary period for all civil service promotional ranks
commencing the date the Officer is actually promoted. Salary, benefits and seniority within the
promotional rank commences the date the Officer was eligible for the promotion pursuant to this
Agreement and Chapter 143 of the Local Government Code. During the promotional
probationary period, an Officer may be demoted by the Chief to the rank from which he was
promoted on the basis of the Officer’s inefficiency, incompetence, or inability to supervise.

Section 2.

In the event that an Officer is demoted under Section | above, said officer may file a grievance
pursuant to the grievance procedure in this Agreement. If the grievance proceeds to arbitration,
the Officer shall only raise to the arbitrator the issue of whether or not the Officer was demoted
for some reasons other than inefficiency, incompetency, or inability to supervise. The burden of
proof shall be on the officer to demonstrate that the demotion was for some reason other than
inefficiency, incompetency, or inability to supervise. In the event that the arbitrator rules that the
demotion was for some reason other than incompetency, inefficiency, or inability to supervise,
the arbitrator shall rescind the demotion and restore the officer to the promotional rank from
which the Officer was demoted.

Section 3.

Upon demotion while holding a probationary promotion, an Officer shall resume the competitive
rank from which appointed and the salary shall be in accordance with said competitive rank with
service time credited as continuous time in that competitive rank and with all salary increases to
which the officer would have been automatically entitled had the Officer continuously remained
in said competitive rank.

ARTICLE 28
Disciplinary Actions

Section 1. Authority of the Chief.

The Chief shall have authority to demote and/or suspend not to exceed forty-five (45) calendar
days, or indefinitely suspend (as provided for in Chapter 143 of Local Government Code) any
Officer for the causes set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the Commission. The Officer may
appeal such actions, if any, as provided for herein. Nothing contained herein prevents the Chief

73
and the accused Officer from reaching an agreed settlement on any matter so long as both parties
concur in writing in advance of said settlement. Officers suspended for three (3) days or less who
appeal the suspension shall not serve the suspension unless a suspension with loss of pay is
awarded by an arbitrator.

Section 2. Contemplated Disciplinary Action.

Prior to any such disciplinary action, the Officer shall be given notice of contemplated
disciplinary action by personal service, stating the action or actions contemplated and the reasons
therefore, and notifying the Officer that he may rebut the charges to the Chief, either orally, or in
writing, within seven (7) calendar days. If the Chief should be unable to secure personal service
of the contemplated disciplinary action after due diligence, service may be made by placing the
notice in certified mail addressed to the Officer’s last known address along with delivery of the
statement to the Association, and proof of such service shall be sufficient to provide notice to the
Officer of his right to rebut the contemplated disciplinary action to the Chief.

Section 3. Written Statement of Charges.

After the notice and opportunity for rebuttal provided in the preceding paragraph, the Chief may
demote, suspend, or indefinitely suspend an Officer by service in accordance with this Article on
the officer of a written statement of charges addressed to the Civil Service Commission. A copy
of the disciplinary statement shall be promptly filed with the Human Resources Director of the
City.

The written statement shall point out the particular rule or rules alleged to have been violated by
the Officer and the specific act or acts alleged to be in violation. In the event of demotion,
suspension, or indefinite suspension, the statement informing the officer of disciplinary action
and the reason(s) therefore shall also inform the Officer that an appeal may be had by filing same
in writing with the Human Resources Director, within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of
said written statement unless the case is automatically appealed due to alternate service via mail
to the officer.

Section 4. Notice of Right to Appeal.

The Chief or the Chiefs authorized designee shall not be required to deliver in person a written
statement of charges to the Officer being suspended. The written statement of suspension shall
be deemed to have been delivered upon the officer when the written statement (1) is hand-
delivered to the suspended Officer by the Chief, the Chiefs authorized designee, or by a
designated messenger; (2) is delivered to an attorney representing the suspended Officer, or (3)
mailed as provided below. A written statement is deemed delivered to the Officer’s attorney by
handing it to the attorney or by leaving it with another attorney in the attorney’s office or a
member of the attorney's staff, or by delivering it by any other means that the attorney consented
to in writing. If the City attempts in good faith to deliver the written statement as provided
herein, but such attempts are unsuccessful, the written statement may be mailed by certified mail
to the last known address of the suspended Officer. Service is complete upon mailing and the
suspension shall be automatically appealed to arbitration as of the date of mailing. The Officer is

14
still required to file a proper notice of appeal not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the
arbitration date.

Section 5. Arbitrator Defined.

For the purposes of this Article, the term arbitrator shall mean the same as a third-party hearing
examiner as referred to in Chapter 143 of the Local Government Code. Appeal from demotion,
suspension or indefinite suspension shall be decided by one (1) arbitrator, selected according to
this agreement. Upon receiving an appeal from the Officer, the Human Resources Director shall
act promptly to notify the Association, the Chief, and the City Manager of the appeal.

Section 6. Arbitration Selection and Scheduling.

The counsel for the Officer and the counsel for the Chief of Police shall attempt to mutually
agree on an arbitrator. If the parties fail to agree on an arbitrator within fourteen (14) calendar
days after the appeal is filed, the Human Resources Director shall within five (5) business days
from the expiration of the fourteen (14) calendar days request a list of seven (7) qualified
neutrals from the American Arbitration Association. The parties may mutually agree on one of
the seven (7) neutrals. If they do not so agree, the parties shall alternatively strike the names on
the list within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the list, and the remaining name shall be
the arbitrator. All parties shall act to complete the selection process at the earliest possible date.
The arbitrator shall be promptly notified of his selection. The parties will not have ex parte
communication with the arbitrator. Communication with the arbitrator will be through the
counsel for the Chief of Police and the counsel for the Officer jointly.

Section 7.

The hearing shall be commenced, but need not be completed, within ninety (90) calendar days of
the arbitrator's selection. Delay in commencement of the hearing within these time periods may
occur due to unavoidable conflicts between the arbitrator and the parties’ schedules, or by mutual
agreement of parties and for no other reason. However, if the arbitrator selected cannot
commence the hearing within ninety (90) calendar days from his selection, and there is no
agreement to extend the hearing to a later date by the parties, the parties shall attempt to agree on
a substitute arbitrator. If the parties cannot agree upon a substitute within seven (7) calendar days
of so learning, another arbitrator shall be selected from a new list of seven (7) names promptly
requested from the American Arbitration Association, according to the procedure set out
herein. The arbitrator shall make an award within thirty (30) calendar days of the close of
evidence or after receipt of brief’s if any in arbitration hearings, and within seven (7) calendar
days of the close of evidence in expedited arbitration hearings under 143.057 of the Local
Government Code. Post hearing briefs shall only be permitted in standard arbitration hearings,
and must be mailed to the arbitrator within such time as is agreed to by the parties, or as directed
by the arbitrator.

75
Section 8.

A stenographic transcription of the proceedings shall be made only upon written agreement of
the parties prior to the commencement of the hearing. Should there be no agreement, the party
desiring the transcript may have the transcript made at its sole expense.

Section 9.

The award of the Arbitrator shall state which particular factual charges he finds to be true, if any,
and the particular rules he finds such conduct to have violated, if any. Where the charges are
upheld, the award shall state whether the discipline imposed is upheld, or whether some lesser
discipline is substituted. This agreement authorizes an arbitrator to reduce an indefinite
suspension to a period greater than 45-days.

Section 10.

The following rules shall govern the conduct of arbitration hearings under this Section, and of
certain preliminary matters.

A. Both parties shall provide, at least twelve (12) calendar days prior to the date of
the hearing, the names and addresses of witnesses expected to be called at the hearing. In the
absence of good or excusable cause, the arbitrator may exclude the testimony of a witness upon
the failure of a party to disclose such a witness. The parties, in writing, may request discovery
from each other concerning the case. Should the opposing party not agree to provide the
requested information within seven (7) calendar days of the request, the request shall be deemed
denied, The requesting party may then apply to the Arbitrator who shall order such discovery as
is appropriate to the nature of the case, consistent with, but not bound by, the rules of discovery
in Texas civil cases. In considering the application, the Arbitrator shall consider the burden and
expense of producing the information, the need of the requesting party, the amount of time
available prior to the hearing, and such other matters as he may deem material. In no event shall
discovery be requested within seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing.

B. The Arbitrator shall have the power to subpoena witnesses. Where the subpoena
request is not opposed by a party, the Human Resources Director shall issue the subpoena in the
name of the Arbitrator and such issuance shall be considered the act of the arbitrator. If the
subpoena is opposed, the moving party shall apply to the arbitrator for issuance of the subpoena.
The City will serve subpoenas on any City employee; otherwise the party issuing the subpoenas
shall be responsible for obtaining service.

C. __ Inall hearings under this Section, the City shall prove its case by a preponderance
of the evidence.

D. All hearings shall be public unless it is expressly agreed in writing by the parties
that the hearing shall be closed to the public. In any event, the final decision of the arbitrator
shall be public, although public announcement may be reasonably delayed upon request of the
parties.

76
E. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the conduct of the hearing shall be
governed by the rules of the American Arbitration Association.

Section 11.

Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Arbitrator shall have all those powers and only
those powers vested in the Commission under Chapter 143 of the Local Government Code and
the Commission Rules, with respect to suspensions, indefinite suspension, and demotions, with
the sole exception of the power to amend such rules.

Section 12.

Any notice or statement required to be filed by the Chief of Police or the officer in a disciplinary
proceeding under Chapter 143 of the Local Government Code, under Commission Rules, or
under this Agreement, shall be filed with the Human Resources Director of the City.

Section 13.

Hearings conducted by the Commission shall be in accordance with Chapter 143 of the Local
Government Code.

Section 14.

Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, with respect to demotions, suspensions, and
indefinite suspensions as defined in Chapter 143 of the Local Government Code the officer shall
have such right to appeal the arbitrator's decision to district court as he is given in Chapter 143 of
the Local Government Code to appeal the Commission's decision, and no greater right.

Section 15.

Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, in cases of conflict, the provisions of this
Agreement will control over Chapter 143 of the Local Government Code, and any other civil
service provision or rule, and American Arbitration Association Rules; and Chapter 143 of the
Local Government Code, and any other civil service provision, and Civil Service Rules
promulgated pursuant to it shall control over American Arbitration Association Rules. Once an
Officer receives a formal notification from Internal Affairs, the officer may initiate a written
request to the Chief to waive the normal investigative track through Internal Affairs for the
investigation to be submitted to an expedited disciplinary track, however in no event can the
expedited disciplinary track be requested within sixty (60) calendar days of the expiration of the
complaint’s one-hundred-and-eighty (180) calendar day timeline in Chapter 143 of the Local
Government Code. Both the Officer and the Chief must agree to submit a matter to the expedited
disciplinary track for an expedited disciplinary finding. An expedited disciplinary finding is an
agreement by the Officer and the Chief that disciplinary action is warranted and enacted, but did
not proceed through the conventional track. Any disciplinary action resulting from the expedited
disciplinary track must be agreed upon by the Officer and the Chief, and must be enacted within
thirty (30) calendar days of the parties’ agreement to expedite the disciplinary process, but under

77
no circumstances later than the time limitation as expressed and proscribed in Chapter 143 of the
Local Government Code, as applicable. Absent an agreement by both the Chief and the Officer,
the matter will continue through the regular investigative procedure.

Section 16.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, the Chief shall have authority to suspend
an Officer for a period of not more than ninety (90) calendar days, or implement an agreed
disciplinary action, only where the Officer agrees to the disciplinary action in writing. An agreed
disciplinary action is an agreement between the Officer and the Chief that may include, but is not
limited to, any one, or combination of, a suspension, demotion, or non-disciplinary actions such
as professional counseling, re-training, or re-assignment. The Officer shall have no right to
appeal such agreed disciplinary actions, and no administrative or judicial body shall have power
to review such a suspension or alter the terms of the Agreement.

Section 17.

Any deadline or time restrictions set out in this Agreement with respect to disciplinary
proceedings may be modified by written agreement of the parties. However, neither party may be
compelled to waive its right to insist upon the deadline and time restrictions provided by the
Agreement.

Section 18.

Officers suspended up to a maximum of forty-five working days may, at the Chief's discretion,
forfeit either accumulated compensatory time, vacation, bonus time or holiday leave equal to the
suspension. Approval of forfeiting time by the Chief shall not be unreasonably withheld and may
only be denied because of a consistent overall pattern of substandard performance. The officer
shall have ten (10) calendar days from receipt of notice of the suspension to decide whether or
not he wishes to forfeit accumulated leave or exercise his appeal rights pursuant to Chapter 143
of the Local Government Code or the Grievance and Arbitration Procedures of this
Agreement. The provisions of this Section shall apply solely to suspensions which are agreed to
by the Officer, and no appeal to the Commission or to arbitration may be instituted on
suspensions where the Officer has forfeited accumulated compensatory, vacation, bonus time or
holiday leave pursuant to the terms of this Article.

Section 19.

Except as provided in this section of this Article, the Chief and City are precluded from the
introduction of evidence or otherwise complaining of any acts or occurrences earlier than the one
hundred and eightieth (180th) calendar day immediately preceding the date on which the Chief
suspends or demotes the Officer. The Chief may introduce evidence or otherwise complain of
any felony Penal Code violation, a felony violation of the Controlled Substance Act, a Class A or
B Misdemeanor committed by an officer so long as the evidence or complaint is filed within one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the Department's first knowledge of the act, provided
however, that the statute of limitation for criminal judicial action against the officer involved has
not expired. This amendment language shall not be applied retroactively. Only upon written
78
notice in the original written statement of the Chief may any act or occurrence be admissible in a
disciplinary hearing in accordance with this section.

Solely to aid the Commission or arbitrator in the assessment of appropriate discipline and not to
prove a charge of a violation of Civil Service Rules or for any other purpose, the Chief and the
City may introduce evidence of prior disciplinary actions which have not been set aside on
appeal as follows:

A. — Where the Chief's original written charges include alleged violations of Civil
Service Rules constituting acts of intentional violence, the Chief and the City may introduce
prior discipline on such other violations found to have been committed within five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of said written charges;

B. Where the Chief's original written charges include alleged violations of Civil
Service Rules concerning drug or alcohol abuse, any prior discipline on such violations found to
have been committed within ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of said written
charges;

Cc: Where the Chief's original written charges allege acts of incompetence, all prior
discipline for acts of incompetence may be introduced by the Chief or the City so long as
adequate records are maintained in accordance with Section 20 below, at the time of the act for
which discipline was assessed; and

D. Where the Chief's original written charges allege a violation of any other Civil
Service Rule, the Chief and the City may introduce prior discipline for a violation(s) of the same
rule within two (2) years immediately preceding the date of said written charges, so long as
adequate records are maintained in accordance with Section 20 below, at the time of the act for
which discipline was assessed.

E. Upon execution of this Agreement, suspensions of three (3) days or less that were
not appealed by the Officer shall be automatically reduced to a written reprimand two (2) years
after the date the suspension was served on the Officer if the Officer did not have a sustained
complaint for the same rule within two (2) years from the date the suspension was served on the
officer. Suspensions that were appealed to the Commission or Arbitrator by the Officer are not
eligible to be reduced to a written reprimand under this Section. The original suspension
paperwork sent to the Commission will reflect the conditions of this Section to reduce the
applicable suspension to a written reprimand. The reduction of any suspension contained within
this subsection does not qualify for any form of reimbursement to the employee.

Section 20.
The City shall develop records, which, to the fullest extent possible, quantify the work done by

each Officer in each assignment. Such records shall be available by assignment upon specific
request of Officers appealing disciplinary actions or their representatives.

79
Section 21.

Section 143.056 of the Local Government Code regarding procedures after felony indictment
and certain misdemeanor complaints shall be modified to provide:

A. Should the Chief fail to charge the Officer with a violation of Civil Service Rules
within thirty (30) calendar days following acquittal or dismissal of the criminal charges, the
officer shall be reinstated with all back pay and benefits; and

B. In the event an Officer has been demoted or suspended, either temporarily or
indefinitely, for any action which results in the Officer being indicted for a felony or charged
with a misdemeanor of Class B or above, no further action may be taken on the Officer’s appeal
until the completion of trial on the merits on those charges; except that a hearing on an officer’s
appeal may be initiated prior to completion of trial on the merits by mutual agreement between
the City and the Officer. Delay of an appeal pending the results of criminal proceedings as
specified above shall apply both to appeals to arbitration and appeals to the Commission
pursuant to this Article.

Section 22.

Pursuant to Section 17, 19 and 21, the Chief or his counsel and the Officer and his counsel may
mutually agree in writing to extend the 180-day deadline for disciplinary proceedings by
delaying the execution of the disciplinary written statement of charges, if any, to a date no later
than thirty (30) calendar days after the final adjudication of the criminal charge pending, By
entering into a mutually agreeable written agreement, neither party intends to create, nor does a
written waiver directly or indirectly create a past practice.

ARTICLE 29
Internal Security Interview Procedure

Section 1. Investigations Through The Chain Of Command.

Minor allegations of misconduct made against officers which are of the type set out in the
Complaint Matrix contained in the General Manual shall be investigated within the Officer's
chain of command within twenty-one (21) calendar days of receipt of the written complaint. The
Captain of the station/section will conduct the investigation under procedures and guidelines set
out in the General Manual. Such an investigation of the Officer shall be confined to the written
complaint, and that complaint only. If the Officer is the rank of Captain or above, or if the
Officer has no Captain in their chain of command, the Officer’s Division Commander, Bureau
Commander, or Chief of Police or designee will investigate. Suspensions, if imposed, may be for
up to three (3) calendar days. If the accused Officer does not agree with the final terms of the
contemplated disciplinary decision within five (5) calendar days, the case will be forwarded to
the Internal Affairs Unit for further investigation. Suspensions agreed to by an Officer may not
be appealed to or altered by the Commission, an arbitrator, or by any court. Investigations
through the chain of command do not entitle the Officer to have an attorney present during
interviews with his commanding officer, but nothing herein prohibits an officer from seeking

80
advice from an attorney or an Association representative provided it is within the five (5) day
time limit. The Officer will be advised in writing of the procedures applicable to the line
complaint investigative process by the Captain prior to providing a report or response. Officers
shall have a reasonable opportunity to consult with counsel before writing a response, statement,
or report resulting from a complaint. The term “complaint” as used in this article does not
include questions about performance of duty raised by the Supervisor or fellow Officers.

Section 2. Internal Affairs Investigations.

This procedure shall apply to all non-criminal investigations of misconduct by officers except
investigations through the chain of command conducted under Section | above.

A. An interview of the charged Officer shall take place at a location designated by the
investigating Officer, usually at the police facility to which the Officer is assigned or the Internal
Affairs Office. If the Officer is required to complete written interrogatories, at the Officer’s
request, such interrogatories shall be provided to the officer on a computer disk so that the
officer may complete such interrogatories at a location other than a police facility. The Officer
must return the completed interrogatories in accordance with a written agreement between the
officer and the investigator in charge of the investigation. An Officer who requests to complete
the interrogatories in this manner will do so during their off duty time and will not be
compensated by the Department in any way. When the interrogatories are completed, the Officer
shall return the computer disk and their responses to the investigator in charge of the
investigation for review and clarification by either party. The Officer will sign the printed copy
of the report in the presence of the investigator.

B. The Officer shall be informed of the rank, name and command of the Officer in
charge of the investigation, and the identity of all persons present during the interview. If an
Officer is directed to leave his post and report for interview to another command, the Officer’s
assigned command shall be promptly notified of the Officer's whereabouts.

C. The Officer under investigation shall be informed forty-eight (48) hours prior to
being interrogated or asked to otherwise respond to an investigation of the general nature of the
investigation, and sufficient information to reasonably apprise the officer of the allegations shall
be provided. The Officer shall be allowed to review but not copy verbatim or photocopy any
complaints, affidavits, other written statements, GPS/AVL readouts, video recordings, audio
recordings, and photographs, which have been gathered as part of the administrative
investigation. The Officer shall not release the provided information to any person other than his
attorney or representative.

D. The interview shall be completed with reasonable dispatch. Reasonable respites
shall be allowed. Time shall be provided also for personal necessities, meals, telephone calls, and
rest periods as are deemed necessary. Except in exigent circumstances where the seriousness of
the complaint warrants an extended interrogation, or when the complaint will expire within sixty
(60) calendar days, an Officer shall not be required to submit to any single interview for longer
than six (6) hours. The interviewing Officer shall advise the Officer being interviewed of an
estimated time for the interview process. Interview sessions may be held on consecutive days

81
until the interview process is completed. Provisions in Subsection A regarding the removal of
interrogatories do not apply to this subsection.

E. The Officer shall not be subjected to any offensive language, nor shall he be
threatened with transfer, dismissal or other disciplinary punishment. No promise of reward shall
be made as an inducement to answering questions. Nothing herein is to be construed so as to
prohibit the investigating Officer from informing the Officer under investigation that this
conduct can become the subject of disciplinary action resulting in disciplinary punishment.

F. In all cases where an Officer is to be interviewed concerning an alleged act which,
if proven, may result in any disciplinary action, the Officer under investigation shall be afforded
a reasonable opportunity and facilities to contact and consult privately with an attorney of his
own choosing or a representative of the Association before being interviewed. An attorney of his
own choosing or a representative may be present during the interview. A representative may not
be a Police Officer who is related to the respondent, or a supervisor with involvement in the
incident being investigated. Such representative may not participate in the interview except to
counsel the Officer, or to assert any rights afforded to the Officer under this article in a manner
which does not impair the ability of the investigator to conduct the interview and obtain
information directly from the Officer. At any time during the interview the Officer under
investigation may request to consult with his attorney or representative in private, prior to
continuing the interview, provided that the investigator may impose reasonable limits on such
conferences in order to complete a meaningful investigative interview and to obtain a written
statement or response from the Officer in the Officer’s own words.

G.  If.an Officer is or maybe likely to be placed under arrest, that is if the Officer under
investigation is a suspect or the target of a criminal investigation, the Officer shall be given his
rights pursuant to the Miranda Decision. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the
authority of the Chief to conduct administrative investigations nor shall anything in this
subsection be construed to relieve the Officer of his obligation to fully cooperate with said
investigations, to comply with the Rules and Regulations and Procedures of the San Antonio
Police Department, or to provide thorough, complete and truthful responses to requests for
written statements and written interrogatories in connection with said administrative
investigations. In all investigations where the Officer is subject to a companion or concurrent
criminal investigation, the Department shall ensure that any officer’s statement gathered as part of
the administrative investigation shall not be released to the criminal investigating entity, except as
required by a subpoena or required to be disclosed by law or Court decision.

H. The Officer under investigation shall be given an exact copy of any written
statement he may execute.

I. The refusal by an Officer to answer pertinent questions concerning any
administrative matter may result in disciplinary action.

J. An Officer shall have the right to have the interview tape or digitally recorded,
provided the Officer furnishes the tape and the recorder and advises all parties of the recording
prior to the beginning of the interview session. The tapes or digital file shall remain in the

82
custody of the Internal Affairs Unit of the Police Department but shall be available for review by
the Officer or the Officer’s designated representative in the event the interview may result in
disciplinary action, or a grievance.

K. No conversation between an Officer and an investigating officer may be recorded
without disclosure prior to the conversation by the party making the recording, that it will be
recorded. Prior to entering the Internal Affairs office, an Officer must disclose the existence of
any recording device in his possession or be subject to disciplinary action. The Chief may
authorize the wearing of a concealed recording device during any criminal investigation which
may involve an Officer.

L. A polygraph examination may be required of an Officer by the Chief only in the
strictest confidence and where the complainant, and any complaining witnesses who give a
written statement have been examined and found wholly truthful by a licensed examiner. The
fact that an examination is ordered or administered and the results thereof shall not be disclosed
by the Chief or the examiner to any person, except following execution of a written agreement
between the Chief and the examined Officer._

M. The Chief's office shall provide written notice, in a sealed envelope, to the
individual Officer of the final status of any complaint filed with the Internal Affairs Unit where
the Officer in question had to respond in writing to the complaint.

N._ The results of a formal investigation will be forwarded to the Advisory Action Board
for recommendations.

Section 3. Chief’s Advisory Action Board.

Chiefs Advisory Action Board (CAAB) as used in this section shall mean the combined Police
portion of the Advisory Action Board and the Citizen’s portion of the Advisory Action Board.

A. The Police portion of the Chief's Advisory Action Board shall consist of seven
(7) voting members: a Deputy Chief who shall serve as chairperson; one Captain; one
Lieutenant; one Sergeant; one Detective Investigator; and two Patrol Officers. The members
shall be appointed by the Chief. Those members shall serve for one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days.

B. Except as specifically provided for in this article, the Chief's Advisory Action
Board (CAAB) will be conducted in accordance with the San Antonio Police Department’s
General Manual.

Cc. Citizen Advisory Action Board

1. This Board shall be comprised of seven (7) appointees selected from a panel of
fourteen (14) available members appointed as set forth below. Of the initial seven (7)
appointees, 3-4 appointees shall be replaced following the expiration of 180-days from the date
of their first Board meeting with 3-4 members of the panel of fourteen (14) not having served

83
on the Board in the previous 180-days. The rotation of Board members shall continue until
such time as all fourteen (14) members have served on the Board and after such time shall
continue with no Board appointee serving for more than two (2) consecutive 180-day periods.
The Chairman shall be entitled to alter the rotating list in order to coordinate the schedules of
the participants. The Chairman may approve agendas for matters not involving the use of force,
bodily injury, or unlawful search or seizure, in instances where workload for the Board makes
it necessary, which do not require the attendance of the citizen Board members. The Chairman
shall schedule any complaint for civilian member participation, upon request by the Officer or
the complainant; if it is reasonably possible to do so based on the workload and availability of
civilian members. Notice shall be given to the President of the Association. It is understood
and agreed that the civilian members shall, nevertheless, be required to hear the full range of
disciplinary cases and controversies presented to the Board, in order to develop an accurate
sense of context and fairness.

2. Members of the panel for the Citizen Advisory Action Board shall be selected by the
City Council from a list of names provided by the City Manager. Prior to providing names to the
Council, the City Manager shall solicit applications from qualified citizens of good character, and
objective ability, and shall recruit qualified individuals as necessary to have a sufficient list for
consideration. The City Manager shall determine whether or not to recommend each of the
individuals who apply. In addition, the Chief of Police shall determine whether or not to
recommend each of the individuals. The input and recommendation of the San Antonio Police
Officer’s Association shall also be obtained as to each of the individuals. The City Council shall
receive a compilation of the applicants along with the separate recommendations by the City
Manager, the Chief of Police, and the Association. Each party agrees that the selections and the
final list shall be representative of the diversity of the community. The City Council may select a
new member to replace anyone removed from the panel by selecting from any remaining names,
or from a new list provided in accordance with the forgoing provisions in the event of vacancies.

3. Citizens appointed to serve on the panel shall meet the minimum requirements for
eligibility established under state statute for service on the Fire and Police Civil Service
Commission and shall take an oath of office as members of the panel. In addition, no person shall be
appointed to serve on this panel who has been indicted for a felony or a crime of moral turpitude, or
officially charged with a Class A or B Misdemeanor. Members of the panel shall serve at the
pleasure of the City Council, which may remove them, or replace them at any time, with or without
cause. Members shall have no right to the position, and shall not be entitled to removal proceedings
or a hearing. If not removed or replaced, a member shall serve for a two (2) year period. The City
Ethics ordinance shall apply to all members of the Citizen Advisory Action Board.

4. Appointment and selection for the meetings of the Board shall be accomplished in
sufficient time to be able to provide each appointee with not less than twenty-four (24) hours of
training, including orientation work at Professional Standards, and one shift on the ride along
program. The responsibility for the training of each new member of the panel shall fall upon the
Commander of the Professional Standards Section.

5. An accused Officer has a right to privacy and all members of the CAAB shall respect
that right to privacy, and shall have a duty to maintain the confidentiality of privileged

84
information. Each member of the Uniform and Citizen Board shall sign a pledge of confidentiality,
agreeing to maintain the right of privacy as to privileged matters under applicable law. Any
violation of this right shall be grounds for disqualification or removal from the panel, as set forth
below. "Right to privacy" shall mean only the right of any accused Officer of the Department to
have the allegations, facts, testimony and evidence brought before the Board held in confidence by
the members hearing the case, and shall not extend to include any public information or information
imparted to the Board members from public information, or from individuals not officially
connected to the Internal Security process. The Chairman shall keep and maintain all records of the
Board, and no members shall have or maintain any records other than during the meetings of the
Board, or on Department premises, in connection with their official duties. This article shall not be
interpreted to impair or effect the right of any person, including the citizens on the Board, to make
report of facts to the Chief of Police, the District Attorney, or the FBI, or to testify under subpoena,
the rules of discovery, or order of any court; nor shall this article be interpreted to impair or affect
the rights of any Officer under Garrity vs. New Jersey or its progeny and Miranda vs. Arizona or its

progeny

6. If any member of the Citizen Advisory Action Board is accused by an Officer of a
violation of the right to privacy, the Civil Service Commission shall convene and if a determination
is made that a member of the Citizen Advisory Action Board violated an Officer’s right to privacy,
then the Civil Service Commission may remove that member. If the breach of privacy involves a
direct report of confidential information by the member to the public or the press, removal by the
Civil Service Commission shall be mandatory. In any event, the Civil Service Commission shall
send a report of its findings and action to the City Council. The purpose of these hearings shall be to
protect the interests of accused Officers and the complainants, and shall not give rise to any rights
on the part of the member accused of a breach of right to privacy.

D. All members of the Chief's Advisory Action Board shall be given the opportunity
to review each case that will be presented for consideration subject to the Chief’s approval of
exceptions, based on workload, as noted above.

E. The Chairperson of the Chief's Police Advisory Action Board shall be responsible
for the maintenance of the confidentiality of all files submitted for review by the CAAB.

F. The Chairperson of the CAAB, on recommendation from any member of the
CAAB may elect to hear testimony from complainants or responding Officers. Attendance to
these boards meetings where testimony is requested are entirely voluntary and complainants or
responding Officers may elect to remove themselves at any stage of the questioning by either
board without fear of reprisal. The Chairperson of the CAAB shall determine the manner in
which all meetings shall be conducted and shall be the determining factor as to the hearing of
testimony or attendance by any person. No responding Officer or complainant shall have the
right to be represented by counsel, but may be accompanied by an observer.

G. Each board shall make independent recommendations and forward these

recommendations to the Chief of Police. Such recommendations are advisory only and are not
binding on the Chief. The Citizen Advisory Action Board may not conduct a separate

85
independent investigation but may recommend to the Chief of Police that further investigations
should be undertaken.

H. Any matter which is brought before the CAAB, where a final ruling by the Chief
of Police has occurred, the Chief of Police shall direct the Commander of the Professional
Standards Section to notify the Complainant(s) and accused Officer(s) as to the final disposition
of the case within twenty-one (21) calendar days.

Section 4. Chief’s City Vehicle Accident Advisory Action Board.

A. — The Chief's Advisory Action Board as described in Section 3 of this Article will no
longer review cases involving City motor vehicle accidents. All cases involving City motor
vehicle accidents previously assigned to the Chief's Advisory Action Board will be assigned to
the Chief's City Vehicle Accident Advisory Action Board in accordance with this section.

B. The City Vehicle Accident Advisory Action Board will consist of one (1)
Captain, one (1) Sergeant, one (1) Detective Investigator and two (2) Patrol Officers appointed
by the Chief. The Captain shall serve as chairperson. Members shall serve from January through
June or from July through December of each calendar year.

Cc. Except as specifically provided for in this Article, the Chief's City Vehicle
Accident Advisory Action Board will be conducted in accordance with General Manual
provisions and the Chief's Advisory Action Board outlined in this Article.

D. An Officer will be retrained for an accumulation of points or the number of
accidents at the Chief's discretion. The occurrence of two chargeable accidents within a two-year
period will serve as a baseline for the Chief or the Board to review individual cases and training
needs. Ultimately, retraining will be determined on the basis of severity of the accidents, which
may drastically differ from one case to another.

ARTICLE 30
Health Benefits

Section 1. Police Active Health Benefits Working Group.

The City and the Association agree in principle that health benefit costs and market based health
plans are issues that will be reviewed in the next collective bargaining cycle. The City and the
Associations further agree to establish a health benefits working group. The City will provide
access to claims information of a statistical and financial nature (consistent with medical privacy
laws), third party vendor contracts, and other information necessary to perform its function. The
Working Group shall be afforded training opportunities which shall be paid for respectively by
each representing organization (Association or City).

86
The working group will have the following responsibilities:
1. Review City’s uniformed health benefit plan, usage trends and cost trends.

2: The City will provide and review with the Association the claims, cost/experience
reporting forms which are currently being provided to the Association’s Health
Benefit Consultant.

3. Identify Master Contract Document language clarification issues for discussion in
the next round of negotiations.

4. Participate in future Requests for Proposals for vendors as to benefits products
and services, by providing input, evaluation and suggestions to the City officials
designated by the City Manager to carry out the selection and administration
process.

3 Conduct or purchase a health benefits survey of other public entities for
comparison with City’s plan and design and experience.

6. Create an educational forum to inform Officers of the costs associated with health
benefits and the increasing need to address increasing costs.

7. Provide the City and the Associations with suggestions regarding possible cost-
saving initiatives to incorporate into future benefits programs.

Section 2. Active Police Officer Health Benefits

A. The City shall provide all active Police Officers who are eligible with family
medical benefits as agreed upon herein. The minimum benefits provided are those as stated in
the Master Contract Document for the City of San Antonio, San Antonio Professional
Firefighters Association and San Antonio Police Officer’s Association Bargaining Unit
(hereinafter referred to as “Master Contract Document”) which is attached and incorporated
herein as Attachment 6. Provisions and benefits specified in the Master Contract Document shall
not be reduced during the life of this Agreement; however, the City reserves the right to change
carriers or plan administrators at any time at its discretion. While the City is prohibited from
reducing the provisions and benefits specified in the Master Contract Document during the life of
this Agreement, a determination of what medical service is medically necessary for a particular
patient or any reduction in the usual and customary charge for that medical service, will not be
construed as a reduction in benefits; provided that the determination is made in accordance with
the procedures and criteria described in the Master Contract Document.

B. Active Police Officers covered under this Agreement shall be granted the
option of entering into or exiting from the civilian benefits program as provided for by the City
to substitute for the basic program as outlined in this Agreement. Said option must be exercised
by the active Police Officer during the re-enrollment period between the dates of October 1, and
December 31, of each calendar year.

87
Section 3.

This agreement, and the Master Contract Document for health benefits adopted herein, shall
control the available health benefits during the term of this agreement, for active Police Officers.

Section 4.

Health care benefits for active Police Officers shall not be terminated, altered, modified or
reduced during the term of the Agreement, except by amendments or successors to this
Agreement.

Section 5.

It is understood and agreed that the provisions of this agreement and the Master Contract
Document for health benefits have been drafted in substantial and material reliance upon existing
provisions of federal and state law concerning employee health benefits. Any change in federal
or state law or regulations which changes the obligations of either party, the applicability or
extent of Medicare benefits, or materially alters the assumptions relied upon in negotiations shall
entitle the City or the Association to reopen negotiations concerning health benefits.

Section 6.

Effective January 1, 2017, bargaining unit employees will be offered two health plans with plan
designs and employee contributions described below:

VALUE PLAN cDHP

|Cost Sharing Item IN Network Out of Network Out of Network

 

Individual $500 $1,500 $3,000 $4,500
Family “$1,000 $3,000 _t $6,000 $9,000
20% 40%. 0% 0%

 

Individual $1,500 $3,000 $3,000 $4,500
Family $3,000 $6,000 $6,000 $9,000

 

 

$25 PCP - $50 SPEC

40% after deductible

0% after deductible

 

$250
$50
[Separate Brand Drug
Deductible or out of
{pocket cap

RX - 30 day Tier 1/ Tier 2
Tier 3 S10'$25/S40

RX - 90 day Tier I/ Ther 2
Tier 3 $20/$50/$80_

 

40% after deductible
40% after deductible

40% after deductible

 

0% after deductible
(0% Afr Ded. Preventive
Drugs Subject to Co-
Pays$10/$25/$40
‘0% After Ded, Preventive
Drugs Subject to Co-
Pays$20/$50/$80

 

 

(0% after deductible
‘0% after deductible

0% after deductible

The two plans are covered in detail in Attachment 5 and the Master Contract Document (Attachment

6) which are the controlling documents.

88
 

 

Employee Monthly Contributions

 

2017 2018 2019 | 2020 2021

    

 

Value CDHP | Value | CDHP

 
  
     
 

 

Value | sae je CDHP jaa
EE Only $30.00 $0.00 ae lee $0.00 oad $0.00 [$0.00 | $0.00

 

      
   

EE & | $75.00 $83.00 | $0.00 | $91.00 | $0.00 | $100.10 | $0.00 | $110.11 | $0.00
Spouse
EE & $61.00 $73.81 | $0.00
Children

 
   
   

 

EE &Family | $125.00 $151.00

 

 

 

$0.00 acy $0.00

 

$166.10 | $0.00 | $182.71 | $0.00

Health Savings Account Annual Contributions (only for CDHP)

 

2017 | 2018 | 2019 2020 2021

 

   

Value | CDHP Value

 

CDHP Value | CDHP Value | CDHP

     

 

EE Only $1,500.00 | $0.00 | $1,500.00

      
    

    
    
   

$1,500.00 | $0.00 | $1,500.00 | $0.00 (ees

 

     

EE. &
Spouse

$1,500.00 | $0.00 | $1,500.00 $1,500.00 | $0.00 | $1,500.00 | $0.00 | $1,500.00

     
 
   

   

 

 

FE &
Children

$1,500.00 | $0.00 | $1,500.00 $1,500.00 | $0.00 | $1.500.00 | $0.00 | $1,500.00

    
 

 

EE
&Family

$1,500.00 | $0.00 | $1,500.00 $1,500.00 | $0.00 | $1,500.00 | $0.00 | $1,500.00

     
 
 

 

 

Health Savings Account Contributions for CDHP will continue during evergreen. Employee
contributions beyond 2021 will increase by 10% annually during evergreen.

The above years are plan (currently calendar) years. Employee monthly contributions will increase
by 10% over the prior year’s contribution every year during the life of the agreement (including
during evergreen). Out of network claims will be capped at the in network allowable amounts under
both the Value and CDHP plans.

ARTICLE 31
Retiree Health Benefits

House Bill 2751, enacted by the Texas Legislature effective October 1, 2007, removed retiree
health benefits from the collective bargaining process. Retiree health benefits are now governed
exclusively by the provisions of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes Annotated, Article 6243(q), a
copy of which, in its current form, is attached hereto as Attachment 7. The provisions governing

89
retiree health benefits contained in the Collective Bargaining Agreement in effect at the time
House Bill 2751 was enacted are attached hereto as Attachment 7.

In the event the Texas Legislature repeals Article 6243(q) or any successor in function, the
provisions of Article 6243(q) shall remain in effect until such time as the Association and the
City shall negotiate retiree health benefits into this Agreement.

ARTICLE 32
Supplemental Benefits

Section 1. Parking.

The City will provide each on-duty Officer with free parking on the Police lot itself or a lot
adjacent to the Police building to which the Officer is assigned. Should the City not provide
such parking, the Association may acquire such parking and require the City to fully compensate
it for all related costs and expenses.

Section 2, Other Benefits

A. Definitions. The term “Trusts” as used in this section shall refer to the San
Antonio Police Officers and Fire Fighters Benefit Plan and Trust, which provides optical and
dental services, and San Antonio Police Officers and Fire Fighters Prepaid Legal Plan and Trust,
which provides legal services to members of the San Antonio Police Department and the San
Antonio Fire Department.

B. Amounts. During the term of this Agreement the City will pay a monthly amount
for each Officer as shown by the schedule below for dental, optical and prepaid legal benefits
Trusts. Furthermore, neither the City nor the Association may change the amounts paid or
allocated for the respective benefits as shown in the schedule during the term of this Agreement.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Iz | Optical/Dental Prepaid Legal Plan
Employees with dependents | $89.50 $32.00
Employees without dependents [ $43.50 | $32.00
c. Audits. The Association shall ensure that the Trusts will conduct annual

independent audits at no additional cost to the City. The Association shall further ensure that the
Trusts shall provide a copy of each annual independent audited financial report to the City,
through its Finance Director, within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the audit by the
respective Trust.

The City reserves the right, at its sole discretion, to conduct an audit of said benefit plans at the
City’s expense any time during the term of this Agreement. Should the City decide to conduct
such an audit, the Association shall ensure that the Trusts make available to the City all relevant
documentation within a reasonable time.

90
D. Use of Benefits. With respect to the Prepaid Legal Benefits, it is understood that
no officer may use the benefits for the purpose, in whole or in part, of implementing and/or
initiating legal action against the City, any of its agents, officers, and/or assigns.

EB. Exclusive Trust. The Association shall ensure that all funds paid by the City
pursuant to this Section are used for the exclusive benefit of the employees and that said funds
shall not be commingled with the funds of any other organization, entity, or Association, nor
shall said funds be used for any other purpose other than that provided for herein.

F. Payment and Change in Plans. During the term of this Agreement, the
Association may change providers for Supplemental Benefits (Dental/Optical and Legal). In the
event that the Association makes a proposal to change benefit providers, the Association shall
submit the same in writing to the City.

G. Copies of Trust Plan. The Association will provide up-to-date copies of the Trust
Plan Documents to the Human Resources Department of the City and the Association Office.

H. Determination Letter. It shall be the sole responsibility of the Association to
maintain the tax- exempt status of the benefit received under this Section. In accordance
therewith, the Association shall provide to the City, through its Director of Finance, a copy of the
Internal Revenue Service Determination Letter regarding the tax-exempt status of the benefit
received under this Section. The City shall receive said letter no later than ten (10) calendar days
from commencement of this Agreement.

I. In an effort to coordinate the provisions outlined in this Article with the scheduled
collective bargaining cycle with the San Antonio Professional Firefighters’ Association, the City
and the Association agree to reopen any portions of this Article during such negotiations in order
to facilitate the development of a consistent approach and language in both Agreements. The
parties shall have the same statutory duty to bargain in good faith as to all issues which relate to
the benefits under this Agreement.

In the event the City and the San Antonio Professional Firefighters’ Association, IAFF Local
624, ratify a new collective bargaining agreement that ceases City’s contributions to the San
Antonio Police Officers and Fire Fighters Prepaid Legal Plan and Trust on behalf of fire fighters,
the City will not be required to continue its contributions for police officers. In lieu of the City’s
contribution to the Prepaid Legal Plan, the City will contribute $32.00 per month per employee
to each employee as a voluntary qualified supplemental insurance incentive.

If the Association desires to continue a Prepaid Legal Plan and Trust, with or without
participation of the San Antonio Professional Firefighters’ Association, the Association may by
secret ballot of its members determine the contribution of an Officer to the Prepaid Legal Plan
and Trust. The Association shall notify the City in writing as to the monthly deduction amount,
and the City shall commence making such deductions from the pay of each Officer no later than
two pay periods following such notice.

91
ARTICLE 33
Educational Incentive Pay

Section 1. Degree Required.

Educational Incentive Pay shall be provided immediately to Officers who qualify for such
payment by furnishing documented proof of an Associate's, Bachelor's, Master’s or Doctorate
Degree to the Training Academy. Officers who hold Associate’s, Bachelor's, Master’s Degree
or Doctorate shall receive Educational Incentive Pay. All college hours must come from an
“Accredited College or University.” For purposes of this Agreement, an institution of higher
education must be accredited by a state education department, or by either the Southern
Association of Colleges and Schools or a similar regional association recognized by the United
States Department of Education. In cases where the validity of a college or university
accreditation is raised, outside of this definition, the Chief, at his discretion, may accept or reject
the question of any university’s accreditation.

Payment shall be made monthly.

Officers without college or university degrees shall be paid Educational Incentive Pay for college
hours earned at the following rates:

 

 

 

 

 

       

 

 

65_to 94 college hours $60.00 per month

95 to 124 college hours $90.00 per month

125 to 154 college hours $120.00 per month

155 to 184 college hours $150.00 per month +
185 to 214 college hours $180.00 per month

215 to 229 college hours $210.00 per month

230 or more college hours | $240.00 per month

 

 

Officers with college or university degrees shall be paid Educational Incentive pay at the
following rates:

 

 

 

 

 

Associates Degree | $215.00 per month
Bachelor’s Degree | $315.00 per month
Master’s Degree | $335.00 per month
Doctors or Equivalent | $350.00 per month

 

Nothing in this article should be construed to entitle an Officer to receive educational incentive
pay pursuant to this section for both college hours and a college degree.

Section 2. Law Enforcement Related Courses.
A. Officers graduating from the Academy shall be required to have a minimum of
thirty-one (31) college accredited hours before the expiration of one year after the completion of

the thirty (30) week period following graduation from the Academy. The City shall ensure that,
92

 
upon entrance to the Academy, each cadet is informed in writing of this requirement, the cadet
acknowledges his understanding in writing, and the writing is made a permanent part of his file.

B. Officers who fail to complete the above requirement(s) shall not be allowed to
move into the "Class B" Police Officer pay status until the requirements are met. Officers shall
be required to show proof of achieving the above required college hours prior to being moved
into "Class B" Police Officer pay status. Officers who have all the college accredited hours
required by this section shall not be required to meet the additional standards outlined above.

Officers shall be entitled to receive reimbursement for tuition, fees, on-campus parking
and the price of required text(s) at a college or university for course hours in an accredited
degree program. Reimbursement shall be made in accordance with the following schedule:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Course Grade Amount of Reimbursement
A 100%
B 90%
¢ 80%
DorF 0
¢. Officers who are enrolled in an accredited college or university and who under an

approved college or university master’s or doctorate degree plan are required to complete any
course that is not assigned a grade, will upon successful completion of the course, be reimbursed
by the City at 100% upon presentation of documentation of payment to the registrar's office of
the college or university at the end of the semester of the required course.

D. The City shall reimburse bargaining unit employees for tuition under the
following circumstances:

1. The tuition rate will not exceed the tuition rate charged by the UTSA; and

a Such reimbursement for tuition and fees shall only be paid at Texas
residency rates; and

3. City tuition reimbursement is secondary to other sources such as grants or
scholarships.

ARTICLE 34
Certification and Instructors Pay

Section 1. Certification Pay.
Basic Certification

Officers who hold a Basic Certificate issued by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement
Officer Standards and Education shall receive Fifty ($50.00) Dollars per month.

93
Intermediate Certification

Officers who hold an Intermediate Certificate shall receive One Hundred and Sixty Dollars
($160.00) per month.

Advanced Certification

Officers who hold an Advanced Certificate shall receive Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) per
month).

Masters Certification

Officers who hold a Master’s Certificate shall receive Two Hundred and Forty Dollars ($240.00)
per month).

Section 2. Instructors Certificate.

Officers who hold an active or inactive Instructors Certificate issued by the Texas Commission
on Law Enforcement Standards and Education shall receive Twenty Dollars ($20.00) per month
regardless of the Certificate held.

Payment shall be made monthly. The Chief shall have the right to require the Officer to produce
a copy of the certificate or other valid verification prior to approval for the employee to receive
such payments. Only officers who have obtained Texas Instructors Certificate (T.1.C.) through
Departmental approval will be eligible for T.I.C. pay. Officers who possess T.I.C., whether
active or in-active prior to April 1, 2004, will automatically qualify for T.I.C. pay.

Officers who are actively involved in teaching or instructing citizens or other Police Officers
may request, through their chain-of-command, inclusion in the next academy sponsored Texas
Commission on Law Enforcement Standards and Education Instructors Training
Course. Admittance shall not be unreasonably denied, however, admittance shall be at the
discretion of the Academy Commander and limited based on available classroom size.

ARTICLE 35
Psychological and/or Medical Examination

Section 1. Psychological and/or Medical Evaluation.

The Chief shall have the authority at any time to require an Officer to submit to psychological
evaluation or treatment and/or medical evaluation, at the City's expense, to be performed by a
qualified psychologist, psychiatrist, counselor, therapist, or medical doctor chosen by the City.
An Officer ordered either to submit to such an evaluation or to submit to a “fitness for duty”
evaluation pursuant to Section 143.081 of the Local Government Code, must authorize, in
writing, the release of the results of the examination to the Chief, as the Officer’s employer. If
indicated by the evaluation, the Chief may order an Officer to undergo treatment by an
appropriate health care practitioner of the officer’s choosing.

94
Section 2. Commitment to Effective Drug Interdiction Program.

The City and the Association agree that officers may be called upon in hazardous situations
without warning, and that it is imperative to the interest of officers and the public to ensure that
officers are not substances impaired. In order to further their joint interest in protecting officers
and the public, the City and the Association agree to mandatory drug testing as described in this
section.

A. One Hundred Percent (100%) of Officers of all ranks, including the Chief, shall be
susceptible to mandatory drug testing during each calendar year on a fair and impartial statistical
basis at the City’s expense. The fair and impartial statistical basis (in which each Officer has an
equal chance of being selected during a calendar year) shall be by a non-discriminatory
computerized program operated and certified as non-discriminatory by an independent firm hired
by the City, and the Officer shall be tested upon being selected by the computer.

The City and the Association have a mutual interest in ensuring that drug impaired Officers do
not perform law enforcement duties, The City and the Association agree that the purpose of the
mandatory drug testing policy is not to punish an officer who has not violated the Police
Department’s rules, regulations, policies or procedures. The City and the Association are
committed to the principle that the mandatory drug testing policy for officers is designed and
shall be administered to result in disciplinary action only against those Officers who have
violated the Police Department’s rules, regulations, policies or procedures.

Where an Officer appears unable or unwilling to give a specimen at the time of the test, testing
personnel will document the circumstances surrounding the inability or unwillingness. The
officer will be permitted no more than four (4) hours to provide the sample during which time he
will remain in the testing area under observation. Reasonable amounts of fluids may be given to
the Officer to encourage urination. Failure to provide a sample may be considered a refusal to
submit to a drug test.

Officers shall have the right to request that their urine sample be stored in case of legal
disputes. The urine sample will be submitted to the designated testing facility where a sample
will be maintained for a period of one-year. Officers may at their own expense request to have
the test for urine, blood and/or hair administered at a qualified physician’s office or certified
testing laboratory, accompanied by the testing personnel provided such testing is administered
within five (5) hours after notification by the Chief (and the sample shall be properly handled by
a certified testing laboratory).

B. Drug testing shall consist of a two-step procedure:
1. Initial screening test.
2: Confirmation test.

Should a confirmation test be required, the test procedure will be technologically different and
more sensitive than the initial screening test.

95
The City and the Association will agree within one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days as to
a SAMHSA/CAP FUDTP certified laboratory selected to conduct drug testing. The laboratory
selected shall be experienced and capable of quality control documentation, chain of custody and
have a demonstrated technical expertise and proficiency in urinalysis and shall comply with all
requirement of SAMHSA/CAP FUDTP. The City shall require any laboratory selected for
collecting samples to conduct a background investigation on those laboratory personnel involved
in the collecting or handling of an unsealed sample. In addition, the City shall require any
laboratory selected for collecting samples to use only employees who have not been arrested by
Officers of the San Antonio Police Department or convicted of a felony or misdemeanor crime
involving dishonest conduct or possession of illegal drugs to be involved in the collecting or
handling of an unsealed sample collected from an Officer. Test results shall be inadmissible in
any administrative disciplinary hearing if it is determined that the laboratory collecting samples
failed to conduct a background investigation on the laboratory personnel involved in collecting
or handling the unsealed sample which resulted in a positive test result.

All records pertaining to the Department required drug tests shall remain confidential except to
the extent used in a disciplinary process and appeal. Drug test results and records shall be stored
in a locked file under the control of the Chief. The Chief will maintain original copies submitted
by the laboratory. No access to these files shall be allowed without written approval of the Chief.

Cc. The City and the Association agree to a zero tolerance policy for the use of drugs and
alcohol while on duty or driving a City vehicle, and also agree to require post-accident
mandatory drug/alcohol testing of any officer involved in a vehicular accident in a City vehicle
which results in a death, injury to any person requiring medical treatment or significant property
damage (as determined by a supervisor) which for a vehicle is a damage rating of 3 or more, as
defined in the Texas Department of Transportation Vehicle Damage Guide for Traffic Crash
Investigator. Drug testing shall be in accordance with the testing guidelines set forth in
subsection (B) above. Alcohol testing shall be by breathalyzer or other recognized scientific
process. The assigned severity code, resulting in a decision to test/not test is non-grievable.

D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the Chief from conducting a drug
test on an Officer based upon reasonable suspicion in accordance with the guidelines as set forth
by this section.

E. For the purposes of this section:

1. “drug testing” shall be defined as the compulsory production and submission of
urine by an Officer for chemical analysis to detect the presence of prohibited drug usage.

& “reasonable suspicion” shall be defined as a judgment/conclusion that a person is
unable to safely and/or effectively perform their duties due to the suspected influence of drugs,
alcohol, or inhalants. Reasonable suspicion is based on specific, observable facts that an officer
may be under the influence of drugs, alcohol, or inhalants.

96
Be “drug/alcohol testing” shall be defined for post-accident incidents as the
compulsory production and submission of urine, breath, or blood for analysis to detect the
presence of prohibited drug(s) or alcohol.

ARTICLE 36
City Protection for Police Officers

The City will defend in or out of court any Police Officer who incurs a charge or lawsuit as a
result of the lawful performance of his duties pursuant to the provisions of City guidelines as
adopted and approved under City Ordinance No. 83927 incorporated as Attachment "4",
excluding Section 1. “Definitions” Subsection 8B, V and VI, which shall not apply, or as
otherwise provided by law.

ARTICLE 37
Employee Personnel Systems

Section 1. Police Personnel Unit.

A. The City shall implement a Police Personnel Unit. Such unit shall be staffed with
a minimum of one (1) Sergeant or above, support personnel, and the operational equipment, i.e.,
computers. At the discretion of the Chief and without limiting his authority to determine the
manpower and/or staffing needs of any unit and/or the Department as a whole, this unit's primary
functions shall be to make recommendations to the Chief:

a To set the amount and type of relief days assigned to each police station;

2. To set the number of Officers assigned to each work station and the actual
personnel on a seniority basis assigned to each patrol shift at each police station.

B. Additionally, this unit shall:

1. Maintain an updated, City-wide file of all Officer requests for relief days
and work station assignments; and

2; Process assignment of relief days, from said office, by seniority of
requests on file pursuant to Article 12 of this Agreement.

Section 2. Thirty (30) Day Requirement.

All premium relief days shall be filled or abolished in accordance with current practice within
thirty (30) calendar days. For purposes of this section, premium relief days shall be defined as
Thursday/Friday, Friday/Saturday, Saturday/Sunday, and Sunday/Monday. If any shifts are
established with a four-day work week, premium relief days for those shifts shall be defined as:
(i) Thursday/Friday/Saturday; (ii) Friday/Saturday/Sunday; (iii) Saturday/Sunday/Monday and
(iv) Sunday/Monday/Tuesday.

97
A. Thirty (30) Calendar Day Exception

The thirty (30) calendar day requirement shall be waived from February 24 through the last day
of Fiesta each year. Officers having transferred into any assignment and who meet their six (6)
month requirement for seniority eligibility during the Fiesta break will be eligible only for
premium days that become available after their six month eligibility has been met.

For example, an Officer who meets his six-month requirement on March 15" would not be
eligible for any premium relief days that become available before that date.

It is agreed and understood that only prime relief days that become available during the waived
Fiesta period can be guaranteed to the most eligible Officer under this exception clause, All non-
premium relief days that would have become available as a result of the guaranteed transfer that
would have taken place were it not within the Fiesta period, and that are not premium relief days
will be filled in accordance with available openings after the waived Fiesta period ends. All
premium relief days being vacated during the Fiesta period shall be filled within thirty (30)
calendar days after the last day of Fiesta.

While it is understood that situations may arise when there will be legitimate reasons for
eliminating a particular set of relief days, premium relief days shall not be abolished for the
purpose of compliance with this section.

Section 3. Nepotism.

No Officer shall be allowed to work under the direct supervision of a relative. Relatives may be
co-workers in the same division. No Officer shall be allowed to exercise his seniority in applying
for positions that would place him under the direct supervision of a relative. No supervisory
Officer shall be allowed to exercise his seniority in applying for positions that would place him
in direct supervision of a relative. For the purposes of this section, relative means persons related
through blood or marriage, and include spouses, parents, children, brothers or sisters, and in-laws
standing in the same relationships.

Section 4, Personnel Career Activity System.

All Officers requesting transfers to positions outside of the patrol shifts will utilize the Personnel
Career Activity System (PCAS).

When Division Commanders are authorized to fill a current vacancy or newly created position,
the Division Commanders shall request the position be advertised in the Daily Bulletin for a
period of not less than four (4) calendar days. Only Division Commanders shall request the list
of qualified candidates from the Manpower Allocations Detail.

All officers who hold the rank of Patrol Officer or Detective Investigator who apply for a

position through PCAS and who are not selected, and who request same in writing through the
chain of command to the Captain of the Unit to which the officer was not selected, shall be given

98
the true reason for rejection in writing within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date the request
was received by the non-selecting Captain.

Within fourteen (14) calendar days of receiving a written rejection, an affected officer may
submit a written appeal to the Deputy Chief who supervises the non-selecting Captain. The
Deputy Chief shall affirm the rejection or overturn the rejection in writing within fourteen (14)
calendar days of receipt of the appeal.

Appeals and responses under this section are not subject to Article 15 (Grievance Procedure) of
this Agreement, nor may be used in any official proceeding, unless such response includes a
violation of Article 4, Section 2 (Management Duties to the Association) of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 38
Miscellaneous Provisions

Section |. Service Handgun/Badge Upon Retirement.

Each Officer who retires from the force shall be given their service handgun and badge at no
charge.

Section 2. Service-Connected Death.

In the event of an Officer’s death in the course and scope of employment, over and above the
City's life insurance/accidental insurance benefit, the City shall pay funeral expenses of $10,000
payable within 10 calendar days to the Officer's beneficiary as designated in the City's life
insurance program and provide at no cost the Officer's badge and service handgun to that
beneficiary if otherwise legal.

Section 3. Special Assignments,

A. Except as provided elsewhere in this Agreement, the City shall have a right to
place Officers on special assignment. Officers placed on special assignment on an involuntary
basis shall work the assignment for a maximum of sixty (60) calendar days. At the end of the
sixty (60) calendar day period, the Chief of Police may extend the term, based on extenuating
circumstances. Officers whose assignment exceeds the original sixty (60) calendar day period
shall relinquish their seniority and relief days from the original, permanent assigned unit.
Officers who object to the continuation of the special assignment after the sixty (60) calendar
day period shall be returned to their assigned unit. Officers returning to an original unit from a
special assignment that exceeded the sixty (60) calendar day limit must re-bid on relief days,
based on the next available opening (no six (6)-month waiting period unless the special
assignment goes beyond one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days, in which case the officer
will be required to wait the six (6) months).

B. Officers placed on special assignment on a voluntary basis may work the
assignment for a maximum of one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days. Officers whose
assignment exceeds the original one hundred and eighty (180) calendar day period shall

99
relinquish their seniority and relief days from their original, permanent assigned unit. Officers
returning to their original unit from a special assignment that exceeded one hundred and eighty
(180) calendar days must re-bid on relief days, based on the next available opening.

Section 4. Permanent Personnel File.

The City shall be required to maintain a permanent personnel file on each Officer, pursuant to
the requirements as outlined in Section 143.089, Local Government Code or its successor in
function.

Section 5. Exception to Open Records Act (Officer File Photo).

Contained within each Officer's permanent personnel file shall be a photograph(s) as defined by
H.B. No. 474, Article 2.12 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The same shall not be released to
the public or the press where the same would endanger the life or the physical safety of the
officer unless:

A. The Officer is under indictment or charged by an offense by information; or
B. The Officer is a party in a Civil Service hearing or a case in arbitration; or
CG, The photograph is introduced as evidence in a judicial proceeding.

Section 6. Pay Stub.

The City will utilize electronic or paper payroll check stubs with current data showing accrued
balances of sick leave, bonus leave, accrued holidays, compensatory time, vacation time, and
military leave.

Section 7. Family Assistance Officer.

The Chief shall appoint a Family Assistance Officer. The Family Assistance Officer will be
relieved of regular duty on a case-by-case basis in order to assist the families of officers who die
or are seriously injured while on active duty, or suffer a catastrophic illness in making
appropriate arrangements and completing necessary paperwork.

Section 8. Reimbursement for Lost, Damaged, or Stolen Items.

The Chief shall have discretion to reimburse any Officer, the replacement value (up to a
maximum of $250.00), for any personal item lost, damaged, or stolen (including clothing) as a
result of on-duty employment. The Chief shall also have the discretion to reimburse any Officer
the replacement value, equivalent to the specifications for a Department approved personal rifle
or shotgun as determined by the Firearms Proficiency Control Officer or Training Academy
Commander’s designee, for a personal rifle or shotgun lost, damaged, or stolen as a result of on-
duty employment. The Chief's decision in this regard shall be final and is not subject to
grievance and/or arbitration.
100
Section 9. Physical Fitness.

The City and the Association are committed to a healthy, physically fit and well-trained police
department. In demonstrating this commitment, Officers who participate and meet standards as
established in a police academy sponsored wellness program or who score the standards set out
in this section during annual in-service training shall be awarded the administrative leave
incentives outlined herein.

During October of each year preceding the starting date of each yearly in-service training, the
Chief and the President of the Association shall appoint three (3) members each (six total) to a
physical fitness panel. It will be the sole responsibility of this panel to set point values, time
limits, and the necessary requirements for the wellness program and for achieving incentives for
the next year’s in-service. The Chief and Association shall provide written notice of their
appointees to the physical fitness panel at least thirty (30) calendar days before the panel is
scheduled to meet. Through the use of both the most current Physical Fitness Standard number
scale criteria, and the previous year testing results, the panel will set standards which best create
a performance curve of the Department and provide incentives based on performance according
to sex and age groupings. The panel shall reach an agreement on all items relating to point
values, time limits, or necessary requirements, and all recommendations shall be forwarded to
the Chief. The Chief can veto any recommendation and return the recommendation to the panel
for re-examination. The Training Academy Commander shall act as the non-voting moderator
and will be responsible to ensure the panel meets at the required stated time.

A. Academy Sponsored Wellness Program.

Officers may elect to participate in a personalized wellness program individually designed for
the Officer by the fitness panel. Officers participating in personalized programs will have
administrative leave incentives set by fitness panel. Personalized incentives will be awarded in
accordance with personalized goals and objectives met by the individual officer involved. The
Chief or designee will approve all panel approved individual wellness programs and award
incentives of eight (8) to forty (40) hours in accordance with this Agreement and the success of
the individual Officer in achievement of the designed goals and objectives which will be
measured by the fitness test.

B. In-Service Physical Standards.
A PT staff member will monitor each Officer’s sit-ups, push-ups, vertical jump, mile and one-
half run, dummy drag and stationary or bicycle ride. The sit-ups, push-ups, weight control and
vertical jump will be monitored on a one-on-one basis.

C.. Incentives.
Officers who successfully complete any combination of exercises and who score within the pre-

designated total point range will receive the corresponding physical fitness incentive of sixteen
(16) to forty (40) administrative leave hours.

101
Officers who participate in the physical fitness program for three consecutive years during in-
service and who do not receive an incentive shall receive one-day administrative leave for their
participating in the program. For purposes of this section the physical fitness panel shall define
participation for each year.

Officers may select five of the six events (which may include but shall not be limited to, sit ups,
push ups, vertical jump, mile and one half run and/or walk, stationary or bicycle ride, and sprint,
wall, drag) in which to participate in to achieve their goal. Weight loss is not an event but will be
counted towards the Officers overall score. No points will be subtracted for not participating in
any individual event.

Officers on light duty, that have a documented injury will need to provide the Academy PT staff
with a copy of their 172-form in order to reschedule a make-up with the PT staff. Officers who
cannot participate in the physical fitness portion of their scheduled in-service due to a
documented injury will have sixty (60) calendar days from the date they return to full duty in
order to complete this portion of their in-service and qualify for the administrative leave hours.

Officers who attend their scheduled in-service but miss participating in the physical fitness
portion due to Departmental business or other emergency, but not a documented injury, have
thirty (30) calendar days from their scheduled in-service date to reschedule a make-up with the
PT staff.

The award of administrative leave or lack thereof shall not be the grounds for a grievance.
Decision by Academy staff as to the actual individual completion times or individual completion
of exercise requirements shall be final. This leave shall be awarded the second pay period of the
following quarter in which the Officer earned the administrative leave hours and the Officer has
365 calendar days from the date posted to the individual Officer’s leave bank to use it.

Section 10. Preemption

It is expressly understood and agreed that all provisions of this Article shall preempt any statute,
Executive Order, local ordinance, City policy or rule, which is in conflict with or is inconsistent
with this Agreement and the procedures developed hereunder, including for example and not by
way of limitation, any contrary provisions of Chapters 141, 142, and 143 of the Texas Local
Government Code, including but not limited to Sections 141.032 and 142.0015 and Sections
143.041 through 143.047 and 143.089.

Section 11. Preemption of Civil Service Chapter 143 Claims for Public Safety and Police
Personnel.

The City and the Association agree that officers covered by the Meet & Confer Agreement
between the City of San Antonio and San Antonio Park Police Officers Association, including
but not limited to Park Police, Airport Police, Code Abatement Officers and Deputy City
Marshals, are not members of the bargaining unit covered by and have no rights under the
Agreement between the City of San Antonio and the San Antonio Police Officers Association.
The parties agree that members of the bargaining unit covered by the Meet & Confer Agreement

102
between the City of San Antonio and the San Antonio Park Police Officers Association and/or
San Antonio Airport Police Officers Association are not officers who have been hired in
substantial compliance with Chapter 143 pertaining to civil service police positions, and are not
officers who must have knowledge of work within the San Antonio Police Department in their
duties, jobs, and responsibilities. This provision preempts any contrary provisions of Chapter 143
which might otherwise be applicable to such officers covered by the Meet & Confer Agreement
between the City of San Antonio and San Antonio Park Police Officers Association, and/or San
Antonio Airport Police Officers Association and preempts any rights, privileges, or benefits to
such officers which might arguably result from the creation of additional civil service positions.

ARTICLE 39

Civilianization
Section 1.
Notwithstanding any provision in this agreement to the contrary (if any), and without altering
any other provision of this Agreement, the City is authorized to civilianize the following

positions or units, and any civilianization action heretofore taken by the City is hereby ratified
and approved by the Association.

1, Court Liaison

2. Facilities Management
3. Communications

4. Research and Planning

5; Municipal Integrity
6. Crime Scene Unit
7. UCR/Report Review
8. Youth Services

9. Vehicle Storage

In addition to the listed functions above, the administrative services positions titled Service and
Support Office as reflected on the attached Organizational Chart, shall be a civilian position
irrespective of the fact that portions of the job description carried out by that position have
previously been the responsibility of sworn civil service personnel. It is understood and agreed,
however, that the civilian position shall at no time supervise or command sworn civil service
personnel.

The City agrees to maintain staffing levels in the Crime Scene Unit at no less than 30% sworn
officers, not to include supervisors, it being understood that any reduction in the percentage of
103
sworn officers shall be by attrition or enhanced authorized staffing only. It is understood and
agreed, however, that when the Chief implements the UED program under Article 11, this
percentage may be reduced pro-rata with the transfer of personnel to other assignments in
accordance with Article 1] Section 7. The Chief will meet with Association representatives from
time to time to make sure that implementation protocols and procedures for patrol and dispatch
sufficiently provide for the safety of officers, the safety of civilian employees and the public
generally, and effective prosecution. The lead incident commander of the shooting investigation
team shall be a sworn Officer.

Officers and Detectives assigned to Vehicle Storage, Communications and Youth Services at the
time of the City Council approval of this Agreement who also receive shift differential pay will
retain the shift differential pay if they are involuntarily reassigned due to civilianization of the
units until they voluntarily transfer to a job assignment without shift differential.

The City shall notify the Association President at least ninety (90) calendar days prior to
civilianization of Vehicle Storage, Communications, Youth Services and jobs traditionally
performed by sworn officers and shall consult, and reach mutual agreement, with the Association
President over the effects of such civilianization. The City agrees the effect of civilianization
shall not reduce the authorized number of sworn Police Officers, Detectives or Supervisors.

Section 2.

The City of San Antonio may additionally utilize civilians in any position created in the future,
that does not require the individual to have and exercise the power of arrest under the standards
for distinguishing between classified and civilian positions set forth in Lee v. City of Houston, or
any later decision by the Supreme Court of Texas.

Section 3. Preemption

It is expressly understood and agreed that all provisions of this Article shall preempt any statute,
Executive Order, local ordinance, City policy or rule, which is in conflict with or is inconsistent
with this Agreement and the procedures developed hereunder, including for example and not by
way of limitation, any contrary provisions of Chapters 141, 142, and 143 of the Texas Local
Government Code, including but not limited to Sections 143.001 through 143.027 and 143.041
through 143.047.

ARTICLE 40
Savings Clause

Should any provision of this Agreement be found to be inoperative, void or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, all other provisions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect for the duration of this Agreement, it being the intention of the parties that no portion of
this Agreement or provision herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the invalidity of
any other portion or provision.

104
ARTICLE 41
Closing Statements

Section 1. Stability of Agreement.

No agreement, understanding, alteration or variation of the Agreement, terms or provisions
herein contained shall bind the parties unless made and executed in writing by the parties hereto.
The failure of the City or the Officers to insist in any one or more instances, upon performance
of any of the terms or conditions of this Agreement, shall not be considered as a waiver or
relinquishment of the right of the City or the Officers to future performance of any such term or
condition, and the obligations of the City and the Officers as to such future performance shall
continue in full force and effect.

Section 2. Civil Service.

In the event that any provision of this Agreement conflicts or is inconsistent with any provision
of Chapter 141, 142, or 143 of the Local Government Code or any other civil service provision,
this Agreement shall prevail, notwithstanding any such provision of Chapter 141, 142, or 143 of
the Local Government Code or any other civil service provision.

Section 3. Full and Final Scope of the Agreement.

The parties agree that each has had the full and unrestricted right and opportunity to make,
advance, and discuss all matters properly within the province of collective bargaining. The above
and foregoing Agreement constitutes the full and complete Agreement of the parties and there
are no others, oral or written, except as herein contained. Each party for the term of this
Agreement specifically waives the right to demand or petition for changes herein, whether or not
the subjects were known to the parties at the time of execution hereof as proper subjects for
collective bargaining. Subject to the Maintenance of Standards clause (Article 8), it is agreed that
the City shall not be subject to provide additional wages, compensation, or emoluments of any
kind beyond that which is specified in this agreement; and should any future State law be enacted
which requires cities to compensate City Police in any manner beyond the scope of this
Agreement, the compensation or emolument levied against the City shall be waived and
disclaimed in-to. It is additionally agreed that, except as specifically modified by this Agreement,
benefits and emoluments provided Police Officers by State legislation shall remain in effect
throughout the term of the Agreement, notwithstanding the fact that during the life of this
Agreement, legislation may become effective which would negate certain benefits or
emoluments.

Section 4. Impasse Procedure.

In the event the City and the Association reach an impasse in collective bargaining negotiations,
as such impasse is defined in Chapter 174 of the Local Government Code, the parties shall abide
by the impasse procedure set forth in City Ordinance No. 51838, which ordinance is set forth in
Attachment 3 hereto and incorporated herein by reference. This agreement, and the “contract”
referred to in the ordinance are one and the same.

105
Section 5. No Bypass Agreement.

The parties hereto agree that all negotiations will be conducted exclusively between the
designated representatives of the City and the Association, Neither party will make any effort to
bypass the spokesman of the other party during the period of negotiations up to and including
impasse resolution attempts.

Section 6. Indemnity.

The indemnity provided herein by the City shall be permitted to the extent, and only to the
extent, permitted by Texas Law.

106
FOR THE CITY OF SAN ANTONIO:

Jeffrey Londa Sheryl L. Sculley
Chief Negotiator City Manager

Date: Date:

William McManus Erik Walsh

Police Chief Deputy City Manager
Date: Date:

Martha Sepeda

Acting City Attorney

Date:

FOR THE SAN ANTONIO POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION:

Ronald G. DeLord Michael F. Helle
Chief Negotiator President, SAPOA
Date: Date:

107
ATTACHMENT 1
EXPEDITED LABOR ARBITRATION RULES

1. Agreement of Parties

These procedures shall apply whenever the parties have agreed to arbitrate under them, the
Streamlined Labor Arbitration Rules, or the Expedited Labor Arbitration Rules of the American
Rules, or the Expedited Labor Arbitration Rules of the American Arbitration Association, in the
form obtaining when the arbitration is initiated.

2. Appointment of Neutral Arbitrator

The AAA shall appoint a single neutral arbitrator from its Panel of Labor Arbitrators, who shall
hear and determine the case promptly.

3. Qualifications of Neutral Arbitrator

No person shall serve as a neutral arbitrator in any arbitration in which that person has any
financial or personal interest in the result of the arbitration. Prior to accepting an appointment,
the prospective arbitrator shall disclose any circumstance likely to prevent a prompt hearing or to
create a presumption of bias. Upon receipt of such information, the AAA shall immediately
replace the arbitrator or communicate the information to serve promptly.

4. Vacancies

The AAA is authorized to substitute another arbitrator if a vacancy occurs or if an appointed
arbitrator is unable to serve promptly.

5. Date, Time and Place of Hearing

The arbitrator shall fix the date, time and place of hearing, notice of which must be given at least
24 hours in advance. Such notice may be given orally or by facsimile.

6. No Stenographic Record

There shall be no stenographic record of the proceedings.

7. Proceedings

The hearing shall be conducted by the arbitrator in whatever manner will most expeditiously
permit full presentation of the evidence and arguments of the parties. The arbitrator shall make
an appropriate minute of the proceedings. Normally, the hearing shall be completed within one

day. In unusual circumstances and for good cause shown, the arbitrator may schedule an
additional hearing to be held within seven days.

108
8. Posthearing Briefs
There shall be no posthearing briefs.
9. Time of Award

The award shall be rendered promptly by the arbitrator and, unless otherwise agreed by the
parties, no later than seven days from the date of the closing of the hearing.

10. Form of Award

The award shall be in writing and shall be signed by the arbitrator. If the arbitrator determines
that an opinion is necessary, it shall be in summary form.

109
ATTACHMENT 2
WAGES

|A. The following monthly wage scales shall become effective October 1, 2016:

 

 

Police Officer
Police Detective Investigator
Police Sergeant
Police Lieutenant
Police Captain

Police Deputy Chief
Police Assistant Chief

 

 

Police Officer
Police Detective Investigator
Police Sergeant
Police Lieutenant
Police Captain

Police Deputy Chief
Police Assistant Chief

 

 

 

 

 

 

$4,222
$5,912
$6,716
$7,521
$8,630
$11,946
$12,902

$4,349
$6,090
$6,917
$7,747
$8,889
$12,304
$13,289

110

    

  

$5,080
$6,087
$6,848
$7,671
$8,803

  

$5,232
$6,270
$7,054
$7,902
$9,068

B. The following monthly wage scales shall become effective October 1, 2017 (3%):

$5,422
$6,268
$6,985
$7,825
$8,979

IC. The following monthly wage scales shall become effective October 1, 2018 (3%):

  

$5,585
$6,456
$7,195
$8,060
$9,248

$5,530
$6,393

  

$5,696
$6,585

    

  

$5,808

$5,639

Title A B Cc D EB F
Police Officer $4,099 $4,932 $5,264 = $5,369 $5,475 $5,584
Police Detective Investigator $5,740 $5,910 $6,085 $6,207

Police Sergeant $6,520 $6,649 $6,782

Police Lieutenant $7,302 $7,448 $7,597

Police Captain $8,379 $8,547 $8,717

Police Deputy Chief $11,598

Police Assistant Chief $12,526

  
       

$5,752

 

  
  

  

$5,924

 

 

   
 

 

D. The following monthly wage scales shall become effective October 1, 2019 (3%):

 

 

  

A B Cc D
Police Officer $4,479 $5,389 $5,752. $5,867 $5,983 $6,102
Police Detective Investigator $6,272 $6,458 $6,649 $6,783
Police Sergeant $7,125 $7,266 $7,411
Police Lieutenant $7,979 $8,139 $8,301
Police Captain $9,156 $9,340 $9,525
Police Deputy Chief $12,673
Police Assistant Chief $13,687

 

E. The following monthly wage scales shall become effective October 1, 2020 (2%):

D E a

$6,102

 

$6,224

Police Officer $4,569 $5,497 $5,867 $5,984
Police Detective Investigator $6,398 $6,587 $6,782 $6,918
Police Sergeant $7,267 $7,411 ‘$7,559

Police Lieutenant $8,139 $8,301 $8,467

Police Captain $9,339 $9,526 $9,716

Police Deputy Chief $12,927

Police Assistant Chief $13,961

 

F. The following monthly wage scales shall become effective April 1, 2021 (3%):

Police Officer $4,706
$6,590

$7,485
$8,383
$9,619
$13,315
$14,380

$5,662
$6,785
$7,633
$8,550
$9,812

D E F

$6,043
$6,986
$7,786
$8,722
$10,007

$6,164
$7,126

$6,285

$6,411

 
ATTACHMENT 3 CITY ORDINANCE 51838

AN ORDINANCE 5 1 83 8

ESTABLISHING A BINDING IMPASSE PROCEDURE IN THE EVENT

AN IMPASSE IS REACHED DURING THE COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
PROCESS WITH THE SAN ANTONIO POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION
OR WITH THE INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FIREFIGHTERS,
LOCAL 624; ESTABLISHING THE CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH THE
IMPASSE PROCEDURE WILL BECOME INVALID AND VOID; REITERATING
THE CITY'S AUTHORITY AND INTENTION TO DISCIPLINE ANY
FIREFIGHTER OR POLICE OFFICER ENGAGING IN A STRIKE; AND
PROVIDING FOR THE TERMINATION OF THE ORDINANCE IN

MARCH of 1981.

WHEREAS, the courts of the State of Texas have found to be unconstitutional a
portion of the impasse procedure contained in the Fire and Police Employee
Relations Act; and

WHEREAS, the findings of the courts leave the City and the Fire and Police
Associations without an acceptable impasse procedure in the event contract
talks reach impasse; and

WHEREAS, the City intends to bargain in good faith with its Firefighters and
Police Officers, while insuring that Firefighters and Police Officers are
discouraged from engaging in any kind of strike or job action; and

WHEREAS, the City intends for this ordinance to be effective only long enough
for the parties to bargain an impasse procedure and establish it by contract;
NOW THEREFORE:

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN ANTONIO:

SECTION 1. (Normal bargaining) The City shall engage in collective bargaining
in accordance with the provisions of the Firemen's and Policemen's Employee
Relations Act, and shall use the services of a mediator when appropriate.

SECTION 2. (Factfinding to be used) In the event of an impasse, a factfinding
panel shall ascertain the facts and make recommendations.

SECTION 3. (Composition of the factfinding panel) Factfinding shall be accomplished
by a factfinding panel of three (3) members. One (1) member shall be appointed by
the Association, one (1) by the City, and the third (neutral) shall be as agreed
upon or, if unable to reach agreement, selected through the American Arbitration
Association procedure. The cost of the neutral shall be shared equally. The
Association's member, if paid, shall be paid by the Association, and the City shall
Pay for the City representative, if any cost is involved.

112
ATTACHMENT 3

CITY ORDINANCE 51838

SECTION 4. (Guidelines iting the scope of factfinding »:)

a. The overall compensation in the current contract including direct salary and
fringe benefits;

b. A comparison of wages, hours and conditions of employment of San Antonio Police
Officers and Firefighters with the wages, hours, and conditions of employment
of other public and private employees in the local labor market area performing
similar services and with other employees generally in public and private employ-
ment in comparable cities in the State of Texas and the City of San Antonio;

c. The hazards of employment, physical, educational, and menta] qualifications,
job training and skills required of a San Antonio Police Officer or Firefighter;

d. The cost of living in San Antonio relative to other communities;

e. The rate of increase in the cost of living for the preceding twelve-month
period using localized data to the fullest extent feasible;

f. <Any current national or state policies or guidelines with respect to compensation,
and the extent to which such guidelines are followed in the comparable public
and private sectors set forth in Section 4b. above.

SECTION 5. (Action upon recommendations of the factfinding panel) The findings
and recommendations of the factfinding panel shall not be made public for seven (7)
days. If, within seven (7) days after factfinding, the parties have failed to
agree to a contract, the findings and recommendations of the factfinding panel shall
be made public. If, within ten (10) days after the recommendations have been made
public the parties have not agreed to a contract, the major unresolved issues shall
at the request of either party be submitted to a referendum election which shall

be binding on the parties.

SECTION 6. (Conduct of the referendum)

a. The election shall be held on the first date permissible under state law.

b. The party rejecting the factfinder's recommendation shall pay 3/4 of the
cost of the referendum; the other party 1/4 of the cost.

c. Each party shall be entitled to submit two (2) and only two (2) unsettled issues
to the voters. The existing contract shall, therefore, be changed only by the
outcome of the referendum issues.

d. Certain rights are reserved to City management and are not subject to
referendum. They are:

(1) The right to hire, direct, transfer and assign employees.

(2) The right to reduce in force or lay off employees because of lack of
work or funds. (All reductions shall be in accordance with Civil Service
laws)

(3) The right to determine appropriate staffing levels and work performance
Standards; along with the quality and quantity of services to be offered
to the public; and the means and methods of offering those services.

(4) The right to discharge for cause.

(5) The right to use security personnel, which include, but are not limited
to such job classifications incorporated with the Classification Manual
as Airport Security Guard, Park Ranger, Lifeguard, School Crossing Guard,
and Municipal Guard, which require training in law enforcement, safety
and security duties, firefighting skills, emergency medical treatment,
water safety, and other similar related skills.

(6) The right to use civilians in the Police Department and the Fire Department
to perform duties which do not require a commissioned officer or the
power of arrest.

113
ATTACHMENT 3
CITY ORDINANCE 51838

e. Civil Service laws sh i not MuguBifot to referendum.

£. The City shall not place on the referendum bailot any issue that would reduce
any existing direct economic benefit accruing to association members.

g- Polling places shall be consolidated to the maximum degree feasible in accordance
with applicable state and federal laws.

SECTION 7. (The procedure void in case of a strike) Should an Association cause,
counsel, or permit its members to strike, slow down, disrupt, impede, or otherwise
impair the normal functions of its department; or in any manner encourage members

to refuse to cross any picket line by whomever established, where such refusal

would interfere with or impede the performance of the employee's duties as an employee
of the City, the City shall render null and void the impasse procedure established

by this ordinance by giving written notice to this effect to the president of the
Association.

SECTION 8. (Disciplinary action) By this ordinance, the City reaffirms its right
and intent to discipline any Firefighter or Police Officer who engages in any action
listed in Section 7 above, in addition to whatever other remedies may be available
to the City at law or in equity.

SECTION 9. (Time limitation of the ordinance) This ordinance is intended to provide
an impasse procedure for the 1980 bargaining year only. It is intended to provide
an opportunity for the Firefighter and Police Associations and the City to bargain
an impasse procedure and include such a procedure as a permanent provision of the
contract. Accordingly, this ordinance shall become invalid and void after

March 31, 1981.

PASSED AND APPROVED THIS Lf day of Laban, 1980.

Ale Crohute

MAYOR

armesr: nme. J, (fadrae 80-10

City Clerk

APPROVED AS TO FORM:
pres Attorney

APPROVED AS TO FUNDS: bu RK. Whee

Director of acct

114
ATTACHMENT 3

CITY ORDINANCE 51838
TITY OF SAN ANTONIC

Interdepartment Correspondence Sheet

TO:_______The Mayor and City Counciy

FROM: Claude C. McRaven, Employee Relations Coordinator

copies 10;__file

 

suBJECT.___An_Impesse Procedure for Collective Bargaining

Dote_February 11, 1980

‘kground

The proposed ordinance is submitted in accordance with the Council's
@irective (Resolution of December 13, 1979) to develop an impasse procedure
to be utilized during the 1980-'81 Fire and Police Contract Negotiations,
in the event the parties fail to reach agreement.

It is felt the procedures outlined offer the best compromise available
to insure good faith bargaining for the upcoming contract talks. The
ordinance is designed to self-destruct after the 1980 negotiations; and
any impasse procedure beyond this time period should be bargained and
included in future contracts, if agreement can be reached.

Conclusion and Recommendation

 

The ordinance provides an impasse procedure which is workable and
which is in the best interest of the City. It is recommended for adoption
with the understanding that all parties will negotiate in good faith toward
agreement on a reasonable and workable procedure to be included in future

contracts.

Claude C. McRaven

Employee Relations Coordinator
CCMCR: ses

Recommendation Approved:
wee 4

 

 

11S
ATTACHMENT 4

CITY ORDINANCE 83927
Js
4/18/96
#33 a
ANoRDINANCE 8 3 92 @

ADOPTING THE CITY’S OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE LIABILITY
PLAN POLICY AND REPLACING ORDINANCE NO. 62206,
ADOPTED IN JANUARY 1986.

a

WHEREAS, the current Ordinance adopted as Ordinance No. 62206, in January 1986,
lacks procedural detail and clarity, causing concerns as to “acts” covered and excluded
under the Indemnification Policy; lacks detail in procedures that officers and employees
need to follow in order to be entitled to indemnification; and causes confusion as to when
the City will pay for employee's outside counsel, and

WHEREAS, a new Ordinance is needed to define “acts” and to formalize the
procedural process; NOW THEREFORE:

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN ANTONIO:

SECTION 1. This Ordinance formally adopts the City of San Antonio Officer and
Employee Liability Plan Policy (“the Plan”). It replace Ordinance No. 62206, adopted in
January 1986. The Plan indemnifies City officers and employees in connection with legal
proceedings arising from the performance of their duties.

SECTION 2. This Policy will clarify the rights and responsibilities of the City, and of
the officer or employee, and will simplify the process of responding in a timely manner
to the initiation of litigation. The Plan shall consist of the policies, rights, and duties
embodied in this Ordinance, and shall be implemented and administered as provided by
this Ordinance.

SECTION 3. The proposed Ordinance defines “acts” that are covered and excluded. If
the City denies coverage, the Plan member may seek a determination from the court as to
whether they are entitled to coverage; it will formalize the procedural process, in that
officers and employees are given specific procedures in order to request indemnification.

SECTION 4. The City Attorney or his designee will represent the Plan member unless a
conflict arises, then the Plan member must select an approved private attorney for
representation. The City will not pay for any costs or legal fees incurred by the Plan
member if they utilize an attomey not approved by the City Attorney and Risk Manager,
unless required by law.

SECTION 5. The Plan does not affect police/fire personnel under their present labor
contracts.

116
ATTACHMENT 4

CITY ORDINANCE 83927

SECTION 6, Formal adoption of this Ordinance will not necessitate a current budget
amendment, as expenditures will be approved on a case-by-case basis in connection with
each individual lawsuit.

SECTION 7. This Ordinance shall be effective on April 25, 1996.

WH

Y O RB

PASSED AND APPROVED this 11th day of April, 1996.

vy
ATTESTe

ASSISTANT City Clerk

APPROVED AS TO FORM:
Ci orney

117
ATTACHMENT 4

ORDINANCE 83927

The City of San Antonio Officer and Employee Liability Plan Policy

Section 1. Definitions.

The following terms, as used in this Ordinance, shall have the following meanings unless the
context requires otherwise:

“Act” includes an omission or failure to Act.

2 “City” means the City of San Antonio, Texas.

Be “City Vehicle” means a vehicle or any mobile equipment leased to, or owned by CITY.

4. “Claim” means any claim made or suit brought against the City and/or a Plan Member for
damage or injury alleged to be caused by a Covered Act.

5 “Claims Board” means the CITY’s Self-Insurance Claims Board created by the Program

Ordinance.

6. “Coverage Determination Action” means an action by a Plan Member to determine
coverage under the Plan pursuant to Section 7 of this Ordinance.

te “Covered Act” means any act or omission of a Plan Member while constituting no waiver
of immunities, that:

(a) occurs during the discharge of the Plan Member’s official duties,

(b) is within the course and scope of the Plan Member’s office, employment, or
assigned work with the CITY, as applicable, or

(c) constitutes, or is alleged or asserted to constitute, negligence on the part of the
Plan Member.

(d) occurs during incidental medical services or first aid (including transportation) at
the scene of an accident or injury by any Plan Member not regularly engaged in
the medical profession.

Risk Assumption Ordinance

Revised: 03:26:96:yanez

‘

C2040

118
(e)

()

(g)

(h)

@

ATTACHMENT 4
CITY ORDINANCE 83927
occurs while rendering medical services (including transportation) by emergency

medical technicians, paramedics, nurses and aides employed by the CITY while in
the course of their employment as such.

occurs while a Plan Member is carrying out their authorized duties related to the
CITY's public safety activities.

occurs while a Plan Member is using a CITY Vehicle, or one hired by or on
behalf of the CITY, provided the use is with the permission of the CITY, or

arises from the use of a Non-Owned Automobile by a Plan Member while such
automobile is being used in the business of the CITY.

arises from an act or omission of a Plan Member while they are acting the course
of their duties as a member of the Claims Board.

8. “Excluded Action” means any Claim against a Plan Member:

(a)
(b)

©)

(d)

(e)

 

Finalized: 04:11:96

by the CITY; or

that results from (i) an intentional or knowing violation of a penal law (including
an administrative agency rule having the force and effect of law) committed by, or
with the knowledge and consent of, the Plan Member; (ii) an act of fraud
committed by, or at the direction of the Plan Member; (iii) official misconduct, a
willful or wrongful act or omission, or an act or omission constituting gross
negligence committed by, or at the direction of, the Plan Member; (iv) an act of
conspiracy or collusion by the Plan Member against the CITY; or (v) knowing or
intentional violation by the Plan Member of any ordinances, policies or
procedures of the CITY, or of lawful orders, instructions or directives of CITY
management; or (vi) an intentional or knowing violation of employment rules or
policies; or

that arises while the Plan Member is using or operating a CITY vehicle or other
CITY property or equipment with no authority to do so; or

that asserts or alleges liability assumed by the Plan Member under a contract,
unless the Plan Member is authorized by the CITY to enter into the contract; or

that includes a joinder by the Plan Member of a claim or suit of the member
against the CITY for benefits under the Plan; or

119
ATTACHMENT 4

CITY ORDINANCE 83927

( for damages that are not recoverable against the CITY; or

(g) for damages the CITY is precluded from paying under Section 102.002, Texas
Civil Practice and Remedies Code, Vernon’s Texas Codes Annotated, or for
payments in excess of the limitations on payments by the CITY prescribed by
Section 102.003, Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code, Vernon’s Texas Codes
Annotated; or

(h) that includes exemplary damages.

9. “Excluded Loss” means any of the following:

(a) any Loss that arises out of an Excluded Action; or

(b) any Loss the CITY is precluded from paying by law; or

(c) any Loss arising out of a Claim resulting from a Covered Act that occurred before
the Plan took effect, unless the Board at its discretion, extends coverage; or

(d) any Loss arising out of a claim resulting from a Covered Act that occurs while the
Plan is in effect if (i) the Plan Member experiencing the Loss becomes legally
obligated to pay the Loss after the Plan is terminated, and (ii) such Claim or Legal
proceeding were barred by any statute of limitations when instituted; or

(e) any Loss arising out of a Claim resulting from a Covered Act that occurs after the
Plan is terminated.

10. “Loss” means (i) the damages, excluding exemplary damages, that a Plan Member or

former Plan Member is legally obligated to pay on account of a Claim; and (ii) amounts
paid, or agreed to be paid, by the CITY pursuant to Section 3(b) and 4 of this Ordinance,
to compromise or settle a Claim in order to avoid the risk expense and uncertainty of
litigation.

“Loss Expenses” means any of the following:

(a) the CITY’s expense in investigating or defending a claim that may result in a Plan
Claim; and
(b) the costs taxed against a Plan Member in a suit that results in a Plan Claim and
any pre-judgment or post-judgment interest for which the Plan Member is liable;
and
Risk Assumption Ordinance 3

Finalized: 04:11:96
13

14,

15

16.

17

18.

ATTACHMENT 4
CITY ORDINANCE 83927

(c) the reasonable expenses of a Plan Member incurred at the CITY’s request in
connection with a Claim that may result in a Plan Claim; and

(d) any attorneys’ fees ordered by a court to be paid by a Plan Member in a suit
arising out of a Claim that results in a Plan Claim.

“Non-Owned Automobile” means an automobile which is neither a CITY Vehicle nor
one hired by the CITY.

“Plan” means the City of San Antonio Officer and Employee Liability Plan, as
established by this Ordinance.

“Plan Claim” means any Plan Loss, together with the Plan Loss Expenses that result from
the Claim giving rise to such Plan Loss.

“Plan Loss” means any Loss that is not an Excluded Loss

“Plan Loss Expenses” means any Loss Expenses, except those incurred in connection
with an Excluded Action.

“Plan Member” means an individual who at the time of a covered Act is

(a) an employee of the CITY;

(b) the Mayor, and any other member of the City Council;

(c) a member of (i) a CITY board, commission, or committee created by charter,
ordinance, or resolution of the CITY, or (ii) the board of directors of any
nonprofit corporation created under the authority of the City Council as an
instrumentality of the CITY, unless by specific contract provision the CITY does

not provide coverage.

“Program Ordinance” means Ordinance No. 83926 (which establishes the CITY’s Self-
Insurance), as from time to time amended.

Section 2. Plan Established.

The CITY hereby establishes the “City of San Antonio Officer and Employee Liability Plan”
which shall consist of the policies, rights, and duties embodied in this Ordinance. The Plan shall
be implemented and administered as provided by this Ordinance.

Risk Assumption Ordinance 4
Finalized: 04:11:96

121
ATTACHMENT 4

CITY ORDINANCE 83927

Section 3. Defense and Settlement.

(a)

(b)

The CITY will defend any suit, except an Excluded Action, against a Plan
Member or former Plan Member that results from a covered Act occurring prior to
termination of the Plan, even if the suit is groundless or fraudulent.

The CITY may investigate, negotiate, or settle any Claim, as the CITY determines
necessary or appropriate.

Section 4. Payment of Plan Claims.

(a) The funds will pay each Plan Claim subject to any limitations contained in the
Program Ordinance No. 83926, subject to the provisions of State law.

(b) This Ordinance will in no way alter any CITY tort or contract liability existing the
date of its’ passage. More specifically, this Ordinance will not alter contractual
obligations in either San Antonio Firefighters or San Antonio Police, labor
contracts existing the date of this Ordinance’s passage.

(c) This Ordinance does not include payment, by the CITY, of exemplary damages on
the behalf of a Plan Member.

(d) TO BE ENTITLED TO PAYMENT BY THE FUNDS FOR ANY PLAN
CLAIM, A PLAN MEMBER MUST:
qd) give notice of loss;

(2) notify the Claims Board in writing, within a reasonable time to be
determined by the Board, after receipt of any written or oral notice of any
Claim that may result in a Plan Claim but in any event not later than two
(2) working days after receipt of such notice;

(3) cooperate fully with the Claims Board, City Attorney, Risk Management,
the CITY and, upon the request of the Claims Board, assist in making
settlement, in the conduct of any suit, and in enforcing any right of
contribution or indemnity against an individual or organization who may
be liable for the Act giving rise to a Claim, or to the CITY because of the
payment by the CITY ofa Plan Claim;

(4) cooperate fully in the investigation and defense of any Plan Claim made
against the Plan Member including but not limited to, attendance at any
hearing or trial held in connection with a Plan Claim and assisting in
discovery, securing and giving evidence and obtaining the attendance of
witnesses;

Risk Assumption Ordinance 5

Finalized: 04:11:96

122
ATTACHMENT 4
CITY ORDINANCE 83927

(5) not give any oral or written statement or enter into any stipulation or
agreement concerning a Claim resulting in a Plan Claim, except upon
advice of the City Attorney or his designee or when questioned by a police
officer at the scene of an accident;

(6) not, except at the Plan Member’s own cost, voluntarily make any payment,
assume any obligation, or incur any expense with respect to any Claim
resulting in a Plan Claim without the consent of the Claims Board;

(7) deliver to the City Attorney or his designee, promptly upon receipt, but no
later than two (2) working days, any demand, summons, notice, or other
process received by the Plan Member in connection with any Claim that
may result in a Plan Claim;

(8) comply with the claims administrative procedure of the Claims Board; and

(9) perform the duties and comply with the requirements imposed on the Plan
member by this Ordinance or by the Program Ordinance.

Section 5. Legal Representation.

(a)

b)

(c)

(d)

The CITY will provide legal representation for a Plan Member or former Plan
Member in a Claim, except an Excluded Action, in which the asserted or alleged
liability of the member results from a Covered Act occurring prior to termination
of the Plan.

The City Attorney or his designee, and the Risk Manager, shall select, supervise
and/or retain, if applicable, attorneys, experts, and investigators he deems
necessary in connection with the defense of any Plan Claim.

The City Attorney or his designee shall be authorized to pursue all cross-claims,
counter claims, and/or affirmative defenses on behalf of a Plan Member or former
Plan Member.

If the City Attorney determines that there exists a potential conflict of interest for
the City Attorney to represent a Plan Member (pursuant to Subsection (a) of this
Section), the CITY will pay the reasonable fee of an a private attorney approved
by the City Attorney and Risk Manager to represent the Plan Member.

Risk Assumption Ordinance 6

Finalized: 04:11:96

123
ATTACHMENT 4

CITY ORDINANCE 83927

(e) If the Plan Member utilizes an attorney not selected and approved by the City
Attorney and Risk Manager, the Plan Member assumes all responsibility for all
associated costs, fees, and expenses, except those required by law that the CITY

pay.
Section 6. Assignment.

If payment of a Plan Claim or legal representation is provided to a Plan Member under the Plan,
the CITY is assigned the Plan Member's rights of recovery against any individual or
organization to the extent of the CITY’s payment or liability for payment. A Plan Member shall
execute and deliver to the Claims Board such documents as are necessary to secure this right of
assignment in the sole opinion of the City Attorney or his designee. A Plan Member shall not
do anything after a Plan Claim is incurred to prejudice this right.

The Plan Member shall:

(a) cooperate fully with the Claims Board and, upon the request of the Claims Board,
assist in making settlement, in the conduct of any suit, and in enforcing any right
of contributions or indemnity against an individual or organization who may be
liable to the CITY because of the payment by the CITY of a Plan Claim;

(b) attend any hearing or trial held in connection with a Plan Claim and assist in
discovery, securing and giving evidence, and obtaining the attendance of
witnesses.

Section 7. Determination of Coverage.

If the CITY denies coverage under the Plan to a Plan Member, the Plan Member may seek a
determination of whether the member is entitled to such coverage from a court of proper
jurisdiction.

Section 8. No Creation of Cause of Action.

NOTHING CONTAINED IN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BE CONSTRUED AS
CREATING A RIGHT OR CAUSE OF ACTION AGAINST THE CITY OR A PLAN
MEMBER OR AS GIVING A RIGHT TO A THIRD PARTY TO INSTITUTE OR
MAINTAIN A SUIT THAT WOULD NOT OTHERWISE EXIST UNDER LAW AS A
LEGAL CLAIM AGAINST THE CITY OR A PLAN MEMBER.

Section 9. Indemnification of Claims Board.
In the course of carrying out its responsibilities, the Claims Board and its members shall be

indemnified and held harmless by the CITY for any act or omission and the Program shall pay all
attorney fees necessary in its defense and fully recognize the members’ official immunity.

Risk Assumption Ordinance q
Finalized: 04:11:96

124
ATTACHMENT 4

CITY ORDINANCE 83927

Section 10. Administration of Plan.

The Claims Board is responsible for the administration of the Plan in accordance with its terms,
subject to the superior authority of the City Manager and approval by the City Council. In the
course of carrying out this responsibility, the Claims Board shall interpret and apply the
provisions of this Ordinance.

Section 11. Other Insurance.

The Self-Insurance afforded by this Ordinance is primary self-insurance. When this self-
insurance is primary and the Plan Member has other insurance which is stated to be applicable to
the Plan Claim, the amount of the Fund’s liability under this Ordinance shall not be reduced by
the existence of such other insurance.

Section 12. Construction, Amendment, Repeal. and Termination.

The Rules of Construction, as found in the Code Interpretation Act, shall apply in interpreting
this Ordinance. This Ordinance may be repealed or amended at any time, subject to existing
rights of Plan Members under Section 4 of this Ordinance, in which case the provisions of this
Ordinance shall govern, all save and except, continuing obligations under prior indemnity
ordinances.

Section 13. Conflicts With Other Ordinances.

This Ordinance shall not operate to repeal or affect any other ordinance of the CITY except to the
extent that the provisions thereof are inconsistent or in conflict with this Ordinance, in which
case the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern.

Section 14. Severability.

That the terms and provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable and that if the
validity of any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phase of this Ordinance should be
declared to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase of the Ordinance.

Section 15. Governmental Regulations.

The regulations provided in this Ordinance are hereby declared to be governmental and for the
health, safety, and welfare of the general public.

Risk Assumption Ordinance 8
Finalized: 04:11:96

125
~-—

ATTACHMENT 4

CITY ORDINANCE 83927

Section 16. Payments Subject to Appropriation.

All amounts payable under this Ordinance are subject to available and appropriated funding, and
applicable law.

Section 17. No Right to Fund by Plan Member.

This Ordinance does not grant or vest any right to any Plan Member in, or to, the Funds
administered by the Program Ordinance or any other funds of the City of San Antonio.

Section 18. Effective Date of Plan.

The program shall become effective on April 25, 1996, 12:01 a.m. and shall continue in effect
until terminated by the City Council.

Section 19. Effective Date of Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall become effective upon its final adoption by the City Council.

 

Risk Assumption Ordinance 9
Finalized: 04:11:96

126
ATTACHMENT 4

CITY ORDINANCE 83927

CITY OF SAN ANTONIG#ENDA ITEM NO.
FINANCE DEPARTMENT

Office of the Director
TO: Mayor anid City Contin
FROM: Nora W. Chavez, Director of Finance and Lloyd Garza, City Attomey __
COPIES: J, Rolando Bono, Assistant City Manager: Frank Garza, First Assistant City
Manager; File
SUBJECT: Indemnification Ordinance
Date: March 26, 1996

 

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS:

This Ordinance formally adopts the City of San Antonio Officer and Employee Liability Plan
Policy (“the Plan”). It replaces Ordinance No. 62206, adopted in January 1986. The Plan
indemnifies City officers and employees in connection with legal proceedings arising from the
performance of their duties. This Policy will clarify the rights and responsibilities of the City,
and of the officer or employee, and will simplify the process of responding in a timely manner to
the initiation of litigation. The Plan does not affect police/fire personnel under their present labor
contracts. The Plan shall consist of the policies, rights, and duties embodied in this Ordinance,
and shall be implemented and administered as provided by this Ordinance.

Staff recommends approval of this Ordinance.
BACKGROUND INFORMATION:

The current Ordinance was adopted as Ordinance No. 62206, in January 1986, but lacks
procedural detail and clarity, causing concerns as to “acts” covered and excluded under the
Indemnification Policy. The Ordinance also lacks detail in procedures that officers and
employees need to follow in order to be entitled to indemnification; and causes confusion as to
when the City will pay for employee’s outside counsel.

The proposed Ordinance defines “acts” that are covered and excluded. If the City denies
coverage, the Plan member may seek a determination from the court as to whether they are
entitled to coverage. In addition, it will formalize the procedural process, in that officers and
employees are given specific procedures in order to request indemnification. The City Attorney
or his designee will represent the Plan member unless a conflict arises, then the Plan member
must select an approved private attorney for representation. The City will not pay for any costs
or legal fees incurred by the Plan member if they utilize an attomey not approved by the City
Attorney and Risk Manager, unless required by law.

127

 
ATTACHMENT 4

CITY ORDINANCE 83927

FINANCIAL IMPACT:

Formal adoption of this Ordinance will not necessitate a current budget amendment, as
expenditures will be approved on a case-by-case basis in connection with each individual
lawsuit.

COORDINATION:

The Finance Department and the City Attorney’s Office have jointly developed this Ordinance
for consideration.
/ ’

ra W. Chavez

Lloyd
City Attorney Director of Finance

  
  

Approved:

Alexander E. Brisefio
City Manager

128
 

 

ATTACHMENT 5
BENEFITS

 

Thdividual Out Of Pocket Maximum
Individual ! Farnity|

(effective 1/1/18 all eligible cost share|
‘amounts apply toward the Out of,
Pocket Maximum)

‘Once the Out of Pocket Maximum is
‘met, all benefits increase to 100%
coverage with no member cost
sharing for the remainder of the
calendar year, except for monthly

‘contributions

129

0% once:

J

 
 

 

Therapy

Serious Mental Health Physician
‘Services Office Visits

Dependent Children Well Visits

Pap, Mammogram, PSA

Prior Plan for
10/01/09 to 12731116

20% after deductible | 40% attrdaducttie | 20% aterdeductiie | 40% ater deductible | 0% ater deductible | 0% ater deductibie
Limit to six attempts por |] Limit to six attempts per | Limit to six attempts per | Limit to six attempts per | Limit to six attempts per | Limit to six attempts por
tine time ten time time time

40% after deductible to 40% ator deductibie to (0% afer deductible to
$300 per your $300 per year $300 por year

0% birth to age 2 with no] 40% after deductible upto] O% bith to age 2 with no | 40% after deductible | 0% bith to ago 2 with no | O% after deductible up to
‘annual § limit $300 per year ‘enna 1p to $300 per year ‘annual $ lint $300 por yoar

$e
Covred at 100%, ‘Covored at 100%,
‘annualy, age and gender] 40% ater deductibte | annually,
appropriate

[= [ewe [= ewe Te [ame

 

130
 

Monthly Employee Contributions

 

Health Savings Account Contributions for CDHP will continue during evergreen. Employee
contributions beyond 2021 will increase by 10% annually during evergreen.

The above years are plan (currently calendar) years. Employee monthly contributions will increase
by 10% over the prior year’s contribution every year during the life of the agreement (including
during evergreen). Out of network claims will be capped at the in network allowable amounts under
both the Value and CDHP plans. Members should be aware that incurring Out of Network
claims exposes them to balance billing from providers (providers reserve the right to bill the
member for amounts not allowed by the plan). Seeking services from in-network providers
protects the members from balance billing.

131
ATTACHMENT 6
MASTER CONTRACT DOCUMENT

City of San Antonio

Master Contract Document

for the

San Antonio Police Officers’ Association Bargaining Unit

Health Benefit Program

San Antonio, Texas

January 1, 2017

132
Introduction...

General Information........

Plan and Claims Administration .

CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 5
CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER 7
CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 12
CHAPTER 13
CHAPTER 14
CHAPTER 15
CHAPTER 16
CHAPTER 17

CHAPTER 18

 

Table of Contents

  

GENERAL PLAN COVERAGE FOR ELIGIBLE PARTICIPANTS.......

 

 

COBRA.

HIPAA PRIVACY.......

 

 

DEFINITIONS.

 

COVERED MEDICAL EXPENSES..........:-+000++0

LIMITATIONS

 

EXCLUSIONS. ee)

 

 

PRE-ADMISSION TESTING IN POLICE VALUE PLAN....

134

HOSPITAL PRE-CERTIFICATION

 

PREFERRED PROVIDER NETWORK .......c.ssessseseeeses

 

PRESCRIPTION DRUG COVERAGE. ..3;:sssciccseassssssscsosssossiscessaceoszace 37

EMPLOYEE SELF AUDIT PROGRAM

 

COORDINATION OF BENEFITS......

  

SUBROGATION/THIRD PARTY CLAIMS .....

aS

GENERAL PROVISIONS

 

CLAIM FILING AND CLAIM PAYMENT.......

   

REVIEW & APPEAL PROCESS .

 

AMENDMENT OR TERMINATION OF PLAN

   
MASTER CONTRACT

INTRODUCTION

The purpose of the Employee Health Benefit Program is to provide the City of San Antonio Uniform
Employees with a family health plan, with coverage and benefits defined herein.

This Master Contract defines and provides for coverage and administration for the benefits common to
uniform CITY employees. The variations in coverage applicable to such classes are set forth in specific
appendices to this MASTER CONTRACT, including but not limited to POLICE OFFICERS. The
coverage provisions applicable to a COVERED PERSON shall collectively be referred to as the Plan, and
the provisions of this MASTER CONTRACT and the applicable appendices for any COVERED
PERSON shall be referred to as the PLAN DOCUMENT.

This PLAN DOCUMENT does not provide for any premium payment or contributions to the cost of
coverage. The obligation and amount of such payments are separately determined from the Ordinances of
the City Council or any applicable Collective Bargaining Agreements.

This plan is open to uniform CITY EMPLOYEES.

The benefits provided and defined in this MASTER CONTRACT are self-funded by the City of San
Antonio at the time this document was drafted, but the City of San Antonio is entitled to reinsure any
portion of its obligations hereunder, and additionally may contract for any carrier acceptable to the City
Council to assume and administer coverage and benefits under this document.

Both parties understand and agree the CITY shall provide health care benefits to the extent they are
required by law in accordance with HR 3590 “The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act” and HR
4872 “Health Care and Education Affordability Reconciliation Act of 2010” pursuant to its effective
dates.

ANY BENEFITS UNDER THE CITY'S INSURANCE OR SELF FUNDED PROGRAMS ARE
SUBJECT TO CHANGE AS DETERMINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL IN ANY BUDGET YEAR, OR
BY AMENDMENT OR OTHER LAWFUL CHANGE TO THE APPLICABLE BARGAINING
AGREEMENTS.

The City of San Antonio may select a CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR from time to time, or may elect to
administer claims under the plan as an internal function. The CITY’S CLAIM ADMINISTRATOR is not
an insurer.
GENERAL INFORMATION
NAME OF PLAN: Police Value Plan or Police Consumer Driven Health Plan
(CDHP)
PLAN YEAR: January 1 through December 31.
PLAN SPONSOR: City of San Antonio

P.O. Box 839966
San Antonio, Texas 78283
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR: Employee Benefits Administrator

City of San Antonio

Human Resources Department
P.O. Box 839966
San Antonio, Texas 78283
(210) 207-8705
CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR AND PRESCRIPTION BENEFIT MANAGER:
To be determined

EFFECTIVE DATE: The effective date of this plan for police uniform CITY
employees is January 1, 2017

iii
PLAN AND CLAIMS ADMINISTRATION

Administration and payment of claims under the PLAN DOCUMENTS shall be carried out by the
CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR, under the supervision of the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR. It shall be a
principal duty of the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR to see that the PLAN DOCUMENT is carried out as
written. The PLAN ADMINISTRATOR shall have full power to administer the Plans and all of their
details, and to make all final determinations about coverage on behalf of the City of San Antonio.

The PLAN ADMINISTRATOR will make available for examination, to each COVERED PERSON, his
heirs, and/or assigns, records that pertain to the COVERED PERSON at a reasonable time during normal
business hours as established by the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR.

The PLAN ADMINISTRATOR'S powers shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

(a)

(b)

(c)

To make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations as the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR
deems necessary or proper for the effective and efficient administration of the PLAN
DOCUMENT;

To interpret the contract, including, but not limited to, all questions of coverage and
eligibility. The PLAN ADMINISTRATOR'S interpretations thereof in good faith shall
be final and conclusive on all persons claiming Benefits under the PLAN DOCUMENT,
subject only to the Review and Appeal Process; and

To coordinate with and supervise the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR, prepare and handle
budgetary and contractual relationships involving the plan, distribute information to
COVERED PERSONS under the plan, appoint such agents, counsel, accountants,
consultants and actuaries as may be required to assist in administering the PLAN
DOCUMENT.
GENERAL PLAN COVERAGE FOR ELIGIBLE PARTICIPANTS

 

ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
Eligible Employee

Full-time CITY employees (authorized full-time equivalent) are eligible to participate in the PLAN on the
date their employment begins. Coverage begins on the date of hire, or upon taking office and performing
work for the City of San Antonio, whichever occurs later.

Eligible Dependent
An Eligible Dependent is:

(1) The Eligible EMPLOYEE'S lawful spouse. A spouse that is legally separated under a
court decree under the laws of another state shall not be an eligible dependent,

(2) All natural children including legally adopted, under legal guardianship of the Covered
EMPLOYEE and who have not yet reached their twenty-sixth birthday. Foster children are not Eligible
Dependents under this Plan, unless there has been an application for adoption accepted by the Texas
Department of Human Services. Stepchildren are Eligible Dependents during the marriage between the
Eligible EMPLOYEE and the natural parent of the child, so long as (a) they permanently reside in the
EMPLOYEE'S household, and (b) are PRINCIPALLY DEPENDENT on the EMPLOYEE.

The term "Eligible Dependent" shall not include anyone who is covered as an Eligible EMPLOYEE. An
Eligible Dependent shall not be entitled to any additional benefits or coverage by virtue of the fact that
both parents, step parents or guardians are employed by the CITY.

Incapacitated Dependent

An Eligible Dependent child who is physically or mentally incapable of self-support upon attaining the
age of twenty-six (26) years, shall continue to be an Eligible Dependent while remaining incapacitated,
unmarried and continuously covered under the PLAN. An eligible incapacitated dependent must be
solely dependent on the EMPLOYEE, and must be incapacitated by a disability that arose while such
dependent was a covered dependent. To continue eligibility under this provision, proof of incapacity
must be submitted by the EMPLOYEE at least thirty-one (31) days within such child's attainment of age
twenty-six (26).
Effective Date of Coverage

Coverage does not become effective until the Eligible EMPLOYEE completes the CITY'S health benefit
enrollment process.

Newborn infants will be covered from the date of birth as long as the EMPLOYEE is covered under this
plan and coverage for the newborn child is requested within 31 days of the child's date of birth. If
coverage of a newborn is not requested within 31 days of the child's date of birth, then coverage cannot
become effective until the next January | of the year following the next open enrollment period.

Eligible Dependents who are enrolled after the EFFECTIVE DATE of this Plan will become covered on
the date such dependent is acquired, provided that the covered EMPLOYEE enrolls such dependent
within 31 days of the date the dependent is acquired. If coverage of a dependent is not requested within
31 days of the date the dependent was acquired, the coverage cannot become effective until the next
January | of the year following the next open enrollment period.

Change of Family Status
If there is a legal change in family status, the EMPLOYEE has thirty-one (31) calendar days to notify the
EMPLOYEE Benefits Office in writing or by personally appearing in the Benefits Office and completing
a change of dependent coverage form.
If there is no change in family status or if notice is not given for additional coverage within thirty-one
(31) days after the legal change in status, no change can become effective until the next January | of the
year following the next open enrollment period.
A legal change in family status includes: divorce; marriage; birth or adoption of a child, including a child
living with the adopting parents during the period of probation; change in employment status for the
EMPLOYEE 's spouse; or ineligibility of a child due to age, or change in student status.

Termination of Coverage for Individuals

The coverage of any COVERED PERSON under the PLAN shall terminate on the earliest of the
following dates:

() The date of termination of the PLAN;
(2) The date employment terminates;

(3) The date all coverage or certain benefits are terminated in a particular class by modification of the
PLAN; and

(4) The date an active Eligible EMPLOYEE is covered under any other available alternative health
care delivery system for the EMPLOYEE or dependents of the EMPLOYEE.

Termination of Coverage for Dependents

Coverage with respect to the COVERED PERSON'S dependents shall terminate under the PLAN at the
earliest time specified below:
(1) Upon termination of employment for the covered EMPLOYEE;

(2) On the date dependents cease to be eligible as defined in the PLAN.

Termination of Coverage for Failure to Pay Premium

Coverage with respect to any COVERED PERSON for which a premium or contribution is required shall
terminate 31 days after the due date for such premium, or as soon thereafter as otherwise allowed by law.

Documentation

The PLAN ADMINISTRATOR is entitled to require relevant legal documentation to be furnished with
any request for coverage or change in status.
 

 

CONTINUATION COVERAGE

On April 7, 1986, a federal law was enacted requiring that most employers sponsoring group health plans
offer EMPLOYEES and their families the opportunity for a temporary extension of health coverage
(called "continuation coverage") at group rates in certain instances where coverage under the plan would
otherwise end. This law is called the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985, better
known as COBRA. This notice is intended to inform EMPLOYEES, in a summary fashion, of rights and
obligations under the continuation coverage provisions of COBRA. The EMPLOYEE and spouse should
take the time to read this notice carefully.

“Qualified Beneficiary" means:

a. you, as a Covered EMPLOYEE, for termination or reduced hours;

b. your spouse or your dependent child if he/she was a dependent under the PLAN on the
day before your Qualifying Event occurred; or

c a child who is born to a Covered EMPLOYEE during a period of COBRA continuation
coverage.

"Qualifying Event for a Covered Employee" means a loss of coverage due to:

a. termination of employment for any reason other than gross misconduct; or
b. reduction in hours of employment.

"Qualifying Event for a Covered Dependent” means a loss of coverage due to:

a. a Covered EMPLOYEE'S termination of employment for any reason other than a gross
misconduct or reduction in hours of employment;

b. a Covered EMPLOYEE'S death; a spouse's divorce or legal separation from a Covered
EMPLOYEE;

c. a Covered EMPLOYEE'S entitlement to Medicare; or

d. a dependent child's loss of dependent status under the PLAN.
"Timely contribution payment” means contribution payment must be made within 30 days of the due
date or within such longer period as applies to or under the PLAN.

Continuation of Health Coverage. Continuation of health coverage shall be available to you and/or
your Covered Dependents upon the occurrence of a Qualifying Event. To continue health coverage, the
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR must be notified of a Qualifying Event by:

(a) the EMPLOYER, within 30 days of such event, if the Qualifying Event is:

he for a Covered Dependent, the Covered EMPLOYEE'S death;
the Covered EMPLOYEF'S termination other than for gross misconduct or
reduction in hours;

3; for a Covered Dependent, the Covered EMPLOYEE'S entitlement to Medicare.

(b) you or a Qualified Beneficiary, within 60 days of such event, if the Qualifying Event is:

1. for a spouse, divorce, or legal separation from a Covered EMPLOYEE; or
2. for a dependent child, loss of dependent status under the PLAN.

The PLAN ADMINISTRATOR must, within 14 days of receiving such notice, notify any Qualified
Beneficiary of his/her continuation right. Notice to a Qualified Beneficiary who is your spouse shall be
notice to all other Qualified Beneficiaries residing with such spouse when such notice is given.

Upon termination of employment or reduction in hours, to continue health coverage for 29 months, a
Qualified Beneficiary who is determined under Title II or Title XVI of the Social Security Act to be
disabled on such date or at any time during the first 60 days of COBRA continuation coverage, must
notify the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR of such disability within 60 days from the date of determination
and before the end of the 18 month period. If a Qualified Beneficiary entitled to the disability extension
has non-disabled family members who are entitled to COBRA continuation coverage, the non-disabled
family members are also entitled to the disability extension.

Qualified Beneficiaries who are disabled under Title II or Title XVI of the Social Security Act must
notify the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR within 30 days from the date of final determination that they are no
longer disabled.

A Qualified Beneficiary must elect Continuation of Health Coverage within 60 days from the later of the
date of the Qualifying Event or the date notice was sent by the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR.

A newborn child of a Qualified Beneficiary or a child placed with a Qualified Beneficiary for adoption
may be added according to the enrollment requirements for dependent coverage under the Eligibility
Requirements of the PLAN.

Any election by you or your spouse shall be deemed to be an election by any other Qualified Beneficiary,
though each Qualified Beneficiary is entitled to an individual election of continuation coverage.
 

Upon election to continue health coverage, a Qualified Beneficiary must, within 45 days of the date of
such election, pay all required contribution to date to the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR. All future
contribution payments by a Qualified Beneficiary must be made to the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR and
are due the first of each month with a 30-day grace period.

A Qualified Beneficiary will be notified by the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR of the amount of the required
contribution payment and the contribution payment options available.

Termination of Coverage. Coverage will end upon the earliest of the following:
a. termination or reduction of hours;

iE 18 months from the date of the Qualifying Event; or
29 months from the date of the Qualifying Event if the Qualified Beneficiary is
determined under Title II or Title XVI of the Social Security Act to be disabled
on such date or at any time during the first 60 days of COBRA continuation
coverage and provides notice as required by law (including, COBRA
continuation coverage of non-disabled family members of the Qualified
Beneficiary entitled to the disability extension).

b. the day, after the 18 month continuation period, which begins more than 30 days from the
date of a final determination under Title II or Title XVI of the Social Security Act that a
Qualified Beneficiary, entitled to 29 months, is no longer disabled (including COBRA
continuation coverage of non-disabled family members of the Qualified Beneficiary
entitled to the disability extension who is no longer disabled).

z for a Covered Dependent, 36 months from the date of the Qualifying Event if the
Qualifying Event is:
1. the Covered EMPLOYEE 's death;

2 the Covered EMPLOYEE's entitlement to Medicare;

Bs a spouse's divorce or legal separation from a Covered EMPLOYEE; or
4. a dependent child's loss of dependent status under the Plan.
d. if any of the Qualifying Events listed in (c) occurs during the 18-month period after the

date of the initial Qualifying Event listed in (a), coverage terminates 36 months after the
date of the Qualifying Event listed in 1.

16s the date on which the EMPLOYER ceases to provide any group health plan to any
EMPLOYEE;

fi the date on which a Qualified Beneficiary fails to make timely payment of the required
contribution;
g. the date on which a Qualified Beneficiary first becomes (after the date of the election) |
covered under any other group health plan (as an EMPLOYEE or otherwise) which does
not contain any exclusion or limitation with respect to any pre-existing condition of such
Qualified Beneficiary;

h. the first day of the month in which a Qualified Beneficiary becomes entitled to Medicare;
or

i. the date this PLAN terminates.

Continuation of health coverage under this provision shall not duplicate health care coverage continued
under any state or federal law.

 

Any questions about COBRA should be directed to the CITY'S Employee Benefits
Office, 111 Soledad, San Antonio, Texas 78205, (210) 207-8705.

 
CHAPTER 3 HIPAA PRIVACY

A, Use and Disclosure of Protected Health Information (PHI)

The PLAN will use protected health information (PHI) to the extent of and in accordance with the uses
and disclosures permitted by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).

Specifically, the PLAN will use and disclose PHI for purposes related to health care treatment, payment
for health care and health care operations.

Payment includes activities undertaken by the PLAN to determine or fulfill its responsibility for coverage
and provision of plan benefits that relate to an individual to whom health care is provided. These activities
include, but are not limited to, the following:

determination of eligibility, coverage and cost sharing amounts (for example, cost of a benefit, plan
maximums and COINSURANCE as determined for an individual's claim);

coordination of benefits; 2

adjudication of health benefit claims (including appeals and other payment disputes);

billing, collection activities and related health care data processing;

claims management and related health care data processing, including auditing payments,
investigating and resolving payment disputes and responding to participant inquiries about payments;

obtaining payment under a contract for reinsurance (including stop-loss and excess of loss insurance);
medical necessity reviews or review of appropriateness of care or justification of charges;

utilization review, including pre-certification, preauthorization, concurrent review and retrospective
review;

disclosure to consumer reporting agencies related to the collection of premiums or reimbursement
(the following PHI may be disclosed for payment purposes: name and address, date of birth, Social
Security number, payment history, account number and name and address of the provider and/or
health plan); and

reimbursement to the PLAN.

Health Care Operations include, but are not limited to, the following activities:

quality assessment;

population-based activities relating to improving health or reducing health care costs, protocol
development, case management and care coordination, disease management, contacting health care
providers and patients with information about treatment alternatives and related functions;

rating provider and plan performance, including accreditation, certification, licensing or credentialing
activities;

underwriting, premium rating and other activities relating to the creation, renewal of replacement of a

contract of health insurance or health benefits, and ceding, securing or placing a contract for

reinsurance of risk relating to health care claims (including stop-loss insurance and excess of loss

insurance);

conducting or arranging for medical review, legal services and auditing functions, including fraud and

abuse detection and compliance programs;

business planning and development, such as conducting cost-management and planning-related

analyses related to managing and operating the PLAN, including formulary development and

administration, development or improvement of payment methods or coverage policies;

business management and general administrative activities of the PLAN, including, but not limited to:

(a) management activities relating to the implementation of and compliance with HIPAA’s
administrative simplification requirements, or

(b) customer service, including the provision of data analysis for management; and

resolution of internal grievances.

B. The PLAN Will Use and Disclose PHI as Required by Law and as Permitted by Authorization of
the Participant or Beneficiary

C. For Purposes of This Section, the City of San Antonio is the PLAN SPONSOR

The PLAN will disclose PHI to the PLAN SPONSOR only upon receipt of a certification from the PLAN
SPONSOR that the plan documents have been amended to incorporate the following provisions.

D. With Respect to PHI, the PLAN SPONSOR Agrees to Certain Conditions

The PLAN SPONSOR agrees to:

not use or further disclose PHI other than as permitted or required by the PLAN DOCUMENT or as
required by law;

ensure that any agents, including a subcontractor, to whom the PLAN SPONSOR provides PHI
received from the PLAN agree to the same restrictions and conditions that apply to the PLAN
SPONSOR with respect to such PHI;

not use or disclose PHI for employment-related actions and decisions unless authorized by an
individual;

not use or disclose PHI in connection with any other benefit or employee benefit plan of the PLAN
SPONSOR unless authorized by an individual;

report to the PLAN any PHI use or disclosure that is inconsistent with the uses or disclosures
provided for of which it becomes aware;

make PHI available to an individual in accordance with HIPAA’s access requirements;

make PHI available for amendment and incorporate any amendments to PHI in accordance with
HIPAA;

make available the information required to provide an accounting of disclosures;
¢ make internal practices, books and records relating to the use and disclosure of PHI received from
Plan available to the HHS Secretary for the purposes of determining the PLAN’S compliance with
HIPAA; and

e if feasible, return or destroy all PHI received from the PLAN that the PLAN SPONSOR still
maintains in any form, and retain no copies of such PHI when no longer needed for the purpose for
which disclosure was made (or if return or destruction is not feasible, limit further uses and
disclosures to those purposes that make the return or destruction infeasible).

E. Adequate Separation Between the PLAN and the PLAN SPONSOR Must Be Maintained

In accordance with HIPAA, only the following employees may be given access to PHI:

¢ the staff of the Employee Benefits Division of the Human Resources Department
e the staff of the Finance Department assigned to the Self Insurance Fund and
* the staff of Legal Department assigned to the Employee Benefits Division.

F. Noncompliance Issues

If the persons described in section E do not comply with this PLAN DOCUMENT, the PLAN SPONSOR
shall provide a mechanism for resolving issues of noncompliance, including disciplinary sanctions.
CHAPTER 4 DEFINITIONS

"ACCIDENTAL INJURY" means a condition caused by an accidental means which results in traumatic
damage to the COVERED PERSON’S body from an external force that is unexpected at the time, but
which occurrence was definite as to time and place. Normal and routine human movements and activities
shall not be considered accidents, even though unexpected physiological injury or damage may occur as a
result thereof. (Such as bending, stooping or lifting resulting in disc injury; or yawning that damages the
temporomandibular joint).

"ACTIVELY AT WORK" means the active expenditure of time and energy in the service of the
EMPLOYER, except that an EMPLOYEE shall be deemed actively at work on each day of a regular paid
vacation or on a regular non-working day, provided he was actively at work on the last preceding regular
working day.

"ALLOWABLE EXPENSE" relates to coordination of benefits, under Chapter 13 of this PLAN
DOCUMENT. Allowable expenses shall mean any necessary usual, customary and reasonable expenses
incurred while eligible for benefits under the PLAN, part or all of which would be covered under any of
the plans, but not including any expenses contained in the Exclusions chapter.

"AMBULATORY SURGICAL CENTER" means a specialized facility which is established, equipped,
operated and staffed primarily for the purpose of performing surgical procedures on an outpatient basis
and which fully meets one of the following two tests:

(a) It is licensed as an ambulatory surgical facility in the state in which it is located; or

(b) Where licensing is not required:

f. it is operated under the full-time supervision of a PHYSICIAN;

2. it permits surgical procedures to be performed only by PHYSICIANS who are
privileged to perform the procedure in at least one local HOSPITAL;

a it requires in all cases, except for those using only local infiltration anesthetics,
that a licensed anesthesiologist either administers the anesthetic or supervises an
anesthetist who administers it and that the anesthesiologist or anesthetist remains
present throughout the surgical procedure;

11
4. it provides at least one operating room and at least one post-anesthesia recovery
room;

5. it is equipped to perform diagnostic x-ray and laboratory examinations or has an
arrangement to obtain these services;

6. it has trained personnel and necessary equipment to handle emergencies;
he it has immediate access to a blood bank or blood supplies;
8. it provides the full-time services of one or more registered graduate nurses (R.N.)

for patient care in the operating room and post-anesthesia recovery room; and

9. it maintains an adequate medical record for each patient that contains an
admitting diagnosis that includes, except for patients undergoing a procedure
under local anesthesia, a preoperative examination report, medical history and
laboratory tests and/or x-rays, and operative report and discharge summary.

"ANNUAL MAXIMUM OUT OF POCKET" is the sum of all member cost sharing expenses including
deductibles, co-pays and COINSURANCE under the PLAN DOCUMENT, It does not include any
applicable monthly employee contributions. When the annual out of pocket is reached (which can be for
an individual or a family, cumulative) covered expenses incurred during that plan year will be paid at
100%.

Out of Pocket does not include:

* Charges beyond usual & customary fees;

* Penalties resulting from non-compliance with pre-certification;
* Charges not covered under the PLAN.

"BODY ORGAN" means the following (a) a kidney; (b) a heart; (c) a heart/lung; (d) a liver, (e) a
pancreas, when the condition is not treatable by use of insulin therapy; (f) bone marrow; and (g) a cornea.

"CALENDAR YEAR" a period of 12 consecutive months beginning with January 1 through December
31 of the same year. For new EMPLOYEES and dependents, the CALENDAR YEAR is the
EFFECTIVE DATE of their coverage through December 31 of the same year.

"CITY" means the City of San Antonio.

"CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR" means the Third Party Administrator or any CITY EMPLOYEE or
office designated to process claims under the PLAN DOCUMENT.

"COINSURANCE" is the COVERED PERSON'S obligation to pay a percentage of the costs of care in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this PLAN DOCUMENT. For example, if this plan provides
for payment of 80% of eligible medical expense, the remaining 20% is the EMPLOYEE'S obligation, and
is referred to as "coinsurance." If the plan provides for out of network payment of 60% of eligible
medical expense, the remaining 40% EMPLOYEE obligation is referred to as “coinsurance.” If the plan
provides for an in-network prescription payment of 80%, the remaining 20% is the employee's obligation
and is referred to as “co-insurance

"COMPLICATIONS OF PREGNANCY" means:

(a) conditions requiring HOSPITAL confinement (when the pregnancy is not terminated)
whose diagnoses are distinct from pregnancy but are adversely affected by pregnancy or
caused by pregnancy, such as: acute nephritis; nephrosis; cardiac decompensation;
missed abortion; and similar medical and surgical conditions of comparable severity; or

(b) non-elective caesarean section; ectopic pregnancy which is terminated; or spontaneous
termination of pregnancy which occurs during a period of gestation in which a viable
birth is not possible.

"Complications of pregnancy" does not mean: false labor; occasional spotting; physician
prescribed rest during pregnancy; morning sickness; hyperemesis gravidarum; preeclampsia; or similar
conditions associated with the management of a difficult pregnancy not constituting a nosologically
distinct complication of pregnancy.

“COPAYMENT OR CO-PAY” is the fixed dollar amount (or, in some cases, a percentage) that you
must pay to a health care provider in order to receive a specific service or benefit covered under this Plan.

"COSMETIC PROCEDURES" mean any surgical procedure or any portion of a surgical procedure
performed primarily to improve physical appearance and does not promote the proper function of the
body or treat any illness or injury.

"COVERED PERSON" means an eligible EMPLOYEE, retiree, official or eligible Dependent covered
under this Plan.

"COVERED PROVIDER" means an AMBULATORY SURGICAL CENTER, a HOME HEALTH
CARE AGENCY, a licensed HOSPICE care center, a HOSPITAL, a PHYSICIAN, a SURGEON, a
PSYCHIATRIC DAY TREATMENT FACILITY, a REHABILITATION FACILITY and a SKILLED
NURSING FACILITY, or other licensed clinician approved by the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR.

"CUSTODIAL CARE" means that type of care or service, wherever furnished and by whatever name
called, which is designated primarily to assist a COVERED PERSON, whether or not totally disabled, in
the activities of daily living. Such activities include, but are not limited to: bathing, dressing, feeding,
preparation of special diets, assistance in walking or in getting in or out of bed, and supervision over
medication which can normally be self-administered.

"DEDUCTIBLE" means the amount of Covered Medical Expenses a COVERED PERSON must incur
and pay each CALENDAR YEAR before benefits are payable under the PLAN.

"FAMILY DEDUCTIBLE LIMIT" means that, once the sum of the family deductible has been satisfied
by the cumulative Covered Medical Expenses of the eligible EMPLOYEE and one (1) or more of his
eligible dependents in a CALENDAR YEAR, no further deductible need be satisfied in that CALENDAR
YEAR for any other eligible member of the family.

13
"DENTIST" means a currently licensed dentist practicing within the scope of the license or any
PHYSICIAN furnishing dental services which the PHYSICIAN is licensed to perform.

“DIABETES EQUIPMENT" means the following:

blood glucose monitors, including monitors designed to be used by blind individuals;
insulin pumps and associated appurtenances;

insulin infusion devices; and c

podiatric appliances for the prevention of complications associated with diabetes.

aoe

“DIABETES SUPPLIES” means the following:

test strips for blood glucose monitors;

visual reading and urine test strips;

lancets and lancet devices;

insulin and insulin analogs;

injection aids; syringes;

prescriptive and non-prescriptive oral agents for controlling blood sugar levels; and
glucagon emergency kits.

mmoeaoege

"DONOR" means a person who undergoes a surgical operation for the purpose of donating a BODY
ORGAN(s) for TRANSPLANT SURGERY.

"DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT" means equipment prescribed by the attending PHYSICIAN
which meets each of the following: a) MEDICALLY NECESSARY; }) is not primarily or customarily
used for non-medical purposes; c) is designated for prolonged use; and d) serves a specific therapeutic
purpose in the treatment of any injury or illness.

“EFFECTIVE DATE”, when applied to an individual’s coverage under the PLAN, means the first day
of the individual’s coverage. The individual’s effective date may or may not be the same as the
individual's enrollment date (as “enrollment date” is defined by the PLAN).

"ELIGIBLE EXPENSE" is any expense, which is eligible for payment, in whole or in part under this
PLAN DOCUMENT.

“EMERGENCY SERVICES” Emergency Services are health care services provided in a Hospital
emergency facility or comparable facility to evaluate and stabilize medical conditions, including a
behavioral health condition, of a recent onset and severity including, but not limited to, severe pain that
would lead a prudent lay person, possessing an average knowledge of medicine and health to believe that
his or her condition, Illness, or Injury is of such a nature that failure to get immediate medical care could
result in:

1. placing his or her health in serious jeopardy;
2; serious impairment to bodily functions;
LE serious dysfunction of any BODY ORGAN or part;
4. serious disfigurement; or

3: in the case of a pregnant woman, serious jeopardy to the health of the fetus.

This definition is only for purposes of determining whether out of network emergency services will be
paid at in-network benefit levels.

"EMPLOYEE" means a person who is directly employed by the City of San Antonio and is regularly
scheduled for a full shift or schedule in like manner as other similarly situated workers in the department
or division. "Employee" shall also include employees on Worker's Compensation, Disability, or Non-
Paid status.

"EMPLOYER" means the City of San Antonio.

“FLEXIBLE SPENDING ACCOUNT (FSA)” means a tax favored account that allows employees to
be reimbursed for qualified medical expenses. FSAs are funded through voluntary salary reduction
agreements with the employer. No employment or federal income taxes are deducted from the
contribution. The employee must be an eligible individual to qualify for an FSA.

“HEALTH SAVINGS ACCOUNTS (HSA)” means a tax-exempt trust or custodial account set up with
a qualified HSA trustee to pay or reimburse certain medical expenses. The employee must be an eligible
individual to qualify for an HSA. Two eligible Police employees married to each other may each receive
the employer contribution to an HSA.

"HOME HEALTH CARE AGENCY" means an agency or organization which meets all of the
following requirements:

ql) It is licensed and primarily engaged in providing skilled nursing care and other
therapeutic services;

(2) It has policies established by a professional group associated with the agency or
organization and includes at least one physician and one registered graduate nurse (R.N.)
who provide full time supervision of such services;

(3) It maintains complete medical records on each individual;

(4) It has a full time administrator.

“HOSPICE” means an agency which:

a. is primarily engaged in providing counseling, medical services or room and board to
terminally ill persons;
b. has professional service policies established by a group associated with it. This group

must include one (1) PHYSICIAN, one (1) Registered Nurse (RN) and one (1) social
service coordinator;

c. has full-time supervision by a PHYSICIAN;

d. has a full-time Administrator;

15
provides services 24 hours a day, seven (7) days a week;
maintains a complete medical record of each patient; and
is licensed in accordance with state law.

"HOSPITAL" means only an institution constituted and operated pursuant to any applicable law,
engaged in providing, on an inpatient basis at the patient's expense, diagnostic and therapeutic facilities
for the surgical and medical diagnosis, treatment, and care of injured and sick individuals by or under the
supervision of a licensed PHYSICIAN or SURGEON and continuously providing 24-hour-a-day services
by registered nurses. The term "hospital" shall not include any institution or part thereof which is other
than incidentally a place for rest, a residential treatment center, or a nursing home or convalescent

hospital.

"INTENSIVE CARE UNIT OR CARDIAC CARE UNIT" means a clearly designated service area
which is maintained within a hospital and which meets the following tests:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

It is solely for the treatment of patients who require special medical attention because of
their critical condition;

It provides within such area special nursing care and observation of a continuous and
constant nature not available in the regular rooms and wards of the HOSPITAL;

It provides a concentration of special lifesaving equipment immediately available at all
times for the treatment of patients confined within such area; and

It provides at least one professional registered nurse who continuously and constantly
attends to the patient confined in such area on a twenty-four (24) hour a day basis; or

An alternate hospital that is approved by the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR, as long as the

cost of care does not exceed the cost of care at a HOSPITAL that substantially meets

subparagraphs (a) through (d) above, in accordance with one or more of the following

criteria:

(i) to facilitate provision of medical services by a particular PHYSICIAN;

(ii) the COVERED PERSON'S physician certifies in writing to the PLAN
ADMINISTRATOR before services are rendered that the hospital is equipped to
provide needed intensive or cardiac care;

(iii) proximity of the COVERED PERSON'S immediate family members;

(iv) the medical condition of the COVERED PERSON indicates that it would be
inadvisable to transfer to another hospital.

"LIFETIME MAXIMUM" is the cumulative maximum amount payable during the lifetime of the
COVERED PERSON, during periods of eligibility, as set forth in the Schedule of Benefits.

16
"MASTER CONTRACT" means and refers to this PLAN DOCUMENT, which sets forth the provisions
of universal applicability to the CITY'S various health benefit plans.

"MEDICALLY NECESSARY" means any care, treatment, service or supply provided for the diagnosis
and treatment of a specific illness, injury or condition which meets all of the following.

(a) The care and treatment is appropriate given the symptoms, and is consistent with the
diagnosis, if any. "Appropriate" means that the type, level, and length of service and the
setting are needed to provide safe and adequate care and treatment;

(b) It is rendered in accordance with generally accepted medical practice and professionally
recognized standards in the United States medical community;

(c) It is not treatment that is generally regarded as experimental, educational or unproven;
and

(d) It is specifically allowed by the licensing statutes that apply to the provider that renders
the service.

With respect to confinement in a HOSPITAL, "MEDICALLY NECESSARY" further means that the
medical condition requires confinement and that safe and effective treatment cannot be provided as an
outpatient.

The CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR may require satisfactory proof in writing, that any type of treatment,
service or supply received is MEDICALLY NECESSARY. The CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR may also
specifically require the prescribing physician or consulting board or committee of any facility to provide a
written analysis of the necessity and acceptability of the methods, process or procedure under this
paragraph, taking into account the criteria set forth above. The fact that a physician may prescribe, order,
recommend or approve care, treatment, service or supply does not, in itself, make them MEDICALLY
NECESSARY.
Medical necessity specifically does not include any:

(a) Repeated test which would not be necessary if initially done correctly, or is not necessary
at current intervals;

(b) Care, treatment, service or supply which is for the psychological support, education or
vocational training of the COVERED PERSON;

Criteria used in determining that a procedure is experimental includes:
(a) Whether there is an appropriate rationale for the treatment;
(b) Whether there is evidence that the treatment is effective;

(c) Whether there is evidence that the treatment is harmful;

(d) Whether the benefits justify the immediate and delayed risks of treatment;
 

 

(e) Whether the treatment has been endorsed or approved by the appropriate medical
authorities, such as the FDA, the AMA or other medical specialty societies or specialists
or whether the treatment is covered by Medicare or other public programs;

(p) Whether the device or treatment is the subject of ongoing investigation or research;
(g) Whether the treatment is legal;

(h) Whether controlled medical trials have been carried out that demonstrate the treatment's
efficacy.

"NEWBORN CARE" charges for the routine care of a newborn child, while HOSPITAL confined, are
covered by the PLAN on the same basis as an illness of such newborm child. Such charges will be
considered separate from the mother's charges and subject to the DEDUCTIBLE and the applicable
benefit percentage payable as shown in the Schedule of Benefits. All such newborn coverage shall
include circumcision. Well baby care is covered for three days after birth, before an individual dependent
DEDUCTIBLE is applicable to the newborn.

"OTHER COVERAGE" means any other contract or policy under which the COVERED PERSON is
enrolled, such as:

* Group or blanket insurance;

* Group plans, other employer plans, individual plans offered on a group basis, or other group
prepayment coverage;

* Labor management trusteed plans, union welfare plans, employee organization plans, or
employee benefit organization plans;

* Government programs, such as Medicare, or coverage required or provided by statute;
* Any group coverage of a child sponsored by, or provided through, any educational institution;
* Group arrangements for members of associations or individuals.

"OTHER COVERED PROVIDER" means a certified social worker (CSW) licensed professional
counselor (LPC), licensed occupational therapist (LOT), certified nurse midwife, licensed speech
therapist, licensed physical therapist, registered nurse, licensed vocational nurse, or licensed practical
nurse.

"PHYSICIAN OR SURGEON" means any professional practitioner who holds a lawful license
authorizing the person to practice medicine or surgery in the locale in which the service is rendered,
limited to a Doctor of Medicine (M.D.), a Doctor of Osteopathy (D.O.), a Doctor of Podiatric Medicine
(D.P.M.), a Doctor of Dental Surgery (D.D.S.), a Doctor of Chiropractic (D.C.), a Clinical Psychologist
(Ph.D), who has met the standards of the National Register of Health Service Providers in Psychology.

"PLAN" whenever used herein without qualification means this PLAN DOCUMENT.
"PLAN ADMINISTRATOR" means the City of San Antonio's designated Employee Benefits
Administrator.

"PLAN DOCUMENT" means this Master Contract and Attachment 5, which collectively provides and
defines coverage for particular EMPLOYEES and dependents.

"PLAN SPONSOR" means the City of San Antonio.

"PLAN SUMMARY" is the information provided to City EMPLOYEES concerning coverage and
benefits to assist in understanding and using available benefits. THE PLAN SUMMARY DOES NOT
DEFINE COVERAGE, WHICH IS THE SOLE PURPOSE OF THE MASTER CONTRACT. ANY
STATEMENT ABOUT COVERAGE IN THE SUMMARY IS A GENERAL INTERPRETATION
ONLY, AND IS NOT MADE FOR SPECIFIC APPLICATION TO ANY COVERED PERSON,
ILLNESS, OR EXPENSE.

"POLICE OFFICER" means any full time, permanent, paid EMPLOYEE who:
(a) Is employed by the City's Police Department;

(b) Has been hired in substantial compliance with Chapter 143 of the Local Government
Code;

(c) Has successfully completed the Police Academy; and
(d) Has received his or her certificate from the Police Chief.

"POST DELIVERY CARE” means postpartum health care services provided in accordance with
accepted maternal and neonatal physical assessments. Post Delivery Care includes parent education,
assistance and training in breast-feeding and bottle-feeding, including use of a Certified Lactation
Consultant, and the performance of any necessary and appropriate clinical tests.

"PRINCIPALLY DEPENDENT" shall have the meaning defined in Sections 151 and 152 of the
Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder.

"PSYCHIATRIC DAY TREATMENT FACILITY" means an institution which meets all of the
following requirements:

(a) It is a mental health facility which: provides treatment for individuals suffering from
acute mental, nervous or emotional disorders, in a structured psychiatric program
utilizing individualized treatment plans with specific attainable goals and objectives
appropriate both to the patient and the treatment modality of the program; and is
clinically supervised by a doctor of medicine who is certified in psychiatry by the
American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology.

(b) It is accredited by the Program for Psychiatric Facilities or its successor, or the Joint
Commission on Accreditation of HOSPITAL; and

(c) Its patients are treated for not more than eight (8) hours in any twenty-four (24) hour
period.

19
"QUALIFIED INSURED” means an individual eligible for coverage under the PLAN who has been
diagnosed with:

a. insulin dependent or non-insulin dependent diabetes;
b. elevated blood glucose levels induced by pregnancy; or
c. another medical condition associated with elevated blood glucose levels.

"RECIPIENT" means an insured person who undergoes a surgical operation to receive a BODY
ORGAN transplant.

"REHABILITATION FACILITY" means a facility that provides services of acute rehabilitation. All
services are provided under the direction of a PHYSICIAN with a specialty in rehabilitation and physical
medicine. The facility is staffed around the clock by registered nurses and it does not provide services of
a custodial nature. The facility must be Medicare certified, licensed by the State Department of Health as
a "special hospital" and accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations. It is also accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities.
"SKILLED NURSING FACILITY" means a legally operated institution, or a distinct part of an
institution, primarily engaged in providing skilled nursing care to patients recovering from injury or
illness and which:

(a) Is under the resident supervision of a PHYSICIAN or registered nurse (R.N.);

(b) Provides continuous skilled nursing care for 24 hours of every day;

(c) Requires that the health care of every patient be under the supervision of a PHYSICIAN;

(d) Provides that a PHYSICIAN be available at all times to furnish necessary medical care in
emergencies;

(e) Maintains clinical records for each patient;
(f Has an effective utilization review plan;
(g) Has a transfer agreement with at least one (1) HOSPITAL;

(h) Is not, other than incidentally, a clinic, a place devoted to care of the aged or a place for
treatment of mental disorders or mental retardation;

(i) Is not a place for CUSTODIAL CARE.

“TEMPORARY MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT" means any non-organic device used in conjunction
with the RECIPIENT's own BODY ORGAN for the purpose of sustaining a bodily function for which a
transplant has been deemed necessary by the attending physician.

"TRANSPLANT SURGERY" means the transfer of BODY ORGAN(s) from a DONOR to a
RECIPIENT.

20
"USUAL & CUSTOMARY CHARGE" means charges for MEDICALLY NECESSARY services and
supplies which would usually be provided for cases the same as or similar to the one being treated. The
Usual and Customary charge is limited to the lesser of:

(a)
(b)

The fee usually charged by the provider for similar services and supplies; and

The fee usually charged for the same service or supply by other providers who are in the
same area. "Area" means a geographical area as determined by the CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR to be significant enough to establish a representative base of charge
for the treatment. The determination of the "usual and customary" charges by the
CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR shall be based on standard profiles and statistical sampling
methods accepted in the benefits industry. Usual and customary shall be based on the
85th percentile and updated on a semi-annual basis. All charges above or beyond the
"usual and customary" charges so determined are the financial responsibility of the
COVERED PERSON. Upon request, the CITY will furnish information or assistance to
a COVERED PERSON to enable them to contest excessive charges, in accordance with
the policy of the Employee Benefits Office in effect at the time of the request.

21
CHAPTER 5 COVERED MEDICAL EXPENSES

Covered Medical Expenses shall be the portion, set forth in the Schedule of Benefits, of the usual and
customary charges for the following services, supplies, and treatment when MEDICALLY NECESSARY
and when ordered by a licensed PHYSICIAN or SURGEON. Medical expenses exceeding usual and
customary expenses covered by this PLAN will be the obligation of the COVERED PERSON.

1.

2

Daily semi-private room charge in a HOSPITAL or REHABILITATION FACILITY.
Services and supplies furnished by a HOSPITAL.

Treatment by a PHYSICIAN or SURGEON.

Treatment by any OTHER COVERED PROVIDER not related by blood or marriage.
Anesthesia and its administration.

"Surgery in mouth or oral cavity" is limited to:

(a) removal of non-odontogenic lesions, tumors or cysts;

(b) incision and drainage of non-odontogenic cellulitis;

(c) surgery on accessory sinuses, salivary glands and ducts and tongue;

(d) surgical treatment of fractures and dislocation of the jaw resulting from an
ACCIDENTAL INJURY.

Diagnostic radiology, radiation therapy and laboratory examinations.

Ambulance charges to or from the nearest medically appropriate HOSPITAL by an ambulance
service operated in accordance with State law.

Medical supplies and equipment as follows:

(a) drugs and medicines which can be obtained only by numbered prescription for the
specified illness or injury for which the patient is being treated;

(b) birth control pills, injections and medication implants are covered for EMPLOYEES and
dependent spouses only. No other contraceptive methods or devices are covered;

(c) blood and blood plasma;

22
(d) charges for drawing and storing autologous blood;

(e) prosthetic appliances such as artificial limbs or eyes, not including their replacement
except when required due to growth or development of a dependent child. After a
covered mastectomy, breast implants or prostheses are also covered. Replacement of
breast prosthesis is covered only when original prosthesis was required due to a major
catastrophic illness or injury;

(f) crutches. The rental (but not to exceed the total cost of purchase) or, at the option of the
CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR, the purchase of DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT
when MEDICALLY NECESSARY and prescribed by a PHYSICIAN for therapeutic use,
including wheelchairs, hospital beds, oxygen and equipment for its administration
including IPPB (Intermittent Positive Pressure Breathing);

(g) medical supplies such as lancets, autolets, syringes, dextrowash and dextrostix, ostomy
supplies, casts, splints, trusses and braces;

(h) orthopedic shoes when prescribed by a PHYSICIAN.

Dental treatment for fractured jaw or for injury to sound natural teeth including replacement of
such teeth within six months after the date of accident, provided that such accident occurs while
the COVERED PERSON is on the PLAN.

Expenses incurred for maternity care and services shall be covered on the same basis as for any
other illness incurred by the COVERED PERSON or the dependent spouse. There is no coverage
for expenses for maternity care and services incurred by a dependent child except for
COMPLICATIONS OF PREGNANCY which shall be treated as any other illness.

The attending PHYSICIAN shall make the determination as to whether a delivery is complicated.

Under Federal law, group health plans generally may not restrict benefits for any HOSPITAL
length of stay in connection with childbirth for the mother or newborn child to less than 48 hours
following a vaginal delivery, or less than 96 hours following a cesarean section. The 48-hour
period (or 96-hour period if applicable) begins at the time a delivery occurs in the HOSPITAL (or
in the case of multiple births, at the time of the last delivery) or, if the delivery occurs outside the
HOSPITAL, at the time a mother and/or newborn are admitted. However, Federal law generally
does not prohibit the mother’s or newborn’s attending provider, after consulting with the mother,
from discharging the mother or her newborn earlier than 48 hours (or 96 hours if applicable)
following the delivery.

If a decision is made to discharge a mother or her newborn child from inpatient care before the
expiration of the minimum hours of coverage of inpatient care as provided above, the PLAN will
provide coverage for timely POST DELIVERY CARE as defined herein, Such care may be
provided to the mother and the child by a PHYSICIAN, registered nurse or other appropriate
licensed health care provider and may be provided at the mother's home, a health care provider’s
office, a health care facility or another location determined to be appropriate under rules adopted
by the Commissioner of Insurance.

23
12.

13.

14,

NEWBORN CARE.

Services of a licensed speech therapist are covered when therapy is rendered in accordance with
PHYSICIAN’s specific instructions as to type and duration when speech was present before the
illness and/or injury, and for a child born under the plan with developmental disorder or birth
defects.

Services of a licensed physical therapist are covered only for those services that require the
technical medical proficiency and skills of a licensed physical therapist and which are rendered in
accordance with a PHYSICIAN'S specific instructions as to type and duration.

Acupuncture or hypnosis when performed by a COVERED PROVIDER and in lieu of anesthesia.

Psychiatric Conditions — To be treated as any other illness/condition requiring care, as required
by the The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA).

Chemical dependency and substance abuse will be treated as any other illness.
Voluntary sterilization is covered.
Preventive services:

a. One routine pap smear (doctor's procedure charge, lab expenses and office visit) per
CALENDAR YEAR for female COVERED PERSONS;

b. One routine mammogram per CALENDAR YEAR for female COVERED PERSONS age
thirty-five (35) and over;

c. One (1) routine physical examination per CALENDAR YEAR for each _ eligible
EMPLOYEE and dependent.

1. If performed by the EMPLOYEE’S own PHYSICIAN, covered services will be limited
to a preventative medical examination, blood chemistry profile, thyroid function (TSH),
fecal occult blood, urinalysis, electrocardiogram, body fat measurement, health risk
appraisal, stress and personality profile, and nutritional analysis, subject to the
DEDUCTIBLE and COINSURANCE as stated herein.

2. If performed at the Occupational Health Clinic, the PLAN will cover a complete blood
count, cholesterol and glucose screening; blood pressure check; height and weight
evaluation; and a health assessment questionnaire at 100%.

d. A physical examination for the detection of prostate cancer and prostate-specific Antigen
test used for the detection of prostate cancer for each male enrolled in the PLAN who is;

1. at least 50 years of age and asymptomatic; or

2. at least 40 years of age with a family history of prostate cancer or another prostate cancer
risk factor.

24
20.

21.

22.

23.

Immunizations and Vaccines

(a) Gamma globulin injections and the following immunizations for Covered Dependents
from birth through the date the child is six (6) years of age shall be covered: (a) DTP, (b) polio
(OPV), (c) MMR, (d) meningitis (HIB); (e) hepatitis B (HBV); (f) TB tine; (g) varicella; and (h)
any other immunizations as required by Texas law. After age six (6), the aforementioned
immunizations will be covered only if the dependent was covered under this PLAN before
attaining age six (6). Expenses for all covered immunizations are covered at 100%, deductible
waived. Other services provided at the same time as the immunizations, including, but not
limited to, office visit charges, shall be subject to the DEDUCTIBLE and COINSURANCE.

(b) Synagis (Palivizumab) administration for the prevention of respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV) among high risk infants meeting prescribing criteria set forth by American Academy of
Pediatrics (AAP) will be covered at 100%, deductible waived, only if such treatment is
determined to be MEDICALLY NECESSARY and prior authorization obtained on or before
administration of the first injection.

Attention Deficit Disorder- To be treated as any other illness/condition requiring care, as required
by the The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA).

Occupational Therapy.

Diabetes. Coverage shall be provided to each QUALIFIED INSURED as defined herein for:
a. DIABETES EQUIPMENT;

b. DIABETES SUPPLIES; and

6: diabetes self-management training programs as defined herein.

Self-management training programs must be provided by a health care practitioner or provider who is
licensed, registered, or certified in Texas to provide appropriate health care services related to diabetes
education. Self-management training includes:

24.

a. training provided to a QUALIFIED INSURED after the initial diagnosis of diabetes in
the care and management of that condition, including nutritional counseling and proper
use of DIABETES EQUIPMENT and supplies;

b. additional training authorized by a PHYSICIAN or other health care practitioner of a
significant change in the QUALIFIED INSURED'S symptoms or condition that requires
changes in the QUALIFIED INSURED'S self-management regime; and

c. periodic or episodic continuing education training when prescribed by an appropriate
health care practitioner as warranted by the development of new techniques and
treatments for diabetes.

Temporomandibular Joint. MEDICALLY NECESSARY diagnostic or surgical treatment of
conditions affecting the temporomandibular joint (jaw and the craniomandibular joint) resulting
from one of the following shall be covered:

a. an accident;
b. a trauma;

25
c. a congenital defect;
d. a developmental defect; or
e. a pathology.

Such coverage is subject to the same Plan provisions as for any surgical treatment including, but not
limited to, the requirements for pre-certification of benefits.

2s

26.

27,

Mastectomy. Coverage for inpatient care for a COVERED PERSON is as follows:
a. 48 hours following a mastectomy; and
b. 24 hours following a lymph node dissection for the treatment of breast cancer.

For reconstruction of the breast on which a MEDICALLY NECESSARY mastectomy has been
performed; surgery and reconstruction of the other breast to produce a symmetrical appearance;
prostheses and treatment of physical complications for all stages of the mastectomy, including
lymphedemas are covered under this Plan.

If the COVERED PERSON and the COVERED PERSON's attending PHYSICIAN determine
that a shorter period of inpatient care is appropriate, the Plan is not required to provide the
minimum hours of coverage of inpatient care stated above.

Treatment for Mental and Nervous Conditions shall be covered the same as any other
illness/condition requiring care, as required by the The Mental Health Parity and Addiction
Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA).

HOSPICE Care. HOSPICE Care is an alternative to the Hospital Confinement of a terminally ill
person. HOSPICE Benefits are available for COVERED PERSONS with a life expectancy of six
(6) months or less provided the attending PHYSICIAN approves the program. Failure to pre-
certify will result in no benefit allowances. HOSPICE Care is subject to the DEDUCTIBLES and
COINSURANCE as provided in the applicable appendix for each class of CITY EMPLOYEE,
retiree, and official.

Eligible HOSPICE Charges are charges made by a HOSPICE for:

a. room and board;

b. private duty nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a Registered Nurse
(R.N.);

c. part-time or intermittent home health aide services which consist primarily of caring for
the patient by employees of the HOSPICE;

d. social work performed by a licensed social worker, routinely provided by the HOSPICE
agency;

e. nutritional services, including, special meals, if included in the per diem;

f. emotional support services routinely provided by the HOSPICE agency, if included in the
per diem;

g. bereavement counseling sessions for eligible dependents covered under the PLAN, if
included in the per diem; and

h. drugs and medication.

26
28. Organ Transplants. If covered expenses are incurred as a result of a BODY ORGAN transplant,
the PLAN will pay the applicable COINSURANCE percentage of the Covered Expenses, as
defined herein, after the DEDUCTIBLE is applied, subject to the LIFETIME MAXIMUM benefit
and the following conditions:

a.

b.

Benefits are available for BODY ORGAN transplantation, subject to determination made
on an individualized case by case basis in order to establish medical necessity;

Benefits will be provided only when the HOSPITAL and PHYSICIAN customarily
charge a transplant RECIPIENT for such care and services;

When only the transplant RECIPIENT is a COVERED PERSON, the benefits of the
PLAN will be provided for the DONOR to the extent that such benefits are not provided
under any other form of coverage. In no such case under the PLAN will any payment of
a "personal service" fee be made to any DONOR. Only the necessary HOSPITAL and
PHYSICIAN’S medical care and services expenses with respect to the DONOR will be
considered for benefits;

When only the DONOR is a COVERED PERSON, the DONOR will receive benefits for
care and services necessary to the extent such benefits are not provided under any
coverage available to the RECIPIENT. Benefits will not be provided to any RECIPIENT
who is not a COVERED PERSON; and

When the RECIPIENT and the DONOR are both COVERED PERSONS, as provided
herein, benefits will be provided for both in accordance with their respective Covered
Expenses.

If the RECIPIENT is the COVERED PERSON and/or pursuant to the conditions set forth above, the
following coverage shall be provided:

a.

saas

The use of TEMPORARY MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT, pending the acquisition of
"matched" BODY ORGAN(s);

TRANSPLANT SURGERY of a BODY ORGAN(s) as defined herein;

Multiple transplant(s) during one (1) operative session;

Replacement(s) or subsequent transplant(s); and

Follow-up expenses for covered services, including immunosuppressant therapy.

If the DONOR is a COVERED PERSON and pursuant to the conditions set forth above, the following
coverage shall be provided:

a.
b.
c.

The acquisition of a BODY ORGAN(s) from the DONOR;

The life support of a DONOR pending the removal of a usable BODY ORGAN(s); and
Transportation of a BODY ORGAN(s). However, transportation of a BODY ORGAN(s)
shall not include transportation of a living DONOR and/or a DONOR on life support.

27
CHAPTER 6 LIMITATIONS

Benefit limitations apply to the following conditions and services:
1. Abortions

Abortions will be covered when the attending PHYSICIAN certifies that the mother's life would be
endangered if the fetus were carried to term.

2. Cosmetic Procedure

Elective procedure performed solely to improve appearance is not covered. Nor are the complications
that may arise from or are the direct result of such procedure covered. A procedure utilized as treatment
of neurosis, psychoneurosis, psychopathy, psychosis, and other mental, nervous and emotional illness will
be covered as any other illness/condition requiring care, as required by the The Mental Health Parity and
Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA). Additionally, expenses incurred for a cosmetic procedure for
the prompt repair or alleviation of damage caused solely by accidental bodily injury, or congenital defects
of children, or for the correction of a congenital anomaly in a newborn child, or for the reconstruction of
the breast on which a MEDICALLY NECESSARY mastectomy has been performed; surgery and
reconstruction of the other breast to produce a symmetrical appearance; prostheses and treatment of
physical complications for all stages of the mastectomy, including lymphedemas are covered under this
PLAN.

3, Treatment in Mouth or Oral Cavity

The care and treatment of the teeth, gums or alveolar process or for dentures, appliances or supplies used
in such care and treatment is not covered, except for charges incurred as a result of and within six months
after an accident suffered while covered hereunder for treatment of injuries to sound, natural teeth,
including replacement of such teeth, or for setting of a jaw fractured or dislocated in such accident;
provided, however, that this exclusion shall not be applicable to services and supplies rendered to a
newborn child which are necessary for treatment or correction of a congenital defect.

4. Maternity for Dependents

Maternity care and services rendered to a dependent child are limited to treatment of COMPLICATIONS
OF PREGNANCY.

5. Mental and Nervous Conditions - shall be covered the same as any other

illness/condition requiring care, as required by The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of
2008 (MHPAEA).

28
Expenses for treatment in a psychiatric day treatment facility for a mental, nervous or emotional disorder,
if the attending physician certifies that such treatment is in lieu of hospitalization, will be covered as if
incurred on an inpatient basis. Any benefits so provided shall be determined as if necessary care and
treatment in a psychiatric day treatment facility were inpatient care and treatment in a hospital; each full
day or treatment in a psychiatric day treatment facility shall be considered equal to one-half day of
hospital confinement for purposes of determining benefits and benefit maximums under the PLAN.

6. Private Room Limit
When private room accommodations have been used, charges will be reimbursed at the average semi-

private room rate in the facility. If a HOSPITAL has private rooms available only, then the maximum
eligible charge will be based on the usual and customary semi-private room charge in the community.

29
CHAPTER 7 EXCLUSIONS

Unless mandated by provisions of the Affordable Care Act, no coverage is provided under the PLAN for
services and supplies:

IT: For which the patient or EMPLOYEE has no legal obligation to pay, or for which no charge
would be made if the EMPLOYEE had no health coverage.

2. Any treatment or service rendered by a COVERED PROVIDER related by blood or marriage.

a Not MEDICALLY NECESSARY for the diagnosis and treatment of an illness or injury or which
exceed the USUAL AND CUSTOMARY CHARGES.

4, For intentionally self-inflicted injury, whether sane or insane.

Ss For diseases contracted or injuries sustained as a result of service in any branch of the armed
forces.

6. For accidental bodily injury or illness which is covered by Workers' Compensation or an

Occupational Medical Policy, or any expenses payable under compromise settlement agreements
arising from a Workers' Compensation Claim.

7. For marital, family, vocational and other counseling services, except for nutritional counseling for
diabetics.

8. For sex transformation surgery and all expenses in connection with such surgery.

9: For reversal or attempted reversal of sterilization.

10. For services, therapy and counseling for sexual dysfunction or inadequacies or for implants or
aids to sexual function except due to a disease or injury which is otherwise covered by this
PLAN.

11. Family planning, infertility treatment and services including but not limited to: artificial
insemination and personal therapy for infertility, except in-vitro coverage as allowed in the
Schedule of Benefits

30
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31,

For a dependent child's pregnancy except for complication as defined by the PLAN arising from a
dependent child's pregnancy.

For smoking cessation seminars, services, devices or medications.

For the surgery or treatment of obesity, morbid obesity, dietary control, or for weight reduction.
For nutritional supplements, including prescription and over the counter vitamins.

For exercise equipment or exercise programs.

For orthotics (arch supports, etc.) and other supportive devices for feet that are not prescribed by
a PHYSICIAN.

For air conditioners, filters, humidifiers, dehumidifiers, and purifiers.

For eye exercises, visual training (orthoptics), eyeglasses, including contact lenses, hearing aids,
or examinations for the purpose of determining visual acuity or level of hearing.

For radial keratotomy surgery and orthokeratology.

For medical, dental or surgical treatment including associated diagnostic procedures of
orthognathic conditions.

For vocational therapy.
For preparing medical reports or itemized bills.
For travel or accommodations, whether or not recommended by a PHYSICIAN.

For charges associated with non-emergency HOSPITAL admissions on either a Friday or a
Saturday unless a surgical procedure is performed within 24 hours of admission.

For special education, counseling or care for learning deficiencies or behavioral problems
whether or not associated with a manifest mental disorder or other disturbance.

For care in a health resort, rest home, nursing home, residential treatment center, or any
institution primarily providing convalescent, or CUSTODIAL CARE.

For CUSTODIAL CARE.

For any claims filed more than one (1) year from the month the covered service or supply was
provided.

For admissions aimed at primarily overcoming the after effects of a specific episode of drug
abuse (detoxification), or to keep the patient from access to drugs (maintenance care).

For sales tax, transportation, tariffs, immigration fees for international travel, or federal excise
taxes.

31
32.

33.

34.

35.

 

For routine physical examinations for eligible dependents and for eligible EMPLOYEES not
covered in Chapter 1. .

No coverage is provided for services and supplies for routine or preventative immunizations or
vaccinations except for gamma globulin injections and child immunizations.

Coverage for HOSPICE Care does not include the following charges:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)
(

nutritional services, including special means not included in the per diem;

emotional support services not routinely provided by the HOSPICE agency and/or not
included in the per diem;

bereavement counseling sessions for eligible dependents covered under the PLAN not
included in the per diem;

funeral arrangements;

pastoral counseling; and

financial or legal counseling.

Coverage for Organ TRANSPLANT SURGERY does not include the following charges:

(a)

(b)

(d)

Experimental treatment for new procedures, and treatments, services or supplies which
are still considered experimental or investigational and not "generally accepted" by the
medical profession. The judgment whether a procedure, treatment, service or supply is
experimental is based upon all of the relevant facts and circumstances, including, but not
limited to:

WPI

Approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, the American Medical
Association or the appropriate Medical Specialty Society;

Medical and scientific literature;

Scientifically demonstrated health benefits;

Safety and effectiveness compared to alternatives; and

Safety, effectiveness and benefits when used outside of a research setting;

Any animal organ or mechanical equipment, mechanical device, or mechanical organ(s),
except as provided herein;

Any financial consideration to the DONOR other than for a covered service or supply
which is incurred in the performance of or in relation to TRANSPLANT SURGERY; and

Transportation of a DONOR, except as provided herein.

32
 

 

If a COVERED PERSON under the Police Value Plan who is scheduled for inpatient surgery in a
HOSPITAL, has preoperative testing relating to this surgery performed within ten (10) days prior to the
scheduled surgery and the testing is performed at a PHYSICIAN's office, diagnostic laboratory,
ambulatory surgery center or on a HOSPITAL outpatient basis, the PLAN will pay pre-operative testing
at 100% provided:

Ne The charge for the surgery is a covered expense;

ay The tests would have been covered had the patient been confined as a HOSPITAL
inpatient;

Sy The tests are not repeated when the patient is confined for the surgery;
4. The test results are a part of the patient's medical record;
5. The surgery is performed in a HOSPITAL;

6. The service is identified as pre-admission or preoperative testing.

The DEDUCTIBLE does not apply.

This benefit is not available under the Police Consumer Driven Health Plan

33
CHAPTER 9 HOSPITAL PRE-CERTIFICATION

 

Certification of ALL non-network admissions to a HOSPITAL including admissions for rehabilitation,
treatment of mental or nervous condition, drug, alcohol or substance abuse and maternity is required prior
to or on the day of admission as an inpatient. Emergency admissions must be verified within forty-eight
(48) hours following admissions.

Certification of all non-network outpatient surgery, performed in an ambulatory surgery center or
HOSPITAL outpatient facility, is required prior to or on the day of the surgery. Emergency outpatient
surgery must be certified within forty-eight (48) hours following the surgery.

The COVERED PERSON is responsible for the certification of hospital admission and outpatient
surgery.

If Pre-Certification Authorization is not obtained the maximum benefit paid for the doctor and
HOSPITAL will be fifty percent (50%) of the usual and customary charges. The fifty percent (50%) not
reimbursed by the PLAN will not count toward satisfaction of the Plan year out-of-pocket maximum.

Pursuant to State law, the PLAN will not restrict benefits for any HOSPITAL length of stay in connection
with a mastectomy or lymph node dissection of less than 48 hours following a mastectomy or less than 24
hours following a lymph node dissection or require that a provider obtain authorization from the PLAN
for prescribing a length or stay within the above periods. Certification is required for a length of stay,
which is in excess of the above periods.

Pursuant to State law, the PLAN will not restrict benefits for any HOSPITAL length of stay in connection
with childbirth for the mother or newborn child of less than 48 hours following an uncomplicated vaginal
delivery or less than 96 hours following an uncomplicated cesarean section, or require that a provider
obtain authorization from the PLAN for prescribing a length of stay within the above periods.
Certification is required for a length of stay, which is in excess of the above periods.

34
CHAPTER 10 PREFERRED PROVIDER NETWORK

 

PREFERRED PROVIDER NETWORK

The City of San Antonio participates in a Preferred Provider Network of HOSPITALS, PHYSICIANS
and other providers that are contracted to furnish, at negotiated costs, medical care for the CITY
EMPLOYEES and their dependents. The use of a Preferred Provider may result in reduced out of pocket
expenses to the COVERED PERSON.

A current listing of the Preferred Provider Network contracting HOSPITALS, PHYSICIANS and other
providers is available from the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR by phone or internet. A COVERED
PERSON may choose any health care provider.

The CITY reserves the right to terminate or modify the Preferred Provider Network program, or any
portion thereof, at any time. In the event the CITY changes the PPO provider, the CITY will ensure that
the EMPLOYEES will not be substantially affected by a disruption of available in-network providers.

The "In-Network Benefit" level will be paid if a COVERED PERSON receives services from a Non-
Participating Provider only in the following situations:

1. EMERGENCY SERVICES.

2. Court-Ordered Dependents. If your court-ordered Eligible Dependent lives outside the service
area, and no Out-of-Area Participating Providers are reasonably available to treat the Eligible
Dependent. Contact the Employee Benefits Office for details.

3. Continuity of Care if Participating Provider Leaves the PPO Network. If your Participating
Provider leaves the PPO Network, a covered person may continue to see that Provider and receive
PPO Benefits under “special circumstances.”

4. “Special circumstance” means a condition such that a covered person’s Participating Provider
reasonably believes discontinuation of care could cause harm to that person, such as a Disability,
an acute condition, a life-threatening illness or a pregnancy that is past the 24" week. If a
COVERED PERSON’S Participating Provider makes such a request and special circumstances
exist, In-Network Benefits will continue:

(a) In the case of a COVERED PERSON who is past the 24" week of pregnancy, through the
delivery of the child, immediate postpartum care, and the follow-up checkup within the first
six (6) weeks of delivery;

35
 

(b) In the case of other special circumstances, (e.g. terminally ill), for 90 days;

(c) Ifa Participating Provider, including a facility or a specialist is not available to a
COVERED PERSON within the service area to provide MEDICALLY NECESSARY
services covered by the PLAN, the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR, approves the coverage

in advance.

36
 

Obtaining Covered Prescriptions In-Network

Retail Pharmacy - Up to a 30-day Supply

The retail network of pharmacies is available for prescriptions you need right away or for a short time
only (such as antibiotics). You can obtain up to a 30-day supply of medication from thousands of
participating retail network pharmacies nationwide. A small number of medications may be limited to a
30-day or less supply.

Mail Service Pharmacy

Prescriptions for maintenance medications or chronic long-term health conditions can be ordered through
mail order. Ordering through the mail is both a safe and easy way to receive prescriptions and save
money.

Refer to ATTACHMENT 5 for the Pharmacy Payment Schedule
Covered Items

The following items are covered under the prescription program, unless specifically listed in the
“Exclusions and Limitations” section below.

* Federal legend drugs (drugs that federal law prohibits dispensing without a prescription)

* Compound prescriptions containing at least one legend ingredient

e Insulin and diabetic supplies such as disposable needles and syringes, blood test strips, and
lancets and any other items mandated under Texas Insurance Code

* Topical acne agents through age 23 (over age 23, prior authorization required)

* ADHD/Narcolepsy drugs through age 19 (over age 19, prior authorization required)
© Oral contraceptives for EMPLOYEE or eligible spouse only

* Only prescriptions which are prescribed for the condition for which they are labeled
Exclusions and Limitations [See Chapter 7]

The following items are excluded from or limited in coverage unless mandated by provisions of
the Affordable Care Act:

* Drugs used for cosmetic purposes, including but not limited to certain anti-fungals, hair loss
treatments and those used for pigmenting/depigmenting and reducing wrinkles

* Diabetic alcohol swabs

e Fluoride supplements

e Nutritional/Dietary Supplements

* Over-the-counter medications and other over the counter items

* Vitamins

* Miscellaneous medical supplies

¢ Anti-obesity drugs

e Smoking cessation medications

e Experimental or Investigational drugs or for drugs labeled “Caution — limited by federal law to
Investigational use”

¢ Immunization agents, allergens, serums, blood or blood plasma

* Therapeutic devices or appliances, support garments or other non-medical appliances, except
those listed as covered drugs

* Coverage for prescription drug products for an amount which exceeds the supply limit (days
supply or quantity limit)

* Prescription drug products for any condition, injury, sickness or mental illness arising out of, or in
the course of, employment for which benefits are available under any workers’ compensation law
or other similar laws

« Drugs purchased during time of no coverage

© Drugs for any treatment or condition which is listed under expenses not covered in the medical
plan

« Charges to administer or inject any drug
¢ Prescription drugs that are not MEDICALLY NECESSARY

¢ Charges for delivering any drugs, except through the mail order benefit. Express or over night
delivery is at the member’s expense.

« Experimental or Investigational medications

* Prescription drugs purchased from an institutional pharmacy for use while the member is an in-
patient in that institution regardless of the level-of-care

38
« Reimbursement for prescription drugs purchased outside of your prescription drug benefit is
subject to review under the Direct Member Reimbursement Process and reimbursement may be
limited to contract rate less COINSURANCE

* Medication which is to be taken by or administered to an individual, in whole or in part, while he
or she is a patient in a HOSPITAL, extended care facility, or similar institution which operates
on its premises, or allows to be operated on its premises, a facility for dispensing
pharmaceuticals.

© Off labeled drugs

*  Penlac
Formulary Management

A Formulary is a list of medications that have received FDA approval as safe and effective, and have
been chosen for inclusion on the Formulary by a committee of PHYSICIANs and pharmacists from the
Pharmacy Benefit Management (PBM) vendor selected by the CITY to administer the prescription drug
plan. The Formulary drug list can help the member and PHYSICIAN to maximize benefits while
minimizing overall prescription drug costs to the member and the PLAN.

The PBM’s vendor committee evaluates clinical efficacy and safety of each drug and votes the drug into
one of three categories:

¢  Therapeutically Unique — Clinical effectiveness of the drug is superior to existing drugs with an
acceptable safety profile prompting automatic addition to the Formulary

«  Therapeutically Equivalent — Clinical effectiveness and safety profile are comparable to existing
drugs

¢  Therapeutically Inferior — Clinical effectiveness of the drug is no greater than existing drugs and
the safety profile is less favorable prompting automatic non-Formulary status

Products classified by the PBM’s vendor committee as therapeutically equivalent are further evaluated
from an economic perspective to determine which clinically appropriate drugs are most cost-effective for
clients. The PBM’s vendor committee evaluation is based solely on clinical criteria. It is only after the
PBM’s vendor committee clinical assessment is made that the economics of the drug are considered.

Refer to Attachment 5 for the pharmacy benefit structure. The most up-to-date Formulary guide is
available on the pharmacy benefit management vendor’s website. Additions to the Formulary are made on
a quarterly basis throughout the year with deletions most often occurring annually.

Note: Drugs listed on the Formulary may not be covered as they are subject to the City of San Antonio’s
specific plan coverages, exclusions, and limitations.

Prior Authorizations
Certain prescriptions require “clinical prior authorization” or approval from your Plan before they will be

covered. The pharmacy benefit management vendor administers the clinical prior authorization process
on behalf of the City of San Antonio.

39
If the prior authorization request is APPROVED, the pharmacy benefit management vendor’s Clinical
Service Representative contacts the person who initiated the request and enters an override into the
pharmacy benefit management vendor’s processing system for a limited period of time. The pharmacy
will then process your prescription.

If the prior authorization request is DENIED, the pharmacy benefit management vendor’s Clinical Call
Center pharmacist contacts the person who initiated the request and sends a denial letter explaining the
denial reason. This includes denials due to PHYSICIAN non-response. The letter will include
instructions for appealing the denial.

The categories/medications that require prior authorization include, but are not limited to:

¢ Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
° Narcolepsy

« Anabolic steroids (all forms)

¢  Anti-Fungals (i.e., Lamisil, Sporanox)

© Botulinum Toxins (Botox)

© Contraceptives (for dependent children)

* Crinone 8%

The criteria for the Clinical Prior Authorization programs are based on nationally recognized guidelines;
FDA approved indications and accepted standards of practice.

Please have the information listed below when initiating your request for a clinical prior authorization:

© Name of your Medication

« PHYSICIAN’S Name

« PHYSICIAN’S Phone Number

* PHYSICIAN’S Fax Number, if available
© Member ID number (from your card)

* City of San Antonio Group Number:

Age and Quantity Limitations

Some medications are subject to age and quantity limits. Your prescription will be denied at time of
purchase if it exceeds these limitations. Limitations are based on criteria developed with guidelines from
various national medical agencies and in conjunction with the pharmacy benefit management vendor’s
clinical review process.

40
Age Limitations

Certain medications having an age limitation include but are not limited to, the following health
conditions:

© Topical Acne

¢ Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

e Narcolepsy
If your prescription is “denied” due to age limitations, but you and your PHYSICIAN believe it is
MEDICALLY NECESSARY for you to take the medication to treat one of the above conditions, you

may request a clinical prior authorization. Refer to the previous section titled “Prior Authorizations” for
details.

Quantity Limitations

Certain medications having quantity limitations include but are not limited to, the following health
conditions and medications:

* Impotency

* Insomnia

* Migraine

© Butorphanol

¢ Oral Antiemetics

¢ Diflucan 150mg
If your prescription is “denied” due to quantity limitations, and you and your PHYSICIAN believe it is

MEDICALLY NECESSARY for you to take a larger quantity of the medication, you may request a
clinical prior authorization. Refer to the previous section titled “Prior Authorizations” for details.

Specialty Pharmacy

Specialty Pharmacy provides convenient, dependable access to medications for people living with
complex health conditions. The programs and services focus on injectibles and medication therapies
involving strict compliance requirements, special storage/handling/delivery, complex administration

methods, and education /monitoring/ ongoing support. These drugs are limited to a 30-day supply
regardless if dispensed at a retail pharmacy or at mail service

Certain classifications of specialty pharmacy medications will require prior authorization or approval
before they will be covered by your PLAN. Drugs include the following, but are not limited to:

* Asthma (Xolair)

« Endometriosis (Lupron)

41
* Growth Hormone Deficiency (Genotropin, Nutropin)
© Osteoarthritis ( Synvisc)

© Osteoporosis (Forteo)

e Parkinson’s Disease (Apokyn)

© Precocious Puberty (Lupron-Ped)

¢ Prostate Cancer (Lupron, Viadur)
Direct Member Reimbursement

There may be instances where you need to fill a prescription but are unable to have your claim processed
through a network retail pharmacy due to situations such as an emergency situation, or a new member
whose enrollment has not been processed. In these instances, you will be required to pay the full retail
cost of the covered medication, and then file for reimbursement.

You can receive reimbursement for covered prescriptions you've paid for under the PLAN by following
these steps:

© Pay the pharmacist the full amount of your prescription. Keep your receipt(s).
© Obtain and complete a claim form available from the COSA Employee Benefits Office.

¢ Send your completed form and itemized receipts to the pharmacy benefit management vendor.

Please note that the pharmacy benefit management vendor will reimburse you according to the PLAN’S
guidelines.

Drug Utilization Alerts at Time of Purchase

Drug Utilization Review (DUR) is an effective tool in monitoring drug use to assure that it is appropriate,
safe, and effective. At the time of purchase, the pharmacy benefit management’s vendor DUR program
monitors claim submissions across all pharmacies and PHYSICIANS, compares each claim with the
active prescriptions of individual members, and sends “flags” back to the pharmacists should any drug
utilization alerts occur. The DUR system adheres to the National Council for Prescription Drug Products
(NCPDP) DUR guidelines and monitors every prescription for numerous conditions. Examples of some
of the DUR alerts are listed below.

Drug/Drug Interaction

A drug/drug interaction is a potentially harmful result that can occur when a patient is taking two or more
drugs at the same time. The possible results of the interaction may include the increase or decrease in
drug effectiveness or an increase in the adverse effects of one or both of the drugs.

When these occur, the pharmacy benefit management vendor’s system advises the dispensing pharmacist
that the drug he/she is about to dispense may have a potentially harmful interaction with a drug the patient
is currently taking. This allows the pharmacist to use professional judgment to intervene, if necessary, to
prevent the patient from being harmed.

42
Over Utilization

The submission of prescription drug claims across all contracted pharmacies is monitored. When a
pharmacy claim request is received, the pharmacy benefit management vendor's system reviews each
patient’s drug profile, searching for a previous prescription for the same drug or its generic
equivalent. The system then applies any other parameters that have been defined to reject a claim if the
request for the medication is being submitted sooner than the PLAN recognizes as appropriate.

Therapeutic Duplication Monitoring

Duplicate therapy monitoring informs the dispensing pharmacist that the newly prescribed drug may
duplicate the therapeutic effects of another drug already prescribed for the patient. This duplication can
occur even when the two drugs are prescribed for different medical conditions.

When a duplication of therapy is detected, the pharmacy benefit manager will transmit information back

to the dispensing pharmacist, including the name of the drug that is duplicating the therapy, for further
evaluation and intervention.

43
 

 

On inpatient hospital bills under $3,000.00 the PLAN will make a cash presentation to any EMPLOYEE
who (1) detects a billing overcharge made by a HOSPITAL as a result of an inpatient confinement to any
covered family member and (2) receives a billing adjustment and (3) the PLAN realizes a savings.

Upon discharge from the HOSPITAL, simply review the bill. If there is any error, it may be in one of the
following areas:

A calculation error

A charge for service the patient did not receive.

The patient received a service but not in the quantity indicated.
Remember, take the original bill and obtain a corrected bill and present both to the CITY CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR for review and determination. The PLAN will pay the EMPLOYEE 25% of the
savings or maximum of $500, whichever is less. As an example, if an EMPLOYEE detects an incorrect

charge of $1,200 and this is confirmed, the EMPLOYEE will receive a check for 25% of the savings, or
$300 from the PLAN.
COORDINATION OF BENEFITS (COB)

 

The COB provision is designed to correct over coverage which occurs when a person has health coverage
for the same expenses under two (2) or more of the plans listed below. Should this type of duplication
occur, the benefits under this PLAN will be coordinated with those of the other plans so that the total
benefits from all plans will not exceed the expenses actually incurred.

If a COVERED PERSON’S benefits under another health plan are reduced due to cost containment
provisions, such as a second surgical opinion, pre-certification, HMO or preferred provider arrangements,
the amount of the reduction shall not be considered as an allowable expense under this PLAN.

The benefits provided by the plans listed below are considered in determining duplication of coverage:

1. This Plan;

a Any other group insurance or prepayment plan, Health Maintenance Organizations
(HMOs); etc;

By Any labor-management trusteed plan, union welfare plan, employer organization plan or

employee benefit organization plan;

4. Any government plan or statute providing benefits for which COB is not prohibited by
law.

Order of Benefit Determination

Certain rules are used to determine which of the plans will pay benefits first. This is done by using the
first of the following rules which applies:

Os A plan with no COB provision will determine its benefits before a plan with a COB
provision;
2 A plan that covers a person other than as a Dependent will determine its benefits before a

plan that covers such person as a Dependent;

45
3. Any labor-management trusteed plan, union welfare plan, employer organization plan or
employee benefit organization plan will determine its benefits before this plan;

4. When a claim is made for a dependent child who is covered by more than one (1) plan:

(a) the benefits of the plan of the parent whose birthday falls earlier in the year will
be determined before the benefits of the plan of the parent whose birthday falls
later in that year; but

(b) if both parents have the same birthday, the benefits of the plan which covered the
parent longer will be determined before those of the plan which covered the other
parent for a shorter period of time.

This method of determining the order of benefits will be referred to as the "Birthday Rule." The Birthday
Rule will be used to determine the order of benefits for dependent children in all cases except those
described below.

(c) if the other plan does not have the Birthday Rule, then the plan which covers the
child as a dependent of the male parent will pay its benefits first.

(d) if the parents are legally separated or divorced, benefits for the child will be
determined in this order:

(i) first, the plan of the parent with custody of the child will pay its benefits;

(ii) then, the plan of the spouse of the parent with custody of the child will
pay its benefits; and

(iii) _ finally, the plan of the parent not having custody of the child will pay its
benefits.

However, if there is a court decree stating which parent is responsible for the health care expenses of the
child, then a plan covering the child as a dependent of that parent will determine its benefits before any
other plan.
3 A plan that covers a person as:

(a) a laid off employee; or

(b) a retired employee; or

(c) a dependent of such employee;
will determine its benefits after the plan that does not cover such person as:

(a) a laid off employee; or

(b) a retired employee; or

46
(c) a dependent of such employee.

If one of the plans does not have this rule, and if, as a result, the plans do not agree on the order of
benefits, this rule will not apply.

6. If one of the above rules establishes the order of payment, a plan under which the person
has been covered for the longer time will determine its benefits before a plan covering
that person for a shorter time.

Two successive plans of the same group will be considered one plan if the person was eligible for
coverage under the new plan within twenty-four (24) hours after the old plan terminated. A change in the
amount or scope of benefits, or a change in the carrier, or a change from one type of plan to another (e.g.,
single employer plan to multiple employer plan) will not constitute the start of a new plan.

When the COB provision reduces the benefits payable under this Plan:
(a) each benefit will be reduced proportionately; and
(b) only the reduced amount will be charged against any benefit limits under the Plan.

The COB provision is applied throughout the CALENDAR YEAR. If there is any reduction of the
benefits provided under a specific Benefit Provision of this PLAN because of duplicate coverage, similar
benefits may be a payable later in that year if more ALLOWABLE EXPENSES are incurred under the
same Benefit Provision of this PLAN because of duplicate coverage, similar benefits may be payable later
in that year if more ALLOWABLE EXPENSES are incurred under the same Benefit Provision.
"ALLOWABLE EXPENSE" means any necessary, usual and customary item of expense at least part of
which is covered under at least one of the plans covering the person for who claim is made or service
provided, in no event will ALLOWABLE EXPENSE include the difference between the cost of a private
HOSPITAL room and a semi-private HOSPITAL room unless the patient's stay in a private HOSPITAL
room is MEDICALLY NECESSARY.

Benefits under a governmental plan will be taken into consideration without expanding the definition of
"ALLOWABLE EXPENSE" beyond the HOSPITAL, medical and surgical benefits as may be provided
by such governmental plan.

When a plan provides benefits in the form of services rather than cash payments, the reasonable cash
value of each service rendered will be deemed to be both an ALLOWABLE EXPENSE and a benefit
paid.

The PLAN has the right to release to, or obtain from, any other organization or person any information
necessary for the administration of this provision and to pay to any organization any amounts necessary to
satisfy the intent of this provision.

If the PLAN has paid any amounts in excess of those necessary to satisfy the intent of this provision, it
has the right to recover such excess from the person, to or for whom, such payments were made or from
an insurance company or organization.

When you claim benefits under the PLAN, you must furnish information about OTHER COVERAGE,
which may be involved in applying this coordination provision.

47
 

A payment made under another Plan may include an amount which should have been paid under this
PLAN. If it does, the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR may pay that amount to the organization which
made that payment. That amount will then be treated as though it were a benefit paid under this PLAN.
The CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR will not have to pay that amount again. The term "payment made"
includes providing benefits in the form of services, in which case "payment made" means reasonable cash
value of the benefits provided in the form of services.

Compliance with Cost Containment Health Plan Provisions
If the COVERED PERSON’S benefits are reduced by a health plan that has cost containment provisions,

such as a second surgical opinion, HMO, pre-certification or preferred provider arrangements, the amount
of such reduction shall not be an ALLOWABLE EXPENSE.

48
 

PROVISION FOR SUBROGATION AND RIGHT OF RECOVERY

A third party may be liable or legally responsible for expenses incurred by a COVERED PERSON for an
illness or a bodily injury.

Benefits may also be payable under the PLAN for such expenses. When this happens, the PLAN may, at
its option:

lL. Take over the COVERED PERSON’S right to receive payment of the benefits from the
third party. The COVERED PERSON will:

(a) transfer to the PLAN any rights he may have to take legal action against the third
party with respect to benefits paid by the PLAN which are subject to this
provision; and

(b) cooperate fully with the PLAN in asserting its right to subrogate. This means the
COVERED PERSON must supply the PLAN with all information and sign and
return all documents reasonably necessary to carry out the PLAN’s right to
recover from the third party any benefits paid under the PLAN which are subject
to this provision.

2 Recover from the COVERED PERSON any benefits paid under the PLAN which the
COVERED PERSON is entitled to receive from the third party. The PLAN will have a
first lien upon any recovery, whether by settlement, judgment or otherwise, that the
COVERED PERSON received from:

(a) the third party; or
(b) the third party's insurer or guarantor; or
(c) the COVERED PERSON’S uninsured motorist insurance.

This lien will be for the amount of benefits paid by the PLAN for the treatment of illness or bodily injury
for which the third party is liable or legally responsible. If the COVERED PERSON:

(a) makes any recovery as set forth in this provision; and
(b) fails to reimburse the PLAN fully for any benefits paid under this provision; then
he will be personally liable to the PLAN to the extent of such recovery up to the
amount of the first lien. The COVERED PERSON must cooperate fully with the
PLAN in asserting its right to recover.

50
 

1. Proof of Loss

Written proof of loss must be furnished to the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR within one (1) year after the
month such loss was incurred. Failure to furnish proof within the time required shall not invalidate or
reduce any claim if it was not reasonably possible to give proof within such time, provided proof is
furnished as soon as reasonably possible and in no event, except in the absence of legal capacity of the
COVERED PERSON, later than one (1) year from the month care, treatment, service or supply was first
provided for the illness or injury.

2 Legal Actions

No action at law or in equity shall be brought to recover on the PLAN unless the EMPLOYEE or retiree
has exhausted administrative remedies provided in the review and appeal process in Chapter 19.

as Examination
The CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR shall have the right and opportunity to have the COVERED PERSON
examined whose injury or illness is the basis of a claim when and so often as it may reasonably require
during pendency of a claim.

4. Conformity with Federal Statutes

Any provision of this PLAN, which on its EFFECTIVE DATE is in conflict with federal statutes, is
hereby amended to conform to the minimum requirements of such federal statutes.

5. Choice of PHYSICIAN
The COVERED PERSON shall have free choice of any PHYSICIAN, as defined in this PLAN,
practicing legally. Benefits may vary depending on the PHYSICIAN'S participation in the City's
Preferred Provider Network.

6. Entire Contract

The PLAN DOCUMENT constitutes the entire contract of coverage between the PLAN SPONSOR and
the COVERED PERSON.

51
 

7 Effect of Changes

All changes to the PLAN shall become effective as of a date established by the PLAN
ADMINISTRATOR, except that:

No increase or reduction in benefits shall be effective with respect to covered expenses incurred prior to
the date a change was adopted by the PLAN SPONSOR, regardless of the effective date of the change;
and

8. Written Notice
Any written notice required under the PLAN shall be deemed received by a COVERED PERSON sent by
regular mail, postage prepaid, to the last address of the COVERED PERSON on the records of the
EMPLOYER.

9, Clerical Errors/Delay
Clerical errors made on the records of the PLAN SPONSOR, PLAN ADMINISTRATOR or CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR and delays in making entries on records shall not invalidate covered or cause
coverage to be in force or to continue in force. Rather, the EFFECTIVE DATES of coverage shall be
determined solely in accordance with the provisions of the PLAN regardless of whether any contributions
with respect to COVERED PERSONS have been made or have failed to be made because of such errors
or delays. Upon discovery of an error or delay, an equitable adjustment of any contributions will be
made.

10. Workers' Compensation

The PLAN is not in lieu of and does not affect any requirement for coverage by Workers' Compensation
insurance.

11. Statements
(a) Not Representations

Statements made by or on behalf of any person to obtain coverage under the PLAN shall be deemed
representations and not warranties.

(b) Misstatements on Enrollment or Claim Form
If any relevant material fact has been misstated by or on behalf of any person to obtain coverage under the
PLAN, the true fact shall be used to determine whether coverage is in force and the extent, if any, of
coverage. Upon the discovery of any misstatement, an equitable adjustment of any benefit payments will
be made.

(c) Time Limit for Misstatement

No misstatement made to obtain coverage under the PLAN will be used to void the coverage of any
person which has been in force for a period of two (2) years or to deny a claim for a loss incurred or

352
disability commencing after the expiration of the two (2) year period. The provisions of this paragraph
shall not apply if any misstatement has been made fraudulently.

(d) Use of Statements

No statement made by or on behalf of any person will be used in any context unless a copy of the written
instrument containing the statement has been or is furnished to any person or to any person claiming a
right to receive benefits with respect to the person.

12, Identification Cards

Identification card(s) will be issued, which indicate coverage by the City of San Antonio Health Benefits
Program. Upon request, the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR or the City's Employee Benefits Office will
verify coverage of COVERED PERSONS. Identification cards will be for identification of COVERED
PERSONS only and do not constitute a guarantee of coverage.

13. Protection Against Creditors

No benefit payment under this PLAN shall be subject in any way to alienation, sale, transfer, pledge,
attachment, garnishment, execution or encumbrance of any kind, and any attempt to accomplish same
shall be void. If the CITY finds that such an attempt has been made with respect to any payment due or
to become due to any covered person, the CITY in its sole discretion may terminate the interest of such
COVERED PERSON or former COVERED PERSON in such payment. And in such case the CITY shall
apply the amount of such payment to or for the benefit of such COVERED PERSON or former
COVERED PERSON, his/her spouse, parent, adult child, guardian or a minor child, brother or sister, or
other relative of a dependent of such COVERED PERSON or former COVERED PERSON, as the CITY
may determine, and any such application shall be a complete discharge of all liability with respect to such
benefit payment. However, at the discretion of the CITY, benefit payments may be assigned to health
care providers.

53
 

Claim Filing

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Medical claims (doctor's visits, prescription drugs, exams, HOSPITAL, etc.)
shall be filed on a claim form available from the Employee Benefits Office or
CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR.

The claim form shall include medical bills (itemized only) and the explanation of
benefit statement (EOB) from other health insurance policies, if any. The bill
should contain the following:

(i) the official letterhead of the HOSPITAL, doctor, clinic, pharmacy, etc.
including address, phone number and tax ID;

(ii) type of service;

(iii) date of service received;

(iv) amount charged;

(v) name of patient; and

(vi) diagnosis.

Only one (1) detailed claim form must be completed per person per year, even
for different claims and/or diagnoses. Any additional claims throughout the year
may be filed on a short claim form available through the Employee Benefits
Office. If a claim is for an ACCIDENTAL INJURY, then a detailed claim form
must be completed for each accident occurrence. All items on the front of the
claim form must be completed. The blocked section regarding secondary
insurance coverage must be completed.

The original claim form with the attached bills shall be mailed to the City's
CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR.

Limitation of Liability

The PLAN SPONSOR shall not be obligated to pay any benefits under the PLAN for any claim that is not

54
S3 Time of Claims Processing

Benefits for incurred medical expenses which are covered under the PLAN will be processed immediately
upon receipt of proper written proof of loss by the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR. Any benefits payable
will be made within twenty (20) working days.

Periodic Payment: Payment of accrued periodic payments for continuing losses which are covered under
the PLAN will be made immediately upon receipt of proper proof of loss by the CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR and at the applicable time period.

4. Payment of Benefits

All benefits under the PLAN are payable to the Covered EMPLOYEE whose illness or injury or whose
covered dependent's illness or injury is the basis of a claim.

In the event of the death or incapacity of a Covered EMPLOYEE and in the absence of written evidence
to the PLAN of the qualification of a guardian for his estate, the PLAN may, in its sole discretion, make
any and all payments to the individual or institution which, in the opinion of the PLAN
ADMINISTRATOR, is or was providing the care and support of the EMPLOYEE.

Benefits for medical expenses covered under the PLAN may be assigned by a Covered EMPLOYEE to
the person or institution rendering the services for which the expenses were incurred. No assignment will
bind the PLAN SPONSOR unless it is in writing and unless it has been received by the CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR prior to the payment of the benefit assigned. The CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR
will not be responsible for determining whether any assignment is valid. Payment of benefits which have
been assigned will be made directly to the assignee unless a written request not to honor the assignment
signed by the Covered EMPLOYEE and the assignee has been received before the proof of loss is
submitted.

5; Discharge of Liability

Any payment made in accordance with the provisions of this section will fully discharge the liability of
the PLAN SPONSOR to the extent of payment.

6. Recovery of Payments
If the following circumstances apply, the PLAN SPONSOR reserves the right to deduct from any benefits
properly payable under the PLAN or recover from the Covered EMPLOYEE or assignee who received
the payment:

(a) the amount of any payment which has been made in error; or

(b) pursuant to a misstatement contained in a proof of loss; or

(c) pursuant to a misstatement made to obtain coverage under the PLAN within two (2) years
after the date coverage commences.

55
CHAPTER 17 REVIEW & APPEAL PROCESS

 

REVIEW PROCESS FOR DISPUTED CLAIMS

The review process for disputed claims shall include the following:

1

The EMPLOYEE (current or former) may request a review by writing the CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR and stating the basis for the disputed claim.

This request must be made within ninety (90) calendar days after the receipt of the original
explanation of benefits.

Upon receipt of the request, the claim will be reviewed by the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR who
will either affirm the original claim determination in writing, pay the disputed claim amount, or
request additional information necessary to make a determination.

The CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR’S decision will be sent within thirty (30) calendar days to the
EMPLOYEE along with supporting documentation setting out the basis on which the decision is
made.

Either the EMPLOYEE or the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR may request a review by Claims
Review Committee in accordance with paragraph six (6) below. The Employee’s request must be
made within fifteen (15) calendar days after the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR’S decision is
mailed.

A review may be made within fifteen (15) calendar days by a Claims Review Committee upon
the request of the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR only if new claims information is provided by the
EMPLOYEE or Retiree which was not considered before by the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR.
The Committee shall consist of the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR, a representative of the CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR who was not directly involved in processing the initial claim, and an
independent licensed medical reviewer of the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR. The decision of the
Committee will made within fifteen (15) calendar days, mailed to the EMPLOYEE and will be
deemed final and binding.

The review and appeal process in this chapter shall not be construed to supersede, and is in addition to,
any grievance procedure set forth in the Collective Bargaining Agreements between the CITY and the
San Antonio Police Officers’ Association, in regard to Police.

56
 

The CITY may amend the provisions of this PLAN, from time to time, as the need arises in order to
assure the fair and equitable administration of Benefits to be provided eligible EMPLOYEES in
compliance with the terms of the respective Collective Bargaining Agreements.

The CITY may terminate the provisions of the PLAN only during negotiations over the terms to be
contained in Collective Bargaining Agreements with the San Antonio Police Officers' Association, in
regard to Police Officers, for any period covered by a Collective Bargaining Agreement.

Nothing in the Document or any related Bargaining Agreements between the CITY and the Bargaining
Agents of the Police Officers is intended to imply vesting or irrevocable Benefits for current, active
POLICE OFFICERS beyond the provisions of the 2016-2021 Collective Bargaining Agreement between
the CITY and the San Antonio Police Officers’ Association, in regard to POLICE OFFICERS.

Termination, continuance, alteration, or any related activity on the PLAN will be determined by the
provisions of future Collective Bargaining Agreements between the CITY and the San Antonio Police
Officers' Association, in regard to POLICE OFFICERS.
ATTACHMENT 7
TEXAS CIVIL STATUTES ANNOTATED ARTICLE 6243q

ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Purpose

Sec. 1.01. Because of the lasting health consequences associated with the stressful nature of the
professions of firefighting and law enforcement, the purpose of a fund established by this Act is
to provide health care benefits for persons who retired on or after October 1, 1989, from a
municipal fire or police department to which this Act applies.

Definitions
Sec. 1.02. In this Act:

(1) "Actuary" means an actuary selected by the board to conduct an actuarial study who is a
Fellow of the Society of Actuaries, a Fellow of the Conference of Consulting Actuaries, or a
member of the American Academy of Actuaries.

(1-a) "Annual member payroll" means the amount computed on the first payroll date in June of
the applicable fiscal year that equals the product of the base pay plus additional compensation for
employment longevity paid to all members for services rendered multiplied by the total number
of payroll dates in the fiscal year.

(1-b) "Average member salary" means the amount computed on the first payroll date in June of
the applicable fiscal year that equals the quotient of the annual member payroll for the fiscal year
divided by the number of members.

(2) "Board" means the board of trustees of a fund established under Section 1.04 of this Act.

(3) "Beneficiary" means a retiree, or the spouse or other eligible dependent of a retiree, who is
entitled to receive retiree health benefits under Section 5.01(a) of this Act.

(4) "Collective bargaining agreements" means the collectively bargained agreements in effect on
January 1, 2004, between a municipality to which this Act applies and the exclusive bargaining
agents of the firefighters and police officers of the municipality under Chapter 174, Local
Government Code,

(6-a) "Master contract document" means the master contract in effect on January 1, 2004,
containing the terms and conditions of the health and medical benefits plan established under the
collective bargaining agreements.

(6-b) "Member" means a firefighter or police officer, except as provided by Section 4.011 of this
Act.

194
(6-c) "Payroll date" means the date every other week on which a municipality to which this Act
applies pays regular compensation to members.

(6-d) "Pension act" means Chapter 824, Acts of the 73rd Legislature, Regular Session, 1993
(Article 62430, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes).

(6-e) "Pension fund" means the firefighters’ and police officers’ pension fund of a municipality to
which the pension act applies.

(5) "Firefighter" means an employee of the fire department who is classified as a firefighter by
the personnel department of a municipality to which this Act applies.

(6) "Fund" means the firefighter's and police officer's retiree health care fund of a municipality to
which this Act applies.

(7) “Police officer" means an employee of the police department who is classified as a police
officer by the personnel department of a municipality to which this Act applies.

(8) "Retiree" means an individual who was a firefighter or police officer whose retirement date is
after September 30, 1989.

(10) "Years of service" means the number of full years beginning on the date the firefighter or
police officer becomes a member of the fund until the date the firefighter or police officer retires
or otherwise terminates employment as a firefighter or police officer less any service credit for
the amount of time the member is engaged in active service with any uniformed service of the
United States that the member does not purchase in accordance with Section 4.023 of this Act.

(8-a) "Retiree health plan" means the group family health plan for retirees and other beneficiaries
established by the collective bargaining agreements and the master contract document.

(9) "Trustee" means a member of the board.

Sec. 1.03. APPLICABILITY. This Act applies to a paid fire and police department of a
municipality with a population of 1,140,000 or more but less than 1,180,000.

Fund; Statutory Trust
Sec. 1.04. (a) The firefighters’ and police officers’ retiree health care fund is established for each
municipality to which this Act applies. The fund is a statutory trust and is not a subdivision of

government.

(b) The board shall administer and hold in trust the assets of the fund for the exclusive benefit of
the beneficiaries of the fund. The board may pay from the fund reasonable administrative
expenses incurred in administering the fund.

195
(c) The fund may not be diverted, transferred, or used for any other purpose inconsistent with
this Act and with the instruments governing the fund.

(d) A public or private agency, entity, or authority may not alter or impair any contract made by
the board or under the authority or direction of the board.

Exemptions

Sec. 1.05. The health benefits paid or payable by the fund are exempt from garnishment,
assignment, attachment, judgments, other legal processes, and inheritance or other taxes
established by this state.

ARTICLE 2. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

Board of Trustees

Sec, 2.01. (a) The firefighters’ and police officers’ retiree health care fund of a municipality is
governed by a board of trustees consisting of the following nine members:

(1) the mayor of the municipality or the mayor's designee;
(2) two members of the municipal governing body, appointed by that governing body;

(3) two members of the fund who are firefighters below the rank of fire chief, elected by secret
ballot by a majority of the votes cast by the members of the fund who are firefighters;

(4) two members of the fund who are police officers below the rank of police chief, elected by
secret ballot by a majority of the votes cast by the members of the fund who are police officers;

(5) a retiree representative of the fire department, elected by secret ballot by a majority of the
votes cast by the retirees of the fire department who are beneficiaries of the fund and the
surviving spouses of deceased firefighters who are beneficiaries of the fund; and

(6) a retiree representative of the police department, elected by secret ballot by a majority of the
votes cast by the retirees of the police department who are beneficiaries of the fund and the
surviving spouses of deceased police officers who are beneficiaries of the fund.

(b) The board, through its secretary, shall administer the required elections of the members and
retiree trustees. The board shall hold a runoff election between the two candidates receiving the
most votes if no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast for a trustee position. On the
executive director's certification that a candidate for trustee is eligible for office and is
unopposed for election, the board shall certify the candidate as elected to the board.

(c) The fund is independent of the control of the municipality.

Terms of Trustees
196
Sec. 2.02. (a) Subject to Subsection (a-1) the mayor of the municipality or the mayor's designee,
serves on the board for the term of the mayor's office.

(a-1) The mayor may remove and replace the mayor's designee at the mayor's discretion.

(b) The two members of the municipal governing body serve on the board for the term of the
office to which they were elected.

(c) The two members of the fund who are firefighters below the rank of fire chief serve on the
board for staggered four-year terms, with one member's term expiring every two years.

(d) The two members of the fund who are police officers below the rank of police chief serve on
the board for staggered four-year terms, with one member's term expiring every two years.

(e) The retiree representatives serve on the board for staggered four-year terms, with one
member's term expiring every two years.

Resignation or Removal of Trustees

Sec. 2.03. (a) A trustee who is a retiree or a member of the fund may resign or may be removed
by a vote of the group eligible to elect the trustee.

(b) A petition for removal under this section must be filed with the board within 45 days after the
date the first signature on the petition was obtained, A signature is not valid if it is not dated.

(c) A removal election must be held within 90 days after the date the board certifies that a proper
petition for a removal election has been signed by at least 20 percent of the persons eligible to
vote to elect the trustee. A trustee's term of service ends on the entry of an order by the board
declaring that a majority of the votes cast in a removal election under this section favor removal.

(d) On the date the board enters an order under Subsection (c) of this section, the board shall call
a special election to be held not less than 20 and not more than 30 days after that date to fill the
vacancy for the unexpired term of the trustee who was removed. The trustee who was removed is
not eligible to run in the special election but is eligible to run in all subsequent elections in which
the person is otherwise eligible to run.

Officers

Sec. 2.04. (a) The board shall elect a chair, a vice chair, and a secretary from among the trustees.

(b) The board in its discretion may elect other officers of the board. An officer may be, but is not
required to be, a trustee.

Employees

Sec. 2.05. The board may employ an executive director and staff to administer the fund.
197
 

Meetings; Quorum

Sec. 2.06. (a) The board shall hold regular monthly meetings and special meetings at the call of
the chair or on written demand by a majority of the trustees.

(b) Five trustees constitute a quorum. The board may act with the consent of a majority of the
trustees who are present at a board meeting at which a quorum is present.

Board Committees
Sec. 2.07. (a) The chair of the board may appoint committees that report to the board.
(b) Only trustees may be appointed to a committee under this section.

(c) A committee must be composed of not fewer than three and not more than four trustees,
except as otherwise specifically provided by the board.

(d) Only members of a committee may vote as committee members.

(e) The board may direct staff and advisors to assist the committees.

(f) All trustees may attend committee meetings.

(g) Members of a committee serve at the pleasure of the board.

(h) Permanent or standing committees may be appointed.

ARTICLE 3. GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES

General Powers and Duties of Board

Sec. 3.01. (a) The board has complete authority and power to:

(1) administer the fund for the exclusive benefit of the beneficiaries of the fund;
(2) order payments from the fund;

(3) independently control the fund; and

(4) conduct all litigation on behalf of the fund.

(b) The board may contract with a municipality or other entity to receive the following services:

(1) the administration of benefit claims of beneficiaries, including payment of claims from
money in the fund;

198
(2) the administration of the board's administrative expenses, including payment of the expenses
from money in the fund as approved in advance by the board; and

(3) other administrative services approved by the board.

(c) The board shall adopt rules necessary for the board's effective operation, including rules
relating to:

(1) the disbursement of the fund's assets; and
(2) the name of the board and the fund.

(d) The board shall take any action necessary to ensure that contributions to the fund and benefits
received from the fund are exempt from federal taxes and excluded from a beneficiary's taxable
income.

(e) The board shall report annually to the governing body of the municipality regarding the
condition of the fund and the receipts and disbursements of the fund.

(f) The board has full discretion and authority to administer the fund and the retiree health plan,
construe and interpret this Act and the retiree health plan, correct any defect or omission,
reconcile any inconsistency, and perform all other acts necessary to carry out the purpose of this
Act and the retiree health plan and administer this Act and the retiree health plan for the greatest
benefit of all members in a manner and to the extent that the board considers expedient.

(g) A gathering of any number of trustees to investigate, research, or review prospective or
current investments or otherwise attend to the trustees' fiduciary responsibilities, without formal
action by the trustees, is not a deliberation or meeting under Chapter 551, Government Code, and
is not required to be open to the public.

(h) The trustees of the fund are immune from liability for any action taken or omission made in
good faith in the performance of their duties for the fund.

(i) Information contained in a record that is in the custody of the fund concerning a member,
former member, retiree, deceased retiree, beneficiary, or alternate payee is confidential under
Chapter 552, Government Code. The information may not be disclosed in a form that identifies a
specific individual, unless the information is disclosed:

(1) to the individual;
(2) to the individual's spouse, attorney, guardian, executor, administrator, or conservator, or to
another person the executive director or the executive director's designee determines from

written documentation to be acting in the interest of the individual or the individual's estate;

(3) to a person authorized by the individual in writing to receive the information;
199
(4) to a government official or employee seeking the information in order to perform the duties
of the official or employee; or

(5) under a subpoena.
(j) Subsection (i) of this section does not prevent the disclosure of the status or identity of an
individual as a member, former member, retiree, deceased member, deceased retiree, beneficiary,

or alternate payee of the fund.

(k) A determination and disclosure under Subsection (i) of this section does not require notice to
the member, retiree, beneficiary, or alternate payee.

Authority of Municipality

Sec. 3.02. The municipality has the authority and power to:

(1) contract with the board, as described in Section 3.01(b) of this Act;

(2) provide services through a subcontractor in a contract under Section 3.01(b) of this Act;

(3) take any action necessary to ensure that contributions to the fund and benefits received from
the fund are exempt from federal taxes and excluded from a beneficiary's taxable income; and

(4) control the internal functions of the municipality relating to the municipality's interactions
with or activities on behalf of the fund.

Sec. 3.03. Repealed by Acts 1999, 76th Leg., ch. 52, Sec. 24(b), eff. Oct. 1, 1999,

Insurance

Sec. 3.04. (a) The board may use fund assets to purchase insurance from any insurer licensed to
do business in this state that provides for reimbursement of the fund and any trustee, officer, or

employee of the fund for:

(1) liability imposed or damages incurred because of an alleged act, error, or omission committed
in the capacity of a fiduciary, officer, or employee; and

(2) costs and expenses incurred in defense of a claim for an alleged act, error, or omission.
(b) The board may not purchase insurance for reimbursement of a trustee, officer, or employee of
the fund for liability imposed on the trustee, officer, or employee because of the person's

dishonesty, fraud, lack of good faith, or intentional failure to act prudently.

Indemnity

200
Sec. 3.05. (a) If insurance purchased by the board under Section 3.04 of this Act is unavailable,
insufficient, inadequate, or otherwise not in effect, the board may indemnify a trustee, officer, or
employee of the fund for liability imposed as damages because of an alleged act, error, or
omission committed by the person in the capacity of a fiduciary, officer, or employee and for
reasonable costs and expenses incurred in defense of a claim of an alleged act, error, or omission.

(b) The board may not indemnify a trustee, officer, or employee of the fund for liability or
expenses incurred because of the person's personal dishonesty, fraud, lack of good faith, or
intentional failure to act prudently.

(c) A trustee may not vote on a matter of the trustee's own indemnification or be counted in
determining whether a quorum is present for the vote.

(d) The board may adopt a policy establishing a method for presentation, approval, and payment
of claims for indemnification.

(e) If insurance purchased by the board under Section 3.04 of this Act is unavailable, insufficient,
inadequate, or otherwise not in effect, the board may indemnify a former trustee, officer, or
employee of the fund under this section for an alleged act, error, or omission committed by the
person in the capacity of a fiduciary, officer, or employee and for reasonable costs and expenses
incurred in defense of a claim of an alleged act, error, or omission.

(f) The board may authorize indemnification of a trustee, officer, or employee of the fund, or a
former trustee, officer, or employee of the fund under this section regardless of when the alleged
act, error, or omission occurred, provided that the person is considered liable for the alleged act,
error, or omission in relation to the person's capacity as a current or former trustee, officer, or
employee of the fund.

ARTICLE 4. MEMBERSHIP AND CONTRIBUTIONS
Sec. 4.01. MEMBERSHIP. Each member is a member of the fund.

Sec. 4.011. MEMBERSHIP OF FIRE CHIEF AND CHIEF OF POLICE. Not later than the 30th
day after the date a fire chief or a chief of police of a municipality assumes office, the fire chief
or chief of police may make an irrevocable election to not become a member of the fund or to
terminate membership in the fund by delivering written notice of such election to the secretary of
the board. A fire chief or chief of police who does not make an election under this subsection is
considered to have chosen to become or to remain a member of the fund.

Sec. 4.02. MEMBER AND BENEFICIARY CONTRIBUTIONS. (a) Subject to Section 4.022 of
this Act, there shall be deducted from each member's compensation and contributed to the fund
on each payroll date an amount equal to the member contribution amount applicable to the fiscal
year in which the payroll date occurs. The member contribution amount applicable to a fiscal
year equals the amount obtained by:

201
(1) multiplying the average member salary for the preceding fiscal year by the percentage equal
to 100 percent plus the estimated percentage increase in the annual member payroll from the
preceding fiscal year to the fiscal year as determined by the actuary;

(2) multiplying the product computed under Subdivision (1) of this subsection by the percentage
applicable to the fiscal year as provided in Subsection (b) of this section; and

(3) dividing the product computed under Subdivision (2) of this subsection by the total number
of payroll dates that occur during the fiscal year.

(b) For purposes of Subsections (a)(2) and (d)(2) of this section, the percentage applicable to
each fiscal year is:

(1) 2.0 percent for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2007, and ending September 30, 2008;
(2) 2.7 percent for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2008, and ending September 30, 2009;
(3) 3.4 percent for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2009, and ending September 30, 2010;

(4) 4.1 percent for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2010, and ending September 30, 2011;
and

(5) 4.7 percent for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2011, and all subsequent fiscal years.

(c) Subject to Subsection (e) of this section, to be eligible for health benefits under Section 5.01
of this Act, a service retiree or disability retiree who retired or retires with less than 30 years of
service, or the retiree's surviving spouse in the case of a deceased retiree, shall continue to make
monthly contributions in accordance with Subsection (d) of this section to the fund after the date
of the retiree's retirement for the lesser of:

(1) the period preceding the date the retiree becomes or would have become eligible for federal
Medicare coverage; or

(2) the period equal to 30 years less the retiree's years of service achieved on the date of the
retiree's retirement.

(d) The pension fund shall deduct the contribution required under Subsection (c) of this section
from the monthly retirement benefit payment or death benefit payment paid to each retiree or
retiree's spouse required to make the contributions, excluding payments made by the pension
fund under Section 6.12 of the pension act. The pension fund shall deduct an amount equal to the
retiree contribution amount applicable to the fiscal year in which the benefit payment occurs.
The retiree contribution amount applicable to a fiscal year equals the amount obtained by:

(1) multiplying the average member salary for the preceding fiscal year by a percentage equal to
100 percent plus the estimated percentage increase in the annual member payroll from the
preceding fiscal year to the fiscal year as determined by the actuary;

202
(2) multiplying the product computed under Subdivision (1) of this subsection by the percentage
applicable to the fiscal year as provided by Subsection (b) of this section; and

(3) dividing the product computed under Subdivision (2) of this subsection by 12.

(e) A retiree who retired under the pension act as a result of a disability, or the disability retiree's
surviving spouse in the case of a deceased disability retiree, is not required to make contributions
under Subsection (c) of this section for more than 10 years following the date of the disability
retiree's retirement.

(f) This section applies only to members who retire as a service or disability retiree after October
1, 2007, and their surviving spouses.

(g) The municipal contributions to and health benefits paid from the fund are a part of the
compensation for services rendered to a municipality to which this Act applies. This Act is
considered part of the contract of employment and appointment of the firefighters and police
officers of that municipality.

Sec. 4.021. CONTRIBUTIONS BY A MUNICIPALITY. (a) Subject to Section 4.022 of this
Act, a municipality to which this Act applies shall pay into the fund on each payroll date the
municipal contribution amount applicable to the fiscal year in which the payroll date occurs. The
municipal contribution amount applicable to a fiscal year equals the amount obtained by:

(1) multiplying the average member salary for the preceding fiscal year by the percentage equal
to 100 percent plus the estimated percentage increase in the annual member payroll from the
preceding fiscal year to the fiscal year as determined by the actuary;

(2) multiplying the product computed under Subdivision (1) of this subsection by 9.4 percent;

(3) dividing the product computed under Subdivision (2) of this subsection by the total number
of payroll dates that occur during the fiscal year; and

(4) multiplying the quotient computed under Subdivision (3) of this subsection by the number of
individuals who are members on the payroll date.

(b) The municipal contributions to and health benefits paid from the fund are part of the
compensation for services rendered to the municipality. This Act is considered part of the
contract of employment and appointment of the firefighters and police officers of that
municipality.

Sec. 4.022. MANDATORY ADJUSTMENTS TO RETIREE HEALTH PLAN
CONTRIBUTIONS, OUT-OF-POCKET PAYMENTS, AND DEDUCTIBLES. (a) Subject to
Subsection (b) of this section, if on October 1, 2017, the actuary determines and states in the then
most recent actuarial report delivered to the board that the number of years required to fully

203
amortize the unfunded liability of the fund is more than 30 years, the board shall modify the
retiree health plan as follows:

(1) the amount of the contributions in effect under Sections 4.02 and 4.021 of this Act shall be
increased by a percentage determined by the board not to exceed 10 percent on October 1 of each
year, commencing October 1, 2017; and

(2) the maximum deductibles and maximum out-of-pocket payments for each individual in a
calendar year and for each family in a calendar year set out in the retiree health plan then in
effect shall be increased by a percentage determined by the board not to exceed 10 percent on
January | of each year, commencing January 1, 2018.

(b) The board is not required to implement additional increases under Subsection (a) of this
section if the actuary determines and states in the actuarial report delivered to the board under
that subsection that the number of years required to fully amortize the unfunded liability of the
fund is 30 years or less.

(c) Except as provided by this section, the board may not change the amount of contributions to
the fund by a member under Section 4.02 of this Act or a municipality under Section 4.021 of
this Act.

Sec, 4.023. UNIFORMED SERVICE. (a) A member of the fund who enters any uniformed
service of the United States may not:

(1) be required to make the monthly payments into the fund as required by this Act while the
member is engaged in active service with the uniformed service; or

(2) lose any seniority rights or retirement benefits provided by this Act because of that service.

(b) Not later than the 90th day after the date of the member's reinstatement to an active status in a
fire or police department, the member shall file with the secretary of the board a written
statement of intent to pay into the fund an amount equal to the amount the member would have
paid if the member had remained on active status in the department during the period of the
member's absence while in the uniformed service.

(c) The member shall make the payment described by Subsection (b) of this section in full within
a period after the member's return that is equal to three times the amount of time the member was
absent, except that the maximum period for payment may not exceed five years.

(d) If the member does not comply with Subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the member loses
all credit toward the member's years of service for the length of time the member was engaged in
active service in any uniformed service.

(e) The amount of credit purchased under this section may not exceed the length of the active
service in a uniformed service required to be credited by law.

204
(f) If the member complies with this section and makes all required payments, a municipality to
which this Act applies shall make payment to the fund in an amount equal to the amount the
municipality would have paid if the member had remained on active status in the department
during the member's absence while in the uniformed service.

Rights of Beneficiaries and Members; Association

Sec. 4.03. (a) Beneficiaries and members of the fund are entitled to all rights otherwise provided
to the beneficiaries or members under any state or federal statute.

(b) This fund is intended to be a voluntary employee's beneficiary association as described by
Section 501(c), Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)), and the board has the
discretion to take any action necessary to ensure that the fund is classified as such.

ARTICLE 5, RETIREMENT HEALTH BENEFITS

Sec. 5.01. RETIREMENT HEALTH BENEFITS. (a) A person is eligible to receive health and
medical benefits under this Act in accordance with the provisions of the retiree health plan in
effect, except as otherwise provided by this Act.

(b) Health and medical benefits shall be provided by the fund to persons who are eligible to
receive them under Subsection (a) of this section, in accordance with the provisions of the retiree
health plan in effect, except as otherwise provided by this Act.

(c) The expiration of the terms, or the termination, of the collective bargaining agreements or the
master contract document has no effect on the retiree health plan or the benefits provided under
this Act.

(d) The board as it considers appropriate may modify the retiree health plan if the modifications
adopted at any regular or special meeting of the board do not, in the aggregate, increase the
fund's total actuarial unfunded liability, as determined by the actuary. The board has exclusive
authority to modify the retiree health plan.

(e) The board may discontinue benefits under this section for any person who does not make the
contributions required by Section 4.02 of this Act.

(f) On January 1, 2008, the maximum deductible for each individual in a calendar year as set out
in the retiree health plan increases from $100 or $200, as applicable, to $500, and the maximum
deductible for each family in a calendar year as set out in the retiree health plan increases from
$200 or $400, as applicable, to $1,000.

(g) The maximum out-of-pocket, including deductible, payment for each individual for each of
the following calendar years as set out in the retiree health plan increases as follows:

(1) on January 1, 2008, from $600 or $700, as applicable, to $1,500;

205
(2) on January 1, 2009, from $1,500 to $1,600;

(3) on January 1, 2010, from $1,600 to $1,700;

(4) on January 1, 2011, from $1,700 to $1,800; and

(5) on January 1, 2012, from $1,800 to $1,900.

(h) Commencing January 1, 2013, on January 1 of each year the board shall increase the amount
of the maximum deductible and out-of-pocket payments established under Subsections (f) and
(g) of this section by a percentage equal to the then most recently published annual percentage
increase in health care costs as set out in a published index selected by the actuary that reflects
annual changes in health care costs. The annual percentage increase provided for by this
subsection may not exceed eight percent.

ARTICLE 6. INVESTMENT AND FINANCIAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 6.01. Repealed by Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1415, Sec. 19, eff. October 1, 2007.

Sec. 6.02. ACCOUNTS AND FINANCIAL REPORTS. (a) Accounts of the fund shall be kept as
ordered by the board.

(b) The board shall require that monthly financial reports showing all fund receipts and
disbursements be prepared and submitted to the board.

Reserve Funds

Sec. 6.03. (a) The board shall determine a reasonably safe amount of surplus necessary to defray
reasonable expenses of the fund.

(b) All other assets shall be designated as reserve funds.

(c) Only the board may invest and manage the reserve funds. The reserve funds must be invested
and managed for the sole benefit of the beneficiaries.

Investment Powers of Board

Sec. 6.04. (a) The board shall invest the reserve funds in a manner that a prudent investor would
invest the funds, considering the purposes, terms, distribution requirements, and other
circumstances of an enterprise with a similar character and similar aims.

(b) The board shall diversify the investment of the reserve funds to minimize the risk of large
losses unless under the circumstances it is clearly prudent not to do so. In determining whether
the board has exercised prudence concerning an investment decision, the investment of all assets
of the funds, rather than the prudence of a single investment of the funds, shall be considered.

206
(c) The board may directly manage investments of the reserve funds or may choose to contract
for professional management services. If the funds own real estate, the board may, at its
discretion, establish an organization described by Section 501(c)(2) or 501(c)(25), Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to hold title to the real estate.

(d) The board has final responsibility for the investment of the reserve funds. The board may
purchase securities or engage in limited partnerships or make other investments not specifically
provided by this Act and has the authority to exercise discretion in determining the nature, type,
quality, and size of any investment consistent with the investment policies it establishes.

Professional Consultants
Sec. 6.05. (a) The board may contract for professional investment management services,
financial consultants, independent auditors, third-party administrators, preferred providers, health

maintenance organizations, attorneys, and actuaries. Only the board may enter into those
contracts. The board may establish a reasonable fee for compensation under those contracts.

(b) The board may designate its own custodian or master custodian to perform the customary
duties involving the safekeeping of the assets and the execution of transactions of either domestic
or foreign securities. The board may engage in a securities lending program consistent with the
benefits payable to beneficiaries.

Sec. 6.06. INVESTMENT CONSULTANT QUALIFICATIONS. In appointing investment
consultants, the board shall require that the investment consultant be:

(1) registered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. Section 80b-1 et seq.), as
amended;

(2) a bank as defined by that Act; or

(3) an insurance company qualified to perform investment services under the law of more than
one state,

ARTICLE 7. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
REQUIREMENTS

Ethics Policy
Sec. 7.01. (a) A trustee, the executive director, or any employee of the fund may not:
(1) buy, sell, or exchange any property to or from the fund;

(2) deal with the assets of the fund in the person's own interest or for the person's own account;
or

(3) receive any consideration from any person dealing with the fund.
207
(b) To implement Subsection (a) of this section and to strengthen the faith and confidence of the
members and beneficiaries of the fund, the board shall develop standards of conduct and
financial disclosure requirements to be observed by each trustee and by the executive director in
the performance of the board's and executive director's official duties.

ARTICLE 8. TRANSITION; EFFECTIVE DATE; EMERGENCY [REPEALED]
Secs. 8.01, 8.02. Repealed by Acts 1999, 76th Leg., ch. 52, Sec. 24(a), eff. Oct. 1, 1999.

Acts 1997, 75th Leg., ch. 1332, eff. Oct. 1, 1997. Amended by Acts 1999, 76th Leg., ch. 52, Sec.
1 to 24, eff. Oct. 1, 1999.

Amended by:

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state. tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
1, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R:S.; Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
2, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
3, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch, <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
4, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtexv/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
5, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtex/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
6, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www. legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R /billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
7, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www. legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
8, eff. October 1, 2007.

208
Acts 2007, 80th Lez, RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
9, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS.; Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
10, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
11, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
12, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS.,. Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www. legis. state. tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
13, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www. legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
14, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R /billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
15, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www. legis. state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
16, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www .legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
17, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
18, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"

href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
19, eff. October 1, 2007.

209
 

ATTACHMENT 8
ORGANIZATIONAL CHART
SERVICE AND SUPPORT BUREAU

 

210
