aark.
mesa-az

 

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

CITY OF MESA
AND
MESA POLICE ASSOCIATION

July 1, 2014 - June 30, 2017
PREAMBLE...

  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

ARTICLE 1: RECOGNITION
ARTICLE 2: RIGHTS...

Rights of Management.
Rights of Certified Employee Organizatio:
Rights of Unit Members...
Strikes...
ARTICLE 3: LABOR MANAGEMENT...
City Labor-Management Committee..
Police Department Labor-Management Team
ARTICLE 4: HOURS OF WORK...
Schedule
Promotional Lists ..
Off Duty Related Employment.
Briefing.
Meal Breaks/Rest Periods.
ARTICLE 5: BENEFITS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Employee Benefits Task Force.

 

Post-Employment Health Care

 

Holidays...
Sick Time
Vacation Time.....

 

 

 

Bereavement Time...

 

Tuition Reimbursement ..
Stability Pay...
ARTICLE 6: COMPENSATION.

 

 

 

Wages/Market Adjustments.
Promotion...

 

 

Overtime
Step Increases

Shift Differential
Uniform Allowance...

 

 

 

Ballistic Vest Reimbursement...

 

Bilingual Compensation.
Deferred Compensatio:
ARTICLE 7: MISCELLANEOUS.

 

 

Saving Clause..

 

Term and Effect of Memorandum...
MEET AND CONFER RESOLUTION...

 

 

SIGNATURE AUTHORITY RESOLUTION ...

 

 
 

PREAMBLE

This Memorandum of Understanding is entered into between the parties: the City of Mesa,
(hereinafter referred to as “the City”) and the Mesa Police Association (MPA) (hereinafter
referred to as the “Certified Employee Organization’).

WHEREAS: the parties, through their designated representatives, met and conferred in good
faith regarding wages, hours and working conditions of employment pursuant to Resolution
9607 (hereinafter referred to as the Resolution) and Management Policy 358 (hereinafter
referred to as the Policy), as endorsed by the City of Mesa Mayor and Council on November 16,
2009 (attached) and set forth this Memorandum of Understanding (hereinafter referred to as
“Memorandum’”) for Police Department employees who are represented by the Certified
Employee Organization (hereinafter referred to as “unit members”); and

WHEREAS: the parties recognize the importance of continuing and maintaining harmonious
relations, cooperation and understanding between the City and its employees; and

WHEREAS: the parties hereby acknowledge that the provisions of this Memorandum are not
intended to abrogate the authority and responsibility of the City as a government entity
provided for under the laws of the State of Arizona, and the City charter, code, or ordinances of
the City; and

WHEREAS: it is understood that all items relating to unit members’ wages, hours, and
working conditions of employment not specifically addressed in this Memorandum are covered
by ordinances, resolutions, policies, and current practices of the Police Department and the
City; and

NOW THEREFORE, the City and the Certified Employee Organization, having reached this
complete agreement concerning wages, hours, and working conditions as allowed by the

Resolution for July 1, 2014 - June 30, 2017, submit this Memorandum to the Mayor and the City
Council of Mesa with their joint recommendation that the governing body adopt its terms.

 

Page 3
 

ARTICLE 1: RECOGNITION

In accordance with all applicable provisions of the Resolution and the Policy, the City does
hereby recognize the MPA as the Certified Employee Organization for the purpose of meet and
confer with respect to wages, hours and working conditions as defined by the Policy, for all full-
time sworn Police Officers, Police Sergeants, and Master Police Officer, hereby known as unit
members. Contract workers, part-time, temporary, and seasonal employees are excluded; as
are probationary employees who have not graduated from the Police Academy.

ARTICLE 2: RIGHTS

Rights of Management

The following are illustrative of rights of management and are not to be construed as being all-
inclusive.

The City will maintain the right of determination as to the purpose of each of its departments,
agencies, boards and commissions, and will set standards of service to be offered to the public
and shall exercise complete control and discretion over its organization and operations. Any of
the rights, powers and authority the City had prior to entering into this Memorandum are
retained by the City except as expressly provided for in this Memorandum. For example,

A. The City will direct its employees, take disciplinary action, relieve its employees from
duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons, determine whether goods
and services shall be produced or provided by City employees, purchased or contracted
for, and determine the methods, means, and personnel by which the City’s operations
are to be conducted.

B. The City will take all necessary actions to maintain uninterrupted service to the

community.

C. The City Manager, or designee, may consult with the Certified Employee Organization

bout the direct consequences that decisions on any of the foregoing matters may have

mn wages, hours, and working conditions.

D. The City will determine the overall goals, objectives and policies affecting City

al
0]

programs.

E. The City will determine the size of the City’s workforce, its organization, functions,

duties, amount of supervision and table of organization and will direct, appoint, employ

and assign officers, agents and employees of the City and determine the standards
therefore.

F. The City will determine the location of City facilities, including the establishment or

relocation of buildings, divisions or subdivisions thereof, and the relocation or closing of

offices, departments, divisions or subdivisions, buildings or other facilities.

G. The City will determine the financial policies, including all accounting procedures and

all matters pertaining to finance.

 

 

 

Page 4
 

H. The City will direct, supervise, control and evaluate the departments, units, programs,
functions and services of the City.

I. The City will classify the various positions of the City, develop and determine levels of
staffing and training, prescribe duties and standards of productivity therefore, and
adopt reasonable rules and regulations for acceptable conduct.

J. The City will authorize, assign and apportion overtime, including authorization for any
full, part time or contract labor.

Rights of Certified Employee Organization

A. Certified employee organization officials will be released from duty with full pay when
participating in a meeting with the City and/or City representatives. Certified Employee
Organization Officers will also be released from duty with pay to participate in meet and
confer negotiation sessions, or any committee or task force established by this
memorandum. With approval from the Police Chief, training and conference hours will also
result in release from duty with full pay and will not require the use of the release hours in
part b of this section.

B. The City will, subject to operational needs and supervisory approval, allow release time
with pay up to a maximum of 1600 total hours for all duly elected officers to include the
President or designee, Vice President, Secretary/Treasurer, Directors and Trustees of the
Certified Employee Organization and members appointed in writing by the Certified
Employee Organization for specific committees (not to include department committees), to
attend Certified Employee Organization business, Board of Trustees meetings, and other
pertinent events. These hours are not subject to normal leave policies. Additional hours
may be granted at the Police Chief's discretion.

C. Certified Employee Organization representatives, in accordance with the Rights of Unit
Member section of this Memorandum, with supervisory approval, shall be released from
duty with full pay to provide unit member representation. Although permission from the
supervisor is required, the Police Department will make every reasonable effort to approve
the time for the representative where such does not negatively impact operations.

D. The City will facilitate the collection of membership dues by the Certified Employee
Organization by setting up automatic deductions from the pay of employees who submit a
completed authorization form prepared by the City.

E. The City will provide one (1) bulletin board at each police station as designated by the City
for the exclusive use of the Certified Employee Organization for the posting of official
Certified Employee Organization literature that is not political in nature, abusive of any
person or organization, or disruptive of the department's operations. No more than eight
(8) bulletin boards will be provided for this purpose. In addition, the Certified Employee
Organization will be allowed to use all Police Department Communications tools to
disseminate such information when necessary. Such literature shall not be political in

 

 

Page 5
 

nature, nor shall they be abusive of any person or organization or disruptive of the
department's operation.

The City will provide the Certified Employee Organization, upon request, non-confidential
and readily available information concerning unit members, which is necessary to Certified
Employee Organization representatives for negotiations. Such requests may be submitted
to the City Manager or his designee and will not require a public records request form. Any
unusual costs incurred by the City in connection with this section will be borne by the
Certified Employee Organization.

The Certified Employee Organization will be allowed one (1) hour to make presentations to
new Police Officer-Recruits regarding the Certified Employee Organization. Representatives
from other employee associations will be not present during this presentation. During such
presentations, Certified Employee Organization representatives will not discuss
information that is abusive of any person or organization or disruptive of the Department's
operation.

. With the Police Chief's approval, Sworn association Executive Board, Trustees, and the
Grievance Chair may wear department uniform to events and functions that positively
benefit members, or supports the mission of the Police Department or promote the positive
role of law enforcement in the community.

Subject to existing technological capabilities, the City shall provide to the association, upon
written request, an electronic list of all employees and their work locations who are eligible
to become represented members, including any new sworn employees to the Police
Department. This information will not be disseminated by the employee organization.

Subject to operational needs and supervisory approval, two association representatives
from the Certified Employee Organization can respond to facilitate critical incidents.
Command-level approval is required if the association wants to send more than two
association representatives to a critical incident. Critical incident response from
representatives currently off-duty shall not qualify as overtime unless the total hours
worked in a workweek are in excess of forty (40) hours. Subject to operational needs,
flextime can be required of unit members before overtime is accrued.

The City will notify the association of inquiries or public record requests from any media
outlet regarding any alleged misconduct or lawsuits against unit members as soon as
possible after receiving the request.

The City will share information regarding past disciplinary cases with the association. The
association will receive a quarterly report on all Police Department Internal Affairs
investigations completed including tracking number, officer name and ID, date received,
alleged violation, complainant, findings, discipline, and date closed. The information may
also be provided to the association upon written request.

 

 

Page 6
 

M. The timeframes for disclosure/exchange of information, witnesses names and
documents/evidence under A.R.S. § 38-1101 shall not apply for purposes of disciplinary
proceedings. The discovery rules set forth in the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure shall not
apply to disciplinary proceedings. The timelines and discovery rules established in the
City’s Personnel Appeals Board Guidelines shall apply.

Rights of Unit Members

A. At their request, unit members will have the right to be represented by a representative of the
Certified Employee Organization or other coworker where requested during any disciplinary
meeting or when being asked to sign a corrective action plan or written counseling. Although
permission by the supervisor is required, the Police Department will make every reasonable
effort to approve the time for the representative where such does not negatively impact
operations. Discipline for the purpose of this section includes written reprimands, disciplinary
probation, suspension, involuntary demotion and dismissal. Disciplinary meetings do not
include an interview of a unit member during the normal course of work, clarification,
counseling, instruction, informal verbal admonishment or other routine or unplanned contact
with a supervisor.

For the purposes of this section, clarification is defined to be, “a meeting to determine the
accuracy of information.”

Any documented performance or discipline resulting in written or verbal counseling, or written
or verbal reprimand, older than three (3) years shall not be considered when determining
transfers, assignments or promotions.

B. Unit members have the right to be represented by a representative of the Certified Employee
Organization or other coworker for investigations where the unit member is a focus of the
inquiry. The representative may be an attorney so long as the representative/attorney does not
disrupt the investigation/inquiry, as determined by the investigator.

C. All unit members shall have the right to join or not join the Certified Employee Organization as
they individually prefer. Employees have the right to participate on behalf of or engage in
activities on behalf of an Employee Organization and have the right to refrain from such activity.
Employees shall be free from any interference, restraint, or coercion by any employee,
supervisor, or manager for or against Employee Organizations. Violations may result in
disciplinary action.

D. All unit members shall retain the right to represent themselves at disciplinary meetings, during
investigations, for grievances, at Personnel Appeals Board Hearings, and for any other
employee/employer issues.

E. Unit members are merit protected after successful completion of initial regular probation. Ifa
member has an at-will agreement with the City, the member may request to be returned to
merit protected status if no additional disciplinary actions have been taken in 3 (three) years
since the agreement was signed.

 

 

Page 7
 

The City will not require unit members to disclose assets, debts, income, property, personal or
domestic expenditures including those of family or household, or other financial information as
a condition of promotion, job assignment, or other personnel action unless that information is
necessary for the transfer to a specialized financial unit or as part of a court order pertaining to
an investigation.

Strikes

A.

The Certified Employee Organization pledges to maintain unimpaired Police service and
related supported services as directed by the Police Chief. It shall not cause, condone, or
counsel unit members to strike, fail to fully and faithfully perform duties, slow down,
disrupt, impede or otherwise impair the normal functions and procedures of the
Department.

Should any unit members, during the term of this Memorandum, and until such time that it is
expressly and legally rescinded, breach the obligations of Paragraph A of this section, the City
Manager or his designee OR the Police Chief or his designee shall notify the Certified Employee
Organization that a prohibited action is in progress. The Certified Employee Organization shall
forthwith disavow said strike or other prohibited action and shall endeavor in good faith to
cause such unit members to immediately return to work and/or cease the prohibited activity.

There shall be no lockout by the City during the term of the Memorandum.

Unit members found in violation of this section shall be subject to disciplinary action up to
and including dismissal.

The Certified Employee Organization may be subject to decertification by the City Council
for violations of Paragraph B of this section.

 

Page 8
 

ARTICLE 3: LABOR MANAGEMENT

City Labor-Management Committee

A. There shall be a City Labor-Management Committee consisting of members of the City and
representatives of the Certified Employee Organization. The purpose of the committee is to
facilitate improved labor-management relationships by providing a forum for free and
informal discussion of mutual concerns and problems. It is not intended to replace or be an
extension of the meet and confer process.

B. The committee shall meet, when necessary, at mutually agreed upon times and locations.
Participation in such meetings shall be handled in accordance with the Rights of the
Certified Employee Organization, Paragraph A.

C. The City Labor Management Committee will explore potential pay compression issues. If
changes are made to the wages section of the MOU, an addendum will be added.

Police Department Labor-Management Team

A. There shall be a Labor-Management Team consisting of the Police Chief and the Police
Department Executive Staff and the Certified Employee Organization representative. The
team will assign additional standing teams as necessary. Each standing team will consist of
at least one (1) representative of the Certified Employee Organization and one (1)
representative of Police Management. The purpose of the team(s) is to facilitate improved
labor-management relationships by providing a forum for free and informal discussion of
mutual concerns and problems. It is not intended to replace or be an extension of the meet
and confer process.

B. The team(s) shall meet, when necessary, at mutually agreed upon times and locations.
Participation in such meetings shall be handled in accordance with the Rights of the
Certified Employee Organization, Paragraph A.

Page 9
 

ARTICLE 4: HOURS OF WORK

Schedule

Subject to change by the Police Chief based on operational needs, work schedules for members
are set at a standard and consistent, ten (10)-hour, four (4)-day work week schedule or eight
(8)-hour, five (5)-day work week schedule. This section does not prohibit the Police Chief or
designee from requiring overtime, standby, or call-out, when necessary.

Promotional Lists

The duration of the promotion lists for Police Sergeant and Police Lieutenant shall be a
minimum of six (6) months, not to exceed a maximum of two (2) years, upon request of the
Police Chief with the approval of the Human Resources Director. The duration of the list will be
stated on the promotional job announcement. A sworn promotional list may be considered
expired if fewer than three (3) candidates remain on the list.

Off Duty Related Employment

A. Unit members may engage in secondary or off duty related employment in conformance
with department ADM 770, “Off Duty Employment” and ADM 772, “Off Duty and Liquor
Establishments.”

B. Unit members are permitted to utilize departmental safety equipment during member
arranged off duty employment.
Briefing

Members in Patrol Division shall be given the first 10 minutes of briefing for vehicle prep, login
and safety checks subject to operational needs.

Meal Breaks/Rest Periods
A. Members receive one (1) thirty (30) minute meal break during their shifts.

B. Members who work at least four (4) additional hours beyond their scheduled shift may
receive an additional thirty (30) minute meal break.

C. Members may have one (1) separate rest period of fifteen (15) minutes, each four (4) hour
period during the work day, which shall be counted as time worked.

D. All meal breaks and rest periods are considered to be paid time, therefore unit members
are subject to recall during meal breaks and rest periods.

E. One fifteen (15) minute rest period may be combined with the thirty (30) meal break for a
maximum of 45 minutes, subject to the operational needs of the department.

 

 

Page 10
 

ARTICLE 5: BENEFITS

Employee Benefits Task Force

With approval of the Police Chief, the Certified Employee Organization shall choose one unit
member to be assigned to the City of Mesa Employee Benefits Task Force to voice input
regarding all employee benefits not covered by this Memorandum. The assigned unit member
will be released from duty with pay to participate in Employee Benefits Task Force meetings.

Post-Employment Health Care

This plan is being developed. Upon a 30 (thirty) day notification, the City will begin making a
deduction of $25.00 per pay period for unit members hired after January 1, 2009. The City will
contribute $12.50 per pay period to the same account. Contributions will NOT be made by the
employee or the City during the extra pay period in three paycheck months.

Holidays

A. Unit members will receive 10 hours of pay at their effective hourly rate for the following
holidays:

New Year's Day

Martin Luther King Jr./Civil Rights Day

President's Day

Memorial Day

July 4* (2015 and 2016)

Labor Day

Veteran's Day

Thanksgiving Day

. Day after Thanksgiving

10. Christmas Day

CPOENAUAWNE

B. The holiday will be paid separately in the pay period the holiday occurs.

C. Holiday premium will be based on the effective hourly rate of the unit member’s current
schedule.

D. A holiday premium of one and one-half (1%) times the employee's effective hourly rate of
pay will be paid for time worked on a holiday.

E. Unit members required to work on a holiday may not flex the holiday time to another day.

F. Unit members are considered to be essential personnel for holidays; therefore they are paid
for actual holidays. Unless they are in an assignment that is required (mission critical) to be
staffed on a holiday, unit members will not report to work unless required by their chain of
command. A list of assignments will be maintained by the Chief's Office.

 

 

Page 11
 

Sick Time

A.

G.

Accrual

Three point five (3.5) hours per pay period times twenty-six (26) pay periods totaling
ninety-one (91) hours. An additional five (5) hours will be granted on January 1 of each
year for a total of ninety-six (96) hours per calendar year.

Anniversary Dates/Dock Time

Unit Members will accrue sick time once they have met a minimum number of hours ina
biweekly pay period. This hourly requirement may be satisfied through any combination of
hours worked and paid time off. The minimum number of hours is as follows:

Unit Members must meet a minimum of sixty-five (65) hours in a biweekly pay period.

Accumulation: The maximum accumulation of sick time for Unit Members is one thousand
forty (1,040) hours.

Automatic Conversion: Any sick time accrued in excess of the maximum accumulation
shall be automatically converted to vacation time on the basis of one (1) hour of vacation
time for every one (1) hour of excess sick time accrued.

Payment at Retirement/Death: A Unit Member who retires from City of Mesa
employment or dies shall be compensated for all accumulated sick time at the rate of fifty
percent (50%) of the accumulated sick time

Payment at Termination: A Unit Member who terminates City of Mesa employment for
any reason other than retirement or death shall forfeit all accumulated sick time.

Overtime Calculation: Sick leave will not be considered as time worked.

Vacation Time

A.

Accrual:

Fewer than 2 years of service: Three point five (3.5) hours per pay period times twenty-
six (26) pay periods totaling ninety-one (91) hours. An additional five (5) hours will be
granted on January 1 of each year for a total of ninety-six (96) hours per calendar year.

Two years of service or more: Five point five (5.5) hours per pay period times twenty-six
(26) pay periods totaling one hundred forty-three (143) hours. An additional one (1) hour
will be granted on January 1 of each year for a total of one hundred forty-four (144) hours
per calendar year.

Page 12
 

B. Anniversary Dates/Dock Time

Unit Members will accrue vacation time once they have met a minimum number of hours in
a biweekly pay period. This hourly requirement may be satisfied through any combination
of hours worked and paid time off. The minimum number of hours is as follows:

Unit Members must meet a minimum of sixty-five (65) hours in a biweekly pay period.

C. Accumulation: The maximum accumulation of vacation time is two hundred forty (240)
hours. Unit Members who have in excess of the above amounts on December 31st of each
year will be paid for the excess amount of time after December 31* provided they have
used at least 80 hours of vacation during the calendar year. If the Unit Member has not
taken the required amount of time during the year, all excess time shall be forfeited.
Donated time counts as used vacation time.

D. Vacation time payout: At separation, all Unit Members receive 100% of the accumulated
vacation time.

Bereavement Time

A. Unit Members shall be granted paid bereavement time due to a death in the employee's
immediate family.

B. Immediate family members are defined as Unit Member’s spouse, child, stepchild, mother,
father, sister, brother, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in- law, sister-in-law, son-in-
law, daughter-in-law, stepparent, stepparent-in-law, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle,
and former legal guardian, or a minor child or an adult for whom the Unit Member is a legal
guardian.

C. Hours: The following time will be allowed for funerals/memorial services:

An absence up to fifty (50) work hours. Forty (40) work hours will be paid as bereavement
leave time; however, the additional ten (10) hours, if taken, will be charged to any paid or
unpaid time off category at the employee’s discretion.

Tuition Reimbursement

Tuition reimbursement will be handled in accordance with City Management Policy 335.
Stability Pay

A. Eligibility:

1. Unit Members hired prior to July 1, 1988, who have worked for the City of Mesa for five
(5) continuous years receive two and one-half percent (242%) of their base pay. The
credit begins to accumulate at the beginning of the sixth (6th) year. The amount
increases by one-half of one percent (4 of 1%) for each year of City of Mesa employment
thereafter, up to a maximum of ten percent (10%).

 

 

Page 13
 

2. Unit Members hired on and after July 1, 1988, who have worked for the City of Mesa for
five (5) continuous years will receive two and one-half percent (242%) of their annual
pay grade and step. The credit begins to accumulate at the beginning of the sixth (6th)
year. The amount increases by one-half of one percent (1% of 1%) for every other year of
City of Mesa employment, up to a maximum of five percent (5%).

3. Unit Members hired on or after July 1, 1992, will not be eligible for stability pay.
. Stability Pay Periods

The City shall pay Unit Members stability pay on a biweekly basis and the payment will be
included in the Unit Member’s biweekly paycheck. The amount of stability pay is
determined by the Unit Member’s total gross biweekly (base plus assignment) pay at the
end of the pay period and will not be prorated, unless the following circumstances occur:

1. If the Unit Member reports any unpaid time off in the biweekly pay period, the Unit
Member’s biweekly stability payment will be calculated on the Unit Member’s effective
hourly rate for the unpaid time off reported, up to eighty (80) hours.

2. If the Unit Member’s biweekly paycheck consists solely of donated time, the Unit
Member’s biweekly stability payment will be calculated on the Unit Member’s effective
hourly rate, up to eighty (80) hours.

Page 14
 

ARTICLE 6: COMPENSATION

Wages/Market Adjustments

Unit members will receive the following market adjustments:
July 1,2014 5%

July 1,2015 15%

July 1,2016 15%

For Fiscal Year 14/15, unit members will be moved to one higher pay range than their current
range. This will facilitate unit members receiving the 5% market adjustment. As of Fiscal Year
15/16, unit members will be moved to their own pay plan.

Promotion

An employee who is promoted to a higher salary range shall receive an increase of five percent
(5%), unless this salary is less than the designated first step of the new salary range, in which
case the employee shall receive the salary of the designated first step of the new salary range.

Overtime

Overtime compensation will be paid at one and one-half times the employee’s regular rate of
pay. The regular rate of pay will include all remuneration for employment paid to, or on behalf
of, the employee, except those payments specifically excluded under the FLSA.

Step Increases

A. Unit Members who are not at the top step of their pay grade and also received an overall
rating of "Successful Performance" on their performance reviews will be eligible to receive a
step increase, if funded for City employees.

B. Unit members shall be eligible to receive a step increase upon successful completion of
initial regular probation.

C. For items A-B in this section, step increases will only be given if they are funded in a fiscal
year for all eligible City employees.

Shift Differential

A. Shift differential will be paid for eligible shifts.

B. An eligible shift is a shift of eight (8) or more hours, which starts on or after 10:00 a.m.

C. Eligible employees who start work on or after 10:00 a.m. will receive shift differential
premium for all work performed from 3:30 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.

Uniform Allowance

Uniform allowance for Unit Members will be $990 per year.

 

 

Page 15
 

Ballistic Vest Reimbursement

Ballistic vest reimbursement will be $950 per member. Unless damaged, vests are to be
replaced every five years. Vests less than $950 will be reimbursed in full however any
remaining funds will be retained by the Police Department.

Bilingual Compensation

Basic certification will be $50.00 biweekly.

Intermediate certification will be $100.00 biweekly.

Deferred Compensation

The City shall continue to provide a Deferred Compensation contribution of 1% (one percent)
per biweekly pay period. Unit Members must contribute a minimum of $10.00 per pay period
to be eligible for the City contribution. Unit members must be employed for at least one year to
receive the City’s contribution.

ARTICLE 7: MISCELLANEOUS

Saving Clause

In the event that any of the terms or provisions of this Memorandum are declared invalid or
unenforceable by any Court of competent jurisdiction or any federal or state government
agency having jurisdiction over the subject matter of this Memorandum, the remaining terms
and provisions will not be affected.

Term and Effect of Memorandum

This Memorandum will be in full force and effect from July 1, 2014 until June 30, 2017. In the
event the parties are unable to reach agreement on a new Memorandum of Understanding for
the FY 17/18 year prior to the expiration of this Memorandum, the City Manager and an
authorized representative of the Certified Employee Organization may extend this
Memorandum by mutual agreement for the time period necessary to complete negotiations.

 

Page 16
  

A

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have set their hand this _) day of Wve _2014
CITY OF MESA MESA POLICE ASSOCIATION
A

   

By: oO

 

Wie

Christopher J. , City Mawager Ricardo Perine, MPA President

ATTEST:

DeeAnn Mickelsen, City Clerk

 

 

 

Page 17
MEET AND CONFER RESOLUTION

RESOLUTION NO. Guo /

A RESOLUTION OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MESA,
MARICOPA COUNTY, ARIZONA ENDORSING MANAGEMENT POLICY
NO. 358 ESTABLISHING A MEET AND CONFER PROCESS FOR SWORN
PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE GROUPS.

BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MESA,
MARICOPA COUNTY, AS FOLLOWS:

Section 1: That the citizens of Mesa have a fundamental interest in maintaining a strong
working relationship between the City and the sworn public safety employee groups.

Section 2: That it is the intent of this resolution to maintain the strong working
relationship between the City and sworn public safety employee groups by providing a uniform
Meet and Confer process. Management Policy 358 sets forth that process and is hereby endorsed
by the Mesa City Council. The City Manager will consult with the City Council and notify
participating sworn public safety employee groups in writing prior to any proposed modification
of Policy 358.

PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Mesa,
Maricopa County, Arizona, this 16" day of November, 2009.

APPROVED:

 

 

 

 

Page 18
 

SIGNATURE AUTHORITY RESOLUTION

 

RESOLUTION NO. |049 3
A RESOLUTION OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
MESA, MARICOPA COUNTY, ARIZONA, AUTHORIZING THE
CITY MANAGER OR HIS DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE TO
ENTER INTO A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE CiTY OF MESA AND THE MESA POLICE
ASSOCIATION.

BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MESA,
MARICOPA COUNTY, ARIZONA, AS FOLLOWS:

Section 1: Authorizing and directing the City Manager, or his designated
representative, to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding, and any amendments
thereto, between the City of Mesa and the Mesa Police Association, and authorizing the
City Clerk to attest to the signature of the City Manager or his designated representative
thereon.

PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Mesa, Maricopa

County, Arizona, this 16" day of June, 2014,

ATTEST:

 

City Clerk

 

Page 19
