2004 - 2008

MEMORANDUM

OF

UNDERSTANDING

CITY OF SANTA ANA

AND

SANTA ANA POLICE MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
ARTICLE

ARTICLE I
ARTICLE II
ARTICLE III
ARTICLE IV
ARTICLE V
ARTICLE VI
ARTICLE VII
ARTICLE VIII
ARTICLE IX
ARTICLE X
ARTICLE XI
ARTICLE XII
ARTICLE XIII
ARTICLE XIV
ARTICLE XV
ARTICLE XVI
ARTICLE XVII
ARTICLE XVIII
ARTICLE XIX
ARTICLE XX
ARTICLE XXI
ARTICLE XXII
ARTICLE XXIII
ARTICLE XXIV
ARTICLE XXV
ARTICLE XXVI
ARTICLE XXVII
EXHIBIT A
EXHIBIT B

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUBJECT

Recognition

Non-Discrimination Clause

Attendance, Workday, Workweek and Work Schedule
Salaries

Assignment and Other Special Pay Additives 11
Educational Incentive Program

Training and Educational Assistance Program
Overtime

Holidays

Vacation

Other Leaves of Absence

Employee Insurance

Deferred Compensation

Retirement

Credit Union Deduction

Expanded Residency

Controlled Parking and Take Home Vehicle Privileges
Discipline

Grievance Review Procedure

Dues Deduction and Indemnification

City Rights

Strikes and Work Stoppages

Sole and Entire Agreement

Waiver of Bargaining During The Term of Agreement
Separability Provision

Term of Agreement

Ratification and Execution

Salary Schedule Matrix

Assignment of Classes Represented By The Santa Ana
Police Management Association To Salary Rate Ranges
For Fiscal Years 2004-08

 

PAGE

AnkwW

13
16
7
19
22
30
34
35
38
39
40
41
42
44
45
47
48
49
50
51
52
54
55
ARTICLE I
1.0 RECOGNITION

Pursuant to the provision of the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act, Government Code Section 3500,
et seq., the City of Santa Ana (hereinafter called the “City”) has recognized the Santa Ana
Police Management Association (hereinafter called the “Association”) as the recognized
representative of the bargaining unit which includes Police Department employees in the
classifications of Police Records Manager, Policy Property & Facilities Manager, Police
Communications Manager, Police Lieutenant and Police Captain.

Effective February 7, 2005, employees permanently assigned to the position of Police
Lieutenant have the “working” title of “Commander” and employees permanently assigned
to the position of Police Captain have the Aworking@ title of ‘Deputy Chief of Police”.
2.1

2.2

ARTICLE II
2.0 NON-DISCRIMINATION CLAUSE

The City and the Association agree that they shall not discriminate against any employee in
violation of State or Federal law. The City and the Association shall reopen any provision of
this Agreement for the purpose of complying with any order of a Federal or State agency or
court of competent jurisdiction requiring a modification or change in any provision or
provisions of this Agreement in compliance with State or Federal anti-discrimination laws.

Whenever reference is made to the masculine gender, it shall be understood to include the
feminine gender, unless expressly stated otherwise.
3.1

3.2

ARTICLE III

3.0 ATTENDANCE, WORKDAY, WORKWEEK & WORK SCHEDULE

Attendance. Employees covered by this Agreement shall be in attendance at their work
during hours prescribed by the Police Chief or his designee(s) and shall not absent themselves
during prescribed hours without authorization. Employees shall not be required to submit a
Leave of Absence Report for absences of two (2) hours or less.

Alternative Work Schedules.

A.

All represented employees, except Lieutenants assigned as Watch Commanders, shall
work a 9/80 work schedule. Employees assigned to the 207(k) 9/80 work schedule
shall work either five (5) nine-hour workdays in the first seven (7) day span and three
(3) nine-hour and one (1) eight-hour workdays in the second seven (7) day span, or
alternatively three (3) nine-hour workdays and one (1) eight-hour workday in the first
seven (7) day span and five (5) nine-hour workdays in the second seven (7) day span.
Each nine (9) hour workday shall consist of nine (9) hours of work and thirty (30)
minutes unpaid mealtime. The eight (8) hour workday shall consist of eight (8) hours
of work and thirty (30) minutes of unpaid mealtime.

Police Lieutenants assigned to the Field Operations Division as Watch Commanders
will continue to be assigned to a 3/12 - 4/12 work schedule. The minimum work day
for these employees will consist of 11 hours and 30 minutes of work, with 30
additional minutes for meals. A minimum work period shall consist of two (2)
consecutive weeks, with three (3) shifts of 11 hours and 30 minutes in one (1) week
and four (4) shifts of 11 hours and 30 minutes in the second week.

Reopener - 4/10 Work Schedule.

Effective July 1, 2006, the City and Association agree to reopen this Article for the
purpose of discussing the feasibility of implementing a 4/10 Work Schedule for those
employees currently assigned to the 9/80 Work Schedule.

For purposes of computing holiday, vacation, and sick leave accruals, an eight (8)
hour day shall be the basis for computation.
4.1

4.2

43

ARTICLE IV
4.0 SALARIES

Basic Compensation Plan. There is hereby established a basic compensation plan for all
members of the Santa Ana Police Management Association who are now employed or will in
the future be employed in any of the designated classifications of employment listed in this
Agreement and its attachments.

Salary Schedule. The basic salary schedule, attached hereto in a matrix form as Exhibit A, is
comprised of four (4) steps or rate ranges of pay for sworn (CalPERS ASafety@) employees
and five (5) steps or rate ranges of pay for non-sworn (CalPERS AMiscellaneous@)
employees.

The steps within each range are identified by the letters AA@ through AD@ inclusive for sworn
(CalPERS ASafety@) classifications and AAA@ through AD@ inclusive for non-sworn
(CalPERS AMiscellaneous®@) classifications, with Step AA@ being the lowest step for sworn
(CalPERS ASafety@) and Step AAA@ being the lowest step for non-sworn (CalPERS
AMiscellaneous@) classifications.

The assignment of classes to salary rate ranges during the term of this Agreement is listed
in Exhibit AB@, which is attached and made a part hereof as though set forth herein.

Salaries.

A. The base salaries of employees covered by this Agreement shall be adjusted as
follows:

Effective July 1, 2004 through June 30, 2005 and July 1, 2005 through June 30, 2006,
respectively, there shall be no salary increases for employees covered by this
Agreement. If, however, any other City bargaining unit receives an across-the-board
salary increase during the fiscal years defined above, employees covered by this
Agreement shall receive the highest amount provided to any City bargaining unit.

Effective July 1, 2006, the base salary of employees covered by this Agreement shall
be increased by the greater of the following amounts: 1) that percentage increase
necessary, rounded to the nearest half-percent (.5%), not to exceed nine (9) salary
rate ranges (approximately 4.5%), consistent with the amount received by members of
the Santa Ana Police Officers Association; or 2) that percentage increase in an across-
the-board salary adjustment provided to any other City bargaining unit during fiscal
year 2006-07.
44

4.5

Effective July 1, 2007, the base salary of employees covered by this Agreement shall
be increased by the greater of the following amounts: 1) that percentage increase
necessary, rounded to the nearest half-percent (.5%), not to exceed nine (9) salary
rate ranges (approximately 4.5%), consistent with that amount received by members
of the Santa Ana Police Officers Association; or 2) that percentage increase in an
across-the-board salary adjustment provided to any other City bargaining unit during
fiscal year 2007-08.

B. The parties agree that the City may, at its sole discretion, alter its payroll practices to
eliminate the salary and wage step increases system as set forth in its current payroll
matrix, Exhibit AA@ to this Agreement, and replace them with an equivalent
percentage system. For example, a five (5) salary rate range increase would not be
computed as set forth on the current matrix, but would instead be exactly 2.5%,
rounded up to or down to the nearest penny. This system would apply to all salary
increases as set forth in this Agreement, including Article IV (“Salaries”), Article V
(“Assignment and Other Special Pay Additives”) and Exhibit A. There shall be no
negative consequences to any represented employee by such conversion.

Cc. The City agrees, during the term of this Agreement, to the following:

1. To maintain thirty-four (34) salary rate ranges (17%) between the classes of
Police Captain and Police Lieutenant; and

2. Effective July 1, 2002, employees will contribute one-half percent (.5%) of
their base salary plus pay additives through payroll deduction to a fund
maintained by the City of Santa Ana for the purpose of providing retiree
health insurance premium reduction assistance. This payroll deduction for
retiree health insurance premium reduction assistance will continue until such
time as the parties may mutually agree to end said deduction.

Additionally, effective October 1, 2006 and October 1, 2007, respectively, the City shall
contribute an amount equal to one-half percent (.5%) of the bargaining unit’s annual base
salary, including pay additives, for the purpose of providing retiree health insurance premium
reduction assistance.

Application of Basic Compensation Plan. All employees working in classifications of
employment covered by this Agreement shall be compensated at a monthly rate, as set forth in
Exhibit B.

Beginning Rates. An employee appointed to one of the designated sworn (CalPERS
“Safety”) classifications of employment listed in this Agreement may be placed by the
appointing authority at Step AA,@ Step AB,@ or Step AC@ within the applicable rate range in
the schedule to which the class has been allocated by Resolution of the City, provided that

7
4.6

47

such employee shall be assigned such salary step upon the commencement of his or her
service in said classification and such assignment having once been made shall remain in effect
until the said employee shall be entitled to advance to the next salary step in accordance with
the further provisions of the Article.

An employee appointed to one of the designated non-sworn (CalPERS “Miscellaneous” )
classifications of employment listed in this Agreement may be placed by the appointing
authority at Step AAA,@ Step AA,@ Step AB,@ or Step AC,@ within the applicable salary rate
range as provided above.

Service. The word Aservice@ as used in this Agreement shall be deemed to mean continuous,
full-time service in the classification in which the employee is being considered for salary
advancement, service in a higher classification or service in a classification allocated to the
same salary rate range and having generally similar duties and requirements. Employees hired
after the first (1") working day of the month shall not be credited with Atime in service@ for
that month when determining the length of service required for salary step advancement. A
lapse of service by an employee for a period of time longer than ten (10) calendar days by
reason of resignation, quit, or discharge, shall serve to eliminate the accumulated length of
service time of such employee for the purpose of this Agreement and any such employee
reentering the service of the City shall be considered as a new employee, except that he or she
may be reemployed within two (2) years and placed in the same salary step in the appropriate
salary rate as he or she was at the time of termination of employment. AResignation, quit, or
discharge@ for purposes of this section shall mean leaving City service altogether and not
movement within City employment by way of transfer, promotion, or demotion between and
among any City departments.

Advancement Within Ranges. The following regulations shall govern salary advancement
within rate ranges:

A. For any employee covered by this Agreement who has been initially appointed to a
step lower than Step AD,@ advancement to the next higher step (Step AA@ from Step
AAA,@ Step AB@ from Step AA,@ or Step AC@ from Step AB,@ or Step AD@ from
Step AC,@ respectively) shall be granted for continued satisfactory and efficient
service by said employee in the effective performance of the duties of his or her
position. The effective date of an increase from Step AAAG to Step AA, @ if granted,
shall be the first (1") day of the month following the completion of six (6) months of
service at Step AAA.@ The effective date of such step increase from Step AA,@ Step
B,@ and Step AC,@ if granted, shall be the first (1*) day of the month following the
completion of one (1) year of service at the step which said employee is being
advanced.

Such merit advancement shall require the following:
4.8

4.9

There shall be on file in the Office of the Executive Director of Personnel
Services a copy of each periodic efficiency or performance report required to
be made on the employee by the Civil Service Rules and Regulations and/or
the City Manager during the period of service time of such employee
subsequent to his or her last salary advancement.

The Police Chief, at least twenty (20) calendar days prior to the anticipated
completion of such employee=s required length of service, shall file with the
City Manager a statement recommending the granting or denial of the step
increase and supporting such a recommendation with specific reasons
therefore. The employee shall be notified of the reasons therefore.

No advancement in salary above the lowest step in the salary rate range of the
designated classification shall become effective until approved by the City
Manager, except when placement ona salary step above the lowest step in the
applicable salary rate range results from promotion under the provisions of
Section 4.8 of this Article.

When any such employee has not been approved for advancement to the next higher
salary step, he or she may be reconsidered for advancement to the next higher step
above his or her then current step after the completion of three (3) months of
additional service and shall be reconsidered for such advancement after the
completion of six (6) months of additional service.

Promotional Salary Advancement. When an employee is promoted to a position in a higher
classification from a position in a lower classification, he or she shall be reassigned to the
lowest step in the appropriate salary rate range for the higher classification that gives the
employee a minimum increase of one (1) salary step (approximately 5%) over his or her
current base salary step exclusive of any pay additive or additives such as shift differential,
assignment pay, special skill pay or the like.

Demotion. When an employee is demoted to a position in a lower classification, his or her
salary rate shall be fixed in the appropriate salary rate range for the lower classification in
accordance with the following provisions:

A.

B.

Cc.

The salary rate shall be reduced by at least one (1) step.
The new salary rate must be within the appropriate salary rate range.
The new salary rate shall not be higher than the salary step to which the employee

would have been entitled had his or her service time in the higher classification been
spent in the lower classification.
4.10

4.11

Reallocation of Salary Rate Ranges. Any employee who is employed ina classification which
is reallocated to a different salary rate range from that previously assigned shall be retained in
the same salary step in the new salary rate range as he or she had previously held in the prior
rate range and shall retain credit for length of service in such step towards advancement to the
next higher step.

Non-Sworn Classification and Compensation Study. Effective as soon as practicable
following Council approval of this Agreement, the City shall complete an internal
classification and compensation study of the Police Communications Manager, Police Records
Manager, and Police Property and Facilities Manager positions, respectively.

 
5.1

ARTICLE V
5.0 ASSIGNMENT & OTHER SPECIAL PAY ADDITIVES

Bilingual Assignment Pay. An employee who speaks both English and either Spanish,
Samoan, Vietnamese or other languages designated by the Police Chief, will be paid a
monthly assignment pay differential in accordance with the criteria and amounts set forth
below:

A. Any Police Captain or Police Lieutenant who has been certified by the Executive
Director of Personnel Services as having satisfactorily demonstrated conversational
fluency in both languages shall be paid a monthly differential of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150) above his or her then current base monthly salary step.

B. Any other member of this bargaining unit who works in a position where it has been
determined by the Police Chief that bilingual proficiency is essential to carry out duties
and responsibilities of a critical and/or emergency nature without ready access to
backup assistance, or positions where bilingual public contact is a major and essential
element of the work being performed shall be paid a monthly differential of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150) above his or her then current base monthly salary step,
upon certification by the Executive Director of Personnel Services that this person has
satisfactorily demonstrated conversational fluency in both languages.
6.1

ARTICLE VI
6.0 EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE PROGRAM

Effective July 1, 2005, members of the Association will be paid an Educational Incentive
allowance in the amounts and in accordance with the criteria set forth below. Employees
wishing to participate in any of the programs designated herein shall submit a request to his or
her bureau commander, who will then make a recommendation to the Police Chief. Final
approval will be at the discretion of the Police Chief, based on the needs of the Department
and program benefits. In no event shall the application of this Educational Incentive program
result in an employee being eligible to earn more than fifteen (15) salary rate ranges
(approximately 7.5%) above his or her then current base monthly salary step.

FBI National Academy. Any employee covered by this Agreement who successfully
completes the FBI National Academy shall be paid at a rate set ten (10) salary rate ranges
(approximately 5%) above his or her then current base monthly salary step.

California Command College. Any employee covered by this Agreement who successfully
completes the California Command College shall be paid at a rate set ten (10) salary rate
ranges (approximately 5%) above his or her then current base monthly salary step.

West Point Leadership Program. Any member covered by this Agreement who successfully
completes the West Point Leadership Program shall be paid at a rate set five (5) salary rate
ranges (approximately 2.5%) above his or her then current base monthly salary step.

Police Executive Research Forum (PERF) Senior Management Institute for Police. Any
member covered by this Agreement who successfully completes the Senior Management
Institute for Police shall be paid at a rate set five (5) salary rate ranges (approximately 2.5%)
above his or her then current base monthly salary step.

 
7A

7.2

ARTICLE VII

7.0 TRAINING & EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

Purpose.

A.

To encourage the employees of the City of Santa Ana to take college courses and
special training courses, which will better, enable them to perform their present duties
and prepare them for increased responsibilities.

To provide financial assistance to eligible employees for education and training.

To establish eligibility requirements, conditions and procedures whereby such
assistance may be provided.

Eligibility.

A.

Application for tuition reimbursement will be considered only from full-time, regular
City employees who have completed probation.

Reimbursement is not authorized for courses for which the employee is receiving
financial assistance from other sources such as the G.I. Bill, scholarships, etc.

Applications will be approved only for courses directly related to the employee=s job
or directly related to a promotional position in the employee=s occupational specialty.

Courses not ostensibly related to the employee=s job, but which are required to
qualify for a degree that is directly related to his job, may be reimbursable only after
all required, occupationally-related courses have been completed. (For example, a
Fire Engineer is a candidate for an A.A. Degree in Fire Science and has completed all
coursework directly related to his fire suppression duties. A course in American
History is required for the degree. The history course may qualify for tuition
reimbursement because the degree can be related to the employee=s job).

Prior to receiving tuition reimbursement, employees must submit documentary proof
of having received a grade of not less than AC@ for the course. If objective ratings
are not rendered for a specific course, then a certificate of successful completion must
be submitted.

Approval will be limited to courses given by accredited colleges and universities, city
colleges or adult education courses under the sponsorship of a Board of Education
and certain non-collegiate training seminars approved by the Police Chief. Other
workshops, seminars, conferences and similar activities not identifiable as a formal

13
73

74

course of instruction within the curriculum ofa recognized educational institution do
not fall within the purview of this program but may be authorized and funded by the
Police Department with prior approval of the Police Chief.

Reimbursement.

A.

Reimbursement will be based on the cost of tuition or registration fees and all required
texts and related material for each course. Additional expenses such as meals and
parking fees are not reimbursable. If, however, an employee is required by the Police
Chief to attend a particular course or seminar, the expense shall be borne entirely by
the Department.

Costs for required texts are eligible for one hundred percent (100%) reimbursement
subject to the following conditions:

1. That a duplicate of the required text(s) was unavailable for loan from the
Department library prior to the commencement of coursework; and

2. That any textbook(s) purchased by the City shall be submitted to the
employee=s Departmental library in order that such text(s) may be made
available to all employees.

Tuition and registration costs are eligible for one hundred percent (100%)
reimbursement up to a maximum of two thousand dollars ($2,000) per year-(including
non-P.O.S.T. reimbursable courses and approved non-collegiate seminar training
courses).

Reimbursement for non-collegiate seminar training courses require the prior approval
of the Police Chief and shall be limited to two (2) such courses per year and a
maximum of $500 per course.

Employees shall be limited, for purposes of tuition reimbursement, to a maximum
of two (2) collegiate level courses of not more than a total number of units which
is equivalent to six (6) Asemester@ units per semester. One (1) Aquarter@ unit
shall equal two-thirds (2/3) of one (1) Asemester@ unit.

Procedures.

A.

An employee who desires to seek tuition reimbursement under the provisions of this
Article must complete, in duplicate, an Application for Training and Educational
Assistance form and submit it to the Police Chief.

The Police Chief will recommend approval or disapproval and forward the application

14
to the Personnel Services Department.

The Executive Director of Personnel Services will approve or disapprove the
application for the City. One (1) copy will be returned to the employee and the
duplicate will be retained by the Personnel Services Department. It is advisable that
the applicant accomplish the procedure so far described prior to the inception of the
course or disbursement of personal funds in order to ascertain the eligibility of the
intended course of instruction for reimbursement under the provisions of this policy.

The employee will submit his or her copy of the approved application to the Personnel
Services Department within three (3) months after he or she has completed the course
and received his or her final grade with appropriate receipts for tuition and textbook
costs. These will be returned to the employee upon request. Applications not
submitted to the Personnel Services Department within three (3) months following
completion of the course become void.

Upon receipt of the application and required documentation, the Executive Director
of Personnel Services will compute the amount of reimbursement, authenticate the
application and forward it to the Police Chief.

The Police Chief will then authorize the Finance and Management Services
Department to reimburse the employee the approved amount of the budget of the
Police Department.
8.1

ARTICLE VIII

8.0 OVERTIME
Compensation for Overtime. Employees in any of the designated classes of employment listed
in this Agreement are not eligible for monetary compensation for overtime work or for

compensatory time off with pay for overtime work, unless so required by the Fair Labor
Standards Act, or any other State or Federal laws.

16
9.1

9.2

 

A.

ARTICLE IX

9.0 HOLIDAYS

Legal Holidays observed by full-time permanent and probationary employees of the City of
Santa Ana are as follows:

January 1“ - New Year=s Day

Third GB") Monday in January - In observance of Martin Luther King, Jr.=s Birthday
Third GB") Monday in February - In observance of Presidents’ Day

Last Monday in May - In commemoration of Memorial Day

July 4" - In observance of Independence Day

First (1*) Monday of September - In observance of Labor Day

November 11" - In observance of Veteran=s Day

Fourth (4°) Thursday in November - In observance of Thanksgiving Day

The Friday immediately following Thanksgiving Day

Last working day before Christmas Day, unless Christmas Day falls on Thursday, in
which instance, the day following Christmas Day shall be observed in lieu thereof.

December 25" - In observance of Christmas Day

One (1) Floating Holiday - Any workday selected by the employee with prior
permission of the employee=s supervisor.

Every day proclaimed by the Mayor of the City as a holiday for City employees. Any
oliday which falls on a Sunday will be observed on the following Monday. Any
oliday which falls on a Saturday will be observed on the Friday preceding the
oliday.

 

Full-time permanent and probationary employees covered by this Agreement shall be entitled
to receive twelve (12) working days off during the calendar year in lieu of the holiday benefits
specified in Section 9.1, supra. Therefore, employees with alternative work schedules shall
be credited with 96 hours of Holiday Time at the beginning of every calendar year in lieu of
twelve (12) holidays in the year.
9.3

9.4

9.5

9.6

Said substitute holidays may be taken at any time during the calendar year with prior
permission of the employee=s supervisor and subject to the operational needs of the
Department. However, if an employee who separates from the service of the City has taken
time off for holidays in advance of the date or day the holidays actually occur, he or she must
pay the City the cash value for such used but unearned holiday time off benefits prior to or at
the time of separation.

A newly appointed employee must actually work at least one (1) day preceding the day a
holiday listed in Section 9.1, supra, actually occurs in order to receive credit for such holiday
during the month in which it occurs.

An employee separating from the service of the City must actually work at least one (1) day
following the day a holiday listed in Section 9.1, supra, actually occurs in order to receive
compensation for the holiday.

A newly appointed employee must complete six (6) months of continuous full-time service in
order to receive credit for the Floating Holiday listed in Section 9.1 above.

Holiday time off may be only taken in increments equal to that individual employee=s Awork
day@.

Holiday benefits may not be carried over from one (1) calendar year to the next.

Leave Cash Option. Employees covered by this Agreement may cash out a combination of
the following leaves, up to a maximum of 120 hours in a calendar year, as follows:

A. Receive cash compensation, computed ona straight time basis, up to a maximum of eighty
(80) hours of their holiday leave benefits, including the floating holiday, set forth in Section
9.2 above.

B. Receive cash compensation, computed on a straight time basis, up to a maximum of eighty
(80) hours of earned, unused regular vacation leave (which includes longevity vacation)
benefits, set forth in Sections 10.2 and 10.3, respectively, herein.

C. Receive cash compensation, computed on a straight time basis, up to a maximum of forty
(40) hours of earned, unused management vacation leave benefits, set forth in Section 10.7
herein.

Such cash option may be eliminated or modified to the extent it is construed as overtime
under Department of Labor Guidelines implementing provisions of the Fair Labor Standards
Act.
10.1

10.2

10.3

ARTICLE X

10.0 VACATION

Purpose. It is the policy of the City to grant employees vacation leave in order to provide
them with a break in their regular work schedule and this purpose will be used as a guide in
the administration of the provisions of this Article.

Regular Vacation Period.

A.

Cc.

Regular vacation with pay is granted to each full-time permanent or probationary
employee, at the rate of 120 hours for each completed year of service, accrued at the
rate of ten (10) working hours for each completed month of service.

Vacation time off may be taken in increments as small as one (1) hour, with fractional
usage rounded upward to the next higher multiple of one (1).

Computing Regular Vacation.

1.

In computing regular vacation, each municipal holiday that occurs during the
vacation, and that falls on a day which the employee would have worked had
he or she not been on vacation, shall be deducted from the computation so
that one (1) additional day of regular vacation shall be allowed to the
employee. Should an employee be confined to a hospital for sickness or injury
while on authorized vacation, each full day of such confinement, when
confirmed by a physician=s statement and approval of the Police Chief, may
be deducted from the computation of vacation expended and charged against
the employee=s accumulated sick leave.

No employee may carry over from one (1) calendar year to the next, more
than the equivalent of 240 hours of regular vacation from the previous two (2)
years, and vacation not taken beyond that amount is forfeited. A regular
vacation period is defined as the maximum amount of vacation earned in a
calendar year as provided in Subsection A above.

Employees may or may not be allowed or required to accumulate or split
vacations. The time at which an employee shall take his or her vacation shall
be determined by seniority within rank, with due regard for the needs of the
service.

Longevity Vacation.

A.

In addition to regular vacation, each employee is granted longevity vacation with pay

19
for each completed year of full-time, continuous City service as set forth in the
following table.

Completed Additional Hourly Equivalent of
Years Days Additional Days
6 2 4
7 1 8
8 12 12
9 2 16
10 22 20
ll 3 24
12 32 28
13 4 32
14 42 36
15 5 40
16 6 48
17 7 56
18 8 64
19 9 72
20 10 80
B. No employee becomes eligible for longevity vacation until completion of the sixth

(6") year of continuous service, and each employee continues to earn the maximum of
ten (10) working days (80 hours) of longevity vacation for each completed year of
service in excess of twenty (20) years.

Cc. A period of earlier service does not apply toward longevity vacation accumulation
when an employee has had a break in continuous service, unless the break in service is
concluded by reappointment, as provided in Section 9-114 of the Civil Service Rules
and Regulations, or by reemployment from layoff within two (2) years.

Dz Leave of absence without pay, as provided in Article XI, Section 11.1E (Sick Leave -
Extended) and Section 11.8 (Authorized Absence Without Pay - Long Term) herein,
does not constitute a break in continuous service as used in this section; however, the
leave of absence period shall not be applied toward the accumulation of longevity
vacation. Absence on military leave followed by reinstatement, as provided in Section
9-143 of the Civil Service Rules and Regulations, does not constitute a break in
service, and the period of absence on such military leave shall be applied toward the
accumulation of longevity vacation.

10.4 Limitation on Vacation. With the exception ofa retiring employee, no employee is granted,
and no employee shall be allowed to take any vacation leave with pay in excess of fifty (50)

20
10.5

10.6

10.7

10.8

working days (400) hours in any one year by any combination of the vacations granted in
these rules and regulations. Further, no employee may carry over from one (1) calendar year
to the next more than the equivalent of 120 hours of longevity vacation plus the combined
equivalent of 120 hours from the previous two (2) years. Any vacation not taken beyond that
amount is forfeited. Therefore, the maximum vacation that an employee with less than six (6)
years= service could accumulate is thirty (30) working days (240 hours) and only an
employee with more than twenty (20) years= service could carry over and take the authorized
maximum of fifty (50) working days (400) hours in any one year. Under extenuating
circumstances, the Chief, may at his/her discretion, grant an employee a thirty (30) day
extension during which to take this vacation. This extension provision will be limited to two
(2) consecutive years.

Excess Usage. If vacation time off is used in excess of that available, such excess vacation
time off will be deducted from the next scheduled salary payment.

Leave Cash Options. Please refer to Article 9.6 for details.

Management Vacation Benefit. All employees covered by this Agreement will be granted an
additional forty (40) hours of vacation per calendar year over the regular and longevity
vacation schedules. Employees may accrue a maximum of 200 hours of such additional
vacation.

Effect of Extended Sick Leave on Vacation Accrual. Absence on sick leave for a period in
excess of fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days shall not be considered as service for vacation
accrual purposes.

 

21
11.1

ARTICLE XI

11.0 OTHER LEAVES OF ABSENCE

Sick Leave.

A.

Definition. Except as otherwise provided below, sick leave shall be deemed to mean
absence from duty of an employee because of illness or injury that prevents the
employee from performing the duties of his or her position, and shall be deemed to
include time in quarantine resulting from exposure to a contagious disease.

Accrual. Each employee shall be entitled to, and shall earn, eight (8) hours of sick
leave for each full calendar month of service in which he is employed by the City with
full pay; provided, however, any absence on sick leave for a period of time greater
than fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days in any one (1) calendar month shall not be
considered to be service entitling an employee to earn sick leave as aforesaid. Subject
to the other provisions in this Article, sick leave shall accrue to the credit of each
employee to the extent that it is not used. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an
employee on leave of absence for service-connected illness or injury who is covered
by the provisions of Labor Code Section 4850, shall continue to accumulate eight (8)
hours of sick leave for each full calendar month of service for which he or she is
employed by the City with full pay during said absence for service-connected illness or
injury.

Authorized Only When Necessary. Sick leave is not a right which an employee may
use at his or her discretion, but shall be allowed only in cases of necessity and actual
sickness or disability, or as authorized in Subsection J below.

When an accepted industrial illness or injury has caused a non-sworn employee=s
absence, for which benefits are required under the State Workers= Compensation
Insurance and Safety Act, paid sick leave will be allowed such employee during the
first three (3) days of the statutory waiting period. If the workers= compensation
related illness or injury continues past the initial three (3) consecutive days, the
employee will have the three (3) used sick days recredited to his or her account. Paid
sick leave will continue until the fourth (4") day when the City pays the employee
workers= compensation benefits for such illness or injury. Ifthe employee does not
have sufficient accumulated sick leave at the commencement of such industrial illness
or injury, they will be advanced sick leave for this purpose. Subsequently, the City
will deduct an equal amount previously advanced from any sick leave accrued by the
employee until the total amount is recovered. If the employee terminates before
recovery ofall advanced sick leave, the City will deduct the unrecovered cost of sick
leave from such terminated employee=s final paycheck, to the extent possible.

Commencing with Council approval of this Agreement, the City may authorize

22
employees to use sick leave, vacation, or compensatory time for approved workers=
compensation medical appointments as specified herein. The City may authorize use
of such leave for City approved medical appointments whenever such appointments
cannot be secured outside the employee=s regular workday, and salary continuation
or workers= compensation benefits are not available.

Limit. Effective January 1, 2005, the maximum total accumulation of sick leave with
pay shall be 2,000 hours. Sick leave usage of less than a full day shall be charged in
minimum increments of one (1) hour, with fractional usage rounded upward to the
next higher multiple of one (1).

 

Extended. The City Manager may grant leave up to six (6) months without pay to an
employee who has exhausted all of his accrued sick leave if the City physician or a
licensed physician designated by the City Manager indicates that the employee will be
sufficiently recovered to return to his employment within a six (6) month period.
Prior to the expiration of the additional time, the employee may return to his position
provided that the employee has a certificate from a licensed physician stating that the
employee is able to perform all the duties of his position without qualification. In
addition to the above, the City Manager may grant a further extension not to exceed a
total of one (1) year without pay.

Extension by Use of Vacation. After an employee=s sick leave has been exhausted,
he or she may be granted permission to take any earned vacation he or she may have
accrued.

Notice. The employee taking sick leave shall notify his or her immediate supervisor as
established by the Police Department regulations. When the absence is more than
three (3) consecutive working days, the employee must present to the Police Chiefa
physician=s certificate stating that, in the physician=s opinion, the employee could not
report to work because of such illness or injury and that the employee is sufficiently
recovered to safely return to work. Such certificate shall be transmitted to the
Personnel Services Department with the report of the employee=s return to work.

 

A physician=s certificate or other satisfactory written evidence of actual illness or
injury may be required after an absence of any duration less than three (3) days.

Denial. No employee shall be entitled to sick leave with pay while absent from duty
because of sickness or injury purposely self-inflicted or caused by willful misconduct;
or, sickness or disability sustained while engaged in employment other than
employment by the City, for monetary gain or other compensation, or by reason of
engaging in business or activity for monetary gain or other compensation.

23
Excess Usage. Ifsick leave is used in excess of that due and available to an employee,
such excess sick leave will, first, be deducted from any available vacation leave
benefit; finally, deducted from the next scheduled salary payment.

Personal Necessity Leave. Each employee shall be afforded the opportunity to use up
to 48 hours of sick leave per calendar year, on a non-cumulative basis, as personal
necessity leave. All of this personal necessity leave may be used to attend to an illness
ofa child, parent, or spouse of the employee. As used in this section, Achild@ means
a biological, foster, or adopted child, a stepchild, a legal ward, or a child ofa person
standing in loco parentis; and Aparent@ means a biological, foster, adoptive parent, a
stepparent, or a legal guardian.

Up to three (3) days of this personal necessity leave may be used: (a) to attend to a
serious accident to members of the employee=s immediate family; (b) childbirth; (c) to
cope with imminent danger to the employee=s home or other valuable property; or (d)
when the existence of external circumstances beyond the employee=s control make it
impractical for him or her to report for duty. For the purposes of this section only, a
Adayé@ shall be defined as the number of hours of work that an employee is required to
work according to his or her specific workday schedule.

Payment for Unused Sick Leave.
1. Payment criteria and limitations.

a. Upon nondisciplinary termination of employment after ten (10) years of
cumulative full-time service with the City, each qualified employee with less than
twenty-five (25) years of cumulative full-time service with the City shall be entitled
to payment for one-third (1/3) of the total sick leave benefit credited to his or her
account upon the effective date of such termination, not to exceed a maximum
limit of 427 hours at the rate of pay effective on the date of such termination.

b. Affected qualified employees who have completed twenty-five (25) years or
more of cumulative full-time service with the City shall be entitled to payment for
two-thirds (2/3) of the total sick leave benefit credited to his or her account upon
the effective date of such termination, not to exceed a maximum limit of 1,067
hours at the rate of pay effective on the date of such termination.

c. At the employee’s election, payment of unused sick leave may be received in
either a lump sum of money or in equal monthly payments for a period of up to
five (5) years.

d. A lump sum payment shall be made to the beneficiaries of any eligible employee
whose death occurs while such employee is an active employee of the City, such

24
11.2

payment to be in the amount of two-thirds (2/3) of the total sick leave benefit credited
to the employee’s account at the time of his or her death, and at the rate of pay
effective on the date of the death.

2. Conversion to Health Insurance Premium Payments.

At his or her option, an employee may convert any lump sum payment provided
herein into health insurance premiums, to the extent necessary to provide the
employee and his or her designated eligible dependents, ifany, with benefits under the
health insurance program maintained by the City.

i. The City’s obligation to pay such premiums shall terminate when the sum of
premiums paid equals the amounts as follows:

e After ten (10) years, but less than 15 years of service, the employee shall
be entitled to 50% of the amount of unused sick leave benefits credited to
his or her account upon the effective date of termination, not to exceed a
maximum limit of 640 hours. This amount represents 150% of the
amount the employee would have been entitled to had they elected to cash
out their sick leave hours.

e After fifteen (15) years, but less than 25 years of service, the employee
shall be entitled to 66.66% of unused sick leave benefits credited to his or
her account upon the effective date of termination, not to exceed a
maximum limit of 1,067 hours.

e After twenty-five (25) years of service, the employee shall be entitled to
100% of the amount of unused sick leave benefits credited to his or her
account upon the effective date of termination, not to exceed a maximum
limit of 1,600 hours. This amount represents 150% of the amount the
employee would have been entitled to had they elected to cash out their
sick leave hours.

ii. Premiums will first be paid out of the lump sum amount contributed by the
employee and then out of the amount contributed by the City. Ifthe retired former
employee dies before exhausting the full amount of his or her lump sum contribution,
the unused portion of such contribution shall be converted to cash as defined in
Section 11.1K1 above and distributed to the retiree’s designated beneficiary.

Bereavement Leave. An employee shall be granted up to three (3) days leave without loss of
pay in case of death of a member of the employee=s immediate family. For purposes of this
Section only, a Aday@ shall be defined as the number of hours of work that an employee is
required to work according to his/her specific workday schedule. Such leave is designated as

25
11.3

11.4

11.5

11.6

11.7

bereavement leave. Almmediate family@ as used in this section is limited to:
A. Any relative by blood or marriage who is a member of the employee=s household;

B. A parent, parent-in-law, spouse, child, brother, sister, grandparent or grandchild of
the employee, regardless of residence;

Cc. Any other relative of the employee by blood or marriage where it can be established
by the employee that as a result of such relative=s death, the employee=s presence is
required.

Military Leave.

A. Proof of Orders and Reinstatements. An employee shall be granted military leave ifhe
or she furnishes the Executive Director of Personnel Services satisfactory proof of his
or her order to report for duty. Upon return and upon showing of proof of actual
service pursuant to such orders, he or she will be reinstated as provided in Section 9-
143 of the Civil Service Rules and Regulations of the City of Santa Ana.

B. Temporary. Members of the reserve forces of the United States or the National
Guard, granted temporary leave when ordered to duty, in accordance with the
Military and Veterans Code, will be granted leave with pay not to exceed thirty (30)
calendar days in each calendar year after one (1) year=s service with the City upon
presenting satisfactory proof of orders to and from such temporary active duties.

Jury and Witness Leave. When an on-duty employee is called to serve as a juror or witness in
any court action, he or she shall be allowed to leave for the time actually required for such
service without loss of pay. Each on-duty employee called for such service shall present to
the Police Chief for examination the subpoena calling him or her to such service and shall pay
into the City Treasury the fees collected for such service, with the exception of reimbursement
for transportation expenses, if any.

Examination Leave. Employees participating in examinations conducted during their normal
working hours for positions in the competitive service of the City of Santa Ana will be
granted leave with pay for the time actually required without loss of any accrued vacation
time off benefits.

Unauthorized Absence. Unauthorized absence from duty for any duration of time may be
considered cause for dismissal.

Authorized Absence Without Pay - Short Term. Absence without pay not to exceed five (5)
consecutive working days, may be authorized by the Police Chief. Absence without pay not
to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days may be authorized by the Department with the approval

26
11.8

11.9

11.10

11.11

of the City Manager. Such an absence may be authorized only if in the judgment of the Police
Chief it serves the best interest of the City.

Authorized Absence Without Pay - Long Term. Upon receipt of a written request from an
employee having permanent status plus action by the Police Chief recommending approval of
the request, the City Manager may grant a leave of absence without pay for up to six (6)
months.

An employee returning to duty with the City shall inform the Police Chief and the Executive
Director of Personnel Services of his or her intention at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to
the expiration of the six (6) months= period or a shorter period of the full six (6) months if
not taken. Upon receipt of such notice, the Police Chief will take steps necessary to restore
the employee to his or her former position.

Industrial Leave.

A. Each “safety member” employee covered by the provisions of Labor Code Section
4850 who is compelled to be absent from duty because ofan illness or injury covered
by the State of California Workers= Compensation Insurance and Safety Act shall, in
lieu of temporary disability compensation payable under the aforementioned Act,
continue to be paid his or her normal salary and accrue other benefits in accordance
with the provisions of Labor Code Section 4850.

B. Any period of time during which an employee is required to be absent from his or her
position by reason of an industrial injury or industrial illness for which he or she is
entitled to receive compensation shall not be considered a break in continuous service
for the purpose of his or her right to salary adjustments or to the accrual of vacation,
seniority and any other benefits.

Administrative Leave Policy. The City Manager is authorized to grant, at his discretion, paid
or unpaid administrative leave for employees covered by this Agreement.

Catastrophic Leave Donation. In order to assist employees otherwise granted leave of
absence without pay by the City Manager because of catastrophic non-industrial medical
condition or injury, the City and Association agree to implement a Catastrophic Leave
Donation procedure.

Nothing herein shall be construed to alter City policies and procedures as provided in the
Charter or ordinances of the City of Santa Ana or other provisions of this Agreement with
regard to granting unpaid leaves of absence.

The Catastrophic Leave benefit will be provided for non-industrial injury or sickness only.
The leave shall cover the uncompensated time prior to the employee becoming eligible for

27
L.T.D. benefits.

A.

Guidelines. It shall be understood that all donations under this procedure are
voluntary and subject to taxation for the recipient.

1.

Employees may donate vacation or compensatory time or one in lieu holiday
to the eligible employee. In no event shall sick leave be donated.

Employees shall be provided a two-week period to submit donations.
Donations received after this two-week period shall not be processed. The
two-week period for each case shall be designated by the Police Chief or his
designee as provided herein below.

Donations shall be for a minimum of two (2) hours and a maximum of eight
(8) hours per donor. All donations must be made in two (2) hour increments,
except in lieu holidays must be for eight (8) hours.

Any authorization of donations not made in accordance with the procedures
outlined in Section C, subparagraph 2 below, will not be processed.

All donations shall be irrevocable.
In the event the recipient returns to work before leave donations have been

exhausted, any balance on the books shall be accrued by the recipient and
designated as sick leave.

Eligibility. Regular, full-time employees shall be eligible for Catastrophic Leave
donations if the following criteria are met:

1.

When it is reasonably foreseeable that all accrued time on the books, such as
sick leave, compensatory time, vacation, and in lieu holidays, will be
exhausted and the employee=s illness will continue past the time when the
employee will be on paid status.

The Police Chief or his/her designee has approved a written request for
donations accompanied by a medical statement from the employee=s attending
physician. The attending physician=s statement must verify the employee=s
need for an extended medical leave and an estimate of the time the employee
will be unable to work.

Procedure.

1.

Upon receipt of a valid request for donations from an eligible employee, the

28
Police Chief or his or her designee shall post a notice of the eligible
employee=s need for donations on bulletin boards accessible to employees.
No confidential medical information shall be included in the posted notice.

Employees wishing to donate time to an eligible employee must sign his or her
authorization of the transfer of such donated time and provide:

A.

B.

His/her name, department name, and employee number.

The number of hours of compensatory or vacation time of the
donation within the limitations of Section A, subparagraph 3 above.

The name, department and employee number of the recipient.

A statement indicating that the donor understands such donation of
time is irrevocable.

29
12.1

12.2

ARTICLE XII

12.0 EMPLOYEE INSURANCE

Health Insurance. The City shall contribute the following amounts toward the payment of
premiums for affected employees and their dependents under the California Public
Employees= Retirement System (CalPERS) health insurance programs.

A.

Effective March 1, 2005, the City shall contribute toward medical premiums an
amount consistent with the rates then in effect for the “employee-only” and “family”
tiers, respectively, of the Kaiser “Other Southern California” CalPERS HMO plan.
The “employee-only” tier applies to employees who have no dependents. The
“family” tier applies to employees who do have dependents. Effective January 1,
2006, the City shall establish a Cafeteria Benefit Plan for employees covered by this
Agreement.

Any contribution necessary to maintain benefits under any health insurance program
provided by the City for its employees and their eligible dependents in excess of the
amounts of the City contribution specified above shall be borne entirely by the
employee.

For each such employee who is covered under a spouse=s non-City sponsored health
plan, the City will pay the employee a cash payment each month in an amount equal to
one hundred percent (100%) of the monthly premium amount for the City=s lowest
“employee-only” coverage, if said employee waives, in writing, City-paid coverage.
Ifan employee waives City provided coverage, said employee shall provide proof of
medical insurance coverage in a non City-sponsored health plan. Said waiver shall
include a provision warning such employee that reentry into any of City-sponsored
plans is allowed only at open enrollment, unless there is a qualifying event, and may
require proof of insurability for such employee and/or family.

Dental Insurance. The City agrees to contribute toward the payment of premiums for dental
insurance plans provided by the City for employees covered by this Agreement and their
eligible dependents on the following basis:

Effective March 1, 2005:

 

A.

B.

One hundred percent (100%) of the premium cost for “employee-only” coverage.

Up to eighty dollars ($80) per month per employee for “family” coverage.

30
12.3

12.4

Effective January 1, 2006:
A. One hundred percent (100%) of the premium cost for “employee-only” coverage.

B. Up to ninety dollars ($90) per month per employee for “family” coverage.

Effective January 1, 2007:

A. One hundred percent (100%) of the premium cost for “employee-only” coverage.
B. Up to one hundred ($100) per month per employee for “family” coverage.

Effective January 1, 2008:
A. One hundred percent (100%) of the premium cost for “employee-only” coverage.

B. Up to one hundred ten dollars ($110) per month per employee for “family”
coverage.

Any contribution necessary to maintain benefits under said dental plans in excess of the
amount set forth above shall be borne entirely by the employee.

For each such employee who is covered under a spouse’s non-City sponsored dental plan, the
City will pay the employee a cash payment each month in an amount equal to one-hundred
percent (100%) of the City’s contribution, if the employee waives, in writing, City-paid
coverage. Such waiver shall include a provision warning such employee that reentry into any
City-sponsored plan is allowed only at open enrollment, unless there is a qualifying event, and
may require proof of insurability for such employee and/or family.

Disability Insurance. The City shall continue to pay one hundred percent (100%) of the
premium cost for a long term disability insurance plan for employees covered by this
Agreement as said plan was amended effective November 1, 1985, to provide Unrepresented
Management personnel a monthly benefit of sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 2/3%) of
base monthly salary (insured payroll), less offsets contained in the existing plan, to a
maximum monthly benefit of $5,000.

Life Insurance. The City shall continue to pay one hundred percent (100%) of the premium
cost for term life insurance coverage under the policy it maintains on behalf of its officers and
employees in order to provide employees covered by this Agreement with life insurance
coverage in an amount equal to twice such employee=s annual rate of salary to a maximum of
three hundred dollars ($300,000), provided said affected employees can provide evidence of
insurability of coverage above one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000) ifso required by
the terms and conditions of said term life insurance policy.

31
12.5

12.6

12.7

In the event any such employee is determined to be ineligible for said insurance coverage, the
City will attempt to provide as much coverage as may be obtained at reasonable cost without
having to provide evidence of insurability.

The City shall retain the right to change health, dental and life insurance carriers, administer
the insurance benefits provided thereunder, and select and/or change any excess or
supplemental insurance carriers as a part of any self-insurance plan during the term of this
Agreement, provided that employees covered by this Agreement continue to receive
equivalent benefits and provided that the parties have met and conferred before the changes
have been made.

Option to Redesignate Certain Contributions. Affected employees shall have the option of
redesignating coverage under any City-sponsored group, medical, dental, long-term disability,
or life insurance plan. Effective January 1, 2006, the amount allowed for redesignation of
dental coverage is equal to the amount of City contribution (i.e. $90/month in 2006,
$100/month in 2007, and $110/month in 2008). The amount allowed for redesignation of
medical coverage is equal to the amount of City contribution toward medical premiums for
either the “employee-only” or “family” tier, respectively, during the term of the Agreement.
The amount allowed for redesignation of long-term disability or life coverage, respectively, is
equal to the amount actually paid by the City on behalf of the employee. The amounts
referenced above may be applied to the options within the cafeteria plan.

Iftwo City employees are married, at least one of the two employees must maintain insurance
coverage. The amount of money that can be redesignated by the employee waiving coverage
is limited to the value of the “employee-only” level within each type of insurance.

In the event the City experiences an adverse impact in rates due to utilization of the
redesignation option, the City and PMA agree to meet and confer over the impact.

Medical Retirement Subsidy Plan. Effective July 1, 1998, July 1, 1999, July 1, 2000, and July
1, 2001, respectively, the City contributed an amount equal to one-half of one percent (.5%)
of the bargaining unit=s salary base for the purpose of providing a retiree health insurance
subsidy plan. The specific payments made to members of the Association pursuant to this
plan shall be designated at the sole discretion of the Association. The plan shall be
administered by the City, at no cost to the Association or its members, in such a manner as to
insure that the funds are invested in a reasonably secure plan that bears a reasonable rate of
interest/growth given current financial markets. For purposes of this Agreement, investments
made pursuant to the then current Statement of Investment Policy for the City of Santa Ana,
shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this section. Effective June 30, 2002, this .5%
contribution is eliminated.

32
12.8

Effective July 1, 2002, employees covered by this Agreement shall begin contributing one-half
percent (.5%) of their base salary plus pay additives through payroll deduction to the above-
specified fund currently maintained by the City. This payroll deduction for retiree health
insurance premium reduction assistance will continue until such time as the parties may
mutually agree to end said deduction.

Effective October 1, 2006, and October 1, 2007, respectively, the City shall contribute an
additional one-half of one percent (.5%) of the bargaining unit=s salary base for the purpose
specified herein. This one-half of one percent (.5%) may be applied, instead, to the
Retirement Health Savings Program as defined in Article IV, Section 14.9 herein.

  

Vision Insurance. Effective as soon as practicable, the City agrees to implement, through
payroll deduction, a non-participatory vision care plan through Eye Med. This plan is
voluntary on behalf of the employee and shall be fully funded by the participating employee.

33
ARTICLE XIII
13.0 DEFERRED COMPENSATION

Effective January 1, 1977, employees covered by this Agreement were granted a one percent
(1%) salary increase to be utilized toward deferred compensation. Effective July 1, 1991, to
comply with CalPERS salary reporting requirements, salary rate ranges for employees
covered by this Agreement were adjusted upward by one percent (1%) to reflect the deferred
compensation as salary. For salary reporting purposes, the deferred compensation was shown
as part of salary, rather than as an add-on benefit. The amounts contributed by the City under
this article shall be subject to provisions as outlined in the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) 457.
Furthermore, all new contributions and existing assets are to be held for the exclusive benefit
of the participants and beneficiaries.

34
14.1

14.2

14.3

14.4

14.5

ARTICLE XIV
14.0 RETIREMENT

General. The terms of the existing contract between the City and California Public
Employees= Retirement System (CalPERS) governing the City retirement benefits of
employees covered by this Agreement are incorporated by reference herein. The City shall
continue to make contributions to CalPERS in accordance with its contract with CalPERS for
employees covered by said contract as amended.

 

Deferred Retirement. The City will continue to make payment to CalPERS on behalf of each
affected employee, one hundred percent (100%) of his or her individual employee retirement
contribution. Such payments shall be credited to the individual employee=s CalPERS
account.

Such payments are not increases in base salary and no salary rate range applicable to any of
the employees covered by this Agreement shall be changed or deemed to have been changed
by reason thereof. As a result, the City will not treat these payments as ordinary income and,
thus will not withhold Federal or State income tax from said payments. The City has received
an opinion or ruling from the Internal Revenue Service confirming that these payments are
deferred compensation, not ordinary income.

For the purpose of reporting an employee=s compensation to CalPERS, the City shall include
these payments as if they were part of the employee=s base salary.

In the event that the City receives a ruling from the Internal Revenue Service that such
payments are ordinary income of the employees instead of deferred compensation, the City=s
obligation to make such payments shall discontinue and in place thereof the base salary of
each said employee shall forthwith be increased by eighteen (18) salary rate ranges (9%) for
“safety member” employees covered under the 3% at age 50 CalPERS formula and fourteen
(14) salary rate ranges (7%) for all “miscellaneous member” employees covered under the
2% at age 55 CalPERS Formula.

1959 Survivor=s Benefit. Effective December 7, 2002, the City shall provide CalPERS
fourth level of 1959 Survivor=s Benefits to all eligible employees in the unit.

Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2 Death Benefit. Effective July 5, 2000 the City shall
provide the Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2 Death Benefit to all employees covered by
this Agreement.

 

2% at 55 Service Retirement Benefit for Miscellaneous Members. CalPERS designated
“miscellaneous” employees represented by the Association shall be covered by the 2% at 55
retirement benefit. Effective July 1, 1997, the City agreed to pay 2.266% of the cost

 

35
14.6

14.7

14.8

providing CalPERS 2% at 55 retirement benefit to these employees. Employees agreed to
pay one percent (1%) of the total cost of 3.266% for the 2% at 55 retirement benefit by
authorizing a one percent (1%) deduction from their salary (two [2] salary rate ranges)
effective July 1, 1997. Effective November 1, 2001, this one percent (1%) deduction was
eliminated.

Effective July 1, 2006, the City and Association agree to reopen Article XIV, Retirement, for
the purpose of discussing the feasibility of an enhanced retirement formula for Local
Miscellaneous Members.

3% at 50 Service Retirement Benefit for Safety Members. The City agrees to amend its
contract with CalPERS to provide Safety employees represented by this bargaining unit with
the 3% at 50 Service Retirement benefit, effective July 1, 2001.

 

Payment of 3% at 50 Service Retirement Benefit. The actual cost for the benefit shall be
determined upon receipt of the annual actuarial valuation setting forth employer rates for the
2001-02 fiscal year and every subsequent year thereafter. In order to provide this benefit to
its current safety members, the City and Association agree that eligible employees will pay
50% of the total additional normal cost to provide this benefit, not to exceed 1.42% of safety
payroll.

Yearly Actuarial Valuation Fluctuations. CalPERS provides the City with a yearly actuarial
valuation informing it of its new employer contribution rate to be in effect July 1“ of each
year. The City and Association agree that the City=s employer contribution rate will fluctuate
from year to year based on the investment returns earned by the retirement system. The City
agrees that current eligible safety employees paying to receive this benefit should also benefit
from this yearly fluctuation in the City=s annual actuarial valuation. As such, current eligible
Safety employees will contribute 50% of any yearly City employer contribution rate to a
maximum of 1.42% during the term of this Agreement. If, however, during the term of the
Agreement, the City=s employer contribution rate drops below 1.42%, then the City and
Association agree to reopen this Article.

Military Service Credit as Public Service. Effective March 8, 2001, Safety employees and
effective April 5, 2002, Miscellaneous employees, respectively, may elect to purchase up to
four (4) years of service credit for any continuous active military or merchant marine service
prior to employment. The employee must contribute an amount equal to the contribution for
current and prior service that the employee and the employer would have made with respect
to that period of service.

Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP). Ifthe Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP)

is enacted by the State of California during the term of this Agreement, the City and PMA
agree to reopen this Agreement to meet and confer regarding this option.

36
14.9 Retirement Health Savings Program. As soon as practicable following Council approval of
this Agreement, the City shall establish a voluntary program for employees to contribute
unused sick leave, vacation, or other employee benefits on a pre-tax basis in conjunction with
a Cafeteria Benefit Plan or other tax exempt program.

37
ARTICLE XV
15.0 CREDIT UNION DEDUCTION
The City shall permit an employee covered by this Agreement to have a deduction made from
his or her payroll check for the Santa Ana City Employee=s Credit Union, provided that the

employee executes a written authorization on the payroll deduction form provided by the
City.

38
16.1

ARTICLE XVI
16.0 EXPANDED RESIDENCY

The City shall continue to permit employees covered by this Agreement to reside outside the
limits of Orange County, so long as such residency is not an unreasonable distance nor
requires an unreasonable response time to the particular employee=s place of employment.
Any affected employee who desires to take advantage of the opportunity to reside outside of
Orange County shall first request permission to do so from the Police Chief. Said request
shall be granted by the Police Chief if it is determined that the intended residence is not an
unreasonable distance nor requires an unreasonable response time to the employee=s place of
employment.

Should the Police Chief refuse any such request, the employee shall have the right ofappeal of
said determination to the City Manager for reconsideration.

39
17.1

17.2

ARTICLE XVII
17.0 CONTROLLED PARKING AND TAKE HOME VEHICLE PRIVILEGES

Parking. The City shall continue to provide employees covered by this Agreement with free
parking for personal vehicles during on-duty hours in controlled parking facilities in the Civic
Center area.

Take Home Vehicle. Effective July 1, 1998, all employees in the classification of Lieutenant
shall receive a City-owned and maintained vehicle for traveling between the employee=s
residence and the Police Department or other business-related location, as necessary in the
performance of his or her duties.

40
18.1

18.2

ARTICLE XVIII
18.0 DISCIPLINE

An employee covered by this Agreement may only be disciplined in accordance with the
standards and procedures and subjects to all rights of appeal set forth in Section 1000d of the
City Charter and Municipal Code Sections 9-9, 9-10, 9-118.1 et. seq.

In addition, a new section shall be added to the Municipal Code to provide as follows:

A. In the event an employee is ordered to absent himself from the job based on probable
cause and it is subsequently determined by the Police Chief, the City Manager,
Personnel Board or a court of competent jurisdiction, that cause did not exist for the
ordered absence, the employee shall have restored to him any paid leaves of absence
against which such absence may have been charged, and he shall be granted a
retroactive leave of absence with pay for the time during which he was prohibited
from performing the duties of his position, less any compensation paid to him by the
City during such ordered absence.

B. In the event an employee is reduced, suspended, and/or discharged, and upon appeal
the City Manager, Personnel Board or a court of competent jurisdiction does not
sustain such reduction, suspension, and/or discharge, the employee shall be entitled to
his base rate of salary including all additives, vacation, and sick leave as if such
unsustained reduction, suspension, or discharge had not been invoked. However, in
no event shall an employee be entitled to any salary credit for vacation and sick leave
for any period of time covered by a suspension sustained on appeal or for any period
of time waived by the employee as a condition to the granting ofa continuance of any
hearing on appeal.

Cc. If, during an absence for which an employee is paid pursuant to this Section, he
earned any money which he would not have earned had he continued to perform the
duties of his position, such sum shall be deducted from the salary otherwise payable to
him pursuant to this Section.

41
19.1

19.2

19.3

ARTICLE XIX

19.0 GRIEVANCE REVIEW PROCEDURE

Definition of a Grievance. A grievance shall be defined as a timely complaint by an employee
or group of employees of the Association concerning the interpretation or application of
specific provisions of this Agreement, or of the rules and regulations governing personnel
practices or working conditions of the City, except, however, those matters specifically

assigne
the Civ

No em

d to the jurisdiction of the Personnel Board by those provisions of the City Charter and
il Service Rules and Regulations.

ployee shall suffer any reprisal because of filing or processing of a grievance or

participation in the Grievance Review Procedure.

Informal Process.

A.

Formal

An employee must first attempt to resolve the grievance on an informal basis through
discussion with his or her immediate supervisor without undue delay, but in no case,
yond a period of ten (10) calendar days after the occurrence of the alleged incident
giving rise to the grievance, or when the grievant knew or should have reasonably
come aware of the facts given rise to the grievance.

Every effort shall be made to find an acceptable solution to the grievance through this
informal means at the most immediate level of supervision.

n order that this informal procedure may be responsive, both parties involved shall
expedite this process. If, within five (5) working days, a mutually acceptable solution
as not been reached at the informal level, the employee and/or the employee=s
designated representative shall then set forth the grievance in writing, indicate the
nature of the action desired, sign it, and submit it to the employee=s Police Chief. At
this point, the grievance review process becomes formal. Should the grievant and/or
is or her designated representative fail to file a written grievance, and in the manner
specified above, within ten (10) working days after first discussing the grievance with
the employee=s immediate supervisor, the grievance shall be barred and waived.

Process.

A.

 

fa grievance is not resolved through the informal process, and a written grievance is
filed within the time limits set forth above, the grievant=s immediate supervisor shall
add his or her comments and any justification he or she considered proper, sign it, and
forward it to the Police Chief without undue delay or, in no case, more than ten (10)
calendar days.

42
If the grievant files a written grievance to the Police Chief in the manner and within
the time limits specified, then a conference shall be held at the request of the employee
or the Police Chief.

Police Chief shall inform the employee of his action within ten (10) calendar days
after the receipt of the request of the settlement. The original of the grievance form
and the Chief=s decision shall be filed in the Personnel Records of the Department.

Ifno satisfactory settlement has been reached at the Department level, the employee
may, within ten (10) calendar days after being informed by the Police Chief of his
decision on the matter, and the reasons thereof, submit the grievance in writing to the
City Manager, or his duly authorized representative, for determination. Failure ofthe
grievant to take this action will constitute a waiver and bar to the grievance, and the
grievance will be considered settled on a basis of the Police Chief=s response.

The City Manager or his duly authorized representative, after a careful review, shall
render a final decision on the merits of the grievance, in writing, and return it to the
grievant within thirty (30) calendar days after receiving the grievance. A copy of the
written grievance to the City Manager, or his duly authorized representative, and of
the City Manager=s or his representative=s written decision shall be filed in the
Personnel Records of the Department and the grievant=s personnel jacket maintained
in the Personnel Services Department.

After the procedures set forth in this Article have been exhausted, the grievant, the

Association, and the City shall have all rights and remedies to pursue said grievance
under the law.

43
20.1

20.2

ARTICLE XX
20.0 DUES DEDUCTION AND INDEMNIFICATION

Dues Deduction. The City shall deduct dues, on a regular basis, from the pay of all
employees recognized to be represented by the Association, who voluntarily authorize such
deduction, in writing, on a form to be provided for this purpose by the City. The City shall
remit such funds to the Association within thirty (30) days following their deduction.

Indemnification. The Association agrees to hold the City harmless and indemnify the City
against any claims, causes of action, or lawsuits instituted by a member or members of the
Association arising out of the deductions or transmittal of such funds to the Association,
except the intentional failure of the City to transmit, to the Association, monies deducted from
the employees pursuant to this Article.

44
21.1

ARTICLE XXI

21.0 CITY RIGHTS

The City reserves, retains, and is vested with, solely and exclusively, all rights of Management
which have not been expressly abridged by specific provision of this Agreement or by law to
manage the City, as such rights existed prior to the execution of this Agreement. The sole
and exclusive rights of Management, as they are not abridged by this Agreement or by law,
shall include but not be limited to the following rights:

A.

B.

To manage the City generally and to determine the issues of policy.

To determine the existence or non-existence of facts which are the basis of the
Management decision.

To determine the necessity of organization of any service or activity conducted by the
City and expand or diminish services.

To determine the nature, manner, means, and technology, and extent of services to be
provided to the public.

To determine methods of financing.
To determine types of equipment or technology to be used.

To determine and/or change the facilities, methods, technology, means, and size of the
workforce by which the City operations are to be conducted.

To determine and change the number of locations, relocations, and types of
operations, processes, and materials to be used in carrying out all City functions
including but not limited to the right contract for or subcontract any work or
operation of the City.

To assign work to and schedule employees in accordance with requirements as
determined by the City, and to establish and change work schedules and assignments.

To relieve employees from duties for lack of work or similar nondisciplinary reason,
subject to the provisions of the City Charter, Municipal Code, Federal and State law

and this Agreement.

To establish and modify productivity and performance programs and standards.

45
21.2

L. To discharge, suspend, demote, or otherwise discipline employees for proper cause in
accordance with the provisions set forth in the City Charter and Santa Ana Municipal
Code.

M. To determine job classifications and to reclassify employees.

To hire, transfer, promote and demote employees for nondisciplinary reasons in
accordance with this Agreement.

O. To determine policies, procedures and standards including, but not limited to, quality
and quantity standards and to require compliance therewith.

P. To establish employee performance standards including, but not limited to, quality and
quantity standards and to require compliance therewith.

Q. To maintain order and efficiency in its facilities and operations.

R. To establish and promulgate and/or modify rules and regulations to maintain order
and safety in the City which are not in contravention with this Agreement.

Ss. To take any and all necessary action to carry out the mission of the City in
emergencies.

Except in emergencies, or where the City is required to make changes in its operations
because of the requirements of law, whenever the contemplated exercise of Management=s
rights shall impact on a significant number of employees of the bargaining unit, the City agrees
to meet and confer in good faith with representatives of the Association regarding the impact
of the contemplated exercise of such rights prior to exercising such rights, unless the matter of
the exercise of such rights is provided for in this Agreement.

46
22.1

22.2

ARTICLE XXII
22.0 STRIKES AND WORK STOPPAGES
Prohibited Conduct.

A. The Association, its officers, agents, representatives, and/or members agree that
during the term of this Agreement, they will not cause or condone any unlawful strike,
workout, slowdown, sick-out, or any other unlawful job action by withholding or
refusing to perform services.

B. Any employee who participates in any conduct prohibited in Subsection A above shall
be subject to suspension, demotion or dismissal by the appointing authority.

Association Responsibility. In the event that the Association, its officers, agents,
representatives, or members engage in any of the conduct prohibited in Subsection A, Section
22.1 above of this Article, the Association shall immediately instruct any persons engaging in
such conduct that their conduct is in violation of this Agreement and unlawful, and they must
immediately cease engaging in the conduct prohibited and return to work.

47
23.1

23.2

ARTICLE XXIII
23.0 SOLE AND ENTIRE AGREEMENT

It is the intent of the parties hereto that the provisions of this Agreement shall supersede all
prior agreements and memoranda of agreement, or memoranda of understanding, or contrary
salary and/or personnel rules and regulations or administrative codes, provisions of the City,
oral and written, expressed or implied between the parties, and shall govern the entire
relationship and shall be the sole source of any and all rights which may be asserted
hereunder. This Agreement is not intended to conflict with Federal or State law or the City
Charter.

The City will continue to administer its employee relations and its personnel policies and

procedures in accordance with duly adopted ordinances and resolutions, and the affected
employees will continue to be governed thereby during the term of this Agreement.

48
24.1

ARTICLE XXIV
24.0 WAIVER OF BARGAINING DURING THE TERM OF AGREEMENT

During the term of this Agreement, the parties mutually agree that they will not seek to
negotiate or bargain with regard to wages, hours and terms of conditions of employment,
whether or not covered by this Agreement or in the negotiations leading thereto, unless
required by specific provision of this Agreement, and irrespective of whether or not such
matters were discussed or were even within the contemplation of the parties hereto during the
negotiations leading to this Agreement. Regardless of the waiver contained in this Article, the
parties may, however, by mutual agreement, in writing, agree to meet and confer about any
matter during the term of this Agreement.

49
25.1

ARTICLE XXV
25.0 SEPARABILITY PROVISION

Should any provision of this Agreement be found to be inoperative, void, or invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction or by statue, all other provisions of this Agreement shall remain in
full force and effect for the duration of this Agreement, provided that if any such affected
provisions invalidate or void any benefits of employees covered hereunder, the parties shall
forthwith commence negotiations to replace the invalidated benefits with benefits of
comparable value.

50
ARTICLE XXVI
26.0 TERM OF AGREEMENT

26.1 The term of this Agreement shall be from July 1, 2004 through June 30, 2008.

51
ARTICLE XXVII
27.0 RATIFICATION AND EXECUTION

27.1 The City and the Association have reached an understanding as to certain recommendations
to be made to the City Council for the City of Santa Ana and have agreed that the parties
hereto will jointly urge said Council to adopt a new wage and salary resolution which will
provide for the changes contained in said joint recommendations. The City and the
Association acknowledge that this Agreement shall not be in full force and effect until ratified
by the membership of the Association and adopted by the City Council of the City of Santa
Ana. Subject to the foregoing, this Agreement is hereby executed by the authorized
representatives of the City and the Association and entered into this 7 day of February, 2005.

CITY OF SANTA ANA, a municipal
corporation of the State of California

Dated: By:
MAYOR
Dated: By:
CITY MANAGER
Dated: By:
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS MANAGER
PERSONNEL SERVICES
ATTEST:
CLERK OF THE COUNCIL

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

CITY ATTORNEY

52
This Agreement has been ratified by the membership of the Santa Ana Police Management
Association.

Dated: By:
PRESIDENT, SANTA ANA POLICE
MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION

53
M52
M53
M54
M55
M56
M57
M58
M59
M60
M61
M62
M63
M64
M65
M66
M67
M68
M69
M70
M71
M72
M73
M74
M75
M76
M77
M78
M79
M80
M81
M82
M83
M84

0
2637
2769
2907
3052
3205
3365
3533
3710
3896
4091
4296
4511
4741
4978
5226
5488
5762
6050
6353
6670
7005
7355
7723
8109
8515
8941
9388
9857
10350
10868
11411
11982
12581

1
2650
2782
2921
3067
3221
3381
3550
3728
3915
4111
4317
4533
4764
5002
5252
5515
5790
6080
6384
6702
7039
7391
7761
8149
8557
8985
9434
9906
10401
10922
11468
12041
12643

SALARY SCHEDULE MATRIX

2
2663
2796
2936
3082
3237
3398
3568
3747
3935
4132
4339
4556
4787
5026
5278
5542
5818
6110
6415
6735
7073
7427
7799
8189
8599
9029
9482
9955
10453
10976
11525
12102
12707

3
2676
2810
2950
3098
3253
3415
3586
3765
3954
4152
4360
4579
4810
5051
5304
5569
5847
6140
6446
6768
7107
7463
7837
8229
8641
9073
9529
10005
10506
11031
11583
12162
12770

4
2690
2824
2965
3113
3269
3432
3604
3784
3974
4173
4382
4601
4834
5076
5330
5596
5876
6170
6478
6801
7141
7499
7875
8269
8683
9117
9577
10055
10558
11086
11640
12223
12834

54

5
2703
2838
2980
3129
3285
3449
3622
3803
3994
4194
4404
4624
4858
5101
5356
5623
5905
6200
6510
6835
7176
7535
7913
8309
8725
9161
9625
10105
10611
11142
11699
12284
12898

6
2717
2853
2995
3144
3302
3467
3640
3822
4014
4215
4426
4648
4882
5126
5382
5650
5934
6230
6542
6869
7211
7571
7951
8349
8767
9205
9673
10156
10664
11198
11757
12345
12963

7
2730
2867
3010
3160
3318
3484
3658
3841
4034
4236
4448
4671
4906
S151
5408
5678
5963
6260
6574
6903
7247
7609
7989
8389
8809
9250
9721
10207
10717
11254
11816
12407
13027

8
2744
2881
3025
3176
3335
3501
3676
3861
4054
4257
4470
4694
4930
5176
5434
5706
5992
6291
6606
6937
7283
7647
8029
8431
8853
9296
9770
10258
10771
11310
11875
12469
13093

EXHIBIT A

9
2758
2896
3040
3192
3352
3519
3695
3880
4074
4278
4493
4718
4954
5201
5461
5734
6021
6322
6638
6971
7319
7685
8069
8473
8897
9342
9819
10309
10825
11366
11934
12532
13158
EXHIBIT B

ASSIGNMENT OF CLASSES REPRESENTED BY THE
SANTA ANA POLICE MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION TO
SALARY RATE RANGES FOR THE PERIOD
JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008

SALARY RATE RANGES EFFECTIVE

July 1, 2004
CalPERS SAFETY MEMBER CLASSES
(assigned to 4 step salary rate ranges)
CLASS TITLE NO. MIN-MAX
Police Captain 788 $9770-11310
Police Lieutenant 754 —$8269-9577

CalPERS MISCELLANEOUS MEMBER CLASSES
(assigned to 5 step salary rate ranges)

 

NO. MIN-MAX
Police Communications Manager 681 $5790-7039

Police Property & Facilities Mgr 713 $6768-8229
Police Records Manager 703 = $6446-7837
Note: Salary rate ranges for 2006-07 and 2007-08, respectively, will be increased by that percentage
increase necessary, rounded to the nearest half-percent (.5%), not to exceed nine (9) salary rate

(approximately 4.5%), consistent with the amount received by members of the Santa Ana Police
Officers Association. Please see Article IV, Section 4.3A for details.

55
THREE-YEAR CONTRACT AMENDMENT/EXTENSION TO
THE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING, AS AMENDED, BETWEEN
THE CITY OF SANTA ANA
AND
THE SANTA ANA POLICE MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION FOR FISCAL YEARS 2010-11
THROUGH 2012-13

The City of Santa Ana (CITY) and the Police Management Association (PMA) have met and agreed to
amend the previously amended 2004-10 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the CITY
and PMA, by extending this amended MOU for three (3) additional years, The existing MOU
provisions shall remain unchanged and in effect unless modified by this contract extension. The new
expiration date of the MOU, as amended, shall be June 30, 2013, and the MOU shall be amended as
follows:

AMENDED ARTICLE III (new language in bold italics; deleted provisions lined out)

3.2 Alternative Work Schedules.

 

A. All represented employees, except those Lieutenants assigned as Watch Commanders or
assigned to positions designated by the Police Chief as special exemptions, shall be permitted,

at the employee's aero to work a A work schedule. Pe cna el
3 da k Each

 

 

 

PMA 2010-13 Contract Extension Page 1
workday shall consist of ten (10) hours of work and thirty (30) minutes unpaid mealtime. Said
schedule shall be set by the Police Chief and subject to annual review by the Police Chief.

B. All represented employees (except those Lieutenants assigned as Watch Commanders)
not assigned to the 4/10 work schedule shall work a 9/80 work schedule. Employees assigned to
the 207(k) 9/80 work schedule shall work either five (5) nine-hour workdays in the first seven (7)
day span and three (3) nine-hour and one (1) eight-hour workdays in the second seven (7) day span, or
alternatively three (3) nine-hour workdays and one (1) eight-hour workday in the first seven (7) day
span and five (5) nine-hour workdays in the second seven (7) day span. Each nine (9) hour workday
shall consist of nine (9) hours of work and thirty (30) minutes unpaid mealtime. The eight (8) hour
workday shall consist of eight (8) hours of work and thirty (30) minutes of unpaid mealtime.

C. Police Lieutenants assigned to the Field Operations Division as Watch Commanders will
continue to be assigned to a 3/12 - 4/12 work schedule. The minimum work day for these employees
will consist of 11 hours and 30 minutes of work, with 30 additional minutes for meals. A minimum
work period shall consist of two (2) consecutive weeks, with three (3) shifts of 11 hours and 30
minutes in one (1) week and four (4) shifts of 11 hours and 30 minutes in the second week.

For purposes of computing holiday, vacation, and sick leave accruals, an eight (8) hour day shall be
the basis for computation.

AMENDED ARTICLE IV (new language in bold italics: deleted provisions lined out)
43 Salaries.
A. The base salaries of employees covered by this Agreement shall be adjusted as follows:

1. Effective July 1, 2008, the base salaries of classifications covered by this Agreement
shall be increased by eight (8) salary rate ranges (approximately feur-pereent{4%).

2. Effective January 1, 2009, the base salaries of classifications covered by this Agreement
shall be increased by five (5) salary rate ranges (approximately #we-and-one-helf-pereent
£2.5%).

 

3. Effective July 1, 2009, there shall be no salary increase for employees covered by this
Agreement.

 

PMA 2010-13 Contract Extension Page 2
4. Effective January 1, 2010, there shall be no salary increase for employees covered by this
Agreement.

Effective-July—1—2010—+ lari £ ificati his—A
shell_-be_inereased_by_appreximately-four_percent {4%)- os

5. Effective July 1, 2010, there shall be no salary increase for employees covered by
this Agreement.

 

6. Effective January 1, 2011, there shall be no salary increase for employees covered
by this Agreement.

7. Effective July 1, 2011, the base salaries of classifications covered by this
Agreement shall be increased by six (6) salary rate ranges (approximately 3%).

8. Effective July 1, 2012, the base salaries of classifications covered by this
Agreement shall be increased by seven (7) salary rate ranges (approximately 3.5%).

9. Should any other bargaining unit—with—the—exception—ef-SERL receive a salary or
benefit increase of greater than the combined value of that set forth in "7" and “8”
hereof during the term of this Agreement, PMA employees shall be granted that salary or
benefit equivalent.

10. The City and Association agree that upon the expiration of this Agreement and during the
period of good faith negotiations for a subsequent contract, salary and benefits shall continue
at the then current rate.

AMENDED ARTICLE VI (new language in bold; deleted provisions lined out)
G. Homeland Security Executive Leaders Program. Any employee covered by this Agreement who

successfully completes the Homeland Security Executive Leaders Program shall be paid at a
rate set five (5) salary rate ranges (approximately 2.5%) above his or her then current base
monthly salary step.

H. Advanced Leadership Program (note new letter “H"). Additional leadership courses to be added
to the already existing menu contained in the Advanced Leadership Program under existing

Section G are:

e FBI-LEEDA Executive Survival 32 hours
e Role of the Police Chief 40 hours

 

PMA 2010-13 Contract Extension Page 3
I. Additional Courses. Any other course, 24 hours or longer, which focuses on developing
leadership skills or increasing knowledge of contemporary law enforcement issues of a
management/executive nature, or which enhances knowledge of community policing strategies
or trends. All such courses shall be reviewed and approved by the Chief of Police after
he/she ensures that the above criteria are met.

AMENDED ARTICLE IX (new language in bold italics; deleted provisions lined out)

9.6 Leave Cash Option. Employees covered by this Agreement may cash out a combination of +he
fellewing holiday, regular and/or longevity vacation, and management vacation \eaves, up to
a maximum of 120 hours in a calendar year. Effective July 1, 2009, all employees covered by
this Agreement shall defer for the duration of Fiscal Year 2009-10 an employee's ability to
cash out holiday leave, regular and/or longevity vacation leave, and management vacation leave.
Effective July 1, 2010, employees began cashing out holiday leave, as defined in 9.6A1
below. Effective July 1, 2011, employees choosing to cash out a combination of holiday,
regular and/or longevity vacation, and management vacation leaves may begin to do so, up
to a maximum of 460 174 hours in a calendar year as follows:

A. Holiday Leave: Employees may receive cash compensation, computed on straight time
basis, up to a maximum of eighty (80) hours of their holiday leave benefits, including the
floating holiday, set forth in Section 9.2 above. Effective July 1, 2009, all employees covered
by this Agreement shall defer for the duration of Fiscal Year 2009-10 an employee's ability to
cash out holiday leave time. The ability to cash out holiday leave time shall be reinstated on
July 1, 2010. Such deferral shall not affect an employee's ability to be compensated for
accumulated holiday leave time upon separation from employment with the City, not to exceed a
maximum of 160 hours.
1, Effective July 1, 2010 through June 30, 2013, employees choosing to cash out their
holiday time may do so to a maximum value of +33-«-80-heurs-er 106 hours per year.

B. Regular and/or Longevity Vacation Leave: Employees may receive cash compensation,
computed on a straight time basis, up to a maximum of eighty (80) hours of earned, unused
regular vacation leave (which includes longevity vacation) benefits, set forth in Sections
10.2 and 10.3, respectively, herein. Effective July 1, 2009, all employees covered by this
Agreement shall defer for the duration of Fiscal Years 2009-10 and 2010-11,
respectively, an employee's ability to cash out vacation leave time. The ability to cash out

vacation leave time shall be reinstated dety-4,-2020 July 1, 2011. Such deferral shall
not affect an employee's ability to cash out vacation leave time upon separation of
employment with the City.

1. Effective July 1, 2040 2011 through June 30, 2043 2014, employees choosing to
cash out their vacation leave time may do so up to a maximum value of 4:33-*-80-heurs,
er-t06 133 hours per year.

PMA 2010-13 Contract Extension Page 4
C. Management Vacation Leave: Employees may receive cash compensation, computed on a
straight time basis, up to a maximum of forty (40) hours of earned, unused management
vacation leave benefits, set forth in Section 10.7 herein. Effective July 1, 2009, all
employees covered by this Agreement shall defer for the duration of Fiscal Years 2009-
10 and 2010-11, respectively, an employee's ability to cash out management vacation
time. The ability to cash out management vacation time shall be reinstated July 1, 2020
2011. Such deferral shall not affect an employee's ability to cash out management
vacation time upon separation of employment with the City.

1. Effective July 1, 2040 2011 through June 30, 2613 2014 employees choosing to
cash out their management vacation leave time may do so up to a maximum value of
433<40-heurs-er-53 67 hours per year.

The terms and conditions identified in “bold type" above apply to the Cash Option set forth in 9.6
above for the period of time beginning July 1, 2009, and ending June 30, 2013 2014. Effective
July 1, 2043 2014, these terms and conditions no longer apply and the Cash Option reverts to that
set forth above (maximum of 120 hours of combined holiday, regular or longevity vacation, and/or
management vacation).

Notwithstanding the above, employees covered by this Agreement who retire between July 1,
2010 and January 31, 2011, shall have the ability to cash out any and all leaves at a value
increased by six and one-half percent (6.5%) of base pay, plus premiums. In no event shall
this provision be construed as precedent-setting, nor shall this provision entitle an employee to
enhanced retirement benefits of any kind as provided by CalPERS, including but not limited to
making this leave cash out reportable to CalPERS as income for the purpose of enhancing an
employee's retirement benefit.

Such cash option may be eliminated or modified to the extent it is construed as overtime under
Department of Labor Guidelines implementing provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act.

AMENDED ARTICLE XI (new language in bold italics, deleted provisions lined out)

11.3 Military Leave.

A. Proof of Orders and Reinstatements. An employee shall be granted military leave if he or
she furnishes the Executive Director of Personnel Services satisfactory proof of his or her order to
report for duty. Upon return and upon showing of proof of actual service pursuant to such orders,
he or she will be reinstated as provided in Section 9-143 of the Civil Service Rules and Regulations of
the City of Santa Ana.

B, Temporary. Members of the reserve forces of the United States or the National Guard,
granted temporary leave when ordered to duty, in accordance with the Military and Veterans Code,
will be granted leave with pay not to exceed thirty (30) eatendar working days in each calendar year

 

PMA 2010-13 Contract Extension Page 5
after one (1) year's service with the City upon presenting satisfactory proof of orders to and from
such temporary active duties.

AMENDED ARTICLE XII (new language in bold italics; deleted provisions lined out)

12.4 Life Insurance. The City shall continue to pay one hundred percent (100%) of the premium cost
for term life insurance coverage under the policy it maintains on behalf of its officers and
employees in order to provide employees covered by this Agreement with life insurance
coverage in an amount equal to twice such employee's annual rate of salary to a maximum of
three hundred thousand ($300,000), provided said affected employees can provide evidence
of insurability of coverage above one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000) if so required
by the terms and conditions of said term life insurance policy.

AMENDED ARTICLE XIV (new language in bold italics; deleted provisions lined out)

146 3% at 50 Service Retirement Benefit for Safety Members. The City agrees to amend its
contract with CalPERS to provide Safety employees represented by this bargaining unit with

the 3% at 50 Service Retirement benefit, effective July 1, 2001.

Payment of 3% at 50 Service Retirement Benefit. The actual cost for the benefit shall be
determined upon receipt of the annual actuarial valuation setting forth employer rates for the
2001-02 fiscal year and every subsequent year thereafter. In order to provide this benefit
to its current safety members, the City and Association agree that eligible employees will pay
50% of the total additional normal cost to provide this benefit, not to exceed 1.42% of safety
payroll. Effective July 1, 2011, current safety members shall contribute an additional
one percent (1%) for a total of 2.42% of safety payroll. This additional 1% contribution
shall be implemented through payroll deduction on a pre-tax basis. Effective July 1,
2012, current safety members shall contribute an additional one percent (1%) for a total
of 3.42% of safety payroll. This additional 1% contribution shall be implemented through
payroll deduction on a pre-tax basis.

14. 10Reopener regarding CalPERS Employer Contribution

If, at any time during the term of this Agreement, the City receives notification from CalPERS
that the employer contribution rate for the cost of providing the 3% at 50 service retirement
benefit to members of the Association meets or exceeds 25%, then Article 14.6 "Payment of
3% at 50 Service Retirement Benefit” shall be subject to being immediately reopened for
negotiation at the request of the City.

 

 

PMA 2010-13 Contract Extension Page 6

 

 
 

AMENDED ARTICLE XXVI (new language in bold italics; deleted provisions lined out)

26.1 The term of this Agreement shall be from July 1, 2010 through June 30, 20113.

PMA 2010-13 Contract Extension Page 7
AMENDED ARTICLE XXVII (new language in bold jtalics; deleted provisions lined out)

27.0 RATIFICATION AND EXECUTION

27.1 The City and the Association have reached an understanding as to certain recommendations to
be made to the City Council for the City of Santa Ana and have agreed that the parties hereto
will jointly urge said Council to adopt a new wage and salary resolution which will provide for
the changes contained in said joint recommendations. The City and the Association
acknowledge that this Agreement shall not be in full force and effect until ratified by the
membership of the Association and adopted by the City Council of the City of Santa Ana.
Subject to the foregoing this Agreement is hereby executed by the authorized
representatives of the City and Association and entered into this 29"-dey-of—Fune—2009

 

      

 

 

22” ay of February 2011.
CITY OF SANTA ANA,a
Municipal Corporation of the
State of California
~
MAR 25 2011 a
Dated: .
MAYO!
AR 2 5 20tt bh _
pores: _WAR i /)
CITY MANAGER
+ | _ } \
Dated: \ By: eb 7 ‘ —
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
PERSONNEL SERVICES
ATTEST: APPROVED AS TO FORM:
PDN ive P Lbs A (
CLERK OF THE COUN JY CITY ATTORNEY

i
PMA 2010-13 Contract Extension Page 8

 
This Agreement has been ratified by the membership of the Santa Ana Police Management
Association.

bated: S//o//s

SANTA ANA POLICE MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION

wv hello

STEVE COLON, PRESIDENT

Se ee
PMA 2010-13 Contract Extension Page 9
