LABOR AGREEMENT

July 1, 2015 - June 30, 2016

CITY OF RENO
AND
RENO POLICE PROTECTIVE ASSOCIATION
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Article No.
Appendix A-1

 

8.

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24,
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.

37.
38.
39.
40.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
RPPA NON-SUPERVISORY
July 1, 2015 - June 30, 2016

PreEaAMDle. . cece eee eee eee eee eee teens
Recognition ....
Strikes and Lockout =
Rights of Management..... é
Non-Discrimination.....ceeeeecrreececeeecccrees
Association Dues...
Hours of Work
Holidays and Holiday Pay..
Vacation....
Sick Leave.........

On-the-Job Injury .saas sce s sc oweoss swans
Leave of ADSENCE.. 1. cece eee eee eee ee eee eens
Military Leave.
Jury Duty .
Retirement.
Salaries...
Step Raise Eligibility
Inoculations.........+.-
Overtime
Stand-by Time .
Longevity Pay....
Health and Accident Insurance
Uniform Allowance ..-. ccc cece cece cece cece eeeee
Special Pay Practices
Training Courses.......
Vacancies and Promotions

  

 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

   
  
 

Working Rules ....

Grievance Arbitration Procedure ..... # SSSA © 48
Discipline/Discharge..........+- oe eo a 0 Onesie 0353
Amending Procedures ..........4. MAIS TES HAI < 61
Savings ClauS@sieas sss sieieisrers «ob wterareien eo 8 ee exars a 62
Duration of Agreement

Seniority/Layoff...
Compensatory Time
Release Time .......
Labor-Management Committee
Educational Incentive
Flight Program
Special Events. .
Shift Bid...........
Salary Plan
Artic

e

Article
Article

Artic
Artic
Artic

e
e
e

Article
Article
Article

Artic

e

Article
Article

Artic

e

Article
Article
Article
Article

Artic

e

Article
Article
Article

Artic

€

Article
Article

Artic

e

Article

Artic

Appendix A-1

€

Article

Artic

e

Article

Artic
Artic

e
e

Article

Artic

e

Article
Article
Article

Artic
Artic

e
€

Article

Artic

 

e

No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.

No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.

30.
6.

34.
29.
32.
37.
38.
28.
22.
8.

18.
14,
36.
12.
21.
13.

11.
19.
39.
1.
2.
35.
15.
4,
16.

SA.
33.
40.
10.
39.
24,
20.
17.
3.

23.
26.

27.

ALPHABETICAL
TABLE OF CONTENTS
RPPA NON-SUPERVISORY
July 1, 2015 - June 30, 2016

Amending Procedures
Association Dues...
Compensatory Time.......
Discipline/Discharge...........+-
Duration of Agreement..
Educational Incentive......
Flight Program......... : :
Grievance Arbitration Procedure.........eseeee 48
Health and Accident Insurance .......+++++25-- 30
Holidays and Holiday Pay.........sseeeeeeeeeeee 8
Hours Of Work.wceececcccncecces

Inoculations... 5 é
Jury DUTY. . . erereiwseie o 6  esanenme
Labor-Management Committee.
Leave Of ADSENCE..... eee eee ee eee ne ee renee suena is 22
Longevity Pay.......

Military Leave
Non-Discrimination...........
On-the-Job Injury..
Overtime. .ceseeeces
Special Events.
PLEAMDLE. occ eweec ccc crnsecereseeeeces

15 Yolele poh on ho)
Release Time.
Retirement
Rights of Management.
Salaries
Salary Plan
Savings Clause.......eeeeeeecnee
Seniority/Layoff.
Shift Bid
Sick Leave.....
Special Events...
Special Pay PracticesS......eeee essere cece e eee
Stand-by Time... .. cece cece cee eee c cence eeeees
Step Raise Eligibility.
Strikes and Lockouts.........
Training Courses... .
Uniform Allowance......
Vacancies and Promotions.
Vacation. ..... ce eee eee Se ec ee ee
Working Rules..........06- .

  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
 

 

 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF RENO AND
THE RENO POLICE PROTECTIVE ASSOCIATION COVERING
NON-SUPERVISORY EMPLOYEES
July 1, 2015 - June 30, 2016

ARTICLE NO. 1. PREAMBLE:

THIS AGREEMENT is entered into between the City of
Reno, Nevada, hereinafter referred to as the "City" and the Reno
Police Protective Association and its agent(s), hereinafter
referred to as the "Association". It is the intent and purpose
of this Agreement to assure sound and mutually beneficial
working and economic relationships between the parties hereto,
to provide an orderly and peaceful means of resolving any
misunderstandings or differences which may arise, and to set
forth herein the basic and full agreement between the parties
concerning rates of pay, wages, hours of employment and other

conditions of employment.

ARTICLE NO. 2. RECOGNITION:

The City recognizes the Association and its agent, as
identified above as the exclusive bargaining agent, for purposes
of establishing salaries, wages, hours and other conditions of
employment for all of its civil service employees within
non-supervisory law enforcement officer classifications of:

Detective
Police Officer
and excluding all other employees in law enforcement officer
classifications as supervisory or management employees. It is
agreed by the parties hereto that the City recognizes the
Association as the exclusive bargaining agent for the
non-supervisory employees on the basis that such employees have

the same community of interest.

ARTICLE NO. 3. STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS:

(a) The Association, its agent and its membership,
individually and collectively, will not promote, sponsor or
engage in any strike against the City, slow down, or
interruption of operation, concentrated stoppage of work,
absence from work upon any pretext or excuse such as illness,
which is not founded in fact; or any other intentional
interruption of the operations of the City, regardless of the
reason for so doing, and will use its best efforts to induce all
employees covered by this Agreement to comply with this pledge.

(b) The City will not lock out any employees during
the term of this Agreement as a result of a labor dispute with

the Association.

ARTICLE NO. 4. RIGHTS OF MANAGEMENT:
(a) Those subject matters which are not within the
scope of mandatory bargaining and which are reserved to the City

without negotiation include:
(1) The right to hire, direct, assign or
transfer an employee, but excluding the right to assign or
transfer an employee as a form of discipline.

(2) The right to reduce in force or lay off any

employee because of lack of work or lack of funds.

(3) The right to determine:

(i) Appropriate staffing levels and
work performance standards, except for safety
considerations;

(41) The content of the workday,
including without limitation workload factors,
except for safety considerations;

(iii) The quality and quantity of
services to be offered to the public; and

(iv) The means and methods of offering
those services.

(4) Safety of the public.

(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of any collective
bargaining agreement negotiated pursuant to NRS 288, the City is
entitled to take whatever actions may be necessary to carry out
its responsibilities in situations of emergency such as a riot,
military action, natural disaster or civil disorder. Such
actions may include the suspension of any collective bargaining
agreement for the duration of the emergency. Any action taken
under the provisions of this subsection shall not be construed

as a failure to negotiate in good faith.
-3-
(c) The provisions of this Article include without
limitation and the provisions of this section recognize and
declare the ultimate right and responsibility of the City to
manage its operation in the most efficient manner consistent
with the best interests of all its citizens, its taxpayers and
its employees.

(d) NRS 288 as amended does not preclude, but this
Chapter does not require the City to negotiate subject matters
enumerated in paragraph number (a) above, which are outside the
scope of mandatory bargaining. The City shall discuss subject
matters outside the scope of mandatory bargaining but it is not

required to negotiate such matters.

ARTICLE NO. 5. NON-DISCRIMINATION:

(a) The City will not interfere with or discriminate
in respect to any term or condition of employment against any
employee covered by this Agreement because of membership in or
activity as provided for in this Agreement on behalf of the
members of this bargaining unit, nor will the City encourage
membership in another employee organization.

(b) The Association recognizes its responsibility as
the exclusive negotiating agent and agrees to represent all
employees in the negotiating unit without discrimination,
interference, restraint, or coercion.

(c) The provisions of this Agreement shall be applied

equally to all employees in the negotiating unit, without
-4-
discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race, color,
creed, national origin, or political affiliation. The
Association shall share equally with the City the responsibility

for applying this provision of the Agreement.

ARTICLE NO. 6. ASSOCIATION DUES:

(a) Employees of the City of Reno may authorize
payroll deductions for the purpose of paying Association dues
and assessments. Upon written authorization to the City's Human
Resources Department from an employee, the City agrees to deduct
on a biweekly basis from the wages of said employee such sums as
he may specify for United Fund, City of Reno Credit Union,
Association Dues, City of Reno Group Insurance plan, U.S.
Savings Bonds, or such other purposes as the City may hereafter
approve. The City shall activate the withdrawal of dues from new
members within thirty (30) days of Human Resources Payroll
Division receiving authorization. Association assessment shall
be deducted as requested by the Association; however such
assessment deductions shall be requested not more than once per
calendar year. No authorization shall be allowed for payment of
initiation fees or fines. Each employee shall have the right to
terminate such payroll deductions at any time upon his written
request to the City's Human Resources Department.

(b) The Association and its agent will indemnify,
defend, and hold the City harmless against any claims made and

against any suits instituted against the City on account of any
- 5 -
action taken or not taken by the City in good faith under the
provisions of this Article. The Association agrees to refund to
the City any amounts paid to it in error on account of the
payroll deduction provision upon presentation of proper evidence
thereof.

(c) The employee’s earnings must be regularly
sufficient after other legal and required deductions are made to
cover the amount of the appropriate Association dues and/or
assessments. When a member in good standing of the Association
is in non-pay status for an entire pay period, no withholding
will be made to cover that pay period from future earnings. In
the case of an employee who is in non-pay status, during only
part of the pay period, and the wages are not sufficient to
cover the full withholding, no deductions shall be made. In
this connection, all other legal and required deductions have

priority over Association dues and assessments.

ARTICLE NO. 7. HOURS OF WORK:

(a) The normal work period of employees covered by
this Agreement shall consist of eighty (80) hours biweekly. The
Patrol Division is on a four (4) day, ten (10) hours per day
work week. The Detective and Administrative Divisions are on a
plan of five (5), nine (9) hour days one week, and three (3)
nines and one eight (8) hour day(s) the second week, affording
them a three day weekend every other week. The Chief of Police

at his discretion, with the City Manager’s approval, may place
-6-
the Detective and Administrative Division on a four (4) day, ten
(10) hours per day work week. Effective upon ratification of
the 2005/2010 Agreement by both parties, an officer placed on
administrative leave with pay shall be assigned to a Monday
through Friday work week schedule that allows the same number of
work hours per day and the same number of consecutive days off
as on his/her regular schedule. The scheduling of work shifts
and work weeks shall be as directed by the Police Chief except
that all employees shall have consecutive days off, except (1)
in cases of emergency declared by the Chief, or (2) upon not
less than seventy-two (72) hours prior notice to employees in
instances involving shift rotation, military duty, departmental
training programs or as provided in Article 39. Special Events.

(b) Duty hours shall be devoted fully to the
performance of assigned duties; periods of absence for personal
matters are not creditable toward duty hours and must be charged
to vacation or sick leave, or be recorded as unexcused absence.

(c) Except during emergency situations, employees
shall be permitted to take one (1) thirty (30) minute paid lunch
break and two (2) fifteen (15) minute coffee breaks or rest
periods during each workday; however, in the event an employee
is unable to take his/her lunch period off, overtime pay will
not be available for claim. An employee may, at his/her
discretion, combine one (1) fifteen (15) minute coffee or rest
break with the thirty (30) minute lunch break.

(d) This Article is intended to be construed only as a
-7-
basis for calculating overtime and shall not be construed as a
guarantee of hours of work per day or per week.

(e) Flextime scheduling will not be used to avoid
overtime; and if schedule change involves more than one-half
(1/2) hour, the affected employee will receive seventy-two (72)
hours prior notice, except in cases of emergency declared by the
Chief.

(f) Except in cases of emergency as declared by the
Chief, or as a result of a special event, training or shift
changes, employees who are not given at least six (6) hours off
after the completion of their last shift will receive a premium
of two (2) hours pay at the base hourly rate in addition to

their regular pay.

ARTICLE NO. 8. HOLIDAYS AND HOLIDAY PAY:

(a) Effective the last full pay period of June 2001,
employees eligible for holiday pay shall receive ten (10) hours
pay at the base hourly rate of pay if assigned to a ten (10)
hour work day; or either nine (9) hours pay for holidays on a
nine (9) hour work day, or eight (8) hours pay for holidays on
an eight (8) hour work day at the base hourly rate of pay if
assigned to the modified 5/9 plan; or eight (8) hours pay at the
base hourly rate of pay if on administrative leave or if
assigned to an eight (8) hour work day, for the holidays listed
below when not worked. All holidays shall be deemed to occur on

the dates observed by the State of Nevada as referred to in
- 8 -
Nevada PERS Official Policies.
New Year's Day (January 1)
Martin Luther King's Birthday (Third Monday in January)
Presidents’ Day (Third Monday in February)
Floating Holiday to be taken during a fiscal year
Memorial Day (Last Monday in May)
Independence Day (July 4)
Labor Day (First Monday in September)
Nevada Day (the last Friday in October)
Veteran's Day (November 11)
Thanksgiving Day (Fourth Thursday in November)
Day After Thanksgiving (Fourth Friday in November)
Christmas Day (December 25)
and upon any other day declared a paid holiday for City
employees by the Mayor or a paid holiday for local
government employees by the Governor or the President of
the United States.

(b) Each employee will be eligible for eight (8)
hours of paid time off at the base hourly rate to be given in
observation of the anniversary of the employee's birthday. The
time during the year which the employee may take his birthday
time off shall be determined by the Chief of Police after giving
consideration to the operating requirements of the department.

(c) For employees regularly scheduled a Monday-Friday
workweek, whenever one of these holidays falls on a Saturday,

the preceding Friday will be observed as a holiday; and should
-9-
it fall on a Sunday, the following Monday would be a holiday.
For employees regularly scheduled on an other than Monday-Friday
workweek, whenever one of those holidays falls on a non-work
day, the previous or subsequent workday shall be observed as
that holiday as determined by the Police Chief.

(d) In order to be eligible for holiday pay, an
employee must be on the active payroll of the City and must have
worked his full regularly scheduled workday before and after the
holiday, unless such conditions are specifically exempted, in
writing, by the City.

(e) Holidays occurring during an employee's vacation
period shall not be counted as vacation.

(£) When an employee is required by order of the
Police Chief to work during his regularly scheduled work hours
on a holiday, if eligible for holiday pay in addition to his
holiday pay, he shall receive one and one-half (1-1/2) times his
base hourly rate of pay for each hour or major fraction worked.
Effective the first full pay period July, 2011 the one and one-
half (1-1/2) times base shall be reduced to one (1) times his
base hourly rate of pay for each hour or major fraction worked.
Effective the first full pay period in July, 2013 the one and
one-half (1-1/2) times overtime rate shall be reinstated.

(g) Effective July 1, 2011 the Floating
Holiday/Birthday listed in sections (a) and (b) shall be
increased to a total of 30 hours per year and must be taken

during the fiscal year. The time during the year which the
-10-
employee may take this time off shall be determined by the Chief
of Police or his/her designee after giving consideration to the
operating requirements of the department. However, the time off
request shall not be unreasonably denied.

(h) For calculation of payment under this Article,
base hourly rate shall be increased by Investigator assignment
pay, FTO assignment pay, or Senior Officer premium pay for any

employee so assigned by payroll action form.

ARTICLE NO. 9. VACATION:
(a) A regular full-time employee will be granted

vacation benefits as follows:

Years of Vacation Earnings Rate
Continuous Service Biweekly Pay Period
Less than 5 years 4 hours
5 years but less than 10 years 5 hours
10 years but less than 15 years 6 hours
15 years but less than 20 years 7 hours
20 years or more 8 hours

Vacation credits shall accrue for each pay period the employee
is in full pay status for a major portion of his regularly
scheduled biweekly hours.

(b) An employee shall be paid at his base hourly rate
for each hour of vacation time taken. Vacation shall be charged
on the basis of one hour for each full hour or major portion of
an hour of vacation taken.

(c) Choice of vacation dates shall be granted
whenever practical based upon the operating requirements of the

City, as determined by the Police Chief. Where more employees
-11-
than can be spared request a particular period, preference will
be in order of seniority in grade, provided the remaining
employees are qualified to do the work.

(dad) Vacation taken during a biweekly period shall be
charged before vacation earned during the pay period is
credited.

(e) No later than the last full pay period in June
2001, an employee's accrued vacation shall not exceed four
hundred fifty-six (456) hours.

(f) The City shall make available reasonable periods
of time for employees to take earned vacation. The City shall
not make payment for unused vacation in excess of that allowed
to
accrue as provided in paragraph (e) of this Article with the
following exception. In the event that any employee's scheduled
vacation is denied by management due to an operating emergency,
the employee will not lose that accrued vacation in excess of
what is permitted in paragraph (e) unless said employee is
provided the opportunity to use such denied vacation within the
following thirty (30) calendar days and refuses such use.

(g) Vacation Cash Out Provision. Effective July 1,
2001, upon request, bargaining unit employees may, during the
window period November 1 through November 30, 2001, and annually
during the same time period within subsequent calendar years,
cash out up to 40 hours of accumulated but unused regular

vacation leave in increments of 20 hours.
- 12 -
(1) To be eligible, employees must file a
written request with the Chief of Police or his designee
during the window period specified above.

(2) Calculation of the payment due shall be
based on the employee's base hourly rate in effect on the
last day of the window period of the year in which his
request was made. Base hourly rate shall be increased by
Investigator assignment pay, FTO assignment pay, or Senior
Officer premium pay for any employee so assigned by payroll

action form.

ARTICLE NO. 10. SICK LEAVE:

(a) A full-time regular employee shall be entitled to
earn sick leave benefits at the rate of four (4) hours per
biweekly pay period and accumulate without limitation for use as
set forth in paragraph (b)and (d). An employee must be in full
pay status a major portion of his regularly scheduled biweekly
hours to be credited with sick leave for that period.

(b) Sick leave shall be charged for absence from work
by reason of illness, injury or death under the following
circumstances:

(1) Sick leave may be granted only as the result
of illness, or injury of the employee; illness, injury or
death of the employee's husband, wife, domestic partner,
child, adopted child, stepchild, or children of domestic

partner residing with employee, mother or father, or for
-13-
attendance at the funeral of a brother or sister. An
employee requiring extended time off (five days or more)
for medical care of a family member not listed above may
make a request to an advisory review committee which will
make a recommendation to the Chief of Police, or his
designee. The Chief shall make the final determination as
to whether sick leave shall be granted and the amount of
time allowed. His determination shall be non-appealable
and not subject to the grievance process of this Agreement.
The advisory review committee shall consist of three (3)
Association Board of Directors selected by the Association
President, and three (3) police supervisors selected by the
Chief of Police. Employees shall be at their place of
residence, a medical facility, or their doctor’s office, or
shall notify their supervisor of their whereabouts when
using sick leave. Any gainful employment, recreation,
travel for recreation or other activity for non-sick leave
purpose, when an employee is on sick leave is considered
evidence of abuse of sick leave unless approved in advance
in writing by the Police Chief, or his designee.
Utilization of sick leave for purposes other than those
defined in the Agreement shall be considered evidence of
abuse. An employee may be disciplined when evidence of
abuse exists. The parties specifically agree any use of
more than eleven (11) sick leave days in any twelve (12)

month period is considered excessive. Excessive sick leave
- 14 -
usage shall be reviewed to determine if the excessive use
is justified or if the excessive sick leave usage required
corrective action.

(2) The employee requiring sick leave must
provide the Police Chief with evidence of such need.
Thereupon, the Police Chief shall guarantee his personal
knowledge of the necessity by certifying the granting of
sick leave. To ensure such knowledge, he may require the
employee to provide a written doctor's statement before
granting sick leave. Additional documentation may be
required of the employee depending on the seriousness of
the disability. Such documentation will include a
statement of the problem, a prognosis for recovery and any
work limitations.

(3) If any employee does not have adequate sick
leave time, the Police Chief may grant the use of accrued
vacation time in lieu thereof. In no case, however, will
sick leave be granted in lieu of vacation time. The Police
Chief may recommend to the City Council special
consideration for any employee, covered by this contract,
who has exhausted the use of sick leave and vacation time
and who is unable to return to duty.

(c) Sick leave shall be charged on an hourly basis
for each full hour or major portion of an hour of sick leave
taken. Holidays occurring during sick leave periods shall not

be counted as sick leave time if the employee furnishes
- 15 -
documentation of such illness. Sick leave taken during a
biweekly pay period shall be charged before sick leave earned
that pay period is credited.

(d) Upon retirement or involuntary lay-off an
employee shall be compensated for accrued but unused sick leave
as follows:

(1) Effective July 1, 2005, for employees hired
prior to July 1, 2011 having 450 or more hours in his or
her sick leave bank shall be cashed out at the rate of
ninety percent (90%) of the total accumulated hours up to
and including a maximum of 1600 hours at his or her base
hourly rate of pay.

(2) At the time of separation, once the threshold
amount of hours are reached, the employee shall be paid for
all hours up to and including 1600 hours in the bank at the
rate indicated.

(a) Any Officer hired on or after July 1,

2011, having 450 or more hours in his or her sick

leave bank, when separating from employment, shall be

cashed out at the rate of ninety percent (90%) of the
total accumulated hours up to a maximum cash pay-off
of $20,000.00 at his/her base hourly rate of pay.

(3) For purposes of and subject to the provision
in (d) and (e), an employee receiving investigator pay,
field training officer pay and senior officer pay shall

have that amount included with the base hourly rate of pay.
- 16 -
(4) Effective upon ratification of the 2005/2010
Agreement by both parties, any employee with a sick leave
balance between 100 to less than 450 hours shall receive an
incentive payment of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each
biweekly pay period wherein such employee uses no sick
leave. Employees with a sick leave balance of 450 hours or
more shall not be eligible for this incentive. Payment to
be made quarterly.

(5) Effective the first full pay period in July
2011, the benefit described in section (d) (4) providing
incentive pay of twenty-five ($25.00) per biweekly pay
period will be temporarily suspended. The incentive pay of
twenty-five ($25.00) per biweekly pay period shall resume
the first full pay period in July 2013.

(f) The City agrees to pay for all medical costs for
preventive medicine incurred by a department employee as a
result of an on-the-job exposure not covered by NRS 616 Workers’
Compensation System or until NRS 616 Workers’ Compensation
System coverage.

(g) In the event of the death of an employee, the
employee’s estate shall receive payment for sick leave accrued
but unused in accordance with section (d) and (e) above.

(h) No provision of this contract is intended to be
contrary to either the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or
the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA).

(i) The changes shall take effect upon ratification
-17-
of the agreement by the parties or as indicated. However, any
employee who has separated from employment between July 1, 2005
and ratification of the 2005/2010 Agreement by both parties
shall be entitled to the benefits listed, if eligible.

(j) For calculation of payment under this Article,
base hourly rate shall be increased by Investigator assignment
pay, FTO assignment pay, or Senior Officer premium pay for any
employee so assigned by payroll action form.

(k) If the City negotiates a higher percentage (higher
than 90% of 1600 hours) sick leave buyout with any other
bargaining unit after ratification of the 2005/2010 Agreement by

both parties, the City will provide the same for RPPA.

ARTICLE NO. 11. ON-THE-JOB INJURY:

(a) Whenever an employee is injured while on duty
with the City of Reno, and such injury prevents said employee
from performing his normal full time duties, the employee shall
receive full salary for a period up to, but not exceeding,
cumulative one hundred (100) working days not to exceed a period
of one (1) year from date of injury or knowledge of illness as
indicated in the following provisions of this Article. During
this period, the employee shall not forfeit any accrued sick
leave. The one (1) year limitation shall be waived in the event
of later surgery resulting from the original illness or injury.
However, the one hundred (100) working day limitation shall

continue to apply.
- 18 -
(b) In the event that an employee's NRS 616 Workers’
Compensation System claim is denied and the denial is appealed,
the City agrees to pay full salary while the NRS 616 Workers’
Compensation System appeal is pending at the request of the
employee for an appeal period not to exceed one (1) calendar
year. If the final determination is adverse to the employee or
if the appeal period exceeds one (1) calendar year, the employee
must deduct from sick leave and, if sick leave is exhausted,
vacation leave to compensate the City for hours paid during the
appeal period.

If the employee has neither sufficient sick leave nor
vacation leave to compensate for hours paid by the City during
pending of claim which shall not exceed one (1) calendar year,
City may advance the employee sick leave to cover the balance of
hours. If the employee terminates prior to accruing all sick
leave advanced, the employee is responsible for paying the
balance of advanced sick leave hours in cash at the time of
termination.

It is understood that the term "full salary" shall only
include an employee's base salary plus applicable longevity pay.
(c) Any employee while on NRS 616 Workers’
Compensation System leave will not accrue sick leave or vacation

time but shall continue to earn service time credit for
retirement.
(d) Upon the expiration of the accumulative one

hundred (100) working days referenced in (a) above, if the
- 19 -
employee is still unable to work, he may utilize his accumulated
sick leave at the rate of one-half (1/2) the amount charged per
shift or day, during which period the employee shall retain the
NRS 616 Workers’ Compensation System payment, and the City shall
then pay him the difference between his normal pay and NRS 616
Workers’ Compensation System payment.

(e) When accrued sick leave has expired, if the
employee is still unable to work, except for total accumulated
vacation, he may utilize his accumulated vacation time pay at
the rate of one-half (1/2) the amount charged per shift or day,
during which period the employee shall retain the NRS 616
Workers’ Compensation System payment, and the City shall then
pay him the difference between his normal pay and NRS 616
Workers’ Compensation System payment.

(£) INTENT: The intent of paragraphs (d) and (c)
above is that the employee will continue to receive his full
accumulated salary dollars so long as he is disabled and
receiving NRS 616 Workers’ Compensation System benefits and
until his sick leave and vacation hours are exhausted.

(g) When, as the result of an on-the-job injury, an
employee is continually confined to a duly licensed hospital as
a result of such injury, the employee shall retain the NRS 616
Workers’ Compensation System payment and the City of Reno shall
then pay the individual the difference between normal pay and
NRS 616 Workers’ Compensation System payment. Said payment will

be continued so long as the employee is confined to said
- 20 -
hospital and so long as the NRS 616 Workers’ Compensation System
continues to make insurance payments in connection with said
injury. For compensation purposes, the requirements of
continual confinement to a duly licensed hospital or confinement
to the home (if so certified by a medical doctor, assigned by
the City) may be waived by action of the City Council if the
City Council determines that special circumstances warrant such
action. During this period, the employee will not forfeit
vacation benefits or sick leave benefits other than as provided
above. For the purpose of this paragraph (g), the one hundred
(100) days referenced in paragraph (a) does not begin until the
employee is released from the hospital; however, any period
where an employee is not confined in a hospital counts towards
the one hundred days.

(h) Any time within a maximum period of twelve (12)
biweekly pay periods subsequent to the pay period within which
the on-the-job injury occurred, an employee may elect to
continue on NRS 616 Workers’ Compensation System leave, without
additional compensation from the City, and without refunding NRS
616 Workers’ Compensation System salary continuance payments to
the City, provided the employee is receiving NRS 616 Workers’
Compensation System salary continuance payments.

(i) The City may elect to send an employee to a
doctor of its choice at its expense to examine the employee to
determine whether the employee is able to work a light duty job.

It is understood by the parties that the City's choice of
- 21 -
physician will be a specialist in his field to eliminate the
problem with conflicting opinions. The intent of this second
opinion is to determine staffing and encourage rehabilitation of
the employee.

(Jj) When a holiday falls during the period of an
employee's NRS 616 Workers’ Compensation System leave, the
employee shall receive straight time compensation for the
holiday, and the holiday shall not be considered a working day
for purposes of the cumulative one hundred (100) working days

referenced in this Article.

ARTICLE NO. 12. LEAVE OF ABSENCE:

(a) Leave of absence may be granted pursuant to the
Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service Commission. A leave
of absence authorization shall specify any restrictions attached
thereto.

(b) If a leave of absence without pay is granted to
an employee the time actually worked before and after the leave
of absence shall be added together and must total the time
specified in the Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service
Commission of the City of Reno for the probationary period
before confirmation and elevation to Level 2 in the salary grade

will occur.

ARTICLE NO. 13. MILITARY LEAVE:

(a) Any employee who is an active member of the
- 22 -
Nevada

National Guard or is an active member of any reserve component
of

the United States Armed Forces shall be relieved from his duties
upon request to serve under orders on training duty without loss
of his regular compensation for a period of not to exceed
fifteen

(15) working days in any calendar year. Any such absence shall
not be deducted from the employees accrued vacation.

(b) In addition each regular employee shall receive
seniority, or anniversary date benefits in compliance with any
federal laws and court cases pertaining to military service or
service due to any National Guard or reserve duty.

(c) No employee shall be denied promotion or
adversely affected in his position due to serving in the

National Guard or Armed Forces Reserves.

ARTICLE NO. 14. JURY DUTY:

Any employee of the City who is required to serve on
any jury shall receive his regular salary during the period of
jury service, provided that he remit his compensation for such
jury duty to the City Clerk for deposit in the General Fund of

the City of Reno.

ARTICLE NO. 15. RETIREMENT:

Employees shall be retired from employment with the
- Bei -
City in accordance with the provisions of NRS 286. The City
agrees to pay the employee's retirement contribution, including
any increases required by state law which occur during the term
of this Agreement. Effective the first full pay period
following July 1, 2011, the employees agree to pay one-half
(1/2) of the PERS increase that takes effect on July 1, 2011 and
will continue to do so until the last full pay period in June,
2013. At that time the City shall pay the employee’s retirement
contribution including any increase required by state law, which
occurs on or after July 1, 2013.

NOTE and INTENT: When the City resumes paying 100% of the PERS
amounts on the first full pay period following July 1, 2013 the
City shall not be responsible nor shall the City be held
accountable to retroactively pay the RPPA’s portion of the PERS
increase that occurred between the first full pay period
following July 1, 2011, through the last full pay period in
June, 2013. Payment of increases in employee retirement
contributions shall be considered as being in lieu of an

equivalent salary increase.

ARTICLE NO. 16. SALARIES:
(a) All employees will be paid on each biweekly
Friday with salary computed through the end of
the preceding payroll cycle. The amount of pay
shall be for the number of hours on duty as

scheduled or on authorized paid absence. Pay
= 74 =
rates shall be as specified in the attached
Appendix. Base hourly rate as used in this labor
agreement shall be defined as the employee’s step
on the applicable salary appendix attached to
this contract unless otherwise indicated. Base
hourly rate shall be increased by the applicable
Investigator assignment pay, FTO assignment pay,
or Senior Officer premium pay for any employee so
assigned where specified under certain articles
in this Agreement.

(bo) Effective the first full pay period in July,
2015, all employees covered by this agreement
shall receive a two percent (2%) across-the-board
base wage increase in pay as shown in Appendix A-

1.

ARTICLE NO. 17. STEP RAISE ELIGIBILITY:

(a) Effective July 1, 2011 any officer hired as a
Reno Police Officer shall, beginning with the first day of
assignment, following graduation from a Reno Police Department
approved police academy, remain on the Level 1, Salary Grade for
twenty-four (24) subsequent months of employment. Thereafter
he/she shall resume on the salary schedule as described in
Salary Appendix and in accordance with section (a) (2) of this
article. Employees hired prior to July 1, 2011, who are in the

classification of Police Officer and are within the step ranges
- 25 -
covered by this Agreement shall become eligible for step raises
at the start of the payroll period in which the following occur:
(1) At confirmation after one (1) year of
employment.
(2) One (1) year following any previous step
raise.

(b) Step raises will become effective as outlined
above only upon the recommendation of the,Police Chief and
approval of the Human Resources Director. If such
recommendation or approval is delayed for any reason, the
effective date shall be as specified at the time of approval.

(c) If a leave of absence without pay is granted to
an
employee, the time actually worked before and after the leave of
absence shall be added together and must total the time
specified in subsection (2) of Paragraph (a) of this Article
before being eligible to receive a step raise.

(a) The Chief of Police may redetermine and adjust
the step raise of any employee, either upwards or downwards,
within the salary range depending upon the employee's job
performance and duties assigned.

(e) The Merit Review Committee shall consist of
members appointed by the Police Management and an equal number
of members appointed by the Association. The Merit Review
Committee may make recommendations to the Police Chief

concerning upward or downward step raise adjustment. The Police
- 26 -
Chief retains discretion to approve or disapprove the

recommendations.

ARTICLE NO. 18. INOCULATIONS:

The City shall provide those infectious disease
vaccinations that are recommended by the Labor/Management
Committee and approved by the Police Chief. In addition, the
City shall provide, at no cost to the employee, any disease
screening procedures that may be recommended by the

Labor/Management Committee and approved by the Police Chief.

ARTICLE NO. 19. OVERTIME:

(a) Time and one-half the base hourly rate shall be paid
for each quarter (1/4) of an hour worked in excess of forty (40)
hours during the regular workweek or in excess of eight (8)
hours during the regular workday for any employee working a five
(5) day, eight (8) hour work week. If working a modified work
schedule, overtime at the premium rate shall be paid for all
hours worked over the scheduled workday or over eighty (80)
hours in the pay period. If time is lost during the regular
workweek for unexcused absence, then premium pay shall not
prevail until forty (40) hours worked is exceeded. Overtime
will be paid on the payroll for the pay period within which the
overtime is performed or accrued as per Article 7. It is
understood that nothing in this Article shall require payment

for overtime hours not worked. Overtime shall not be paid more
- 27 -
than once for the same hours worked. All overtime must have
previous authorization of the Police Chief, if compensation
therefore is to be effected.

(b) Effective upon ratification of this Agreement if an
employee is off-duty and receives a telephone call regarding
official police department business from a supervisor, or at the
request of a supervisor, the employee shall receive minimum
compensation at time and one-half the hourly rate of pay for
each quarter (1/4) of an hour on the telephone. If the total
work time for a phone call or multiple calls actually extends
beyond fifteen (15) minutes, the work time shall be rounded to
the nearest fifteen (15) minute increment. This provision is
intended to apply to situations where it is necessary to obtain
information from the employee regarding a work situation. It is
not intended to apply to calls on matters such as requests to
work overtime, or directives given to the employee to report to
work early or other reporting instructions.

(c) Generally, the City shall assume no liability for
overtime, and the Association shall expect none, for an employee
as a result of out of town training or prisoner extradition
except as provided for by the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)
applied to local government operations related to definition of
hours actually worked; however, should a legitimate overtime
liability occur on an individual instance, beyond the ability of
management or the employee to prevent, overtime will be paid in

accordance with this Article.
- 28 -
(d) Effective upon ratification of this Agreement
employees scheduled to work the Hot August Nights special events
shall be paid two (2) times their base hourly rate of pay.
Effective July 1, 2011 through June 30, 2013 the two (2) times
base hourly rate shall be reduced to one and one-half (1-1/2)
times base hourly rate for HAN overtime. The overtime rate of
two (2) times base hourly rate shall be reinstated on July 1,
2013. The extension of work shifts either prior to or following
their regularly scheduled work shifts shall also qualify for the
premium pay as long as it is related to the Hot August Nights
special event. (This includes regular patrol backfill and other
overtime assignments necessitated by the staffing requirements
of the special event.)

(e) For calculation of payment due under this
Article, base hourly rate shall be increased by Investigator
assignment pay, FTO assignment pay, or Senior Officer premium
pay for any employee so assigned by payroll action form.

ARTICLE NO. 20. STAND-BY TIME:

(a) Due to staff limitations, it may be necessary for
the Police Chief to schedule an employee to be on a telephone
stand-by alert available for duty at the Central Police Station
within sixty (60) minutes of notification by the Police Chief to
handle overtime work which may arise during other than his
normal working hours.

(b) Regular Stand-by. Those employees on stand-by

will be carried on a stand-by roster to be established and
- 29 -
maintained through procedures promulgated by the Police Chief.
For each listing on the regular stand-by roster, the employee
will be compensated at the rate of one-and-one-half (1 1/2)
hour's pay at the base hourly rate for each eight (8) hour
period of standby. If the period of time served is less than
eight (8) hours, the employee shall receive a minimum one (1)
hour's pay.

(c) Court Stand-by. Employees on stand-by, on a duty
day but not during duty hours (if swing shift or graveyard
officers), for Municipal Court appearance(s) shall receive one
(1) hour stand-by pay for scheduled court appearance during A.M.
and/or P.M. hours, or two (2) hours of stand-by pay if on a
scheduled off duty day for morning and/or afternoon appearances,
to be paid at the straight time rate or, at the employees
option, to be awarded compensatory time off at the rate of
time-and-one-half. Effective June 25, 1991, the court standby
pay shall be extended to Justice and District Courts for each
scheduled court appearance.

(d) Upon arriving on duty when called up from
stand-by, an employee will be compensated in accordance with
Article 19.

(e) In the event that an employee is injured during
the trip to Court through no fault of his/her own, the City will
attest that such injury is in the line of duty.

(£) For calculation of payment due under this

Article, base hourly rate shall be increased by Investigator
- 30 -
assignment pay, FTO assignment pay, or Senior Officer premium

pay for any officer so assigned by payroll action form.

ARTICLE NO. 21. LONGEVITY PAY:

(a) Effective July 8, 1996, each full-time employee
who has completed five (5) years of service with the City of
Reno, shall be entitled to longevity pay in addition to regular
salary. Said employee’s longevity pay shall be at a rate equal
to one-half percent (.5%) of the employee’s biweekly base hourly
rate for each year of service, up to a maximum annual payment of
twelve and one-half percent (12.5%) of base hourly rate for
employees with twenty-five (25) years or more of service, with
payment to be effected each pay day beginning with the pay
period within which the anniversary falls. Years of service for
calculation of longevity pay shall include full time service
with the City, excluding time for temporary employment, leave of
absence, or lapse of service.

(b) For calculation of payment under this Article,
base hourly rate shall be increased by Investigator assignment

pay, FTO assignment pay or Senior Officer premium pay.

ARTICLE NO. 22. HEALTH AND ACCIDENT INSURANCE:

(a) Any full-time probationary employee and each
full-time regular employee shall have the right to participate
in the City's group insurance program as set out in this

Agreement or as altered pursuant to this Agreement. The City
- 31 -
shall make contributions equal to one hundred percent (100%) of
the employee only cost of the health and accident insurance
premiums for each full-time probationary employee and full-time
regular employee to one of the following plans selected by an
eligible employee:

(1) A group medical and dental indemnity plan,
benefits of which shall be provided through a self-insured
plan or under a group insurance policy or policies issued
by an insurance company or insurance companies selected by
the City.

(2) Any other prepaid or indemnity group medical
and dental plan or plans (including health maintenance
organizations) determined appropriate by the City.

(b) As part of the City’s group health and life
insurance program, a term life insurance policy in an amount
equal to one (1) times the employee’s annual base wage shall be
provided for each active regular full-time and qualified part-
time employee enrolled in the City’s group health and life
imsurance program. The life insurance benefit shall be provided
to retirees who continue as part of the City of Reno group
health insurance program regardless of the type of retirement
subject to the reduction formula specified in the group term
life insurance policy.

(c) Effective the first full pay period in July 1,
2011, the City shall contribute to the cost of dependent

coverage an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the cost of
- 32 -
the indemnity plan coverage for each dependent category, for
those qualified employees who elect to be covered by Section (a)
above. This benefit will not sunset on June 30, 2013.

(1) This amount shall be used as a credit to the
appropriate category of dependent coverage selected by
the employee.

(2) This credit shall only be available to those
employees who qualify and elect to receive dependent
coverage.

(3) Under no circumstances will the City
contribute more to the cost of dependent coverage than the
actual cost of that coverage.

(4) This dependent coverage credit is not a
benefit for retirees. This shall not prohibit retirees
from purchasing dependent coverage in accordance with the
providers’ policy.

(d) If the cost of dependent coverage selected by the
employee under (c) above exceeds the maximum City contributions,
the employee shall pay the additional cost.

(e) All qualified employees who select coverage under
Section (a) above, shall be covered by, and the City
contributions shall be made for, the plan(s) of his/her choice
on the first of the month following thirty (30) calendar days of
his/her initial date of hire, provided that the employee enrolls
in such coverage in accordance with the provisions of the plan

selected.
- 33 -
(£) Specific medical and dental benefit levels and
premium costs are not set forth in this contract for the
insurance programs available under this contract.

(1) It is understood that plan benefits are
determined by the providers and the City. The plan
benefits determined by the providers, over which the City
has no direct control, are not subject to bargaining under
this contract. With respect to benefits provided through a
self- insured plan, benefit levels that do not affect costs
paid by the employee are not subject to bargaining under
this contract.

(2) The City assumes no responsibility for
replacement of benefits which may be changed by carriers
over which the City has no direct control.

(3) It is understood that plan costs, premiums
or funding levels for employee and dependent categories are
determined by the providers.

(g) The City agrees to provide, at least annually, an
open enrollment period. Such enrollment period and employee and
dependent eligibility shall be in accordance with the policies
and rules of the insurance carrier or carriers including the
City for self-funded plans.

(h) Each medical insurance or health plan provides
for coordination with Medicare coverage and any employee who
participates in a plan is subject to the requirements of that

plan, including provisions relating to Medicare.
- 34 -
(1) The City is not responsible for the
replacement of benefits which may be reduced, eliminated or
made more expensive as a result of coordination with
Medicare.

(2) City contributions are not payable toward
contributions an employee is required to make to the

Federal Government for Medicare coverage.

(i) Part-time employees working a minimum of twenty-
five (25) hours per week for the City may also be included in
the Group Insurance Plan and receive City contributions prorated
on scheduled hours; however, temporary employees shall not be
included. Any employee on leave of absence from the City may
continue to carry City Group Insurance by making full premium
payments.

(j) For those employees retiring on or after July 1,
1999, and hired before January 1, 2015, the City agrees to pay
one hundred percent (100%) of the Health and Accident employee
only premium for any employee upon separation who has thirty
(30) years or more of service in the Reno Police Department
irrespective of age; or who has twenty (20) years of service in
the Reno Police Department, who is in retirement status and who
receives retirement benefits under P.E.R.S. The premium payment
is to be made for the City's plan for the same employee only
coverage that current employees have for the remainder of the
employee’s life.

(k) For those employees retiring on or after July 1,
- 35 -
1999, and hired before January 1, 2015, the City agrees to pay
seventy-five percent (75%) of the employee only Health and
Accident premium for any employee upon separation who has
fifteen (15) years of service in the Reno Police Department, who
is eligible to retire, who immediately goes into retirement
status and receives retirement benefits under P.E.R.S. The
premium payment is to be made for the City's plan for the same
employee only coverage that current employees have for the
remainder of the employee’s life.
(1) For those employees retiring on or after July 1, 1999, and
hired before January 1, 2015, the City agrees to pay fifty
percent (50%) of the employee only Health and Accident premium
for any employee upon separation who has ten (10) years of
service in the Reno Police Department, who is eligible to
retire, and who immediately goes into retirement status and
receives retirement benefits under P.E.R.S. The premium payment
is to be made for the City's plan for the same employee only
coverage that current employees have for the remainder of the
employee’s life.

(m) For those employees hired on and after January 1,
2015, the employee shall pay biweekly two (2%) percent from a
Level 1 Police Officer base salary as shown in the applicable
Salary Appendix. The City shall likewise pay a matching biweekly
amount of 2% from a Level 1 Police Officer base salary as shown
in the applicable Salary Appendix. Once deducted by the City

the monies shall be placed in the City of Reno Nevada OPEB Trust
(Trust), pursuant to NRS 287.017, for those City of Reno Police
Officer employees as described herein, and deposited into the
Trust invested by the Retirement Benefits Investment Fund
(RBIF), a component of the Nevada State Public Employees
Retirement System (NVPERS). RBIF shall invest same in accordance
with state law. The combined contribution from the employee and
the City will be taken each pay period for the duration of the
employee’s career as a City of Reno police officer. The amount
in the Trust shall not be provided to the employee in an
aggregate amount and must only be used for employees who qualify
for the post retirement benefit as herein described. The purpose
of the Trust fund is to pay for the post retirement health and
accident medical insurance for the employee only premium for any
employee upon separation who has thirty (30) years or more of
service as a police officer with the Reno Police Department
irrespective of age; or who has twenty (20) years of cumulative
service as a police officer with the Reno Police Department, who
upon separation is in retirement status and who receives
retirement benefits under NVPERS. The premium payment is to be
made for the City's plan for the same employee only coverage
plans that the then current employees have until the retired
employee reaches eligibility age for federal benefits under
Medicare or other existing federal programs.

(n) In determination of costs for any considered
insurance proposal, the City agrees, upon proper notice, to

release and/or authorize the release of requested, pertinent and
reasonable information consistent with the provisions of N.R.S.
288.180.

(o) The City's Ad Hoc Insurance Advisory Committee is
responsible for reviewing the group health and accident program.
It is understood that the Ad Hoc Insurance Advisory Committee
referred to in this Agreement is advisory in nature and that the
City is not bound by any of the recommendations of the
Committee. The City shall consult with the Ad Hoc Insurance
Advisory Committee before making changes in the group health and
accident program.

(p) Long Term Disability Insurance. The City shall
provide long term disability insurance to individuals covered
under this Agreement. This insurance coverage shall provide a
long term disability insurance benefit based on 66-2/3% of the
individual's pre-disability base salary up to age 65 in
accordance with the terms of the long term disability policy in
effect between the City and the long term disability carrier.

(q) Effective March 1, 1998, for an employee killed in
the line of duty and who had elected spouse and/or dependent
health insurance coverage under one of the City’s plans, the
City will pay the health insurance premium to the City’s plan
for the surviving spouse and/or eligible dependents. Spouse
coverage shall continue until remarriage or death whichever
occurs first. Killed in the line of duty shall be defined as
death by unnatural causes arising out of performance of his job.

Note: Nothing in this Agreement shall impact the health
- 38 -
insurance benefits of those individuals retiring prior to

July 1, 1999.

ARTICLE NO. 23. UNIFORM ALLOWANCE:

(a) The City will pay each employee a uniform
allowance in accordance with paragraphs (b) and (c) below. Said
uniform allowance will cover the full cost of original purchase,
replacement and up-keep of said uniform during the time of
employment with the City of Reno. Upon termination from City
employment, the Police Chief at his discretion, may require the
employee to return to the City any uniform or parts thereof in
his possession at the time of termination.

(b) Effective July 1, 2001, the uniform allowance
shall be at the rate of nine hundred dollars ($900.00) per year
and shall be paid in two (2) semi-annual equal installments with
the final payday in June and December. Effective July 1, 2002,
the uniform allowance shall increase to one thousand dollars
($1000.00) per year. Effective July 1, 2003, the uniform
allowance shall increase to eleven hundred dollars ($1100.00)
per year. Effective July 1, 2004, the uniform allowance shall
increase to twelve hundred dollars ($1200.00) per year.
Effective July 1, 2011, the Uniform Allowance will be suspended
under this Article for the period July 1, 2011 through June 30,
2013. On July 1, 2013 the Uniform Allowance as listed in this
article shall be reinstated.

(c) In lieu of the uniform allowance provided in
- 39 -
paragraph (b) the City may elect to furnish either directly or
through contracted facilities the required uniforms,
replacements, and up-keep services.

(d) Effective July 1, 2001, in the event employees
lose or damage equipment, watches or eye glasses in performance
of duties, the City will reimburse the cost of item(s) lost or
damaged up to a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
This provision shall include uniforms as well as clothing worn
by detectives. In order to receive the benefit of this Article,
the employee must report any claims prior to, or at the end of
the shift on which the incident occurred. Reimbursement shall
be limited to those items which would ordinarily and customarily
be used in the course of employment.

(e) The City shall replace safety vests for each
employee at the end of the manufacturer’s specified use life.

The old vest shall be returned to the City.

ARTICLE NO. 24. SPECIAL PAY PRACTICES:

(a) Shift Differential Payments: Effective the last
full pay period of June 2001, those employees, other than Second
Watch (Day Shift), required to work between the hours of 1800
(6:00 p.m.) and 0800 (8:00 a.m.) as one regular assignment shall
be compensated at the rate of One Dollar and Fifty Cents ($1.50)
per hour for those hours worked during that period.

(1) Any employee working a regular assigned
- 40 -
shift, or any overtime shift, shall be paid shift
differential for the entire shift if at least fifty percent
(50%) of the hours worked are between 1800 hours (6:00
p.m.) and 0800 hours (8:00 a.m.).

(2) Any employee who works any overtime between
the hours of 1800 (6:00 p.m.) and 0800 (8:00 a.m.) shall
receive shift differential for each hour worked between
those hours.

(3) Any employee assigned to First Watch
(Graveyard) shall receive shift differential for any
extension of his regular shift.

(4) The provisions of this Article shall not
apply to standby.

(b) Motorcycle Duty: Effective the last full pay
period of June 2001 and in recognition of the special skills and
abilities required, employees assigned to motorcycle duty shall
receive an additional $80.00 per biweekly pay period. Employees
who work motorcycle duties on a part-time basis shall receive
$10.00 motorcycle pay for each day a motorcycle is ridden.

(c) City Dog Care: Dog Care shall be paid in
accordance with the negotiated FLSA settlement letter dated
January 19, 1996.

(d) Court Appearances:

(1) From time-to-time, employees shall be
required to appear in all courts and administrative

agencies on City business. When so required during off
- 41 -
shift hours, employees shall be compensated at overtime
rate of pay, providing not less than two (2) hours
compensation for any appearance. However, no employee
shall be entitled to the above benefits as a result of a
subpoena or invitation to testify at an EMRB hearing, Civil
Service hearing or arbitration case when called by the
Association.

(2) Employees shall be entitled to retain the
following witness fees:

(A) Witness fees resulting from a court
appearance provided the employee was not on court
stand-by or in a paid work status;

(B) Witness fees resulting from appearances
at DMV hearings provided the employee was not on
stand-by; and

(C) Witness fees resulting from a lawfully
executed subpoena provided the employee was not on
stand-by.

All other witness fees paid to the employee shall be turned
over to the City for deposit in the General Fund.

(e) Outside Jurisdiction - Court Appearance: When an

employee receives a subpoena from an outside jurisdiction, he

must contact his immediate supervisor. The supervisor shall be

responsible for determining which mode of transportation the

employee uses to reach that outside jurisdiction to ensure a

timely appearance.

= 42 -
(£) Acting Pay: From time-to-time, employees will be
required to work in job classifications to which they are not
permanently assigned. When this occurs, the employee shall
receive salary compensation for that classification, provided
that:

(1) The classification is higher than the
employee's regular classification; and

(2) The employee has worked five (5) consecutive
work periods (shifts) in the higher classification.
Administration of the above language shall be under the
direction of the office of the Chief of Police. At no time
will the employee receive pay for a classification lower
than his regular salary classification. Compensation for
the higher classification shall not be less than five
percent (5%) of the employee's regular salary
classification.

(g) Training Officer/Investigator Pay:

(1) TRAINING OFFICER: Any uniformed officer
assigned, in writing, by the Chief of Police or his
designee as a field training officer (FTO) for the Field
Training Evaluation Program (FTEP) shall receive premium
pay at ten percent (10%) of his base hourly rate (as listed
in the salary appendix) for the entire period so assigned.
This pay shall be effective the first full pay period in
January—1999. Any other uniformed employee assigned by the

Chief of Police or his designee to temporarily act as a
- 43 -
field training officer and who works during part of a pay
period as an FTO with the recruit and/or Departmentally
approved auxiliary or reserve programs or other programs,
or who is assigned to train officers newly assigned to a
unit, team, or Division, shall receive FTO pay for the
entire pay period. When assigned as an FTO for citizen
ride alongs, the FTO pay shall be prorated on a per shift
basis. The Department will assign citizen and departmental
ride alongs to designated FTO’s when operationally
reasonable. No employee shall receive Training Officer pay
for taking a ride along who is related or who is engaged in
a social relationship. This would include, but is not
limited to, wives, husbands, boy friends, girl friends,
children. Those officers receiving investigator assignment
pay will not be eligible to receive FTO pay in addition to
their investigator assignment pay. However, the one
exception is those officers receiving investigator
assignment pay and assigned to train an officer newly
assigned to their unit, shall receive premium pay of an
additional five percent (5%) of his base hourly rate
(increased by his investigator assignment pay) for the
entire pay period so assigned. If the officer assigned to
train the newly assigned officer takes sick leave, the
replacement FTO officer assigned to train the newly
assigned officer shall receive premium pay at five (5%) of

his base hourly rate pro-rated on a per shift basis.
- 44 -
Any officer assigned to instruct in-service training,
who is not otherwise receiving FTO or investigator
assignment pay, shall only receive FTO premium pay at ten
percent (10%) of his base hourly rate (as listed in the
salary appendix) pro-rated on a per shift basis.

(2) INVESTIGATOR: Effective the first full pay
period following July 1, 1998, any officer assigned in
writing, by the Chief of Police, or his designee, as an
investigator shall receive special assignment pay in the
amount of ten percent (10%) of his base hourly rate for the
period so assigned.

(A) The RPPA and City agree that the
following language will define “investigator”
assignment, however it will exclude personnel
currently assigned to the inactive Civil Service
classification of “Detective”:

INVESTIGATOR ASSIGNMENT NO.OF POSITIONS
Non-Uniformed Assignments 30

(B) These investigator positions will
be subject to review by the City on an annual
basis in conjunction with the City’s annual budget
process and may be adjusted based on
organizational needs, provided that during the
term of this Agreement the number does not fall
below thirty (30) unless mutually agreed to.

(C) It is understood that the

- 45 -
investigator pay will apply for those currently

assigned to the inactive Civil Service

classification of Detective.

(h) Hazardous Pay: Bomb Squad and Tactical Response
Team members who are qualified and assigned as determined by the
Chief of Police will receive twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per
biweekly pay period. Effective the last full pay period of June
2002, the Tactical Response Team members who are qualified and
assigned as determined by the Chief of Police shall receive
sixty dollars ($60.00) per biweekly pay period. Effective the
last—full pay period of June 2001, lab certified members of the
narcotics unit who are qualified and assigned as determined by
the Chief of Police shall receive sixty dollars ($60.00) per
biweekly pay period.
(i) Senior Officer: Effective the last full pay

period in June 2001, those employees having a minimum of 15
years as a police officer with the Reno Police Department and
who do not qualify for the educational benefits as described in
Article 37 of this Agreement may qualify for an additional five
percent (5%) of their base hourly rate of pay as determined by
the RPPA Board of Directors. There will be no more than five
(5) officers at any one time receiving this pay. The RPPA
President shall send a list of those officers selected to the
Chief of Police. Those officers selected will begin receiving
the aforementioned pay effective the first full pay period

following notification by the selection committee. The
- 46 -
additional pay terminates when a selected employee receives
educational pay, when promoted, or upon separation of employment
with City of Reno as a police officer.

(j) Field Force: Effective the last full pay period
of June 2001, any officer assigned, in writing, by the Chief of
Police or his designee, to work a Field Force position shall
receive twenty five dollars ($25.00) per biweekly pay period.
Effective the first full pay period following July 1, 2011 the
twenty-five dollar ($25.00) per biweekly pay for Field Force
shall be suspended. The twenty-five dollar ($25.00) biweekly
pay shall be reinstated the first full pay period of July, 2013.

(k) Safety Equipment: The City will furnish one pair
of motorcycle boots and one pair of motorcycle britches to all
newly assigned motorcycle officers and will replace such boots

and britches damaged or lost in the performance of duty.

ARTICLE NO. 25. TRAINING COURSES:

Employees will be reimbursed for educational training
courses taken subsequent to approval of the Police Chief
pursuant to the following:

(a) The training must be directly related to the
required skill or education for the employee's current position.
No reimbursement merely for promotion preparation.

(b) Only full-time regular employees who have been so
employed for at least one (1) year will be eligible for

reimbursement. Further, eligibility will be determined by the
- 47 -
Police Chief in accordance with the departmental training
program.

(c) Effective July 1, 2001, no employees will be
reimbursed for more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
fiscal year. No reimbursement will be effected if the cost is
assumed by any other institution, scholarship or grant-in-aid.

(d) Reimbursable expenses shall be restricted to
tuition course fees and required textbooks. While courses
should normally be taken on the employee’s own time, exception
may be granted by the Police Chief - in which case, hours away
from work must be deducted from earned vacation, or be recorded
as excused absence without pay.

(e) To obtain reimbursement, a course must be taken
from a recognized and accredited school. At the Police Chief's
discretion, a course may be taken from a school that is not
accredited.

(f) Reimbursement will be effected upon presentation
of evidence to substantiate the expense, evidence of a passing
grade and the surrender of all textbooks for placement in the

Police Department reference library.

ARTICLE NO. 26. VACANCIES AND PROMOTIONS:

All vacancies and promotions shall be filled and made
by the City consistent with the Reno City Charter and the Rules
and Regulations of the Reno Civil Service Commission. Any

appeal arising out of actions taken by the Civil Service
- 48 -
Commission will be presented to said Commission and are not

grievable under the terms of this Agreement.

ARTICLE NO. 27. WORKING RULES:

The City may adopt any and all rules and regulations
not in conflict with Nevada Revised Statutes, the Reno City
Charter, Reno City Ordinances, the Rules and Regulations of the
Reno Civil Service Commission and this Agreement. The Police
Chief shall have full authority in matters of training, safety,
health and sanitation affecting employees on the job and he
shall consider such suggestions and recommendations pertaining
to these matters as may be from time-to-time presented by the

employees or the Association.

ARTICLE NO. 28. GRIEVANCE ARBITRATION PROCEDURE:

(a) The purpose of the following
grievance-arbitration procedure shall be to settle, as quickly
as possible, disputes concerning the interpretation,
application, and enforcement of this Agreement raised by an
employee or the Association. An attempt will be made to resolve
such disputes through informal discussion by meeting with the
appropriate supervisors and administrators, utilizing the Labor-
Management Committee, or through other appropriate Departmental
forums.

(bo) LEVEL I. If a grievance is not settled during

informal discussion, the aggrieved party may within ten (10)
- 49 -
working days of the event giving rise to the grievance or the
time the aggrieved party could reasonably have acquired
knowledge of the event, or the end of the informal discussions
by the parties, present the grievance in writing on the
City/Association approved grievance form to the grievant’s
immediate supervisor and to the Association President. If the
grievance is a result of an order made or an action taken by a
higher ranking supervisor, then the grievance will be filed at
that level. The immediate supervisor or supervisor receiving
the grievance shall respond to the employee in writing within
five (5) working days thereafter.

(c) LEVEL II. Within five (5) working days after
receipt of the written response from the immediate supervisor,
or the supervisor with whom the grievance was filed, and if the
matter is unresolved, the aggrieved party may present the
grievance in writing on the City/Association approved grievance
form to the Chief of Police and to the Association President,
accompanied by all correspondence on the matter. Within five
(5) working days, the Chief of Police shall examine the relevant
evidence and shall meet in consultation with the aggrieved party
and representative, if any, for the purpose of resolving the
grievance. The Chief of Police shall, within five (5) working
days of the meeting, render a decision and reasons therefore in
writing to the aggrieved party and the Association.

(d) LEVEL III.

(1) If the aggrieved party is not satisfied with
- 50 -
the disposition of the grievance at Level II, the
Association may, within five (5) working days of the Chief
of Police's decision, or within thirty-five (35) days after
the grievance was filed, if no decision is rendered by the
Chief of Police, submit the grievance in writing on the
City/Association approved form to the Reno City Manager and
to the Association President.

(2) Within five (5) working days after written
notice of submission to Level III, the Reno City Manager or
his designee shall schedule a meeting with the Association
to discuss the merits of the grievance. After the meeting
the City Manager will prepare a response to the Association
within ten (10) working days relative to its position on
this grievance.

(e) LEVEL IV. If the Association does not agree with
the City Manager's response, or if no response is given, the
Association shall, within ten (10) working days of the date the
City Manager's response is due, notify the City Manager in
writing if the Association wishes to take the grievance to
arbitration. The Reno City Manager or his designee and the
Association shall agree upon a mutually acceptable arbitrator
who is experienced, impartial, disinterested, and of recognized
competence. If the parties are unable to agree upon an
arbitrator, a request for a list of seven (7) arbitrators shall
be made to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service by

either party. Costs and expenses for arbitration shall be borne
- 51 -
equally by the parties.

(1) The arbitrator so selected shall confer
promptly with representatives of the Reno City Manager and
the Association, shall hold further hearing(s) with the
aggrieved and such other parties in interest he shall deem
requisite, and, unless extended by mutual agreement, shall
issue his report not later than thirty (30) days from the
date of conferences or hearings between the parties.

(2) All hearings held by the arbitrator shall be
in closed sessions and no news releases shall be made
concerning progress of the hearings.

(3) The arbitrator's decision shall be submitted
in writing to the aggrieved party, the Labor Relations
Manager and the Association, and shall set forth his
findings of fact, reasonings, and decision on the issues
submitted. The arbitrator's decision shall be final and
binding except as herein otherwise provided and shall be
consistent with the law and with the terms of this
Agreement.

(4) The Reno City Council agrees to the final
and binding arbitration for resolution of grievance as
specified in the preceding section. However, in the event
that the arbitrator's award would cost the City of Reno an
amount in excess of one quarter cent (1/4¢) on the tax rate
for any one specific grievance, or one-half cent (1/2¢) on

the tax rate in the aggregate (more than one grievance)
- 52 -
during the term of this Agreement, the Reno City Council
shall have final authority in the resolution of the
grievance and the arbitrator's decision shall be advisory
only. At the next meeting of the Reno City Council, the
decision of the arbitrator and any other information shall
be presented to the Reno City Council for consideration and
both parties shall have the opportunity to present their
positions before the Reno City Council takes final action
on the grievance.

(5) A record of decisions shall be maintained by
the City and Association, and each decision shall be
precedent for future interpretation or application of this
Agreement.

(f) The time limits specified in the preceding
sections may be extended by mutual agreement of both parties.

(g) Any employee grievant or participant in the
grievance procedure who is called upon to testify by subpoena
during a regular working business day shall be paid by the City
for time so spent, but only for straight time hours he would
have otherwise worked. The City shall allow officers who are
grievants to attend any hearing or appeal hearings in which they
are named grievants. Those officers shall be excused from their
normal work assignment to attend the hearings. In the case of a
grievance with multiple grievants, no more than five (5)
grievants may attend at any one time. In the event the hearings

fall on an officer’s days off, then an officer who is called to
- 53 -
testify may flex his normal scheduled work days to allow for his
attendance at the hearings.

(h) Subject only to the Association's exclusive right
to initiate arbitration, the aggrieved party shall have the
right to be represented by up to two (2) representatives of
his/her choice at each step of the grievance procedure, provided
that one (1) representative shall be designated as the
grievant's spokesperson. The City shall also designate a single
spokesperson to present the City's side of the grievance at each

step of the procedure.

ARTICLE NO. 29. DISCIPLINE/DISCHARGE:

(a) That all discipline including discharge shall be
for just cause, and shall be imposed without unreasonable delay,
subject only to the need for thorough investigation.

(b) That "just cause" for any discipline as defined
hereinafter, including discharge, is subject to appeal and
review under the procedures set out below, expressly including
final and binding arbitration.

(c) (1) The term "discipline" as used herein shall
include discharge, demotion, suspension and written
reprimands; provided, however, that a formal written letter
of reprimand shall only be subject to review by the Chief
of Police and not subject to arbitration. The Chief, upon
completion of his review may withdraw, modify or affirm the

letter of reprimand. At any time, the affected officer may
- 54 -
submit a written statement responding to the letter of
reprimand and such statement shall be included in the
official department and/or divisional personnel file(s).

As used herein, "formal letter of reprimand" or "letter of
reprimand" is understood and defined as being those letters
customarily issued by supervisors advising and reprimanding
an officer, of and for certain designated and established
specific failure(s) in performance, regarding departmental
policies, rules and regulations, and which letters of
reprimand are placed in the officer's official department
and/or divisional personnel file(s).

(2) Letters of reprimand will be effective for a
period of twelve (12) months following date of incident
and, provided there are no intervening reprimands or more
severe disciplinary action having a same or similar
relationship to the original incident, thereafter shall be
of no further effect and shall be removed from files upon
request of the affected employee.

(3) The Chief and the Association shall meet and
establish a form or format to be used for the purpose of
letters of reprimand.

(d) Each regular employee who has been disciplined

shall have the option of pursuing the appeal procedures set out

below, subject to the Association's right to be a participant in

all arbitration proceedings, or Civil Service remedies for

reviewing the discipline imposed. Any employee choosing to

- 55 -
pursue remedy under Civil Service, waives his/her right to
pursue the arbitration appeal procedures available at the City
Manager’s level and above as delineated below, and such remedy
shall no longer be available to that employee. The City will
require that an employee pursuing the appeal procedures in this
Article sign a waiver of the right to pursue Civil Service
remedies.

(1) If the employee elects to appeal to the
Civil Service Commission, then a hearing will be conducted
in accordance with the rules of the Commission.

(2) In cases where the employee has chosen to go
to arbitration without the concurrence of the Association,
the employee shall be liable for the normal shared costs of
arbitration.

(e) When a recommendation for discipline has been
made as the result of an internal investigation, the employee
has the option of accepting the recommended discipline or
requesting an appeal. Generally the employee’s immediate
supervisor will notify the employee of the recommendation for
discipline.

(1) If the employee elects to appeal, he shall
notify the Chief of Police, in writing or by email, within
ten (10) working days after receiving the notification of
discipline. The employee and/or his two (2) designated
representatives may review investigative files,

recommendations, documents and other evidence pertaining to
- 56 -
the case, as well as the employee’s personnel files, prior
to each of the appeal hearings. Any employee or his
representative, if electing to appeal, may obtain a copy of
the entire Internal Affairs investigative file of the
subject investigation.

(A) Within ten (10) working days after
receipt of the appeal request, the Chief of Police
shall examine the relevant evidence and shall schedule
a meeting with the aggrieved party and representative,
if any, for the employee to present evidence on his
behalf.

(B) The Chief of Police shall, within five
(5) working days of the meeting, render a decision and
reasons therefore in writing to the aggrieved party
and the Association President.

(2) City Manager Level. If the aggrieved party
is not satisfied with the disposition of the appeal at the
Chief of Police level, the aggrieved party shall, within
ten (10) working days, submit an appeal, in writing, to the
Reno City Manager. Any regular employee of the bargaining
unit being disciplined and electing the appeal procedure as
delineated in section (e) of this Article, except those
being discharged, shall remain in pay status and shall not
have discipline imposed pending the outcome of the appeal
at the City Manager level.

(A) Upon receipt of the appeal request, the
- 57 -
Reno City Manager or his designee shall, within ten
(10) working days, schedule a hearing with the
aggrieved employee and the Association for the
employee to present evidence on his behalf. Evidence,
testimony and information relevant to the case,
including mitigating circumstances, may be presented
by the affected employee and his representatives.

(B) Within ten (10) working days after the
hearing, the City Manager or his designee shall render
a decision and reasons therefore, in writing, to the
aggrieved party and to the Association President.

(4) Arbitration. If the aggrieved party and the
Association do not agree with the City Manager’s decision,
the Association shall, within ten (10) working days of the
date of the City Manager’s response, notify the City
Manager in writing if the Association wishes to take the
appeal to arbitration. The City Manager or his designee
and the Association shall agree upon a mutually acceptable
arbitrator who is experienced, impartial, disinterested,
and of recognized competence. If the parties are unable to
agree upon an arbitrator, a request for a list of seven (7)
arbitrators shall be made by the Association to the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service. Costs and expenses for
arbitration shall be borne equally by the parties.

(A) The arbitrator so selected shall

schedule a hearing as soon as possible and, unless
- 58 -
extended by mutual agreement, shall issue his report
not later than thirty (30) days from the date of
hearing or the date of receipt of briefs from the
parties.

(B) Any hearing held by the arbitrator
shall be in closed sessions and no news releases shall
be made concerning progress of the hearing.

(C) The arbitrator’s decision shall be
submitted in writing to the aggrieved party, Director
of Human Resources, and the Association, and shall set
forth his finding of fact, reasoning, and decision on
the issues submitted. The arbitrator’s decision shall
be final and binding except as herein otherwise
provided and shall be consistent with the law and with
the terms of this Agreement. The parties shall make
reasonable efforts to schedule arbitration as quickly
as possible.

(f) Discharge. Any regular employee of the

bargaining unit being discharged shall remain in pay status

pending the outcome of a pre-termination hearing before the

Chief of Police. A pre-termination hearing is an informal

hearing before the Chief of Police, where the employee will be

given the right of Association representation to give his answer

to the charge and give his/her "side of the story." In the

event that the Chief elects to terminate the employee and the

employee elects to appeal, he may appeal to either the City

= 59 -
Manager or Civil Service. Notice of such appeal must be in
writing or e-mail. A hearing will be scheduled as quickly as
possible with the City Manager or his designee.

(g) (1) Disciplinary actions other than letters of
reprimand shall be sealed upon written request by the
employee to the Chief of Police with a copy to the Human
Resources Department according to the following schedule:

(A) Suspension of less than three (3) days,
without recurrence, three (3) years from the date of
the incident giving rise to the suspension;

(B) Suspensions of three (3) days or more,
with no recurrence, five (5) years from the date of
the incident giving rise to the suspension.

(2) It is the intent of the parties that
"recurrence" shall mean repetition of the same or similar
act, error, or omission on the part of the employee as
provided for in the Department Operations Manual or in the
Civil Service Rules. The City agrees that arbitrary or
capricious application of this definition of "recurrence"
shall be subject to the grievance procedure.

(3) Sealing shall include sealing of all memos,
letters, correspondence, complaint forms and any other
written material pertaining to the disciplinary action.

(4) Sealing shall not include the sealing of any
material related to criminal offenses for which the

employee was charged except in concurrence with the sealing
- 60 -
or expungement of criminal charges by a court of competent
jurisdiction, or except in the event of complete
exoneration of the employee by the court.

(5) The City Human Resources Department shall be
notified in all cases where sealing of disciplinary action
is taken, and Human Resources Department file copies will
be sealed accordingly.

(6) The sealed action shall not be held to
discriminate against the employee in any subsequent
disciplinary action, or in the event of impending
promotion, merit step raise, transfer, request for
educational leave, modification of duties, vacation
selection, application for other employment, or against any
other action the employee may take for his personal
improvement or betterment.

(7) Once sealed, the file shall not be opened
unless the employee requests such unsealing -- and then
only for examination by the person or persons which the
employee specified, or at the direction of the Chief of
Police who may deem it necessary. In any case, the
employee is to be notified of the opening of the sealed
file and the reasons therefore.

(h) Subject only to the Association's exclusive right
to initiate arbitration (except as provided in (d)(2)), an
employee shall have the right to be represented by up to two (2)

representatives of his/her choice at each step of the appeal
- 61 -
process described in this Article, provided that one
representative shall be designated as the employee's
spokesperson.

The City shall also designate a single spokesperson to
present the City's side of the case to the arbitrator.
Representatives of the employee may be other members of the
bargaining group, attorneys, persons who are not employed by the
City, non-sworn City employees, or any other persons selected by
the affected employees or the Association. The purpose of the
employee’s representative shall be to provide representation and
assistance to the employee. Where there is a fiscal impact on
the Association, the Association has the exclusive right to
final approval over a paid representative.

(i) The subject employee and the Association shall be
notified prior to the initiation of a formal investigation
determined necessary by the Police Department of any bargaining
unit employee when such advanced notice to the employee and the
Association will not jeopardize any necessary, ongoing ADI
(Administratively Directed Investigations) or IA (Internal
Affairs) investigations of alleged employee misconduct.

(j) Unit peace officers shall be afforded all rights

guaranteed under NRS Chapter 289.

ARTICLE NO. 30. AMENDING PROCEDURES:

 

If either party desires to modify or change this
- 62 -
Agreement it shall, no later than February 1, of any year, give
written notice to the other party of amendment, in which event
the notice of amendment shall set forth the nature of the
amendment or amendments desired. Any amendment, whether a
proposed amendment or an alternative to a proposed amendment,
that may be mutually agreed upon shall become and be a part of
this Agreement, the effective date to be as mutually agreed.
Any amendments that may be agreed upon shall become and be a
part of this Agreement without modifying or changing any of the

other terms of this Agreement.

ARTICLE NO. 31. SAVINGS CLAUSE:

(a) This Agreement is the entire agreement of the
parties, terminating all prior arrangements and practices and
concluding all negotiation during the term of this Agreement,
except as provided in this Agreement. The City or the
Association may request meetings relative to the administration
of this Agreement when questions arise necessitating such
meetings.

(b) In the event the City intends to institute a
change during the term of this Agreement of a subject which
falls within the scope of mandatory bargaining as outlined in
Subsection 2 of NRS 288.150, the City recognizes its duty to
bargain with the Association over said change. Disputes arising
under this Article shall not be grievable under Article 28 of

this Agreement, but shall be submitted to the Nevada Local
- 63 -
Government Employee-Management Relations Board of resolution.

(c) Should any provisions of this Agreement be found
to be in contravention of any Federal or State Law, the Reno
City Charter, or Rules and Regulations of the Reno Civil Service
Commission, by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
particular provision shall be null and void, but all other
provisions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect until otherwise canceled or amended. The parties agree
to meet within a reasonable period of time after such a finding

of contravention to renegotiate the invalidated provision(s).

ARTICLE NO. 32. DURATION OF AGREEMENT:

This Agreement shall be in full force and effect on
July 1, 2015 and shall continue in force through June 30, 2016.
It shall be renewed from year to year thereafter unless amended

by the parties.

ARTICLE NO. 33. SENIORITY/LAYOFF:

(a) In the event of layoff or reduction in force due
to lack of funds or lack of work, regular employees will be laid
off according to seniority within the classifications being
reduced starting with the least senior employee.

(b) Subject to Civil Service regulations, employees
shall be given opportunity to transfer in lieu of layoff, to any
other positions for which he/she is or has qualified, and is

more senior than the least senior employee in that class.
- 64 -
For purposes of this Article, seniority of regular
employees shall commence on their date of hire, and include any
break in employment with the City not exceeding twelve (12)
months.

Employees who are temporary or probationary are not
regular employees and shall not have seniority for purposes of
bids or layoff, but shall be assigned as the Department sees

fit, and shall be laid off before any regular employee.

ARTICLE NO. 34. COMPENSATORY TIME:

(a) In lieu of overtime or premium pay for working a
holiday, compensatory time-off may be allowed and scheduled
subject to the convenience of the employee and Department.
Court appearance overtime shall be eligible for compensatory
time-off. Compensatory time may be accrued up to a maximum of
eighty (80) hours. Any change in this Article shall be by
mutual agreement between the Chief of Police and Association
representatives.

(b) Effective July 1, 2011 through June 30, 2013 the
cash out of compensatory time shall be suspended. The cash out
benefit shall be reinstated on July 1, 2013. Effective July 1,
2001, upon request, bargaining unit employees may, semi-
annually, cash out up to 80 hours of accumulated but unused
compensatory time in increments of 20 hours during the window
periods of November 1 through November 30 and April 1 through

April 30. Employees electing to cash out compensatory time must
- 65 -
notify the City between April 1 through April 30 and November 1
through November 30.

(1) To be eligible, employees must file a
written request with the Chief of Police or his designee
during the window period specified above.

(2) Calculation of payment due shall be based on
the employee’s base hourly rate in effect on the last day
of the window period of the year in which his request was
made. Base hourly rate shall be increased by Investigator
assignment pay, FTO assignment pay, or Senior Officer
premium pay for any employee so assigned by payroll action

form.

ARTICLE NO. 35. RELEASE TIME:

(a) There shall be established a release time bank
for the use of designated Association officers for Association
business. This release time bank shall be in addition to
release time provided for representation activities pursuant to
this Agreement and NRS 288. Effective July 1, 2001, The City
shall contribute release time at the rate of four hundred fifty
(450) hours per contract year. In addition, any unused time may
be carried over to the next contract year.

(b) Effective July 1, 2001, The City shall provide a
release time bank at the rate of one thousand forty (1,040)
hours per fiscal year for the exclusive use of the RPPA

President for Association related matters. This shall be the
- 66 -
sole release time that may be used by the President. There
shall be no additional release time provided for the President
for disciplinary, grievance or collective bargaining or any
other Association related issues. The release time used by the
President shall be paid at the same level of pay and benefits
otherwise afforded him. In the event the President’s release
time bank is exhausted prior to the end of the fiscal year
additional hours for disciplinary, grievance or collective
bargaining related issues may be granted at the discretion of
the Chief of Police and the Assistant City Manager (Human
Resources). The RPPA President may transfer unused release time
from the President’s bank to the pool specified in (a) above, if
needed; however, those transferred hours shall not be available
to carry over to the next contract year.

(c) Effective July 1, 2005, the City shall provide a
release time bank at the rate of four hundred (400) hours per
fiscal year for use by Association board members for board
meetings.

(d) The use of release time shall be subject to
reasonable prior notice and approval based on the staffing needs
of the department. Approval shall not be unreasonably denied,
but the decision to grant or deny a request for use of release
time shall not be grievable under Article 28 of this Agreement.
Each individual shall record all release time taken on his or
her time card.

(e) No overtime compensation shall be paid for hours
- 67 -
spent on release time. Release time shall be treated the same
as other forms of paid leave for the purpose of determining
eligibility for overtime compensation.

(f) The Association shall provide the City with a
list of Association officers authorized to use these release
time banks. Updates to the list shall be provided when there is

a change in Association officers.

ARTICLE NO. 36. LABOR-MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE:

The parties agree to the establishment of a permanent
Labor-Management Committee. The Committee shall include three
(3) sworn employees designated by and representing the Police
Department Administration and three (3) current sworn employees
designated by and representing the Association. The parties
agree that one member designated by and representing the Police
Department shall be the Chief of Police of the Reno Police
Department or his designee who must at least be a Reno Police
Deputy Chief of Police. One member designated by and
representing the Association shall be the Association President
or his designee and shall be a current sworn non-supervisory
police officer. All officers shall serve without loss of
compensation. Representatives of both Police Administration and
the Association may, from time to time, bring an expert(s) who
may assist the committee in clarifying concerns and issues. The
experts may or may not be employees of the City or the

Association. Committee meetings shall ordinarily be held at
- 68 -
least monthly. Association members of the Committee shall be
allowed department time on those mornings preceding Committee
meetings to study agenda items and issues.

Changes in Department work rules will also be
discussed in this forum and recommendations by the Committee

shall be considered by the Chief.

ARTICLE NO. 37. EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE:

Effective the first full pay period following January
1, 1998, educational incentive shall be paid in accordance with
the following:

(a) Any full-time employee who has obtained an
Associate's Degree from an accredited college or university
shall receive five percent (5.0%) of his biweekly base hourly
rate per pay period.

(b) Any full-time employee who has obtained a
Bachelor's Degree from an accredited college or university shall
receive six percent (6.0%) of his biweekly base hourly rate per
pay period. Effective the last full pay period of June 2001,
any full-time employee who has obtained a Bachelor's Degree from
an accredited college or university shall receive eight percent
(8.0%) of his biweekly base hourly rate per pay period.

(c) Any full-time employee who has obtained a Nevada
Intermediate POST certificate shall receive three percent (3.0%)
of his biweekly base hourly rate per pay period.

(d) Any full-time employee who has obtained a Nevada
- 69 -
Advanced POST certificate shall receive four percent (4.0%) of
his biweekly base hourly rate per pay period.

(e) No individual shall receive compensation under
more than one of the above subsections during any fiscal year.

(f) An employee requesting educational incentive pay
shall be required to provide proof of the required degree. An
employee who becomes eligible according to the sections above,
but after January 1, 1998, shall receive incentive pay beginning
the first full pay period following the date the certification
or degree is awarded.

(g) For calculation of payment due under this
Article, base hourly rate shall be increased by Investigator
assignment and FTO pay for any employee so assigned by payroll
action form.
ARTICLE NO. 38. FLIGHT PROGRAM:

The City shall meet and confer over any future
expansion of the flight program or addition of a helicopter

program.

ARTICLE NO. 39. SPECIAL EVENTS:
(1) Hot August Nights
(a) The Hot August Nights special event may require
the Chief of Police or his designee to schedule officers to work
on their days off. The Chief of Police or his designee shall
advise the Association President, or his designee, of the

manning requirements for Hot August Nights by the first of June

-70-
preceding the event. Those officers with equal qualification in
excess of the manning requirements will be granted consecutive
days off by seniority. Officers desiring time off during the
Hot August Nights special event will normally be granted leave
by seniority on a first come, first served basis. When two (2)
officers put in for any leave request, the officer with the most
departmental seniority will be granted the leave. When five
percent (5%) of the officers have been granted leave, additional
leave may be granted subject to supervisor approval.

(b) Notwithstanding the above, all overtime for
officers scheduled to work the Hot August Nights special event
on their scheduled days off, or required to work extended shifts
either prior to or after their regularly scheduled shifts shall
be at two (2) times their base hourly rate of pay. Effective
July 1, 2011 through June 30, 2013 the two (2) times base hourly
rate of pay shall be reduced to one and one-half (1-1/2) times
base hourly rate of pay. The two (2) times base hourly rate of
pay shall be reinstated on July 1, 2013. In order to qualify
for Hot August Nights special event overtime pay, any extension
of shift must be related to the Hot August Nights special event.
Officers working on their scheduled days off shall be paid a
minimum of eight (8) hours pay at the rate of two (2) times
their base hourly rate of pay. For calculation of payment due
under this section, base hourly rate shall be increased by
Investigator assignment pay, FTO assignment pay, or Senior

Officer premium pay for any employee so assigned by payroll
-71-
action form.

(c) All officers working or required to work the Hot
August Nights special event and qualifying for two (2) times
their base hourly rate of pay, including those officers whose
work shifts are extended either prior to or after their regular
shifts, shall receive shift differential pay in the amount
identified in Article 24, section (a), of the collective
bargaining agreement, for the hours identified in Article 24 and
worked during that period of time.

(d) The Chief of Police or his designee shall make
every effort to not work any officer more than a sixteen (16)
hour shift. He shall also make every effort to allow officers
to have at least eight (8) hours off between shifts.

(2) Other Special Events

(a) The Chief of Police, or his designee, may require
officers to work on other special events on their scheduled days
off. However, the Chief of Police, or his designee, shall
advise the Association President, or his designee, a minimum of
thirty (30) days preceding that special event of anticipated
manning requirements. Officers with equal qualifications shall
be granted time off and/or scheduled to work by seniority as
defined in section (1) (a) above.

(bo) When manning requirements for any special event
require the involuntary scheduling of more than forty percent
(40%) of officers, who are regularly assigned to patrol teams

and detectives, on their regularly scheduled days off, the
- 72 -
Association and the City shall immediately open negotiations for
the limited purpose of negotiating overtime pay and benefits for
that special event.

(c) Officers scheduled to work special events shall
receive shift differential pay in the amount identified in

Article 24(a) for the hours identified in Article 24 and worked.

ARTICLE NO. 40. SHIFT BID:

(1) Patrol shift bidding shall be the procedure used
for allowing rotation of employees assigned to patrol shifts.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the right to
administratively assign probationary personnel in accordance
with the needs of the department. He shall also have the right
to administratively assign patrol personnel for performance
related issues and for personal hardship reasons.

(2) Patrol shift bidding shall be conducted on a
semi-annual basis. Bidding and shift preference shall be based
on seniority (time in grade). Procedures for the shift bid
shall be established and handled by the Patrol Division Deputy
Chief or his designee after meeting and conferring with the RPPA
designated representatives.

(3) Notice governing the shift bidding process shall
be distributed to the patrol officers prior to a shift change.
This notice shall include:

(a) The date the shift change will occur;

(b) The parameters of the bidding process;
- 73-
and
(c) The employee’s bidding time.

(4) Employees shall be assigned to the same area for
the bid period with the exception that the Chief of Police or
his designee shall have the right to administratively assign to
other areas for performance related issues and for personal
hardship reasons. This shall enable the officer(s) to become
better acquainted with the persons, businesses, organizations
and hazards of the specific beat area.

(5) Patrol shift bid teams shall consist of not fewer
than five (5), nor more than twelve (12), police officers.

/

/
/

= 74 -
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City and the Association have
caused these presents to be duly executed by their authorized

representatives this Qu day of Sept embev , 2015.

RENO POLICE PROTECTIVE ASSOCIATION CITY OF RENO, NEVADA

   

City Clerk

WITNESSETH: APPROVED AS TO LEGAL FORM:

*
By: E
City Attorney

 

- 75 -
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK

- 76-
 

 

 

 

 

AqqTenuuy | TT "97 EL | 06°97L'89 | TE” 80S5‘79 | WS" E67 ‘09 | 61° 6109S | SH" 80S ES
Atxeemta | pz"078‘z | peero’z |eo'tsr’z | se'ste’z | 68°9St’z | 10°8S0’z
ATanoH | 6297 °SE 8TrO"E€e QETO"TE €L86° 82 V196°97% CSZL°SS yld | JEOTIFJO SOTTOd
9 TeAeT G [eaAet y [eAeT € [eaoT Z [eAeT I TeaeT epery | UOTIEOTITSSeTO
Azetes

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

potred ey} ToZ YOerQuoD Azostazedng-uon wWaady ey TOF ueTa Azetes

9t0z ‘O€ eUNe Yybnory GToz ‘T ATne

T-W XIGNaddw

 
