TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREAMBLE
ARTICLE 1 - RECOGNITION..
ARTICLE 2 - NON-DISCRIMINATION

 

 
 

ARTICLE 3 - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS... .cesccssesseessesssssesssssseseussssseseessscntesescseesnseseeaneess 5
ARTICLE 4 - SUBCONTRACTING AND OTHER TRANSFERS OF BARGAINING
UNIT WORK. ......cccssssssssssssessssssessnsscesne HRASSisS OU bahepit ARETE UR URE AT SES 7

ARTICLE 5 - DUES DEDUCTION AND FAIR SHARE on esssessesssessressessesestcsrsesreeneenneeneene®
ARTICLE 6 - NO STRIKE/NO LOCKOUT
ARTICLE 7 - INTERNAL TRANSFERS
ARTICLE 8 - ASSOCIATION RIGHTS om
ARTICLE 9 - INVESTIGATIVE RIGHTS ... .sssvsssvassassoarssansssonssssvssrevvcovsvsavscovsesssswesccieiiy 15
ARTICLE 10 - PERSONNEL FILES sacassiisainnsssssrsirrnrcsannanisieaenigheiaanmoienisanais 17
ARTICLE 11 - DISCIPLINE
ARTICLE 12 - DISPUTE RESOLUTION AND GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
ARTICLE 13 - SENIORITY or
ARTICLE 14 - REDUCTIONS IN FORCEesscssssssssanesssvnessscvscsssssseessissssatussussaisnnanscssussisss 27
ARTICLE 15 - HOLIDAYS ...esscsssessssssssesssssesessnes ns sASSaiinseaUsiochzsusasenaneLaataN UHM UNAS 28
ARTICLE 16 - VACATIONS...
ARTICLE 17 - SICK LEAVE...
ARTICLE 18 - LEAVES OF ABSENCE

 

  
 

 

  
 
  

ARTICLE 19 - HOURS OF WORK/OVERTIME esscsssscoseenornssenccaneennonsnenscanvsanesunnaveraneana 35
ARTICLE 20 - WAGES v..sssssscsssssssssssevseceseoos sonsennsestiiectuasiasenusibestusstcunsrusnaasvasiocisssetite 37

 

  
 

ARTICLE 22 - LABOR MANAGEMENT/SAFETY COMMITTEE.
ARTICLE 23 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

 

ARTICLE 27 - POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS
ARTICLE 28 - RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT...

ARTICLE 29 - DURATIONAND RENEWAL OF AGREEMENT AND IMPASSE
INTEREST ARBITRATION ssisscssscssnssccsconrnensscanncvscacaasncsnssiaessyisiiug 45

 
PREAMBLE

This Agreement is entered into by the City of St. Louis Missouri (“City”), a body
politic, hereinafter referred to as the "Employer", and the St. Louis Police Officer’s
Association/Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 68 and their respective successors. The
purpose of this Agreement is to provide an orderly collective bargaining relationship
between the Employer and the Association representing the employees in the bargaining
unit, and to make clear the basic terms upon which such relationship depends. It is the
intent of both the Employer and the Association to work together to provide and maintain
satisfactory terms and conditions of employment, and to prevent as well as to adjust
misunderstandings and grievances relating to employees’ wages, hours and working
conditions. In consideration of mutual promises, covenants and agreements contained
herein, the parties hereto, by their duly authorized representative and/or agents, do
mutually covenant and agree as follows:

ARTICLE 1 - RECOGNITION

Section 1. Unit Description

The Employer hereby recognizes the Association as the sole and exclusive
collective bargaining representative for the purpose of collective bargaining on matters
relating to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment of all full-time
commissioned personnel of the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department holding the
rank of Police Officer, Probationary Police Officer, or Police Officer Trainee as set forth
below.

Included: All full-time commissioned personnel holding the rank of Police
Officer, Probationary Police Officer, or Police Officer Trainee employed by the
Department.

Excluded: All other employees employed by the Employer including Police
Officers regularly assigned to work out of the following offices: Chief of Police
administrative staff; Law Department; Internal Affairs investigative staff; and
supervisory, managerial and confidential employees.

Section 2. Non-bargaining Unit Employees Performing Bargaining Unit Work

Sergeants may continue to perform bargaining unit work which is incidental to
their jobs. They may also perform bargaining unit work in emergency situations and
where such work is necessary to train a bargaining unit employee. Such work by
Sergeants shall not cause any layoffs of bargaining unit employees.

Airport Police Officers and Airport Police Sergeants may continue to perform
bargaining unit work limited only to work performed at Lambert International Airport
until such time as the St. Louis Lambert International Airport Police are integrated into
the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department at which time the commissioned employees
will become part of this bargaining unit. Within at least 30 days prior to the integration of
the St Louis Lambert International Airport Police with the St. Louis Metropolitan Police
Department, the parties will reopen negotiations for the terms and conditions of
employment of the new employees only.

City Marshals may continue to perform bargaining unit work limited to courtroom
and building security on the premises of City owned buildings and prisoner transport
related directly to municipal court operations, or special details.

Law Enforcement Officers from other jurisdictions who are cross-commissioned
with police powers in the City of St. Louis by the Employer may perform bargaining unit
work so long as it does not result in the layoff of any bargaining unit employee or the
reduction of the manning table for Police Officers and Probationary Police Officers. The
Employer agrees that it will not cross-commission, deputize or in any other way empower
law enforcement officers from another jurisdiction to perform bargaining unit work or
exercise police powers within the City of St. Louis with the exception of the St. Louis
County Police Department, University City Police Department, and Washington
University Police Department, or any other agency approved by the union.

Except as provided for under this section, bargaining unit work shall only be
performed by bargaining unit members.

Section 3. Definitions

The following definitions apply to terms used in this Agreement, unless a
different definition is required by the context in which the term is used:

1. “Association” means the St. Louis Police Officers Association/Fraternal Order
of Police Lodge 68, and its officers and representatives authorized to act on its
behalf.

2. “City” or “Employer” means the City of St. Louis Missouri, its designees
and/or successors.

3. “Department” means the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department.

4. “Chief? means the Chief of Police of the St. Louis Metropolitan Police
Department or his lawful designee.

5. “Employee” and “Officer” mean all commissioned officers of the St. Louis
Metropolitan Police Department, except those specifically excluded in this
agreement, holding the rank of Police Officer, or Probationary Police Officer,
or Police Officer Trainee.
6. “Bargaining Unit Work” means any work commonly considered to be a law
enforcement function and/or work currently performed by Police Officers and
Probationary Police Officers of the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department
within the corporate limits of St. Louis or upon property owned by the City,
including but not limited to, the following: enforcing criminal laws and traffic
laws; responding to radio calls for police; investigating crimes; making
arrests; processing crime scenes; seizing evidence; and, keeping the peace and
providing for the general security of the city and its residents.

7. “Service” or “Employment” with the Department shall mean continuous
employment with the Employer and its predecessor, the Board of Police
Commissioners of the City of St. Louis.

8. “Job Class” for purposes of this agreement means rank.
9. “Manning Table” means the Commissioned Employee Staffing Report.
Section 4. Police Officer Trainees

Beginning with the first Police Academy class following the ratification of this
agreement, all Recruits in Training shall hold the rank of Police Officer Trainee during
their initial Police Academy training. For the purposes of this Agreement, the Employer
shall retain sole discretion for determining acceptable performance of Police Officer
Trainees and may terminate their employment with or without cause. An employee’s
twelve (12) month probationary period shall not commence until he/she has successfully
graduated from the Police Academy and been promoted from Police Officer Trainee to
Probationary Police Officer.

ARTICLE 2 - NON-DISCRIMINATION

Section 1. Prohibition Against Discrimination

The Employer and Association prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, sex,
religion, color, age (40 years and older), national origin, ancestry, disability, political
affiliation and/or beliefs, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
or genetic information in connection with terms or conditions of employment covered by
this collective bargaining agreement. This policy prohibits retaliation against an
employee who files a complaint and employees who report discrimination or who
cooperate in an investigation of a complaint of discrimination.

The Employer and Association agree that the mandatory retirement age of sixty-
five (65) does not constitute illegal discrimination under this Agreement or under current
state and federal law.

(T/A 03/14/14)
Section 2. Association Membership or Activity

Neither the Employer nor the Association shall interfere with the right of
employees covered by this Agreement to become or not become members of the
Association, and there shall be no discrimination against any such employees because of
lawful Association membership or non-membership activity or status.

(T/A 03/14/14)

Section 3. Disabilities

This Agreement incorporates the City of St. Louis Department of Personnel Joint
Regulation No. 2 Reasonable Accommodation Policy, provided, however, an employee
or the Association may appeal a decision either through the procedure referenced in
Article IX of Joint Regulation No. 2 or Article 12 of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 3 - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Except as otherwise expressed in this Agreement, the Association recognizes that
the Employer possesses the sole and exclusive right to operate and direct all of the
officers of the Police Department, in all aspects, including, but not limited to, all rights
and authority granted by law including those rights and powers granted by Missouri
statutes and City Charter.

Management rights include the rights listed below, except to the extent such rights
are restricted by provisions of this Agreement:

1. To maintain executive management and administrative control of the Police
Department and its properties and facilities and the staff.

2 To plan, direct, control, assign and determine the operations or services to be
conducted by officers of the Police Department.

3 To determine the methods, processes, means, job classifications and number
of personnel by which the Police Department operations are to be conducted.

4 To select, hire, promote, schedule, train, assign and evaluate work of
bargaining unit officers.

5. To direct and supervise the entire working force of the Police Department,
including the establishment of work standards.
6. To demote, suspend, discipline, or discharge officers for just cause and to
discipline or terminate Police Officer Trainees and Probationary Police
Officers, except those Probationary Police Officers who hold such rank due to
demotion, with or without just cause.

7. To make, add, delete, alter, and enforce procedures, rules and regulations.
8. To introduce new or improved methods or facilities.
9. To contract out for goods and services.

The Employer has the sole authority to determine the purpose and mission of the
Police Department.

Section 1. Other Employment

Any and all employees covered by this Agreement who desire to perform policing
related work for an entity other than Employer shall seek-prior approval for such
employment from the Employer in accordance with the policies of the Department
relating to secondary employment. Employees may work up to 32 hours of other
employment in any work week (not including additional hours worked by an officer on
his regularly scheduled days off). The Employer agrees that it shall not unreasonably
withhold permission to work secondary employment, except that the Employer may, at its
discretion, place additional restrictions on other employment performed by Police Officer
Trainees.

Any employee working for an entity shall hold the Employer and the Association
harmless against any and all claims, demands, suits or other forms of liability involving
his work for another entity.

In the event an employee is employed by any entity, said employment shall not
affect the performance of his duties, nor shall such other employment interfere with any
operations of the Employer, nor affect an employee's availability for call-outs, nor shall
constitute, nor appear to constitute, a conflict of interest with employment for the St.
Louis Metropolitan Police Department. Should the Employer determine that an officer's
outside employment does not conform to the requirements set forth in this Section, the
Employer may order the employee to terminate the outside employment, subject to
reasonable notice, with an explanation to the order.

The Employer agrees that it shall not engage in favoritism or disparate treatment
in the course of notifying employees of available law enforcement related secondary
employment.

Employees shall be prohibited from working secondary employment under the
State, a political subdivision of the State, or any agency established by authority of the
laws of the State of Missouri, or employment by the Federal Government or agencies of
the Federal Government, except that nothing in this section shall be construed as to
prohibit employees from receiving compensation through the Employer for work paid for
by State or Federal agencies or other political subdivisions.

Section 2. Civil-Emergency Conditions

If, at the sole discretion of the Employer, it is determined that extreme civil-
emergency conditions exist, including but not limited to riots, civil disorders, tornado
conditions, floods, or other similar catastrophes, upon oral notice to an Association
representative at a practical time, the provisions of this Agreement may be suspended by
the Employer during the time of the emergency, provided wage rates and all economic
benefits shall not be suspended and that the provisions of this Section shall neither limit
an employee's right to invoke the grievance procedure in a timely manner after the
cessation of the emergency, nor limit the protections granted by the terms of this
Agreement. It is agreed that the processing of any grievance occurring during this
emergency shall be delayed until a time when the emergency conditions no longer
hamper normal business activity. The Employer agrees to return to normal operations as
soon as the conditions that led to the declaration of an emergency no longer significantly
interfere with the operations of the Department. The definition of emergency set forth in
this section shall apply throughout this Agreement unless otherwise defined in and
applied to other sections of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 4 - SUBCONTRACTING AND OTHER
TRANSFERS OF BARGAINING UNIT WORK

Section 1. General Policy

It is the general policy of the Employer to continue to utilize employees to
perform work they are qualified to perform. However, the Employer reserves the right to
contract out any work it deems necessary in the interests of economy, improved work
product, or emergency. Such subcontracting shall not cause the layoff of any bargaining
unit employee nor a reduction to the manning table for bargaining unit employees.

Section 2. Filling Overtime

When overtime is made available for bargaining unit work, it shall first be offered
to bargaining unit members on a first-come-first-serve basis within their assignment.
When an insufficient number of bargaining unit members accept the offered overtime, the
Department may offer it to other commissioned personnel of the Department.
ARTICLE 5 - DUES DEDUCTION AND FAIR SHARE

Section 1. Association Membership

Membership in the Association shall be open to all employees in accordance with
the Association’s Constitution and By-Laws.

Section 2. Dues Deduction

Upon receipt of a written and signed authorization form (attached as Appendix A)
from an employee, the Employer shall deduct the amount of Association dues and
initiation fees, if any, set forth in such form and any authorized increases therein, and
shall remit such deductions per pay period to the Association at the following address:

3710 Hampton Avenue
St. Louis, MO 63109

The Association shall advise the Employer of any increase in dues, in writing, at
least thirty (30) days prior to its effective date.

Section 3. Dues

With respect to any employee on whose behalf the Employer receives a written
and signed authorization form (attached as Appendix A), the Employer shall deduct from
the wages of the employee the dues and/or financial obligation uniformly required and
shall forward the full amount to the Association by the Tuesday following the issuance of
pay from which the deductions are made along with a written list of all members from
whom dues were collected and a separate list of all employees who commenced or
discontinued payment of dues and a reason for such change in payment of dues, except
that such remittance may be delayed by one day should a holiday recognized under this
agreement fall on that Tuesday or the Monday immediately prior thereto.

The amounts deducted shall be in accordance with the schedule to be submitted
to the Employer by the Association.

Section 4. Fair Share

Any present employee who is not a member of the Association shall be required
to pay a fair share (not to exceed the amount of Association dues) of the cost of the
collective bargaining process and contract administration in pursuing matters affecting
wages, hours, and other conditions of employment. All employees hired on or after the
effective date of this Agreement and who have not made application for membership
shall, on or after the thirtieth (30th) day of their hire, also be required to pay a fair share
as defined above. Upon request of Employer, Association shall provide Employer with
all information reasonably requested for the purpose of determining whether the fair
share amount is appropriate and does not include amounts for inappropriate expenses.
The Employer shall with respect to any employee in whose behalf the Employer has not
received a written authorization as provided for above, deduct from the wages of the
employee the fair share financial obligation, including any retroactive amount due and
owing, and shall forward said amount to the Association on the Tuesday following the
issuance of pay from which the deduction is made, subject only to the following:

1. The Association has certified to the Employer that the affected employee has
been delinquent in his obligation for at least thirty (30) days;

2. The Association has certified to the Employer that the affected employee has
been notified in writing via US Mail or their department email address
supplied to the Association by the Employer of the obligation and the
requirement for each provision of this Article and that the employee has been
advised by the Association of his obligations pursuant to this Article and of
the manner in which the Association has calculated the fair share fee;

3. The Association has certified to the Employer that the affected employee has
been given a reasonable opportunity to prepare and submit any objections to
the payment and has been afforded an opportunity to have said objections
adjudicated before the Civil Service Commission for the purpose of
determining and resolving any objections the employee may have to the fair
share fee.

4, Upon objection by the employee based on bona-fide religious grounds, the fair
share obligation shall be paid to Backstoppers.

5. The Fair Share procedures of this Article will continue to comply with the
substantive components of such a procedure required by City ordinance.

Section 5. Indemnification

The Association shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Employer from
any and all liability arising out of any claim or cause of action, whether in law or equity,
brought by any employee as a result of deductions being taken pursuant to this Article 5,
Section 4.

ARTICLE 6 - NO STRIKE/NO LOCKOUT

Section 1. No Strike Commitment

Neither the Association nor any of its officers or agents may call, initiate,
authorize, participate in, sanction, encourage, or ratify any work stoppage, slow down,
unauthorized absence, picketing of the Department over terms and conditions of this
Agreement, “work to rule" action, or the concerted interference with the full, faithful and
proper performance of the duties of employment with the Employer during the term of
this Agreement. Neither the Association nor any officer shall refuse to cross any picket
line, by whoever established. This Section does not apply to informational picketing,
handbilling and other forms of protected speech designed to communicate with the public
about issues of concern to the Association. Such communications shall not request any
kind of work stoppage. The Association’s right to conduct informational picketing or
handbilling as set forth herein shall be subject to the following conditions: 1) no
picketing or handbilling on Department property, 2) no person shall represent himself as
speaking as a member of or on behalf of the Police Department, 3) persons engaging in
such activities shall be off-duty, and 4) persons engaging in such activities shall not be in
police uniform.

Section 2. Performance of Duty

It is recognized that employees covered by this Agreement may be required in the
line of duty to perform duties growing out of or connected with labor disputes which may
arise within the City. The Association agrees that no disciplinary action or other action
will be taken by the Association against any employee or employees covered by this
Agreement by reason of any such action or conduct in the line of duty.

Section 3. Resumption of Operations

In the event of action prohibited by Section 1 above, the Association immediately
shall disavow such action and request the officers to return to work, cease work
slowdown or cease all other actions prohibited by Section 1 and shall use its best efforts
to achieve a prompt resumption of normal operations. The Association, including its
officials and agents, shall not be liable for any damages, direct or indirect, upon
complying with the requirements of this Section.

Section 4. Discipline of Strikers

Any officer who violates the provisions of Section 1 of this Article shall be
subject to immediate discharge. Any action taken by the Employer against any officer
who participates in action prohibited by Section 1 above shall not be considered as a
violation of this Agreement and shall not be subject to the provisions of the grievance
procedure except that the issue of whether an officer in fact participated in a prohibited
action shall be subject to the disciplinary procedure of the Employer.

Section 5. No Lockout

The Employer will not lock out any employee(s) covered by this Agreement
during the term of this Agreement as a result of a labor dispute with the Association.

ARTICLE 7 — INTERNAL TRANSFERS

Section 1. Internal Transfers within the Same Job Class

1. If a new position is created or if there is a vacancy in a unit, it shall be posted by
e-mail notice for fourteen (14) days and shall be provided to the Association at the
time of posting. Provided that performance, skill and ability are relatively equal
based upon demonstration of these attributes over the course of the employees”
employment, the position shall be awarded to the most senior employee bidding
for it based on Department seniority, as measured from the date of Employee’s
initial date of employment. Employees on authorized leave shall be eligible to bid
provided they meet the posting deadline. The Department shall not consider past
or pending internal complaints in determining the performance, skill and ability of

10
an employee bidding for a vacancy or new position, other than sustained
complaints within the last three (3) years or open, filed criminal complaints.

2. The foregoing provision shall not apply to transfers within the Intelligence Unit.
The Police Chief’s selection within the Intelligence Unit shall not be grievable,
provided that the number of bargaining unit members assigned to the Intelligence
Unit does not exceed 30 officers.

3. If no qualified employees bid for an opening, it may be re-posted or the Chief
may fill the position with a qualified employee within the same job class who
agrees to accept the position.

4. An employee shall be in trial status for the first thirty (30) days in a new position
for which he is the successful bidder, during which period he may be disqualified
for good cause and returned to his former assignment without loss of seniority
rights.

Ey Nothing in this Article shall be construed as to apply to Police Officer Trainees.
Section 2. Temporary Assignments within the Same Job Class

The Chief may reassign or detach employees temporarily for no more than one (1)
year for operational needs of the Department to positions within the same job class. If
any such action does exceed one year, the position so occupied shall be posted for bid in
accordance with paragraph 1 above, provided however that this provision does not
prohibit the temporary reassignment of employees for in-service training or internships.
Detachments, reassignments and internships shall not be used for the purpose of
defeating the seniority rights established herein. Time spent in a detachment,
reassignment or internship shall not be considered in determining the performance, skill
and ability of an employee bidding for a vacancy or new position.

Section 3. Reductions in Platoons or Units

When the number of employees in a platoon or unit is to be reduced for more than
thirty (30) days, the Department shall request volunteers for reassignment, but if there are
an insufficient number, then provided performance, skill and ability are relatively equal
based upon demonstration of these attributes over the course of the employees’
employment, the reductions shall be by inverse Department Seniority and in the case of
ties, by time within the platoon or unit. Employees transferred within the same job class
as a result of such platoon or unit reductions shall be entitled to existing vacancies within
the same job class for which they are qualified provided they have relatively equal
performance, skill and ability for the assignment based upon demonstration of these
attributes over the course of the employees’ employment. If two or more such employees
claim a vacancy the Department shall award the job according to Department Seniority
provided performance, skill and ability are relatively equal based upon demonstration of

11
these attributes over the course of the employees’ employment. The Department shall
provide the union with a copy of the manning table on a weekly basis.

Section 4. Minimum Qualifications for Specialized Units

The minimum qualifications for any job shall be determined by the Department of
Personnel, in consultation with the Department, along with the tests for fitness for the
positions as provided for under the Charter and the Rules and Regulations. The
Department agrees that it shall not establish as a minimum requirement for an internal
transfer to a position within the same job class for any specialty assignment, a time in
rank of less than two (2) years. The Department shall notify the Association of any new
job qualifications for internal transfers within the same job class prior to the final
approval by the Chief. Either party may call a meeting of the Labor-Management
Committee within seven (7) days to discuss the job qualifications. If requested, the Labor
Management Committee shall meet no later than ten (10) days from the notice to discuss
the qualifications before final approval.

Section 5. Transfers within Job Assignments

Employees assigned to patrol districts, district desks, or district detective bureaus
may be voluntarily transferred to another district within their current job assignment in
order to fill a vacancy or newly created position in that same job assignment (i.e., a North
Patrol desk officer voluntarily moving to the Central Patrol Desk). Such vacancies need
not be posted for bid in such situations.

Section 6. Involuntary Transfers within the Same Job Class

Involuntary transfers shall not be made in retaliation for employees exercising
union rights provided for in this CBA, or for other unlawful reasons. Upon request, the
Department shall give a written reason for an involuntary transfer. The restrictions on
involuntary transfers in this section and the requirements for filling vacancies in Article 7

shall not apply to transfers into or out of the Intelligence Unit, provided that the number
of bargaining unit members assigned to the Intelligence Unit does not exceed 30 officers.

ARTICLE 8 - ASSOCIATION RIGHTS

For the purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions of this Agreement,
the Employer agrees as follows:

Section 1. Released Time for Association Meetings

12
Subject to the need for orderly scheduling and emergencies, the Employer agrees
that members of the Association’s Executive Board or their designated division alternate
shall be permitted reasonable time off, not to exceed eight hours per month, without loss
of pay, to attend general, board or special meetings of the Association, provided that at
least forty-eight (48) hours notice of such meetings shall be given in writing to the
Employer, and provided further that the names of such officials and employees shall be
certified in writing to the Employer. The certified employees shall not modify their
schedule in an effort to be on duty at the time a general, board or special meeting of the
Association is scheduled.

Section 2. Grievance Processing

Reasonable time while on duty shall be permitted Association representatives for
the purpose of aiding or assisting or otherwise representing employees in the handling
and processing of grievances or exercising other rights set forth in this Agreement, and
such reasonable time shall be without loss of pay.

Section 3. F.0.P. Delegates

Any employee(s) chosen as delegate(s) to an F.O.P. State or National Conference
will, upon written application approved by the Association and submitted to the
Employer with at least fourteen (14) days notice, be given two days off without the loss
of pay to attend such convention or conference. Delegates shall be granted additional
time to attend FOP conferences with loss of pay with the total time off not to exceed one
(1) week; provided however, the delegates may use any accrued time off for the
conference time in excess of the two paid days. No more than twelve (12) employees may
take leave as a delegate under this provision. Requests for attendance shall be subject to
the approval of the employer which shall not be unreasonably denied.

Section 4. Association Negotiating Team

No more than six (6) members designated as being on the Association negotiating
team who are scheduled to work on a day on which negotiations will occur, shall, for the
purpose of attending scheduled negotiations, be excused from their regular duties without
loss of pay. If a designated Association negotiating team member is in regular day off
status on the day of negotiations, he will not be compensated for attending the session.
Association negotiating team members assigned to a shift following the negotiations shall
be granted an amount of comp time equal to the length of the negotiations.

Section 5. Bargaining Unit Member List
The Employer will furnish the Association with a current list of all bargaining
unit members holding the rank of Police Officer, Probationary Police Officer or Police

Officer Trainee on a quarterly basis, identifying the employee’s name, Department
Service number, work mailing address, date of appointment and place of assignment.

13
Section 6. Bulletin Boards

The Employer agrees to furnish and maintain suitable bulletin board space in
convenient places in work areas to be used by the Association for notices to its members,
as reasonably requested by the Association.

Section 7. Intra-office mail system

The Employer will permit the President or Vice-President of the Association to
use the Department's electronic and intra-office mail system for the purpose of notifying
members of the Association and/or members of the bargaining unit of the date, time and
location of a general membership meeting and other reasonable uses as determined by the
Association so long as it shall not include commentary on department policies, practices
or management. Division Representatives will be permitted to use the Department’s
electronic and intra-office mail system for the purpose of communicating with members
of their division under the same restrictions herein. The Employer agrees to provide the
Association’s Business Manager with full access to changes in Department policies,
procedures or orders.

Section 8. Police Officer Trainee Class Announcement

The Employer shall allow the Association a period of time not to exceed one (1)
hour to address each Police Officer Trainee class relating to information about the
Association and the collective bargaining agreement. Release time shall be granted for
up to two (2) employees designated by the Association to speak to a Police Officer
Trainee class. No competing union shall be granted such access to Police Officer Trainee
classes. The Employer agrees that neither its academy staff nor other agents of the
employer shall in any way discourage Police Officer Trainees from considering
membership in the Association.

Section 9. Roll Call Announcement

Upon reasonable advance notice to the Watch Commander and the Watch
Commander’s consent, a representative of the Association may notify fellow officers of
Association business at roll call. The Watch Commander’s consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld.

Section 10. Distribution of Agreement

Within thirty (30) days after this agreement is approved by the Employer, the
Employer shall display the agreement and any benefit plans it incorporates on the
password protected part of its website so that it is accessible to all members of the
bargaining unit; provided, however, that any economic issues shall be excluded until
passage of the Compensation Ordinance.

14
Section 11. Access to Members

With the prior approval of the Police Chief, the Employer shall provide the
Association representatives with access to members of the bargaining unit at their work
assignments for the purpose of conducting union business except that the Department
may require Association representation to sign a log book recording the time and date of
their entry and the Department may restrict access to sensitive areas of Police buildings.

Section 12. Newsstands

The Employer agrees to allow the Association to place newsstands containing the
Association’s monthly publication in all buildings where members of the bargaining unit
report to work in a convenient and conspicuous location within each building. The
newsstands shall be provided at the expense of the Association.

Section 13. FOP Disaster Trailer

The Employer agrees that on any occasion when the Missouri State FOP Disaster
Trailer has been activated and deployed to respond to a formally declared disaster or state
of emergency, up to two employees designated by the Association shall be provided up to
seven (7) days of paid release time, excluding overtime unless so reimbursed by a state or
federal agency, not to exceed the duration of the deployment, for the purpose of manning
the FOP Disaster Trailer.

ARTICLE 9 - INVESTIGATIVE RIGHTS

Section 1. Conduct of Investigations and Rights of Officers

The procedures set forth in this section shall apply prospectively to investigations
initiated after the effective date of this Agreement. All investigations initiated prior to,
and still pending as of, the effective date of this Agreement shall be governed by the
predecessor agreement. The procedures for and rights of employees in connection with
internal investigations as they apply to commissioned officers holding the rank of Police
Officer or Probationary Police Officer are set forth in Rule 7, Sections 7.001 through
7.004 and Sections 7.006 through 7.016 of the Police Manual, in effect November 4,
2013, subject to the changes set forth in the following paragraph. If the Department
formally adopts any further changes to Rule 7, Sections 7.009, 7.010, 7.013, 7.014 or
7.015, the Association shall be given notice and may elect whether or not to incorporate
the modified language into this Agreement.

Section 7.004.A — “the Board of Police Commissioners” is deleted.

Section 7.004.C.3.q — “at a Civil Service hearing” is substituted for “in a Board Trial”.
Section 7.004.C.5 — “the Chief of Police” is substituted for “the Board”.

15
Section 7.004.C.6 — “the Chief of Police” is substituted for “the Board”.

Section 7.004.C.35 — “the Board” is deleted.

Section 7.011.B — “Board” is deleted.

Section 7.012 — Deleted

Section 7.013.B — “the Board of Police Commissioners” is deleted.

Section 7.013.E — “The Chief of Police” is substituted for “the Board”

Section 7.014.A — “The Chief or the Chief’s designee” is substituted for “The Secretary
to the Board of Police Commissioners”.

Section 7.014.C — “[T]he Chief or, if appealed, by the Civil Service Commission” is
substituted for “the Board of Police Commissioners”.

Section 7.014.E — The last sentence is deleted.

Section 7.015.K — “Board of Police Commissioners” is deleted. “[T]he City’s Law
Department” is substituted for “Legal Division”.

Section 2. Political Activity

Employees, as First Responders, may engage in the political activity protected by
RSMo 67.145. Any other political activity is governed by the City Charter, Civil Service
Rules, and Police Manual Section 7.005.

Section 3. Administrative Suspension

A Police Officer shall have the right to appeal an administrative suspension to the
Civil Service Commission within ten (10) days of receiving notice of placement on
administrative suspension to determine whether good cause exists for placement on
administrative leave and may utilize earned discretionary holidays, accrued vacation
leave, accrued sick bonus time or compensatory time, for some or all of the suspension
period.

If an employee is placed on administrative suspension and the Police Chief
thereafter determines that disciplinary suspension or disciplinary leave is warranted, the
disciplinary suspension or disciplinary leave shall commence on the effective date of the
administrative suspension and if the employee has been on paid leave, such paid leave
will not be restored. If the length of time of the disciplinary suspension or disciplinary
leave is less than the length of time of the administrative suspension, the employee will
be compensated for the length of time on administrative suspension beyond the period of
time of the disciplinary suspension or disciplinary leave, by receiving back pay, if
docked, or by having paid leave restored, if such paid leave was taken. If the Police Chief
determines that a demotion is warranted, the employee shall be returned to duty
immediately and receive back pay for the period of administrative suspension, if docked
during such time, or have his/her paid leave restored, if such paid leave was taken.

Section 4. Civil Service Commission’s Authority

The Employer and the Association acknowledge and agree that this article is
subject to ratification and adoption by the Civil Service Commission. In the event the

16
Civil Service Commission fails to ratify and adopt this article, the Association has the
right to immediately reopen negotiations regarding this article.

ARTICLE 10 - PERSONNEL FILES

Section 1. Personnel Files

The Employer shall keep a personnel file in the City of St. Louis Department of
Personnel for each employee within the bargaining unit.

Section 2. Inspection of Personnel File in the City of St. Louis Department of
Personnel

Upon request of an employee, the Employer shall reasonably permit an employee
to inspect his personnel file subject to the following:

1, Such inspection shall occur within a reasonable time following receipt of the
request;

2. Such inspection shall occur during daytime working hours Monday through
Friday upon reasonable request;

3. The employee shall not be permitted to remove any part of the personnel file
from the premises but may obtain copies of any information contained therein;

4. The employee may have a representative of the Association present during
such inspection.

Section 3. Review of IAD History

An Employee shall have the right, upon reasonable notice to Internal Affairs
Department (IAD), to view the Employee’s IAD history and to take notes during the
viewing but can not leave with any documents.

Section 4. Notification

Employees shall be given immediate written notice by the Employer when a
formal, written warning or other disciplinary documentation is issued. An employee may
attach to any material placed within his file a letter of rebuttal, which must remain in the
file along with the material. Signing a copy of the disciplinary action shall constitute
receipt of notice. The Employee shall be entitled to a copy of the disciplinary notice.

17
ARTICLE 11 - DISCIPLINE

Section 1. Administration and Imposition of Discipline

The provisions of this article shall apply to commissioned officers holding the
rank of Police Officer and, notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement,
Probationary Police Officers holding such rank due to demotion. The provisions of this
article shall apply prospectively to discipline initiated by the issuance of an Employee
Misconduct Report or an Expedited Consent to Accept Recommended Discipline after
the effective date of this Agreement. Where an Employee Misconduct Report or an
Expedited Consent to Accept Recommended Discipline has been issued prior to the
effective date of this Agreement, the disciplinary process shall be governed by the
predecessor agreement. The procedures for and rights of employees in connection with
discipline are set forth in Rule 7, Section 7.017 through Section 7.020 of the Police
Manual (together with the annexes), in effect November 4, 2013 subject to the changes
set forth in the following paragraph. If the Department formally adopts any further
changes to Rule 7, Sections 7.018, 7.019 or 7.026-F, the Association shall be given notice
and may elect whether or not to incorporate the modified language into this Agreement.

Section 7.017.A — “Chief of Police” is substituted for “Board”.

Section 7.017.B.1 — “Chief of Police” is substituted for “Board of Police Commissioners”
Section 7.017.B.2 - “Chief of Police” is substituted for “Board of Police Commissioners”
Section 7.018.C — Deleted

Section 7.019.D - Deleted

Section 7.020.B.1 — “waiver of appeal and hearing rights” is substituted for “Board
Waiver”. The second and third sentences are deleted.

Section 7.020.B.2 — Deleted

Section 7.020.B.3 — Deleted

Section 7.020.B.4 — Deleted

Section 7.021.I — Deleted

Section 7.021.L — the following language is substituted for the current language: The
Summary Hearing Board may affirm, increase the recommended discipline (up to a
maximum of 15 days) or decrease the recommended discipline.

Section 7.022 - Deleted

Annex 2 — Deleted

Section 2. Disciplinary Code
Rule 7, Section 7.025 (together with the Annex #1) of the Police Manual,
including all revisions, in effect November 4, 2013 shall remain in effect subject to the

changes in the following paragraph.

Section 7.025.B — Deleted
Section 7.025.D — “the Chief” is substituted for “Board of Police Commissioners”.

18
Section 3. Discipline of less that sixteen (16) days disciplinary suspension or
disciplinary leave - Summary Hearing Board

Discipline of less than sixteen (16) days disciplinary suspension or disciplinary
leave, unless accepted by the officer, shall be determined by a Summary Hearing Board
(“SHB”). Such discipline shall not be imposed until such time as the SHB reaches its
decision in the case. The decision of the SHB shall be final.

No officer shall be appointed to serve on a SHB who has been employed by the
Department less than three (3) years.

A SHB panel is selected every six months from a pool of volunteers at all ranks of
Police Officer and above. The Association shall select from the pool of volunteers a
Police Officer and an alternate Police Officer to serve on the panel. The Chief of Police
shall select from the pool of volunteers, for each rank above Police Officer, one officer
and an alternate to serve on the panel.

When an officer requests a SHB, the SHB shall consist of: a command rank
officer at the rank of Captain or above (who shall serve as Chairperson of the SHB); an
officer of the same rank as the accused officer, and; an officer one rank above that of the
accused officer. When a SHB must be assembled, the Chief or his designee shall notify
the officer from the SHB panel and the command rank officer at the rank of Captain or
above from the SHB panel. These two members of the SHB shall appoint the third
member, who shall be an officer at the appropriate rank from the SHB panel.

Neither the Inspector of Police nor any other employee assigned to the Internal
Affairs Division shall discuss the case with any member of the SHB outside of the
hearing or otherwise attempt to influence the SHB’s decision. There shall be no
intimidation or retaliation against any officer for serving on the Summary Hearing Board.

The decision of the Summary Hearing Board shall be final.

Section 4. Discipline of sixteen (16) days or more of disciplinary suspension or
disciplinary leave, reduction in rank or termination - Civil Service Hearing

Discipline of sixteen (16) days or more of disciplinary suspension or disciplinary
leave, reduction in rank or termination, may be appealed by the officer to the Civil
Service Commission. Irrespective of any provisions of Rule 7 of the Police Manual to the
contrary, such discipline is determined by the Chief of Police and may be imposed at the
time of such determination.

Upon timely appeal to the Civil Service Commission, a hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with the “Evidentiary Hearing Process” policy adopted by the
Civil Service Commission, to the extent such policy is not inconsistent with Section
84.344.8 RSMo. Section VII of said policy concerning reduction of back pay shall not
apply if the case is continued at the written request of the officer and with the consent of

19
the Chief until the conclusion of the criminal matter in the trial court. Notwithstanding
the provisions set forth in Section VI of such policy, within ten (10) calendar days of the
date of the accused member’s signature indicating that he/she intends to appeal the
discipline imposed, the Department shall produce or make available to the accused
member or his/her attorney the following items in the Internal Investigation File
pertaining to the discipline imposed and the underlying charges and investigation of those
charges:

1) Any statements of the accused and witnesses (video, audio and written).
2) Any tangible or physical evidence relating to the charges at issue, including
but not limited to items such as surveillance videos or photos, 911 tapes, bank

or credit card statements and phone and other records.

3) Inter-office memoranda relating substantively to the investigation or charges,
excluding any attorney-client communications.

4) All investigative reports, including I-Leads reports, ICAD reports, INET
reports and incident reports.

5) ARTS form and any attachments.

6) Investigation Information Sheet.

7) Advice of rights forms, video or audio recordings.

8) ECARD.

9) Warrant application; and

10) Notice of Discipline.

Further, notwithstanding the provisions set forth in Section VI of such policy, in
the case of terminations appealed to the Civil Service Commission, each party shall be
entitled to take up to three (3) depositions upon reasonable notice to the other party. Upon
request in extraordinary circumstances, the hearing officer acting on behalf of the Civil
Service Commission may, in his/her discretion allow additional depositions.

The decision of the Civil Service Commission shall be final.

Section 5. Imposed Discipline which Includes Loss of Pay

In the case of any disciplinary suspension or disciplinary leave, the officer may

utilize earned Discretionary Holidays, accrued Vacation Leave, accrued Sick Leave

bonus days or Compensatory Time, for up to one half of the suspension or leave period,
subject to the Employer’s approval.

20
Section 6. Civil Service Commission’s Authority

The Employer and the Association acknowledge and agree that this article is
subject to ratification and adoption by the Civil Service Commission. In the event the
Civil Service Commission fails to ratify and adopt this article, the Association has the
right to immediately reopen negotiations regarding this article.

ARTICLE 12 - DISPUTE RESOLUTION AND GRIEVANCE
PROCEDURE

Section 1. Definition of a Grievance

A grievance is defined as any unresolved difference between the Employer and
the Association or any employee regarding the application, meaning or interpretation of a
provision of this Agreement or which involves an alleged violation of a provision of this
Agreement and excluding discipline issues or other matters that are reserved to the
disciplinary processes set forth in Articles 9 through 11 of this agreement. The
Association retains the right to grieve the failure of the Department to follow procedures
established in Articles 9 and 11.

In order to avoid confusion about the application of the grievance process herein
agreed to by the parties, the Employer agrees that it will no longer use the term
“grievance” for any internal process used for adjusting disputes that currently exists or is
hereafter adopted.

Section 2. Informal Dispute Resolution

In the interest of resolving disputes at the earliest possible time, it is agreed that
an attempt to resolve a dispute may be made between the employee and his immediate
supervisor. If the employee elects to make his complaint to his immediate supervisor, the
supervisor will notify the employee of the decision within ten (10) calendar days
following the day when the complaint was made. Settlements or withdrawals at this step
shall not constitute a precedent in the handling of other grievances. In the event of a
complaint, the employee shall first complete his assigned work task, and complain later.
The Association may initiate grievances at the Step 1 described below. Neither the
employee nor the Association forfeits the right to pursue further dispute resolution under
this Article by seeking Informal Dispute Resolution.

Section 3. Representation

21
Grievances may be processed by the Association on behalf of an employee, on
behalf of a group of employees, or the Association itself. Either party may have the
grievant or one (1) grievant representing a group of grievants present at any step of the
grievance procedure, and the employee is entitled to Association representation at each
and every step of the grievance procedure upon his request. Grievances may be filed on
behalf of two (2) or more employees only if the same facts, issues and requested remedy
apply to all employees in the group.

Section 4. Subject Matter

Unrelated issues shall not be addressed in the same grievance if it is grievant
specific. A grievance shall contain a statement of the Association’s position, the Article,
and Section of the Agreement allegedly violated, the date of the alleged violation, the
relief sought, and the signature and the date of the grieving employee(s) or an
Association representative. Either party may request of the other that parallel grievances
of a similar nature be consolidated at any time prior to a matter being submitted to
arbitration. If either party declines the other’s request to consolidate such grievances, the
requesting party may submit the question of consolidation to the Arbitrator selected to
hear the first such matter submitted for arbitration. The Arbitrator shall have the sole
authority to determine the appropriateness of consolidating the grievances and hearing
them together based on evidence submitted by the parties. The standard of review for the
Arbitrator in such matters shall be that the grievances must be substantially similar in
nature and that the same facts, issues and requested remedy apply to all of the grievants.

Section 5. Withdrawal and Advancement of Grievances

Grievances may be withdrawn at any step of the grievance procedure without
precedent.

The Association may advance the grievance to the next step if the Employer fails
to timely answer. Time limits may be extended by mutual agreement.

Any grievance that is not filed within the time limits set forth in this Article
and/or advanced within the time limits set forth in this Article will be considered to be
abandoned and waived. Any grievance not advanced with in the designated time limits
will be treated as resolved based on the last response.

Section 6. Grievance Processing

No employee or Association representative shall leave his work assignment to
investigate, file or process grievances without first securing permission of his supervisor.
In the event of a grievance, the employee shall always perform his assigned work task
and grieve his complaint later, unless the employee reasonably believes that the
assignment endangers his safety. Grievances shall not be investigated by an Association
representative during his working hours unless mutually agreed to by the Employer and
the Association.

22
Section 7. Grievance Meetings

A maximum of two (2) employees (the grievant and/or Association
Representative) per work shift shall be excused from work with pay to participate in a
Step 1 or Step 2 grievance meeting. The employee(s) shall only be excused for the
amount of time reasonably required to present the grievance. The employee(s) shall not
be paid for any time during which a grievance meeting occurs outside of the employee's
work shift. In the event of a grievance, the employee shall first perform his assigned work
task and file his grievance later unless the employee reasonably believes that the
assignment endangers his safety.

Section 8. Steps in Procedure
Disputes arising under this Agreement shall be resolved as follows:

Step 1. If no agreement is reached or sought between the employee and the supervisor,
as provided for in Section 2 Informal Dispute Resolution, the Association shall prepare a
written grievance on a form mutually agreed to as set forth in Appendix B and present it
to the Department’s designated representative for handling grievances no later than ten
(10) calendar days after the employee was notified of the decision by the supervisor.
Within ten (10) calendar days after the grievance has been submitted, the Chief of Police
or his designee shall meet with the grievant and the Association Representative to discuss
the grievance and make a good faith attempt to resolve the grievance. The Chief or his
designee shall respond in writing to the grievant and the Association Representative
within ten (10) calendar days following the meeting. The Employer may initiate a
grievance at Step 1 and the Association shall respond within ten (10) days. If the
Employer is not satisfied with the Association response, the Employer may proceed to
Step 3.

Step 2. If the grievance is not settled at Step 1, a written appeal may be filed within
five (5) calendar days after the decision of the Chief of Police or his designee. Within ten
(10) calendar days thereafter, the Director of Public Safety or his designee shall meet
with the grievant and the Association Representative to discuss the grievance and make a
good faith attempt to resolve the grievance. If the grievance is not settled at Step 2, the
Director of Public Safety or his designee shall respond in writing to the grievant and the
Association within ten (10) calendar days following the meeting. A copy of the response
from the Director of Public Safety or his designee shall be forwarded to the Director of
Personnel.

Step3. If the grievance is not satisfactorily resolved at step 2, the Director of
Personnel shall review the case and shall have fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of
the Step 2 response to propose settlements of the dispute to the union or, in the
alternative, to propose mediation to the union. The dispute may, by mutual agreement
only, be submitted for mediation. In such cases, the parties shall jointly submit a written
request to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Services (“FMCS”) requesting the

23
services of a mediator for grievance mediation. The grievance mediation shall be held at
a time and place mutually agreeable to the parties and the mediator in an attempt to
satisfactorily settle the grievance.

Proceedings before the mediator shall be informal and the mediator will have the
right to meet jointly and/or separately with any person or persons at the grievance
mediation conference. The mediator shall assist the parties in an attempt to reach a
voluntary settlement. If the parties reach a settlement, it shall be reduced in writing and
signed by the parties. Nothing herein shall prevent the Association and the Employer
from entering into any settlement that would not set a precedent for other grievances.

Step 4. If the dispute is not settled at Step 3, either party may demand that a grievance
be submitted to arbitration within ten (10) calendar days after the mediation is completed,
or, if the mediation was not agreed to, then within ten (10) calendar days after the
Director of Personnel submits his final proposed settlement to the union. Within fifteen
(15) calendar days after the matter has been submitted to arbitration, a representative of
the Employer and the Association shall meet to select an arbitrator from a list of mutually
agreed-to arbitrators. If the parties are unable to agree on an arbitrator within five (5)
calendar days after such meeting, the parties shall request the FMCS to submit a list of
seven (7) arbitrators. Either party shall have the right to reject one (1) entire list of
arbitrators. The arbitrator shall be selected from the list of seven (7) by alternate strikes
by the Employer representative and the Association, A coin toss shall be used to
determine the first strike. The loser of the coin toss shall strike first. The person whose
name remains on the list shall be the arbitrator. The arbitrator shall be notified of his
selection by a joint letter from the Employer and the Association. Such letter shall request
the arbitrator to set a time and a place for the hearing subject to the availability of the
Employer and Association representatives and shall be notified of the issue where
mutually agreed by the parties. All hearings shall be held in the City of St. Louis unless
otherwise agreed to.

Both parties agree to make a good faith attempt to arrive at a joint statement of
facts and issues to be submitted to the arbitrator.

The Employer or Association shall have the right to request the arbitrator to
require the presence of witnesses and/or documents. Each party shall bear the expense of
its witnesses. The Employer has a duty to answer the Association’s request for
information and documents relevant to the investigation of and preparation of a grievance
for arbitration before the hearing. Relevant information and documents not so provided
shall not be considered by the Arbitrator.

Once a determination is made that the matter is arbitrable or if such preliminary
determination cannot be reasonably made, the arbitrator shall then proceed to determine
the merits of the dispute, including whether the grievance time limits set forth above have
been met.

24
The expenses and fees of arbitration and the cost of the hearing room shall be
shared equally by the Employer and Association. Costs of arbitration shall include the
arbitrator's fees, room cost and transcription costs. The decision and award of the
arbitrator shall be made within forty-five (45) days following the hearing and shall be
final and binding.

Section 9. Authority of the Arbitrator

The arbitrator shall have no right to amend, modify, nullify, ignore, add to or
subtract from the provisions of this Agreement. The arbitrator shall consider and decide
only the question of fact as to whether there has been a violation, misinterpretation or
misapplication of the specific provisions of this Agreement as submitted to him by the
parties and shall have no authority to make a decision on any issue not so submitted to
him. The arbitrator shall have the power to determine the issue and defenses raised by
the grievance and answers to it as submitted in writing up through Step 2. The arbitrator
shall have no authority to make a decision on any issue not so submitted or raised. The
arbitrator shall be without power to make decisions contrary to or inconsistent with
applicable federal or state law or public policy. The arbitrator shall submit his or her
decision in writing within forty-five (45) days following the close of the hearing or the
submission of briefs by the parties, whichever is later, unless the parties agree to a written
extension, thereof. The decision shall be based solely upon the arbitrator's interpretation
of the meaning or application of the specific terms of this Agreement to the facts of the
grievance presented, consistent with applicable law and public policy. The arbitrator
shall have the authority to fashion an award consistent with the requested remedy
provided, however, that if monetary damages are awarded, the arbitrator shall only have
authority to award a “make whole” remedy that shall never include any punitive
damages, attorneys’ fees or expert witness fees. A decision rendered consistent with the
terms of this Agreement shall be final and binding.

ARTICLE 13 — SENIORITY

Section 1. Definition of Seniority

As used herein, the term "seniority" shall refer to and be defined as the continuous
length of service or employment from the date of commissioned appointment-or date of
last hire by the City or its predecessor, whichever is earlier.

Section 2. Probation Period
Upon successful completion of his/her training period at the Police Academy as a
Police Officer Trainee, an individual shall be eligible for promotion to the rank of

Probationary Police Officer. Thereafter, an employee shall be a Probationary Police
Officer for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months of employment, excluding his/her

25
initial time in training at the Police Academy. Promotion of a Probationary Police Officer
to the full rank of Police Officer shall be granted unless, in the judgment of the Police
Chief, the employee warrants dismissal from the City service. At or before the time that
the initial twelve (12) month probationary period is concluded, the Employer shall
provide to the Union a full list of all Probationary Police Officers, which includes their
promotional status.

In addition to the above matters and issues not grievable under Article 12 of this
Agreement, Probationary Police Officers (except those Probationary Police Officers who
hold such rank due to demotion) and Police Officer Trainees may not grieve any issue
involving his/her layoff. Further, no discipline or termination of a Probationary Police
Officer who does not hold such rank due to demotion, or Police Officer Trainee is subject
to mediation, arbitration or any disciplinary review or appeal. Upon successful
completion of his probationary period as a Probationary Police Officer, a Police Officer
shall have seniority as of the date of his employment as a Police Officer Trainee.

Section 3. Seniority List

The Employer and Association have agreed upon the initial seniority list setting
forth the present seniority dates for all employees covered by this Agreement and shall
become effective on or after the date of execution of this Agreement. Such lists shall
finally resolve all questions of seniority affecting employees covered under this
Agreement or employed at the time the Agreement becomes effective, except in the case
of employees with identical seniority dates. In the case of such ties, seniority for a
specific decision or purpose shal! be resolved at the time of the decision or event by the
flip of a coin in the case of a tie between two employees and the drawing of numbers
from a hat in other cases. Disputes as to seniority listing shall be resolved through the
grievance procedure.

Section 4. Termination of Seniority

An employee shall be terminated by the Employer and his seniority broken when
he:

1. Quits by oral or written resignation; or

2. Is discharged for just cause or, in the case of Police Officer Trainees or
Probationary Police Officers, is discharged under the provisions set forth in
this Agreement; or

3. Is laid off pursuant to the provisions of the applicable agreement for a period of
twenty-four (24) months or the expiration of his POST certification, whichever

is greater; or

4. Accepts gainful employment while on an approved leave of absence involving
an ability to work from the Police Department unless otherwise approved; or

26
5. Is absent for two (2) scheduled work days without proper notification or
authorization; or

6. Fails to return to work at the conclusion of an approved leave of absence for a
period of three (3) consecutive days unless rendered incapable; or

7. Retires.
Section 5. Seniority While On Leave

Employees will not continue to accrue seniority credit for all time spent on
authorized unpaid leave of absence; provided however that if an employee successfully
challenges a disciplinary unpaid suspension, his seniority shall be restored.

Section 6. Conflicts in Vacation or Personal Days

Employees shall select the periods of their annual vacation in accordance with
Section 1 of this Article or by mutual agreement of the parties. Any conflict resulting
from the selection process shall be resolved by seniority within their current job
assignment. The more senior employee by virtue of seniority within their current job
assignment shall have first choice.

Section 7. Return of Former Employees

Employees who voluntarily leave the Department in good standing and later
return to the Department shall return with a new seniority date; provided, however, for
persons who return within a two year period of time, “time off benefits” such as vacation
or personal days will remain based on the original seniority date.

ARTICLE 14 - REDUCTIONS IN FORCE

1, In the event of the necessity of a reduction in the number of employees in the
bargaining unit, employees shall be laid off by inverse Department seniority.

2. Recalls to active employment shall be in reverse order of the reduction.

3. The Department shall notify an employee of a recall by a notice mailed to his
address and email on file with the Department. A copy shall also be emailed to
the Association. The employee shall have two (2) weeks from the date of the
receipt of the notice to report for duty or two (2) weeks from the date the
Department is notified that the notice is undeliverable. It is the responsibility of

27
all employees eligible for recall to notify the City of St. Louis Department of
Personnel — Police Division of their current address.

4. An employee’s recall rights shall terminate two (2) years after the effective date
of his layoff or the expiration of his POST certification, whichever is greater.

5s The parties agree to comply with the foregoing procedure for addressing layoffs
or reductions in force unless compliance with State or Federal law requires
otherwise.

ARTICLE 15 - HOLIDAYS

Section 1. Paid Holidays

Bargaining unit members shall receive fifteen (15) paid holidays per year.
Section 2. Designated Holidays

The Employer designates the following ten dates as “paid holidays”:

New Year's Day

Martin Luther King’s Birthday
President’s Day

Memorial Day

Independence Day

Labor Day

Veteran's Day

Thanksgiving Day

Day after Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day

In addition the Employer shall provide to the bargaining unit members five (5) personal
holidays which shall be scheduled in accordance with the department policies, except that
a Police Officer Trainee shall not be awarded personal holidays until his successful
completion of the Police Academy.

(T/A 03/21/14)

Section 3. Compensation for Designated Holidays

1. Worked Holidays:

28
(a) Employees, excluding Police Officer Trainees, will receive four (4)
hours of compensatory time if they are required to work a full eight (8)
hour shift that begins on any of the following days:

January 1*

Last Monday in May

July 4"

First Monday in September
Fourth Thursday in November
December 25"

ON FS Wats

(b) In addition, employees who are required to work the afternoon,
evening overlay or night watch on December 31* will receive four (4)
hours of compensatory time.

(c) The compensatory time earned on these days will be banked in an
account separate from other overtime hours earned. The duty roster
system will indicate that the employee was working on the day and will
automatically bank the four (4) hours that were earned. It will not be
necessary to complete an overtime form.

(d) | Compensatory time earned under this policy for working on
authorized days during any calendar year must be taken by December 31
of the following calendar year or be forfeited. Requests to take
compensatory time off must be approved by the Unit Commander. The
duty roster code “CPT” will be used when an employee receives the Unit
Commander’s approval to take off using compensatory time earned under
this policy. Compensatory time off may be taken only in increments of
one (1) hour. It is not necessary to complete an overtime form when
taking this time off.

2 Non-Worked Holidays:

Employees covered by this Agreement when their regularly
scheduled day off falls on the actual day of a designated holiday, shall be
paid a regular day’s holiday pay (a day equals eight hours).

ARTICLE 16 - VACATIONS

Section 1. Vacation Leave

29
As used herein, years of service shall include continuous employment with the
Employer and its predecessor. The Employer shall grant every member of the police
force who has served for one year or more a total of three weeks vacation each year with
pay, and each member of the bargaining unit who has served the department for twelve
years or more shall receive four weeks vacation each year with pay, and each member of
the police force who has served the department for twenty-one years or more shall
receive five weeks vacation each year with pay, and each member of the police force who
has served the department for thirty years or more and is eligible to participate in the
deferred retirement option plan shall receive six weeks vacation each year with pay;
however the Employer may grant an additional week of paid vacation to members after
one year of service. All full-time employees shall earn vacation time. Employees on an
unpaid leave of absence or layoff shall not accrue vacation time. Eligible employees shall
earn vacation time in accordance with the following schedule on employment anniversary
dates as follows:

Completed Years of Service Vacation Leave
1-11 years Three weeks
12-20 years Four weeks
21-29 years Five weeks
30 years + Six weeks*

*The member must have 30 years of completed service and is eligible to participate in
the deferred retirement option plan.

Section 2. Vacation Use

If vacations are canceled due to an emergency, they are to be rescheduled by
mutual agreement of the employee and the supervisor. Forty (40) hours of vacation
leave may be taken in one (1) hour increments subject to the approval of the Supervisor,
which shall not be unreasonably withheld.

Section 3. Vacation Process

This section incorporates Section 8.601, A through H and the first sentence of
Section 8.602 of the Police Manual approved by the Board on September 9, 2010. If the
Employer formally adopts any changes to Section 8.601, A through H and/or the first
sentence of Section 8.602 of the Police Manual, the Association shall be given written
notice and may elect whether or not to incorporate the modified language in this
Agreement.

Section 4. Assigning Beneficiaries

Prior to separation from the Department, employees shall be allowed to designate
and name a beneficiary(ies) for the final payment of any vacation, sick or other accrued

30
time. The Employer shall be responsible for disbursing final payment of accrued time in
accordance with the employee’s directive.

ARTICLE 17 - SICK LEAVE

Section 1. Allowance

It is the policy of the Employer to provide protection for its full-time employees
against loss of income because of illness. All eligible employees are encouraged to save
as much sick leave as possible to meet serious illness situations. Sick leave is not
intended as a one-day vacation nor to be used to extend vacation periods or holidays.
Any employee contracting or incurring any illness or injury, which renders such
employee unable to perform the duties of his employment shall receive sick leave with
pay in accordance with this Agreement.

Section 2. Accumulation

Officers will be granted sick leave at the rate of eight (8) hours on the first day of
each calendar month, for a total of ninety-six (96) hours per calendar year, provided he
has been employed as a full time employee for the previous 12-month period. For such
employees, military reinstatements will be granted eight (8) hours of sick leave on the
first day of the calendar month following the date of their reinstatement. In addition,
military reinstatements will be credited, on the date of their reinstatement, with the
number of sick leave credits accumulated prior to entering the military. Officers hired
prior to April 20, 2011 may earn and bank sick leave hours on an unlimited basis until
termination from the Department.

Officers hired prior to April 20, 2011 with thirty (30) years of service and
possessing 2,200 accrued sick leave hours, will receive compensation for one-half of their
accumulated sick leave hours. Officers hired prior to April 20, 2011 who have at least
twenty (20) years of service who possess 1,600 accrued sick leave hours, will receive
compensation for one-fourth of their accumulated sick leave hours, and also receive
173.33 hour pay (2080 hours divided by 12). All other officers hired prior to April 20,
2011 terminating their employment with the Department will receive compensation for
one-fourth of their accumulated sick leave hours at the time of termination. These
benefits are not granted to employees who have pled guilty, been found guilty or
otherwise convicted of a crime prior to termination.

All officers, excluding Police Officer Trainees, shall accumulate sick bonus time
(SBT) as follows:

31
For the first six (6) months (January 15'— June 30") of a calendar year an
employee with Perfect Attendance will be granted two (2) days of paid
bonus time off to be taken eight (8) hours at a time within the following
six (6) months. ALL bonus time off earned in the first six (6) months of a
calendar year MUST be taken in the following six (6) months and cannot
be taken in less than eight (8) hour periods.

Absences of Eight (8) hours or Less (January 1‘ — June 30"): For the first
six (6) months (January 1° — June 30") of a calendar year in which an
employee has been absent eight (8) hours or LESS, an employee will be
granted one (1) day of paid bonus time off within the following six (6)
months. ALL bonus time off earned in the first six (6) months of a
calendar year MUST be taken in the following six (6) months and cannot
be taken in less than eight (8) hour periods.

Perfect Attendance (July 1 — December 31%): For the second six months
(July 1 — December 31st) of a calendar year an employee with perfect
attendance will be granted two (2) days of paid bonus time off to be taken
eight (8) hours at a time within the following six (6) months. ALL bonus
time off earned in the second six (6) months of a calendar year MUST be
taken in the following six (6) months and cannot be taken in less than
eight (8) hour periods.

Absences of Eight (8) Hours or Less (July 1 — December 31st): For the
second six (6) months (July 1st - December 31st) of a calendar year in
which an employee has been absent eight (8) hours or LESS, an employee
will be granted one (1) day of paid bonus time off within the following six
(6) months. ALL bonus time off earned in the first six (6) months of a
calendar year MUST be taken in the following six (6) months and cannot
be taken in less than eight (8) hour periods.

The incentive periods are the six (6) month periods between January 1 —
June 30", and July 1*— December 31". Eligible employees must take their
bonus time off in the allotted six (6) month period of forfeit the unused
bonus days.

Section 3. Procedures

There shall be no advancement of paid sick leave. Sick leave shall be paid at full
pay at the current rate of compensation.

Sick leave may be utilized by employees when they are sufficiently ill so that
good judgment would determine it best not to report to work or in the event of injury not
arising out of or in the course of their employment, for routine medical and dental
appointments. All foreseeable leave for such purposes shall require a specific prior
approval of the employee’s supervisor or designee.

32
Any absence of more than three (3) consecutive working days shall require a
Healthcare Providers’ statement of release and verification substantiating that the
employee may return to work. If required, a Healthcare Provider’s statement should be
submitted no later than two (2) working days after the employee returns to work. If an
illness or injury requires an extended use of accrued leave for hospital stays, treatment,
and/or recovery time, a Healthcare Provider’s statement must be submitted to the
Commander, Manager, or Director every thirty (30) days commencing from the first day
off work. The Healthcare Provider’s statement should include a diagnosis, prognosis for
recovery, and an approximate date of return to either limited or full duty.

NOTE: A healthcare provider’s statement for undocumented sick time must be submitted
within two (2) days of the employee’s return to work. Statements that are submitted any
later will not be accepted and the time taken will remain undocumented.

The employee’s supervisor may direct an employee who appears ill to leave work
to protect the health of others; provided however that this employee may return to work if
his doctor certifies that he is not ill. If the employee has worked at least one-half of his
scheduled shift, the employee will not be charged for sick leave for the first day if the
employee is sent home.

Section 4. Acceptable Standards of Sick Leave

1. The amount, frequency and type of undocumented sick leave usage that will be
considered as being within the acceptable limits and the established standard for
any twelve (12) month period will be:

(a) Six (6) one-day sick leave absences; or
(b) Three (3) two-day absences; or
(c) Six (6) days of sick leave in any combination of one (1) or two (2) days.

Ds Suspect Pattern — Use of undocumented sick leave in any amount immediately
before or after scheduled time off (ie., vacation time, recreation days,
discretionary holidays, etc.) on two (2) or more occasions in any twelve (12)
month period, except if the employee is on approved intermittent or reduced work
schedule Family Medical Leave in accordance with the provisions outlined in
Special Order 3-04, Family and Medical Leave Program.

NOTE: The indication of a “suspect pattern” as defined above is one
factor management may consider during the course of an examination
in establishing a pattern of sick leave abuse. Although in some cases, a
“suspect pattern” may be considered excessive, this indication may not
by itself serve as the basis for punitive action (ie., disciplinary
requests). When used as a determining factor of sick leave abuse,

33
commanders are to ensure that all cases of “suspect pattern” be
substantiated and documented.

Excessive Use of Sick Leave — Use of undocumented sick leave which exceeds
the acceptable standard for sick leave usage. It will not constitute excessive use of
sick leave, however, if any employee exceeds the acceptable standards because
of:

(a) A serious illness or injury which requires hospitalization, treatment or
recovery time in excess of the acceptable standards, provided that the need
for such additional time has been verified (documented) by a physician;

(b) An illness or injury which would constitute a “serious health condition”
under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA); or

(c) A disability for which time off has been granted to the employee as a
reasonable accommodation pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA).

Section 5. Sick Leave Abuse Sanctions

First Offense in a 12-month period - Employee(s) will receive a one (1) day suspension .

Second Offense _in_a_12-month period - Employee(s) will receive a three (3) day
suspension.

Third Offense in a 12-month period - Employee(s) will receive a six (6) day suspension.

EXCEPTION: In the event an employee expects to exceed the standards above, the
employee should complete an application for Family Medical Leave, as outlined in
Special Order 3-04, Family and Medical Leave Program.

ARTICLE 18 - LEAVES OF ABSENCE

Section 1. Absence Due to Death in Immediate Family

i

In the event of the death of an immediate family member, an employee shall be
permitted to be absent from his job for three (3) working days for each
occurrence, and for each such day's absence, the employee shall receive
compensation at his normal rate of pay. Such leave may be taken before, during
or immediately after the funeral or memorial service of the immediate family
member without restriction by the Employer. If the employee desires to be absent
for more than three (3) working days, he may utilize previously earned, unused,
paid leave and receive compensation for each such additional day's absence at his
normal rate of pay, provided that the Chief of Police approves such additional
absence,

34
2. Any absence to attend the funeral or memorial service of anyone who is not a
member of an employee's immediate family may be arranged with the Chief of
Police, without pay, but previously earned and unused paid leave may be utilized
in such case with the consent of the Chief of Police.

Section 2. Jury Duty

An employee required to serve on a grand jury or petite jury shall be granted
leave for the period required to serve on such jury without loss of pay. Such employees
shall sign a waiver of any compensation otherwise due them for serving on such jury.

Section 3. Definition of Family
A member of the immediate family shall be defined to include the following:

Parents;

Foster parents or step-parents;

Spouse;

Child(ren), foster child(ren) or step-child(ren)

Brother or sister;

In-laws within immediate relationship to the employee;
Grandparents or grandchildren of the employee;
Domestic partner.

eoceoeeee

ARTICLE 19 - HOURS OF WORK/OVERTIME

Section 1. Workday and Workweek

The workday for employees covered by the terms of this Agreement, excluding
Police Officer Trainees, shall be eight (8) hours. Each employee shall be allowed a paid
meal period per normal workday. This meal shall be considered out of service time
during which the employee will be subject to priority calls. Employees will be allowed to
take periodic breaks as long as they are not out of service and properly perform their
duties.

All time in excess of the hours worked in the scheduled work day shall be
compensated in accordance with Section 2.

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed so as to prohibit the Employer and

the Association from mutually reaching new or modified agreements about the length of
hours of a workday and/or a workweek.

35
Section 2. Overtime Payment and Procedure

1. Overtime Pay: Employees shall be paid overtime for all hours worked in excess of
their eight (8) hour work day or any hours worked on a scheduled day off, hereby
defined as one and one-half (1%) the employee’s regular standard rate of pay.
Only hours actually worked shall count toward overtime pay. Vacation, holiday,
meal periods and sick or unpaid leaves shall not be included in computing the
time worked for overtime payment.

2 Compensatory Time in Lieu of Pay: Subject to the approval of the Employer, the
employee may elect to receive compensatory time in lieu of overtime pay.
Compensatory time shall be granted at the rate of one and one-half hour (1%) for
each hour of overtime actually worked. Employee shall be allowed to accumulate
up to forty (40) hours of compensatory time. Compensatory time may be used at
such times and in such time blocks as are mutually agreed upon between the
employee and the supervisor and permission to utilize compensatory time off
shall not be unreasonably denied by the supervisor if operating requirements will
not be adversely affected. Approval to utilize compensatory time shall occur
within forty-eight (48) hours of the employee's written request.

3. Overtime Bank: Employees shall receive additional compensation for authorized
overtime, court time and court standby time whenever the total accumulated time
exceeds forty (40) hours. The accumulated forty (40) hours shall be taken as
compensatory time off at the officer’s discretion with the approval of his
supervisor, and if not used, paid for upon termination or retirement.

Section 3. Callback

A callback is defined as an official assignment of work which does not
continuously precede or follow an officer's regularly scheduled working hours. A
member will receive overtime for the actual time spent or a minimum of two (2) hours,
whichever is greater, when required to return to duty on a call back. No overtime
compensation will be granted for travel time for employees who are assigned a
department car.

Section 4. Court Time

Employees covered by this Agreement required to attend court outside their
regularly scheduled work hours, shall be compensated at the time-and-a-half rate for the
actual time spent attending court, except that an employee will receive a minimum of two

(2) hours pay for going to court outside of his regularly scheduled workday.

Section 5. Standby Pay

36
The Department will compensate eligible employees for court standby time
(which is computed at the rate of one-third (%) of an hour for each hour on standby) at
the regular hourly rate of pay to which the employee is normally entitled.

Section 6. Watch Selection

Employees shall annually submit their watch preferences to their captain. In
making watch assignments, captains shall give consideration to the watch preferences of
employees by seniority and shall make every attempt to honor the preference of more
senior employees unless some demonstrable operational need exists. When a preference
is not honored, an explanation of the operational needs shall be provided to the employee.

Section 7. Schedules

Except in the case of emergencies, transfers, detachments and details, schedules
showing the regular days and hours to be worked by employees assigned to a district_for a
complete year, and changes thereto, shall be posted at least thirty (30) days prior to the
effective date. For all other employees, schedules showing the regular days and hours to
be worked for a complete year, and changes thereto, shall be posted at least ten (10) days
prior to the effective date, except in the case of emergencies, transfers, detachments, and
details. The selective use of detachments or details shall not be used for the purpose of
defeating the notice requirement under this section. Scheduling for details shall be
voluntary. If an insufficient number of officers volunteer for a given detail, the Employer
reserves the right to require additional officers to work the detail based on inverse
seniority within the job assignment(s) participating in the detail.

Section 8. Acting Sergeants
There shall be no acting Sergeants.
Section 9. FTO Incentive
The Employer agrees to continue paying an FTO Incentive to employees who

continue to qualify for the FTO Incentives in place at the time of the ratification of this
agreement.

ARTICLE 20 —- WAGES

Section 1. Salary Matrix

The salary matrix for officers is set forth in Appendix C. During the first year of
this agreement, all officers shall, at a minimum, be paid a wage in accordance with the
attached Salary Matrix correlating to the correct step based upon their actual years of

37
service. The Salary Matrix shall be amended upon the effective date of any and all salary
increases that become effective during the term of this agreement to reflect the
corresponding wage increases.

Section 2. Salaries

During the term of this Agreement, the minimum salary for officers shall be no
less than the salaries the officers earned as of the date of the execution of this agreement.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the Employer from increasing
officers’ salaries above these levels either pursuant to reopened negotiations or at its
discretion.

The Employer agrees to a $1000 adjustment to the existing matrix for all steps for
year one (1) of this agreement which shall be paid in bi-weekly installments, plus full
funding of the regular one (1) step increase for the first year of the Agreement.

The Employer further agrees to an additional $1000 adjustment to the matrix for
all steps for year two (2) of the Agreement, which shall be paid in bi-weekly installments,
plus full funding of the regular one (1) step increase for year two (2) of this Agreement.

Section 3. Officers’ Educational Incentive Pay

During the period of this Agreement, the Employer shall not eliminate educational
salary incentive increments.

Section 4. Night Differential

The Employer shall continue to pay a night differential of 10% for all full hours
worked between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. during the term of this Agreement.

Section 5. Second Shift

The Employer shall not be required to pay a second shift differential during the
first two years of this Agreement. The Employer agrees to reopen negotiations on second
shift differential for FY 2017 upon receipt of the Association’s written demand received
by October 1, 2015. The parties agree to commence such negotiations within thirty (30)
days.

Section 6. Weekend Differential

The Employer shall not be required to pay a weekend differential during the first
two years of this Agreement. The Employer agrees to reopen negotiations on second shift
differential for FY 2017 upon receipt of the Association’s written demand received by
October 1, 2015. The parties agree to commence such negotiations within thirty (30)
days.

Section 7. Wage Reopeners for FY 2016 and FY 2017

No later than October 1, 2015, the Association may demand salary reopener
negotiations for FY 2017 by giving written notice to Employer. Upon receipt of the

38
Association’s written demand for salary reopener negotiations, the parties shall
commence salary negotiations within thirty (30) days. At a minimum, officers shall be
paid in FY 2017 no less than they were paid in FY 2016.

ARTICLE 21 - INSURANCE

Employer shall comply with the provisions of Section 84.344 RSMo.

The Association shall have representation on the Chief’s Department-wide
Benefits Committee concerning all of these benefits.

ARTICLE 22 - LABOR MANAGEMENT/SAFETY
COMMITTEE

Section 1. Labor Management Conferences

The Association and the Employer mutually agree that in the interest of efficient
management and harmonious employee relations, it is desirable that meetings be held
between Association representatives and responsible administrative representatives of the
Employer. Such meetings may be requested at least seven (7) days in advance by either
party by placing in writing a request to the other for a labor-management conference and
expressly providing the agenda for such meeting. Such meetings and locations shall be
limited to:

1. Discussion of the implementation and general administration of this
Agreement;

2. A sharing of general information of interest to the parties.

3. Notifying the Association of changes in non-bargaining conditions of
employment contemplated by the Employer which may affect employees.

4, Discussion of pending grievances on a non-binding basis to attempt to adjust
such grievances and to discuss procedures for avoiding further grievances.

5. Items concerning safety issues.

39
The Employer and the Association agree to cooperate with each other in matters
of the administration of this Agreement, and to the degree that standards of law
enforcement can be maintained for the maximum protection of the citizens of the City of
St. Louis.

To effectuate the purposes and intent of the parties, both parties agree to meet as
necessary.

Section 2. Integrity of Grievance Procedure

It is expressly understood and agreed that such meetings shall be exclusive of the
grievance procedure. Grievances being processed under the grievance procedure shall not
be discussed in detail at labor-management conferences, and any such discussions of a
pending grievance shall be non-binding on either party and solely for the purpose of
exploring alternatives to settle such grievances and such grievance discussion shall only
be held by mutual agreement of the Employer and the Association, nor shall negotiations
for the purpose of altering any or all of the terms of this Agreement be carried on at such
meetings.

Section 3. Safety Issues

Any report or recommendation which may be prepared by the Association or the
Employer as a direct result of a labor-management conference discussion will be in
writing and copies shall be submitted to the Employer and the Association.

Section 4. Association Representative Attendance

When absence from work is required to attend labor-management conferences,
employees shall, before leaving their work station, give reasonable notice to and receive
approval from, their supervisor in order to remain in pay status. Supervisors shall approve
the absence except in emergency situations. Employees attending such conferences shall
be limited to four (4).

ARTICLE 23 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. Use of Masculine Pronoun
The use of the masculine pronoun in this or any other document is understood to

be for clerical convenience only, and it is further understood that the masculine pronoun
includes the feminine pronoun as well.

40
Section 2. Clothing and Equipment Allowance

Unless otherwise mutually agreed, the Employer shall provide and maintain the
following items for all Police Officers and Probationary Police Officers: one winter
jacket, one nylon light weight jacket, two black neckties, one military cap, one trooper fur
hat, one baseball cap, four pair of regulation trousers, six blue long sleeve shirts, six blue
short sleeve shirts, body armor and appropriate external body armor carrier, one pair of
black gloves, one raincoat, one name bar, one flashlight, one nightstick, one nightstick
holder, one belt, one pair of handcuffs with key, one handcuff case, one regulation
holster, one magazine case, one porta clip, four belt keeps, one whistle, one zippered
summons pouch, and a functioning miniature radio.

The Uniform Section will replace worn or damaged items so that all officers will
have the proper number of items prescribed for initial issue and that each item presents a
suitable appearance. In cases of loss, theft or damage, the procedures established by the
Chief will be followed.

Only Department issued or personally owned firearms which have been inspected
and approved by the Department Armorer may be carried while on duty. All other
weapons carried by armed employees of the Department must be issued by the
Department.

Section 3. Uniform, Safety and Equipment Committee

There shall be a uniform, safety, and equipment committee composed of an equal
number of bargaining unit employees and management personnel to consider and/or
investigate uniform, safety and equipment issues. The Association shall appoint its
tepresentatives to the Committee. There shall be no changes in existing uniform
requirements or department issued equipment to employees or to existing safety
standards without the Committee’s recommendation. Any Committee recommendation
concerning uniform, equipment and safety matters will be promptly acted on by the Chief
within sixty (60) days provided that the Committee may designate a recommendation as
an urgent safety issues in which case it will be acted on within thirty (30) days.

Section 4. Savings Clause

If any provision of this Agreement or any application thereof should be rendered
or declared unlawful, invalid or unenforceable by virtue of any judicial action, or by any
existing or subsequently enacted Federal or State legislation, or by Executive Order or
other competent authority, the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall remain in
full force and effect. In such event, upon the request of either party, the parties shall meet
promptly and negotiate with respect to substitute provisions for those provisions rendered
or declared unlawful, invalid or unenforceable.

Al
ARTICLE 24 — TESTING

Section 1: Psychological Testing

An employee may only be required to submit to psychological testing when there
is just cause to believe that an officer suffers from a psychological condition that
interferes with the proper performance of the essential functions of his official duties.
Further, the employee shall be considered a "recipient" within the meaning of state or
federal statutes and such testing, whenever conducted by a psychologist or psychiatrist,
shall be considered to be the practice of clinical psychology within the meaning of these
statues.

If the testing results in a recommendation that the employee is unfit to perform his
regular and normal duties, then the employer shall to the extent possible make reasonable
accommodations to allow the employee to maintain his then current work status, without
loss of pay or other economic benefits. However, nothing in this Agreement shall be
construed to require the Employer to create a new position for the purpose of providing
such an accommodation. In the event such a reasonable accommodation does not exist,
the employee shall be suspended from duty without pay but without loss of seniority
rights and shall be entitled to exercise any vacation or leave benefits which exist by virtue
of the Collective Bargaining Agreement or by law.

The Union may challenge the recommendation and, in such event, the Employer
and the Union must meet and jointly agree upon a psychologist or psychiatrist to examine
and issue a report including an opinion as to the employee's ability to properly perform
the essential functions of his official duties. Employment shall terminate if that report
concludes that the employee is unable to perform the essential functions of his job with or
without reasonable accommodations. In the event the report concludes that the employee
is able to perform the essential functions of his job with a reasonable accommodation, the
Employer will determine whether such an accommodation exists. All firearms provided
by the Employer to an employee shall be relinquished to the Police Department by an
employee during any period of time in which the Chief of Police believes the employee is
unfit to perform his regular and normal duties.

Nothing in this section is intended to supersede or waive any rights guaranteed by
the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Missouri Fair Employment Practices Act,
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) or any other statute.
Section 2. Fitness Tests

Bargaining unit members shall not be required to participate in the Physical

Ability Test (also known as “PAT” or “Fitness Test”) currently conducted by the
Department. No bargaining unit member shall be discriminated against, disciplined,

42
demoted, transferred or in any way treated differently than those voluntarily submitting to
the Wellness Incentive test.

Bargaining unit members who have reached the age of 40 shall, at the Employer’s
expense, be allowed to receive an Annual Routine Physical Examination as defined by
the American Medical Association (AMA), a standard in use by the American Insurance
Industry. The bargaining unit member shall have the option of choosing his/her physician
to conduct the examination. Results shall remain confidential and not used against the
member but rather as manner in which to detect any current medical issues that may have
an adverse effect on the member’s overall wellness.

Section 3. Substance Abuse Testing

The provisions of Department of Personnel Administrative Regulation No. 120(B)
shall apply to employees provided, however, as follows:

1. A nine (9) panel drug test shall be administered.

2. Employees are not prohibited from the possession of illegal drugs if required in
the performance of their duties.

3. Employees are not prohibited from the possession and/or consumption of
alcohol if required in the performance of their duties.

4. Employees assigned as pilots in the Aviation Division shall be subject to more
frequent testing, including scheduled testing, as may be ordered by the
Employer.

ARTICLE 25 — WELLNESS INCENTIVE

The Employer shall offer employees the opportunity to voluntarily participate in a
Wellness Incentive Test to determine their level of fitness and improve it. The Wellness
Incentive Test shall be offered during the month of the employee’s birthday. Employee
participation is voluntary. No employee shall be discriminated against, disciplined,
demoted, transferred or in any way treated differently for not participating in the
Wellness Incentive Test.

For the first year of the program, all employees who take the Wellness Incentive

Test shall be entitled to a wellness incentive of $750. Employees who pass the Wellness
Incentive Test shall be entitled to an additional $500. Said amounts shall be paid as a

43
lump sum cash incentive. All employees shall be given the opportunity to take the
Wellness Incentive Test only once each fiscal year during this Agreement, in accordance
with parameters set forth in a pay regulation to be promulgated by the Director of
Personnel.

Thereafter, during the second and third year of the program, all employees who
take the Wellness Incentive Test shall be entitled to a wellness incentive of $500.
Employees who pass the Wellness Incentive Test shall be entitled to an additional $500.
Said amounts shall be paid as a lump sum cash incentive. All employees shall be given
the opportunity to take the Wellness Incentive Test only once each fiscal year during this
Agreement, in accordance with parameters set forth in a pay regulation to be promulgated
by the Director of Personnel.

If an Employee is unable to participate in the Wellness Incentive Test due to a
disability, as that term is defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act and as
documented by the Medical Director for the Department, the Employee will be given an
opportunity to participate once each fiscal year in an Alternative Wellness Incentive
Program, in accordance with parameters set forth in a pay regulation to be promulgated
by the Director of Personnel. Said employee will be entitled to a $750 lump sum cash
incentive for such participation during the first year of the program, and $500 for the
second and third years of the program. Employees who successfully complete the
Alternative Wellness Incentive Program will be entitled to an additional $500 bonus for
each year they complete the Alternative Wellness Incentive Program.

Employees shall not be entitled to participate in both a Wellness Incentive Test
and the Alternative Wellness Incentive Program in the same fiscal year.

The provisions of this Article shall not apply to a Police Officer Trainee during
his Police Academy training.

ARTICLE 26 - COMPLETE AGREEMENT

This Agreement, together with the appendices referred to herein, constitutes the
entire agreement between the parties with respect to its subject matter and constitutes and
supersedes all prior agreements, representations and understandings of the parties, both
written and oral related to the subject matter herein. Both parties acknowledge their duty
to negotiate over subjects of mandatory bargaining not contemplated by this agreement
arising hereafter.

The parties acknowledge, however, that economic issues addressed in the
Compensation Ordinance, including those contained in Articles pertaining to Wages,
Vacation, Sick Leave, Holidays, Leaves of Absence and Hours of Work/Overtime, are
subject to the passage of a Compensation Ordinance by the Employer and also subject to

44
annual appropriation, except that the Wellness Incentive provided for in Article 25 shall
not be contingent upon the passage of the Compensation Ordinance but will be
implemented through a pay regulation promulgated by the Director of Personnel. During
the period of time between execution of this Agreement and passage of the Compensation
Ordinance, the Employer will continue to follow the provisions of the predecessor
Agreement with respect to the economic issues. The parties agree that the Association
retains the right to demand that negotiations be re-opened immediately on any or all
matters controlled by this Agreement should the Employer fail to adopt a Compensation
Ordinance ratifying all of the economic issues subject to the approval of the Employer by
November 1, 2014.

ARTICLE 27 - POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS

No employee shall be ordered to submit to a polygraph as defined by the Federal
Employee Polygraph Protection Act, provided however, that there shall be no restriction
on the right of any employee to submit to such device on a voluntary basis or if necessary
or required as part of any job assignment by any other law enforcement agency. Refusal
to submit to such tests shall not result in any disciplinary action nor shall such refusal be
made part of his record.

ARTICLE 28 — RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT

Employees will comply with the residency requirements established by the
Charter of the City of St. Louis or state law, whichever is applicable.

ARTICLE 29 - DURATION AND RENEWAL OF
AGREEMENT AND IMPASSE INTEREST ARBITRATION

Section 1. Term, Notice of Termination, and Annual Renewals in the Event of No
Notice of Termination.

This Agreement shall be effective for a period from the date of its execution, until

45
June 30, 2017 and shall be binding during its term upon the parties to this Agreement and
their successors. It shall be automatically renewed for additional one (1) year periods,
from year to year, from and after the termination of the original term of this Agreement,
or any subsequent year for which this Agreement is in force, unless notice is given to
terminate the Agreement no later than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the
termination of the original period of this agreement. Either the Employer or the
Association may give notice of its intention to terminate [or amend] this Agreement by
written notice to the other party certified mail return receipt requested addressed to the
Employer or the President of the Police Officers Association as appropriate, at their
address of record as noted hereafter, postmarked within the required times. Within thirty
(30) days after any such notice is received, a committee of representatives of the
respective parties hereto shall meet and endeavor to come to an agreement on any matters
in issue. This Agreement shall remain in effect until a new or amended Agreement is
entered into or until a good-faith bargaining impasse has been reached.

Section 2. Interest Arbitration in the Event of Impasse.

In the event a successor agreement has not been agreed upon within thirty (30)

days before the expiration of this Agreement, the parties will engage the services of a
mediator from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to assist in resolution of
the dispute. In the event that a successor agreement has not been reached by the
expiration date hereof, either party may demand that unresolved issues shall be submitted
to interest arbitration, on an advisory basis for economic issues (i.e. issues that are
required to be incorporated in and approved by a Compensation Ordinance), disciplinary
issues, and issues involving investigative rights; and a binding basis for [non-economic]
all other issues. The chosen arbitrator shall render a decision on each unresolved non-
economic issue, choosing between the Employer and the Association’s last offer on each.
The arbitrator shall have no authority to make a decision on any issue that was not a
subject of bargaining between the Employer and the Association.

If the parties are unable to agree upon an arbitrator within seven (7) days after the
expiration date, the parties shall request a panel of arbitrators with experience in interest
arbitration from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service and select an arbitrator
from the list by alternate strikes. A hearing before the arbitrator selected shall be
scheduled within thirty (30) days of expiration of this Agreement.

The selected Arbitrator shall issue a decision within thirty (30) days of the
completion of the hearing on all unresolved issues (on an advisory basis for economic
issues and a binding basis for all other issues). If economic issues remain unresolved after
the Arbitration, the parties will resume bargaining to attempt to accomplish a successor
agreement on all issues. During this post-arbitration bargaining, the parties may mutually
agree to alter the Arbitration decision on non-economic issues if doing so will help
resolve the economic issues, or for any other reason. Either party’s rejection of any
advisory decision shall not be construed as an act of bad faith bargaining. If impasse is
reached on non-economic issues during the post-arbitration bargaining, then the parties
shall proceed to execute a successor agreement that incorporates the decisions of the

46
arbitrator on the non-economic issues that will also contain a re-opener for economic
issues, including issues involving discipline and investigative rights, on an annual basis.

Section 3: No Enactment of Pay Ordinance Approving Tentative Agreement on
Economic Issues Upon Expiration of Predecessor Agreement.

In the event that the Employer and the Association reach tentative agreement at
the bargaining table on all issues, but the tentative agreements concerning economic
issues are not approved by a Compensation Ordinance by the expiration date of the
predecessor Agreement, then the parties shall proceed to execute a successor agreement
that incorporates the tentative agreements on the non-economic issues and an annual
reopener for economic issues. If the tentative agreements on economic issues are
approved by a Compensation Ordinance within six (6) months of the expiration of the
predecessor agreement, they will be incorporated into the successor agreement upon the
passage of the Compensation Ordinance.

6/20 zal
J h Steiger, Date

President
St. Louis Police Officers Association/
FOP Lodge 68
‘
Miron) pA— 06/20/01 /
Richard Frank, Date

Personnel Director
City of St. Louis Missouri

 

gy

Appointing Authority
St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department

47
