MASTER AGREEMENT

BETWEEN THE

CITY OF DETROIT

AND THE

DETROIT POLICE
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

2014 - 2019

 
LAW ENFORCEMENT-CODE OF ETHICS

As a law enforcement officer, my fundamental duty is to serve mankind; to safeguard lives and
property; to protect the innocent against deception; the weak against oppression or intimidation;
and the peaceful against violence or disorder; and to respect the constitutional rights of all
persons to liberty, equality and justice.

I will keep my private life unsullied as an example to all; maintain courageous calm in the face
of danger, scorn or ridicule; develop self-restraint; and be constantly mindful of the welfare of
others. Honest in thought and deed in both my personal and official life, I will be exemplary in
obeying the laws of the land and the regulations of my department. Whatever I see or hear of a
confidential nature or that is confided to me in my official capacity will be kept ever secret
unless revelation is necessary in the performance of my duty.

I will never act officiously or permit personal feelings, prejudices, animosities, or friendships to
influence my decisions. With no compromise for crime and with relentless prosecution of
criminals, I will enforce the law courteously and appropriately without fear or favor, malice or ill
will, never employing unnecessary force or violence, and never accepting gratuities.

I recognize the badge of my office as a symbol of public faith, and I accept it as public trust to be
held so long as I am true to the ethics of police service. I will constantly strive to achieve these
objectives and ideals, dedicating myself before God to my chosen profession -- LAW
ENFORCEMENT.

The Law Enforcement Officers Code of Ethics, by agreement of the parties, is not a provision or
article of this contract, but rather is included herein to remind all who read this document of the
dedication, sacrifice, courage, valor, judgment, wisdom, responsibility, accountability, loyalty
and professionalism which is displayed by the membership of the Detroit Police Officers
Association while serving the citizens of the City of Detroit.

CHI-1939680v6

 
AGREEMENT

This Agreement is entered into between the City of Detroit, a Michigan Municipal Corporation
(hereinafter referred to as the “City,” the “Department,” or the “Employer”), and the Detroit
Police Officers Association, an organization existing under the laws of the State of Michigan
(hereinafter referred to as the “Union” or the “Association’).

PURPOSE AND INTENT

The general purpose of this Agreement is to set forth terms and conditions of employment and to
promote orderly and peaceful labor relations for the mutual interest of the City of Detroit in its
capacity as an Employer, the Employees, the Union and the people of the City of Detroit.

The parties recognize that the interest of the community and the job security of the Employees
depend upon the Employer’s success in establishing proper services to the community.

To these ends, the Employer and the Union encourage to the fullest degree friendly and
cooperative relations between the respective representatives at all levels and among all
employees.

1. DEFINITIONS

A. “Association” or “Union” means Detroit Police Officers Association, Inc.

B. “Employee” means any person who is a Police Officer below the rank of Detective
employed by the Detroit Police Department.

Cc. “Department” means the Detroit Police Department.
Dz “Employer” means the Detroit Police Department or the City of Detroit.
E. “Commanding Officer” means the officer officially designated by the Detroit Police

Department as the commander of a given entity.

F. “Reviewing Officer” means the superior officer in charge of the next higher command or
level above the commanding officer of the employee originating the grievance.

G. “Labor Relations” means Labor Relations of the Detroit Police Department.

H. “Grievance” means the claimed unjust treatment, violation, misinterpretation, or
inequitable application of any of the provisions of this Agreement or rules, regulations,
and procedures covering working conditions applicable to the employees of the

Department.

L “Association Officer” means any one of the four elected officers of the Association --
President, Vice-President, Secretary-Treasurer and Sergeant-at-Arms.

CHI-1939680v6 1
J. “Steward” means the agent of the Association at the lowest departmental unit, that is, the
representative at the precinct, or entity, or other similar level.

K. “Alternate Steward” means the agent of the Association who shall function in the absence
of the steward.

L. “Chief Steward” means the representative of the Association at the precinct level other
than Association officer.

M. “Alternate Chief Steward” means the agent of the Association who shall function in the
absence of the Chief Steward.

 

N. “Executive Board” means the nine (9) elected members of the Board of Directors of the
Association and the four (4) elected officers of the Association, as defined in the
Association’s by-laws.

O. “Board of Directors” means all of the stewards and the Executive Board.

P. “Grievance Committee” means a committee of not more than three (3) members

designated by the Union to review, screen and adjust grievances presented by employees.

Q. “Shall” and “will” as used in this contract have the same meaning; they are used to
express what is mandatory or obligatory.

R. Pronouns of masculine and feminine gender include each other.
2. RECOGNITION OF UNION

Pursuant to and in accordance with all applicable provisions of Act 336 of the Public Acts of
1947, as amended, the Employer hereby recognizes the Union as the exclusive representative for
the purpose of collective bargaining in respect to rates of pay, wages, hours of employment, and
other terms and conditions of employment for all Police Assistants and Police Officers of the
Detroit Police Department, below the rank of Detective, for the term of this Agreement.

3. UNION SECURITY

A. Employees are free to join or not to join the Union.

B. Employees who are not members of the Union and who desire membership in the Union
shall confirm their desire to join for the duration of this Agreement by initiating their
Union application form and dues deduction authorization forms within forty-five (45)
calendar days after the effective date of this Agreement.

Cc. Any person who is employed with the City prior to the effective date of this Agreement
and is covered by this Agreement who is not a member of the Union and who does not
make application for membership within forty-five (45) calendar days after the effective
date of this Agreement shall, as a condition of employment, pay to the Union each month
a service charge as a contribution toward the administration of this Agreement in an
amount equal to the regular Union membership dues. Employees who fail to comply

CHI-1939680v6 2
with this requirement shall be discharged by the Employer within thirty (30) calendar
days after receipt of written notice to the Employer from the Union, unless the City is
otherwise notified by the Union in writing within said thirty (30) calendar days.

Dz Any person who becomes an employee of the City after this Agreement is in effect and is
covered by this Agreement who is not a member of the Union and who does not make
application for membership within ninety (90) calendar days from the date of
employment shall, as a condition of employment pay to the Union each month a service
charge as a contribution toward the administration of this Agreement in an amount equal
to the regular monthly Union membership dues. Employees who fail to comply with this
requirement shall be discharged by the Employer within thirty (30) calendar days after
receipt of written notice to the Employer from the Union, unless the City is otherwise
notified by the Union in writing within said thirty (30) calendar days.

E. All deductions under this Article shall be subject to revocation by the employee who
executed such assignments, upon giving written notice within thirty (30) calendar days
immediately prior to the expiration date of this Agreement, to assignees and the Finance
Director. The Finance Director and the City Treasurer shall thereafter cease withholding
any money whatever under such assignments.

F. The Union shall have no rights or interest whatsoever in any money authorized withheld
until such money is actually paid over to it; however, the City shall promptly remit said
monies received to the Union. The City or any of its officers and employees shall not be
liable for any reasonable delay in carrying out such deductions, and upon forwarding
check in payment of such deductions by mail to the Union’s last known address, the City
and its officers and employees shall be released from all liability to the employee and the
Union under such assignments (Section 13-4-4 of the Municipal Code of the City of
Detroit).

G. If any provision of this Article is invalid under Federal Law, or the laws of the State of
Michigan, said provision shall be modified to comply with the requirements of Federal or
State Law or shall be re-negotiated for the purpose of adequate replacement.

H. Dues Deduction.

The Employer agrees to deduct from the wages of bargaining unit employees, all Union
membership dues, initiation fees and assessments uniformly required, if any, as provided
in a written authorization in accordance with the standard form used by the Employer
provided that the said form shall be executed by the employee. The written authorization
for Union dues deduction or service fee deductions shall remain in full force and effect
during the period of this Agreement and may only be revoked within the thirty (30)
calendar day period immediately prior to the expiration of this contract. The revocation
notice must be given to both the Employer and the Union.

Dues and initiation fees will be authorized, levied and certified in accordance with the
constitution and by-laws of the Union. Each bargaining unit employee and the Union
hereby authorize the City to rely upon and to honor certifications by the Secretary-
Treasurer of the Union regarding the amounts to be deducted and the legality of the
adopting action specifying such amounts of the Union dues and initiation fees.

CHI-1939680v6 3
Service Fee Deduction.

The Employer agrees to deduct from the wages of any bargaining unit employee who is
not a member of the Union all Union service fees as provided in a written authorization in
accordance with the standard form used by the Employer provided that the said form
shall be executed by the employee. The written authorization for service fee deduction
shall remain in full force and effect during the period of this contract and may only be
revoked on written notice within the thirty (30) calendars day period immediately prior to
the expiration of this contract. The revocation notice must be given both to the Employer
and to the Union.

The Employer agrees to deduct from the wages of bargaining unit Employees a political
contribution deduction as provided for in a written authorization in accordance with the
standard form used by the Employer, provided that the form shall be executed by the
Employee. The amount to be deducted shall be a set amount which shall be deducted on
a bi-weekly basis. The Secretary-Treasurer of the Union shall notify the City, in writing,
of the amount to be deducted. This deduction may be revoked by the Employee at any
time by giving written notice to both the Finance Department and to the Union.

The Association shall refund to Employees, dues and service fees erroneously deducted
by the City and paid to the Association. The City may offset any amount erroneously or
improperly deducted and paid to the Association from any subsequent remittance to the
Association.

The Union agrees that in the event of litigation against the City, its agents, or Employees
arising out of this provision it will co-defend and indemnify and hold harmless the City,
its agents, or Employees from any monetary award arising out of such litigation.

4. BASIS OF REPRESENTATION

In each representative Precinct (See Schedule A) Employees shall be represented by one
(1) steward for each shift, who shall be a regularly scheduled bargaining unit employee
working in that Precinct and on that shift. One (1) alternate may be selected in each
Precinct for each shift to serve in the absence of the steward. The member selected shall,
for the purpose of title only, be considered a steward and not an alternate steward.

The representative units and number of representatives allocated to each entity are listed
in Schedule A attached to this Agreement. If any existing precinct, or entity is eliminated
or any new precinct, or entity is created, or if the number of bargaining unit personnel of
any existing entity is increased or decreased substantially, the parties to this Agreement
shall re-negotiate the number of representatives allocated to such entity on a basis
consistent with the principle of proportional representation.

Stewards shall be allowed to communicate official Union business to members prior to
on-duty roll call or following off-duty roll call.

Only one (1) chief steward and one (1) steward from each shift shall enjoy top seniority
insofar as remaining with their precinct, section, unit, district or platoon during their term

CHI-1939680v6 4
of office, and they shall not be transferred out of their Precinct, Section, Unit, District or
Platoon, except for justifiable cause, reduction in force, or in connection with
civilianization and/or use of Police ants in accordance with the terms of this
Agreement. This provision will apply when reductions in force occur except when a
Section, Unit, or Platoon is discontinued or otherwise inactivated or consolidated.

 

   

E. Those nine (9) stewards who are members of the Executive Board of the Union shall be
allowed a minimum of one (1) working day a month without loss of pay or benefits to
attend Executive Board meetings.

F. Only one (1) steward from each representative Precinct, Section, or Unit shall be excused
from work without loss of pay or benefits to attend the monthly Board of Directors
meetings when such meetings coincide with their normal working hours.

G. The President, Vice President, Secretary-Treasurer and Sergeant-at-Arms shall be
allowed to conduct Union business on a full-time basis without loss of pay or benefits.
When reductions in force occur, the above titled officers will have top seniority under
Article 10.

H. The Union officers upon leaving their positions shall have the right to return to their
previous assignment.

I. Union officers shall be permitted to discuss Union business with members during their
duty hours, provided such discussions shall not interfere with the performance of the
member’s duties. Such discussions shall not interfere with the normal operations of the
precinct, or entity involved.

J. In the event of a full mobilization of the Department’s resources, now known as a M02
complete, the Union officers shall contact the office of the Chief of Police and shall
remain available during the period of the mobilization for the purpose of establishing a
Department/Union liaison to deal with any labor relations problem which may arise.

K. The Union President, or in his/her absence, the next Union officer in line, shall be given
written notice, in advance, of anticipated major changes in working conditions.

L. A copy of each special order, general order, notation, personnel order, training bulletin
and materials that are distributed to the general membership shall be sent promptly to the
Union President through the Department mails.

M. A copy of photographs of all Department functions shall be available to the Union upon
request on each specific occasion.

N. Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Agreement, the Union President
shall provide the Chief of Police written confirmation of the names of all stewards, chief
stewards, the nine (9) stewards who are members of the Executive Board, Union officers,
designated representatives, and Grievance Committee members who will function in an
official capacity for the Union. As changes occur, the President shall notify the Chief of
Police, in writing, within a reasonable time.

CHI-1939680v6 5
O. The Association may establish a three-member Grievance Committee for the purpose of
working under the authority of the Union President in processing grievances. Grievance
Committee members shall receive two (2) working days off per week in order to
investigate and process grievances. Grievance Committee members may also attend
those meetings and hearings as set forth in the grievance and arbitration articles of this
contract and any other meetings or hearings with officials of the City with the permission
of the Labor Relations Section. Such permission shall not be unreasonably denied.

 

P. The stewards and chief stewards may, during their working hours without loss of time,
pay or benefits, investigate and present grievances to the Employer, after having obtained
release from work from their supervisors. Such release shall be within a reasonable time.
Such privilege shall not interfere with vital police service. The stewards and chief
stewards shall not be released for simultaneous investigation of grievances, unless
mutually agreed between the Chief Steward and the Desk Supervisor.

Q. Special Conferences on important matters may be requested by either party and will be
arranged between the Union President or his/her designated representative and either the
Board of Police Commissioners or their designated representative, or the Chief of Police
or his/her designated representative. When the Union elects to have a special conference
with the Board of Police Commissioners, the Union shall submit a copy of the request to
the Chief of Police.

Arrangements for such special conferences shall be made five (5) calendar days in
advance whenever possible and an agenda of matters to be taken up at the meeting shall
be presented in writing at the time the conference is requested. Matters taken up in
special conferences shall be confined to those included on the agenda.

5. UNION RESPONSIBILITIES

A. Recognizing the crucial role of law enforcement in the preservation of the public health,
safety and welfare of a free society, the Union agrees that it will take all reasonable steps
to cause the Employees covered by this Agreement, individually and collectively, to
perform all police duties, rendering loyal and efficient service to the very best of their
abilities.

B. The Union, therefore, agrees that there shall be no interruption of these services for any
cause whatsoever by the Employees it represents; nor shall there by any concerted failure
by them to report for duty; nor shall they absent themselves from their work or abstain, in
whole or in part, from the full, faithful and proper performance of all the duties of their
employment.

Cc. The Union further agrees that it shall not encourage any strikes, sit-downs, stay-ins, slow-

downs, stoppages of work, malingering or any acts that interfere in any manner or to any
degree with the continuity of police services.

CHI-1939680v6 6
6. MANAGEMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

A. Both the Department and the Association acknowledge their shared responsibility for the
enforcement of the laws and ordinances of the City of Detroit and the State of Michigan
as well as for assuring the safety and property of the citizens of the City of Detroit, and
agree to work together cooperatively to maintain the highest standards of professionalism
and integrity in the service of the City and its citizens. The Union recognizes the
prerogatives of the Department to operate and manage its affairs in all respects in
accordance with its responsibilities and powers of authority and the terms and provisions
of this Agreement. Except as specifically limited by the provisions of this Agreement or
applicable law, the Department will have the discretion and authority:

1.

10.

CHI-1939680v6

to hire, direct, classify, assign, reassign, promote, demote, evaluate, transfer,
layoff, and/or recall Employees, including the assignment or reassignment of
Employees;

to determine the size of its workforce, including the number of Employees, the
number of job classifications, departments, and shifts of work whether increased
or decreased;

to develop, establish, or modify job descriptions and job postings for positions in
the Department;

to determine policies affecting the selection, evaluation and training of
Employees;

to establish and modify hours of work, including the beginning and ending time
for shifts of work, whether increased or decreased, and the establishment of the
hours of the shifts, whether increased or decreased;

to determine the content and nature of the work to be performed, and the
competencies and qualifications needed to perform the work;

to determine the organizational structure of the Department, including the
planning, direction, control, increase, decrease, or discontinuance of operations or
services, and the organization of the same;

to determine the location and types of facilities, including the establishment of
new units, precincts, departments, divisions, or subdivisions thereof and the right
to transfer Employees and equipment between and among the Department’s
various facilities;

to establish, regulate, determine, revise, or modify at any time the policies,
practices, protocols, processes, techniques, methods, means and procedures used
in the Department, including, but not limited to machinery, materials, methods,
facilities, tools, and equipment;

to transfer, relocate, merge, consolidate or close its facilities and operations, in
whole or in part, and to separate its Employees in connection with said

7
transferring, relocation, merger, consolidation or closing after discussing the
effects of such decision with the Association to the extent required by law;

11. to create and maintain special units and to select Employees to work within such
special units provided that the Department will provide reasonable notice to the
Association;

12. to establish and enforce policies pertaining to drug testing and substance abuse;
13. to assign an Employee to work in a restricted capacity for good cause;
14. to enforce state and local licensing, certifications, and other requirements;

15. to subcontract or civilianize any job or job function, subject to the limits set forth
in Article 39.H of this Agreement; and

16. with respect to any other matter related to the enforcement of the laws of the City
of Detroit or the State of Michigan and the protection of its citizens and their
property.

B. The Department has the right to schedule overtime work as required in a manner most
advantageous to the Department and consistent with requirements of municipal
employment and the public safety and consistent with the provisions of this Agreement.

Cc. It is understood by the parties that every incidental duty connected with operations
enumerated in job descriptions is not always specifically described.

D. The Department reserves the right to discipline and discharge for just cause and to
establish reasonable work rules and rules of conduct. The Department reserves the right
to lay off Employees for lack of work or funds or for the occurrence of conditions beyond
the control of the Department or when such continuation of work would be wasteful and
unproductive.

E. The City of Detroit is obligated, legally and morally, to provide equality of opportunity,
consideration and treatment of all members of the Department and to establish policies
and regulations that will insure such equality of opportunity, consideration and treatment
of all members employed by the Department in all phases of the employment process,
without regard to race, color, creed, national origin, citizenship status, religion, age,
political orientation, sex, sexual orientation, genetic information, arrest record, height,
weight, familial status, marital status, or disability, in accordance with applicable State
and Federal laws. To this end, basic rights and equities of members are established
through the City Charter, Executive Orders of the Mayor, Ordinances and Resolutions of
the City Council and the rules of the Department.

 

 

F. The Department shall notify in advance, in writing, the Association President, or in his
absence the next officer in line, when it anticipates exercising its right to make changes in
working conditions. Conferences to discuss said anticipated changes shall be conducted
at the request of either party. Such conferences shall not be construed as “formal”
negotiations. Provided however, in no event shall the City make decisions which alter

CHI-1939680v6 8
the relationship between the parties in regard to wages, hours, and the terms and
conditions of employment as set forth in this Agreement. Any changes in that area
require renegotiations of the contract.

G. No Department official or agent of the City shall:

1. Interfere with, restrain, or coerce Employees in the exercise of their right to join
or refrain from joining a labor organization, except where permitted by law to
avoid a conflict of interest; or

2. Initiate, create, dominate, contribute to or interfere with the formation,
administration, internal affairs, elections, meetings, dues policies or officers, of
the Association; or

3. Discriminate in regard to employment or conditions of employment in order to
encourage or discourage membership in a labor organization; or

4. Discriminate against an Employee because he has given testimony or taken part in
any grievance procedures or other hearings, negotiations, or conferences as a part
of the labor organization recognized under the terms of this Agreement; or

5. Refuse to meet, negotiate, or confer on proper matters with representatives of the
Association as set forth in this Agreement.

H. It is agreed that the City retains and reserves all rights, powers and authorities given to it
under any national, state or local law unless otherwise negotiated in this Agreement.

I. The Union pledges full support for continuity of employment during normal or
emergency working conditions.

J. The Department shall comply with applicable laws pertaining to labor and employment
matters.

7. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

A. Every Employee of the Department shall have the right to present grievances in
accordance with the procedure provided herein. The Association will hand deliver
grievances directly to a Captain or Commander. The written grievance will set forth the
nature of the grievance, the date of the matter complained of, the name(s) of the
employee or employees involved, and the provisions of this Agreement, if any, that the
grievant claims have been violated. Receipt of the grievance will be acknowledged by
signature of the Captain or Commander who receives the grievance. Any grievance not
filed within fourteen (14) calendar days of the occurrence of the alleged violation or
within fourteen (14) calendar days of an Employee or the Association becoming aware of
an alleged violation will be considered untimely and will not be processed.

B. The informal resolution of differences or grievances is urged and encouraged to be
resolved at the lowest possible level of supervision.

CHI-1939680v6 9
Cc. Immediate supervisors, commanding officers and reviewing officers shall consider
promptly all grievances presented to them and, within the scope of their authority, take
such timely action as is required.

D. Grievances shall be processed according to the following procedure
STEP 1 - Written — Sergeant, Lieutenant, or Captain:

The sergeant, lieutenant, or captain will provide a written answer to the steward within
seven (7) calendar days after receipt. Acceptance or rejection of the answer will be
written on the grievance form by the steward.

STEP 2 - Appeal to Commanding Officer of the Precinct or Division:

If the grievance is not satisfactorily adjusted at Step 1 or acted upon by the sergeant,
lieutenant, or captain within seven (7) calendar days, it may be appealed by the chief
steward to the Commanding Officer of the precinct or division within three (3) calendar
days. The Commanding Officer will discuss the grievance with the steward, chief
steward, or both, and the aggrieved Employee(s) and render a written answer within
seven (7) calendar days of his/her receipt of the grievance.

STEP 3 - Appeal to the Chief of Police:

If the grievance is not satisfactorily settled or adjusted in Step 2, it will be referred to the
President of the Association or his designated representative, who may appeal it to the
Chief of Police within fifteen (15) calendar days. A meeting to discuss the grievance will
be held between the President or his designee, or both, and members of the grievance
committee, and the Chief of Police or his designee within ten (10) calendar days after
receipt of the grievance by the Chief of Police. A written decision will be rendered by
the Chief, or his designated representative, within ten (10) calendar days of the meeting.
By mutual agreement, the parties may extend the timeline in order to enable the Chief of
Police to participate directly.

Medical Grievance Procedure:

The Labor Relations Division will provide notice to the President of the Association and
the Employee’s Commander of all grievances involving medical issues

E. Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, individual Employees may present their
own grievances to the Department and have them adjusted without the intervention of the
steward or Union officers; provided, however, that the Department has given the steward
or Union officers notice and an opportunity to be present at such adjustment. In no event
shall any such adjustment be contrary to or inconsistent with the terms of any agreement
between the Department and the Union.

F. Grievances not appealed in writing to the next step within the time limits set forth above

will be considered settled on the basis of the last decision, provided that any grievance
not responded to by the Department within the time limits set forth above will be

CHI-1939680v6 10
automatically moved to the next step in the grievance procedure. Additionally, the time
limits of the grievance procedure may be shortened or extended by mutual agreement.

G. Grievances affecting a large number of employees or concerning a transfer between
commands may be treated as policy grievances and entered at the third step of the
grievance procedure by the Union. One or more members of the Grievance Committee
may attend hearings on policy grievances entered at Step 3 with the permission of the
Labor Relations Section. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused.

H. In instances wherein the subject matter of the grievance lies within the jurisdiction of
specific City agencies (e.g., payroll, etc.), the grievance steps may be reduced in order to
bring the grievance to the agency’s immediate attention for a recommendation as to the
action to be taken. Further, the Chief of Police and the President of the Association will
be permitted, at their discretion, to participate at any step of the grievance procedure.

L Binding Mediation Procedure. By mutual agreement, the parties may submit certain
disputes to an abbreviated binding mediation procedure in lieu of arbitration. The parties
will identify at least one (1) permanent arbitrator from the permanent panel selected
under Article 8 who shall schedule one (1) additional hearing date each month. Prior to
each scheduled hearing date, each party may submit up to five (5) grievances and
disciplinary matters for a binding recommendation by the arbitrator serving as a
mediator. Each party shall provide the other party and the arbitrator with advance notice
of the matters to be presented, including relevant documentation. Either party may reject
a matter that is proposed to be heard. The mediation hearing shall be informal and the
parties agree to be bound by the recommendation of the arbitrator serving as a mediator.

8. ARBITRATION

A. Any unresolved grievance relating only to the interpretation, application or enforcement
of a specific article and section of this Agreement or any Supplementary Agreement,
hereto, having been processed fully through the last step of the grievance procedure, may
be submitted to arbitration by the Department or the Association in strict accordance with
the following:

1. Arbitration may be initiated by written notice to the other party of an intention to
arbitrate. Such written notice of intent to arbitrate must be made within ten (10)
calendar days after receipt of the Step 3 answer.

2. Selection of Arbitrator and Permanent Panel

a. Within thirty (30) calendar days after the execution of this Agreement, the
parties shall convene and select four (4) disinterested persons qualified in
labor-management relations to serve as permanent arbitrators. If the
parties are unable to agree upon four (4) individuals to serve as permanent
arbitrators, for each unfilled position, the Director of the Michigan
Employment Relations Commission (MERC) shall be requested to submit
the names of five (5) disinterested persons qualified and willing to act as
impartial arbitrators. From each list, the Department and Union shall each

CHI-1939680v6 11
CHI-1939680v6

alternately strike one name until four (4) names have been eliminated and
the person whose name remains on the list shall be selected to act as one
of the four (4) permanent arbitrators.

b. If at any time either party desires to terminate the service of an arbitrator,
it shall give notice in writing to that effect to the other party, specifying
the date of termination. The parties shall then send a joint written notice
to the arbitrator of his termination. Neither party may terminate the
services of an arbitrator unless he has heard at least one (1) case.

c. Once the arbitrator has received written notice that his services are
terminated, he shall not hear any further cases. However, he shall render
decisions on all cases that he has heard prior to receiving such notice.

 

d. In the event an arbitrator is terminated, a new arbitrator shall be
immediately selected in accordance with the procedure described in
Section 2.a.

e. The arbitrators will hear cases on a chronological rotation.

It will be within the authority of the arbitrator to make a decision binding upon
the parties regarding the interpretation, application, or enforcement of the
Agreement.

The arbitrator will not consider any evidence submitted by either party, which
was not produced in the grievance procedure unless such evidence was not then
known to the party submitting the same.

The costs of the arbitration will be shared equally by the parties, except that each
party will make arrangements to pay its own attorneys and witnesses. In cases
where the arbitrator provides that either party has filed or denied a grievance in
bad faith, the arbitrator will have the discretion to assess all costs and expenses of
the arbitration hearing, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, against the non-
prevailing party.

The parties may request in writing of each other co-operation to have available at
the arbitration proceedings any witnesses requested by the other party.

If the central issue in the unresolved grievance is an Employee’s medical
condition, which may be the case in matters pertaining to sick leave,
qualifications to perform work, requests for light duty assignments, or
accommodation of disabilities, the arbitration procedure specified in this Article
will not apply, and the parties will instead select a neutral physician to resolve any
disputes concerning medical issues. Such a neutral physician must be licensed to
practice and currently practicing medicine. The neutral physician will be jointly
selected by the Department and the Association. To the extent the Department
and Association cannot agree on a neutral physician, the neutral physician will be
mutually selected by the Employee’s treating physician and the Police
Department’s designated physician. Upon request, the City will provide medical

 

12
information to the Union in accordance with applicable law. The Department and
the Association may mutually agree to establish further guidelines regarding the
processing of medical grievances.

 

B. There shall be no appeal from the decision of an arbitrator if made in accordance with his
or her jurisdiction and authority under this Agreement. It shall be final and binding on
the ociation, on all bargaining unit members, and on the Department. The
Association will actively discourage attempts by any bargaining unit Employee to appeal
a decision of the arbitrator to any Court or labor board, and will not aid or abet in any
such attempt.

 

 

 

Cc. In the event a case is appealed to the arbitrator and he/she finds that the arbitrator has no
power or authority to rule on such case, the matter shall be referred back to the parties
without decision or recommendation on the merits of the case.

 

Dz The decision of an arbitrator in any case shall not require a retroactive wage adjustment
in any other case. Either party may, prior to the submission of a dispute to arbitration,
state, and the opposite party is bound to agree, that the award not be binding precedent in
analogous situations pending at that time.

E. The arbitrator shall limit his/her decision strictly to the interpretation, application or
enforcement of the specific articles and sections of this Agreement, and he/she shall be
without power or authority to make any decisions:

1. Contrary to, or inconsistent with or modifying or varying in any way, the terms of
this Agreement or of applicable laws covering the terms of this Agreement.

2. Involving the exercise of discretion by the City under the provisions of this
Agreement, its Charter or applicable laws, so long as the exercise of this
discretion does not conflict with this Agreement.

3. Limiting or interfering in any way with the powers, duties or responsibilities of
the City under its Charter or applicable laws covering the terms of this
Agreement.

4. Contrary to, inconsistent with, changing, altering, limiting or modifying any

practice, policy, rules or regulations presently or in the future established by the
City so long as such practice, policy, rules or regulations do not conflict with this
Agreement.

5. Implying any restriction or condition binding upon the City from this Agreement,
it being understood that, except as such restrictions or conditions upon the City
are specifically set forth herein, or are fairly inferable from the express language
of any article and section hereof, the matter in question falls within the City’s
management rights under Article 6.

6. Concerning the establishment of wage scales, rates on new or changed jobs, or
change in any wage rate.

CHI-1939680v6 13
7. Providing agreement for the parties in those cases where, by their contract, they
may have agreed that further negotiations should occur to cover the matters in
dispute.

8. Granting any right or relief for any alleged grievance occurring at any time other
than the contract period in which such right originated.

9. DISCIPLINE

A. The Department reserves the right to discipline, discharge, or demote Employees for just
cause.

B. Investigation/Discipline.

1. Investigations regarding any potential or alleged misconduct, actions, or
omissions that may result in discipline will be completed as expeditiously as
practicable. If the Department determines that disciplinary action is warranted,
such discipline will be issued as soon as practicable after the completion of the
investigation. The Department shall provide written notice of the disciplinary
action (“Notice of Discipline”) to the Employee, with a copy to the Association,
stating the Employee’s violation, the date, time, and location of the violation, a
concise statement setting forth the relevant facts, and the disciplinary penalty.
Except as set forth in Sections F, H, and I below, no discipline will be
implemented or incorporated into an Employee’s file until the completion of the
applicable procedures set forth below.

 

 

2. In all cases when a supervisor has reason to believe that an Employee has
committed acts warranting discipline and contemplates issuance of disciplinary
action, the supervisor shall inform the Employee and allow the Employee the
opportunity to have union representation to the extent required by applicable law.
Exceptions to this procedure would be in situations where the Employee is absent
without leave and is not reasonably reachable.

Cc. Chief’s Hearing. Except as set forth in Section H, within two (2) days of the receipt of a
disciplinary action, an Employee may appeal the discipline to a Chief's Hearing (which
will be presided over by the Chief or his/her designee). The Chief’s Hearing is a non-
adversarial proceeding, which must be held within seven (7) days of the date the
discipline was issued. An Employee will have the right to review the investigation and
charges against him, and make a statement of explanation. The Chief or his/her designee
presiding over the Chief’s Hearing will have the authority to rescind the discipline, affirm
the discipline, or lower the level of discipline, but may not increase the disciplinary
penalty from what was stated in the Notice of Discipline. An Employee, with approval of
the Association, may elect to appeal any decision from a Chief’s Hearing to expedited
arbitration when a suspension of more than three (3) days has been rendered. Subject
only to the Chief’s discretion, any written reprimand or disciplinary suspension of three
(3) days or less will be considered final and binding with no right of appeal.

CHI-1939680v6 14
D. Voluntary Mediation. The parties may mutually agree to submit a dispute to mediation
under terms agreeable to the parties.

E. Expedited Arbitration. To the extent that a dispute regarding a suspension of more than
three (3) days or the discharge of an Employee cannot be resolved through the Chief's
Hearing or mediation (if applicable), an Employee, with the approval of the Association,
will have the right to appeal the disciplinary action to expedited arbitration. The
disciplinary action must be appealed to arbitration by providing written notice to the
Department within seven (7) days of the date of the decision resulting from the Chief’s
Hearing. Any information requests shall accompany the request to arbitrate. The
Department will provide responsive information to the extent required by applicable law,
and within thirty (30) days of receipt of the Association’s requests. The arbitration
hearing must be held within sixty (60) days of the date the appeal was filed by the
Employee, so long as an arbitrator on the panel has availability within a sixty (60) day
period.

1. Both the Employee and the Department will have the right to be represented by
counsel, to introduce evidence, and to present and cross-examine witnesses.

2. The arbitrator will issue his or her Award in writing within five (5) days of the
hearing. An explanatory opinion shall follow as soon as practicable.

3. The costs of the arbitration will be shared equally by the parties.

4. The parties may request in writing of each other cooperation to have available at
the arbitration proceedings any witnesses requested by the other party.

5. The decision of the arbitrator will be final and binding on the Employee and the
Department subject to the Chief’s Authority as set forth in Section G.

6. Arbitration cases under this Article will be heard by an arbitrator on the panel
detailed in Article 8. Such arbitrators will hear cases on a chronological rotation
subject to arbitrator availability. To the extent no arbitrator on the panel is
available to hear the case within sixty (60) days, the arbitrator with the next
available date to hear the case will be selected. Where an Employee is suspended
without pay, the arbitration shall be scheduled with the next available arbitrator
without regard to the sixty (60) day time period.

F. Discharge Cases. Where a decision is made to discharge an Employee, that Employee
will be suspended without pay pending the outcome of the disciplinary process set forth
in this Article.

G. Chief’s Authority. The Chief of Police, at his or her sole discretion, may rescind or
mitigate any disciplinary action at any step of the disciplinary process including, but not
limited to, after the conclusion of an arbitration. However, the Chief of Police shall have
no authority to increase any disciplinary action after the conclusion of an arbitration.

H. Written Reprimand. All written reprimands will be issued and implemented as soon as
practicable following an investigation. Written reprimands will remain in employees’

CHI-1939680v6 15
files for a period of time not to exceed two (2) years from the date of issuance of the
reprimand.

L Informal Counseling. The Department may conduct informal counseling sessions
concerning minor misconducts, actions, or omissions. Such counseling sessions will not
be considered disciplinary action, but the substance of the counseling session may be
reduced to writing and added to an Employee’s file for up to one (1) year.

 

J. Department Right to Immediately Suspend Employee. The Department shall have the
right to immediately suspend an Employee with pay in order to preserve order within the
Department and/or in those cases where an Employee is the subject of a criminal
investigation. Moreover, the Department shall have the right to suspend an Employee
without pay in accordance with the terms of the Detroit Police Department Manual.
However, the Department must follow the procedures set forth in this Article before any
discipline relating to the conduct underlying such suspension is incorporated into an
Employee's file.

 

10. SENIORITY

A. Seniority Defined. Seniority is defined as the length of continuous service with the
Police Department of the City of Detroit as a police officer. Seniority is not the same as
“service time” as that term may be used in connection with the various economic benefit
provisions.

B. Continuous Service. Continuous service shall mean employment by the City of Detroit
without interruption or breaks. The following shall not be considered breaks in service.

1. Service in the Armed Forces of the United States up to five (5) years, or longer if
such service is exempt under applicable law.

2. Absence from work due to injuries compensated for under the Workers’
Compensation Act of the State of Michigan.

3. Lay off as a result of a reduction in force for a period not exceeding two (2) years.
4. Other approved leaves of absence for a period not exceeding one (1) year.
Cc. Personal Leave. Employees may be granted a personal leave by the City for up to one (1)

year. Seniority accrued prior to the leave will be retained but Employees will not
accumulate additional seniority for the period of the leave, except that this provision shall
not apply to leaves related to the military.

Dz Forfeiture. An Employee shall forfeit seniority rights for the following reasons:
1. Resignation.
2. Retirement.

3. Discharge.

CHI-1939680v6 16
If an Employee fails to report to work for five (5) consecutive days without
providing proper notice to the Department, unless the Employee, in the judgment
of the Department, is completely incapacitated through no fault of his/her own or
subject to some other emergency situation that, through no fault of his/her own,
makes him/her unable to report said absence and is able to supply sufficient proof
thereof.

If an Employee fails to report within five (5) days after leave of absence, vacation,
or suspension or, if the Employee receives notice from the Department by
certified letter that his/her leave of absence has been terminated, within five (5)
days after receipt of such certified letter.

Failure of a laid-off Employee to notify the Department of his/her intent to return
to work within seven (7) days after notice has been sent by the Department to the
laid-off Employee at his/her last address on the Department’s records at time of
layoff.

Absence from work for any reason (including lay-off) in excess of two (2) years,
except as set forth in Section B.1 of this Article.

E. Probationary Employees.

1.

The probationary period for new Employees shall be eighteen (18) months from
the date of hire, or twelve (12) months from the date of graduation from the
Detroit Metropolitan Police Academy, whichever is earlier. New Employees shall
acquire seniority twelve (12) months after their date of hire. Once a member has
completed the Detroit Metropolitan Police Academy and has been assigned a
command, the Department shall continue the existing practice of utilizing the
appointment date of a probationary employee with regard to: leave days,
furloughs, holidays, prescheduled overtime, involuntary transfers and in other
circumstances where the appointment date has been used.

F. Transfers.

1.

CHI-1939680v6

Transfers between precincts and entities will be made using a Department transfer
list maintained by the Personnel Unit. Such list will be created from transfer
requests submitted by Employees on form DPD #402. Separate lists should be
maintained for each rank.

 

a. Transfer requests shall be valid for a period until October Ist each year.
Continuation requests may be submitted on or after August 15th.

b. Whenever openings occur in precincts or entities, the Employee to be
transferred will be selected from the transfer list based upon knowledge,
training, experience, performance evaluation ratings, certifications, ability,
skills, disciplinary history, attendance, safety record, efficiency, and
seniority. When all other qualifications are equal, the senior qualified
Employee who submitted a transfer request will be selected.

17
CHI-1939680v6

c. Employees submitting transfer requests will not be unreasonably denied
placement on the transfer list. To deny an Employee’s request, the
Department must verify with factual information that the Employee is not
qualified for the requested transfer. Such decisions may be appealed
utilizing the grievance and arbitration procedures set forth in this
Agreement.

d. With the exception of releasing information pertaining to a current
criminal investigation, an Employee who is denied placement on the
transfer list will be advised in writing of the reasons for such denial upon
request.

e. The Employee will be notified of the result of his request for transfer
within thirty (30) days of the submission of the form DPD #402.

f. Voluntary transfers to vacant positions will be awarded based on merit.
The Department will consider knowledge, training, experience,
performance evaluation ratings, certifications, ability, skills, disciplinary
history, attendance, safety record, efficiency, and seniority. If all other
qualifications are equal, the senior qualified Employee will be selected.

Should the need arise for a temporary assignment from one precinct patrol
location to another, the temporary assignment may not exceed one hundred and
twenty five (125) working days. At the expiration of this period, the Employee
will be immediately returned to his former position. In no event shall the
Department utilize temporary assignments to circumvent the transfer provisions
of this Section or as a form of discipline. The parties further stipulate that the
Department’s authority to make temporary assignments under this Section must
be exercised reasonably.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Chief of Police has the right to permanently
transfer an Employee from one precinct patrol location to another based upon
good cause shown upon review of the entire case.

Once placed on a DPD #350, the Commanding Officer of the transfer requested
entity may, upon request, have the Employee removed from the transfer list to
that entity.

Blue Slip Units. Notwithstanding any provisions in this Agreement that could be
construed to the contrary, the Chief of Police may make transfers involving Blue
Slip units at his or her sole discretion. The Department shall provide the
Association with a list of current Blue Slip units as of the effective date of this
Agreement. From time to time, the Chief of Police may designate other units as
Blue Slip Units, provided that a precinct patrol unit may not be designated as a
Blue Slip Unit. The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, will meet and confer
with the Association before designating a unit as a Blue Slip Unit.

18
G. Assignments.

1.

A request for assignments within a precinct, or entity once an Employee is
assigned there, can be made by submitting DPD Form #31 (referred to as a Blue
Slip) to the Commanding Officer. The request shall be valid for a period until
October 1“ each year. An Employee may have only one (1) assignment request
on file at any time; the most recent request will replace the earlier requests.
Whenever openings occur within precincts or entities, the Department will
consider knowledge, training, experience, performance evaluation ratings,
certifications, ability, skills, disciplinary history, attendance, safety record,
efficiency, and seniority. If all other qualifications are equal, the senior qualified
Employee will be selected.

 

In order to determine when such receipt occurred, a copy of the job assignment
request, dated and signed by the supervisor who received the request and the time
he/she received it, shall be provided to the member.

Moreover, notwithstanding any provisions in this Agreement that could be
construed to the contrary, the Chief of Police may exclude assignments from the
above procedure and make assignments involving Blue Slip units at his or her
sole discretion.

H. General Seniority Provision.

An up-to-date seniority list showing the names, length of service dates, and Departmental
assignments shall be furnished to the Union every six (6) months. A copy of the list shall
be maintained in all precincts for inspection by members.

I. Lay-off and Recall.

1.

CHI-1939680v6

When there is an impending reduction in force within the bargaining unit, the City
shall inform and consult with the Association as soon as practicable.

In the event of a reduction in force in the Police Department, it shall be made
among Employees by seniority.

a. The Employees with the least amount of service shall be the first laid off
and last to be recalled.

b. A demotion to the next lower rank shall be required before a layoff,
provided the Employee had prior time in the classification to which
demoted.

c. Any officer demoted due to a reduction in force shall be promoted back in

the reverse order of demotion without any competitive re-examination for
the classification from which he was demoted.

19
3.

J. Reinstatement and Reappointment.

1.

CHI-1939680v6

Any grievance submitted concerning a layoff will be submitted at the third step of
the grievance procedure and the parties expressly agree that they will expedite the
final resolution thereof.

Reinstatement. A former member may, upon written request, be considered for
reinstatement into the rank of police officer. Such request may be honored, at the
discretion of the Chief of Police, provided that it is made prior to the expiration of
two (2) years from the date of separation from service; the member was in good
standing at the time of the separation; and the former member is still physically
qualified. Persons so requesting shall submit a written request in letter form to
the Chief of Police, who shall direct the Recruiting Section to conduct an
investigation of the former member’s activities during the period of absence to
determine the applicant’s qualifications to return to duty. The investigation report
from the Recruiting Section shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police for
appropriate action prior to reinstatement. Such investigation shall be conducted
regardless of the reason for the separation. Persons so reinstated will lose all
longevity pay time. Seniority for time absent from the job will be lost; however,
unused accrued sick time will be returned to the member’s sick bank. At the
discretion of the Chief of Police, a member who has been reinstated may be
required to attend a complete recruit training program or portion thereof, at the
Detroit Metropolitan Academy.

  

 

Reappointment. A former member who has been separated from the Department
for a period of two (2) years or more may apply for reappointment to the rank of
police officer. Reappointment is a re-hire procedure, and a former member
applying for reappointment will be placed on an eligibility list, provided that the
former member meets all requirements for appointment to the Department under
current recruit hiring practices. Persons reapplying to the Department and
approved for reappointment by the Recruiting Section must have final approval
by the Chief of Police. Should the person be re-appointed, all longevity pay time
will be lost, plus all previously unused sick time. All previous seniority will be
lost until a one (1) year probationary period is completed, at which time an
adjusted seniority date will be furnished, excluding the time the member was
absent from the job, strictly for Department purposes.

Salary Status. The salary of reinstated or re-appointed members will be reduced
by one (1) step for each full year of absence. Any officer above the rank of police
officer who resigns and is subsequently reinstated or re-appointed is precluded
from returning to the member’s former rank. Should an officer of the rank of
sergeant or above resign and then be reinstated or re-appointed, and at a future
date be promoted, the time in rank previous to the resignation shall not be counted
as seniority within the rank.

Military Service. The foregoing limitations other than physical qualifications

shall not be applicable to those members who return from active military service
and are entitled to re-employment under Federal law. Such written request must

20
be made within ninety (90) days after the expiration of government service.
However, to facilitate prompt processing of the reinstatement application, persons
are encouraged to request reinstatement prior to separation from military service.

 

11. GENERAL CONDITIONS

A. The Department will furnish for the use of the Union, space for a bulletin board at each of
its precincts or entities where Union members are assigned. Bulletin boards shall be used
only for the following notices:

1. Recreational and social affairs of the Union

2. Union meetings

3. Union elections

4. Information of happenings of other departments or unions

5. Reports of the Union

Notices and announcements shall not contain anything of a political nature except notices
with respect to internal elections. Notices and announcements shall not contain anything
of a libelous nature.

B. An Employee shall not use his privately owned vehicle for any police purpose.
Cc. Employees are urged to keep their commanding officers informed of where they can be

reached whenever they are out of town off duty for periods of forty-eight (48) hours or
less. For absences of longer periods, Employees must so inform their commanding

officers.
D. Safety glasses and ear protectors shall be provided at all police firing ranges.
E. Lockers of individual officers shall not be opened for inspection except with permission

of and in the presence of the officer or his designated representative or steward.

F. No member shall be prohibited from engaging in any political activity, either partisan or
non-partisan, except while working.

G. Compensatory Time Banks. Compensatory time shall be separated into two (2)
categories which shall be reported on the Employee’s bi-weekly paycheck statement.
The first category shall reflect compensatory time accumulated prior to April 15, 1986
and shall reflect excused time as described in Article 31 (Excused Time). The second
category shall include compensatory time earned on or after April 15, 1986, which shall
be subject to the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (F.L.S.A.). Compensatory
time in the second category shall be limited to a total of four hundred eighty (480) hours
or whatever limitation may hereafter be imposed by law. Compensatory time used shall
first be charged to the pre-April 15, 1986 bank and thereafter charged to the post-April
15, 1986 bank. Immediately prior to an Employee’s promotion to a position outside the

CHI-1939680v6 21
DPOA bargaining unit, the Department shall have the option to pay out the Employee’s
accumulated compensatory time based upon the Employee’s then-current rate of pay or
as otherwise provided by law.

H. Work Period. The work period for purposes of computing overtime is twenty-eight (28)
consecutive days and includes eight (8) leave days.

12. FUNERAL LEAVE

A. If a death occurs among members of the Employee’s immediate family, such Employee
will be granted three (3) days funeral leave, not to be deducted from his sick bank,
provided that such leave may be extended to five (5) days within the discretion of the
Commanding Officer based on individual circumstances.

B. If a death occurs among the relatives of the Employee, such Employee will be granted
one (1) day funeral leave not to be deducted from his sick bank.

Cc. The immediate family is defined as wife, husband, son, daughter, brother, sister, father,
mother, stepmother, stepfather or other members of the household.

Dz A relative is defined as a grandson, granddaughter, grandmother, grandfather, great
grandchild, great grandparent, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, uncle, aunt, mother-in-law or
father-in-law.

13. OFF-DUTY COURT APPEARANCES

A. A minimum of three (3) hours credit at time and one-half shall be credited for each off-
duty court appearance, except as specified herein. When an officer who is on-duty is
directed to appear in court and that court appearance extends beyond his normal off-duty
time it shall be recorded as overtime and not as off-duty court time. Off-duty court
appearances for a period of less than forty-five (45) minutes which abut a pre-scheduled
shift may be treated as either overtime or court time at the option of the Department.
Employee’s regularly scheduled working hours shall not be changed to circumvent this
provision for payment for off-duty court appearances.

B. Should a police officer attend court while being carried sick on Platoon Two, the
following provisions shall apply:

If the actual amount of time spent in court is less than three (3) hours, the member shall
be credited with three (3) hours worked at straight time. For the remaining portion of the
member’s shift, a deduction shall be made from the member’s sick time.

If the court appearance is for three (3) hours or more, the member shall be carried
working for the actual amount of time spent in court. For the remaining portion of the
member’s shift, a deduction shall be made from the member’s sick time. If the court
appearance extends beyond the end of Platoon Two, the member shall be compensated at
the rate of time and one-half for the actual amount of time spent in court beyond the end
of the shift.

CHI-1939680v6 22
Members who are carried disabled are already paid for their time off and therefore shall
be carried on Platoon Two and will not receive compensation of any type for their
appearance in court. If the court appearance extends beyond the end of Platoon Two, the
member shall be compensated at the rate of time and one-half for the actual amount of
time spent in court beyond the end of the shift.

Department members scheduled to work Platoon One or Platoon Three who are carried
sick shall be compensated for off-duty court appearances pursuant to contractual
guidelines when they appear in court on Platoon Two.

For all off-duty court time earned, on each court appearance notice turned in, the first
forty (40) hours of straight time earned as off-duty court time (60 hours at time and one-
half) shall be compensatory time. Thereafter, members shall be given the option of being
paid in cash or being credited with compensatory time. Furthermore, such off-duty court
time shall be paid in cash rather than granting compensatory time when necessary to
comply with F.L.S.A. requirements.

Normally, Employees shall not be required to attend court on their leave days or during
their furlough period. In the event that court attendance may be required while he is on
leave or furlough, an Employee may be carried on-duty or off-duty, at his option, while
on Platoon Two.

Employees not assigned or working downtown shall be reimbursed for their parking fees
if the following procedure is followed. When the police lot is filled, the Employee shall
show the lot attendant his Court Appearance slip and receive a Parking Fee
Reimbursement Authorization form. The Employee shall be reimbursed monthly by the
Accounting Office via Department mail.

A member who is required to appear in court on a holiday will receive credit either for an
off-duty court appearance at the three (3) hour minimum or holiday premium pay (1.5 x)
for the actual time spent on the court appearance, whichever is greater.

Any time that compensation is due under the Fair Labor Standards Act, it shall be paid
the next pay period following performance of the work.

14. OVERTIME

Pursuant to its management rights under Article 6, the City has the right to schedule overtime
work and to require Employees to work mandatory overtime.

A.

Prior to any fiscal year all members will be required to sign a list indicating their
preference to be paid in cash or compensatory time for overtime worked. Once a member
elects or does not elect to take time instead of cash payment, he/she is restricted to that
choice for the entire fiscal year. All overtime will be credited at the rate of time and one-
half. For the first seventy-five (75) hours of overtime work in a fiscal year, for which
there is one hundred twelve and one-half (112%) hours of credit, the Employee shall have
an option of receiving compensatory time instead of payment in cash. All overtime
beyond the first one hundred twelve and one-half (112%) converted time hours must be

CHI-1939680v6 23
paid in cash. However, in any fiscal year, not more than one hundred twelve and one-
half (112%) converted time hours may be earned as compensatory time as a result of
overtime worked. Furthermore, such overtime shall be paid in cash rather than granting
compensatory time when necessary to comply with F.L.S.A. requirements.

B. Overtime shall be calculated on the following basis:

1. An Employee shall be entitled to an Overtime Premium for all compensable hours
of work in excess of eighty (80) hours in a single two (2) week pay period. For
purposes of computing overtime, meal periods will not be deemed to be
compensable or counted as time worked for the purposes of computing overtime
unless the member is denied such period by competent authority. The tour of
duty shall include time spent at the normal line-up or roll-call. For purposes of
applying these overtime rules, normal line-up or roll-call shall be deemed to
consist of fifteen (15) minutes at the beginning of a day’s assignment and fifteen
(15) minutes at the end of the assignment.

2. An Employee shall be entitled to an Overtime Premium for all compensable hours
of work on a leave day, as defined in this Article.

3. When an emergency makes it necessary for a member to work all or part of a
furlough or leave day excluding court appearances, such time shall be considered
as overtime. Any furlough or leave days for which overtime credit are given shall
be canceled.

4. In no case shall overtime or other premium compensation be pyramided,
duplicated, compounded or paid twice for the same hours of work.

Cc. Unless additional compensation is required by the FLSA or some other wage and hour
law, the Overtime Premium will be computed by dividing the Employee’s annual salary
by 2080 and multiplying that quotient by 1.5. In those cases where an Employee works
overtime and is entitled to receive a shift premium, the shift premium rate of pay for
overtime hours worked will be determined by multiplying the rate of the applicable shift
premium by 1.5

D. To the extent any subsequent CBA between the parties provides for longevity payments,
the parties may consider incorporating the language in the Article 14, Section C of the
2009-2012 collective bargaining agreement as a potential guideline for calculating
overtime in such subsequent agreement.

E. Prescheduled Overtime.

1. If the Department has been notified of a personnel shortage with two (2) or more
hours notice before the work schedule is to start, then filling of the vacancy
should first be attempted by shifting personnel from one assignment to another.
All Employees within the collective bargaining unit can be considered for this
purpose.

CHI-1939680v6 24
  

2. If it is not possible to meet service needs by such shifting, then overtime work
will be required but the same must be offered in the following order:

a. First, by seniority order amongst Employees of the rank of the vacancy, in
the unit of the vacancy, and on the shift of the vacancy. Such is to be done
by telephone canvassing of the Employees in said category who are not
working on that day.

() In the event that such an Employee not working is contacted and
agrees to work the overtime, said Employee is to be informed that
he MUST appear for duty no later than the regularly scheduled
start of the shift (15 minute roll call period is optional depending
on circumstances and the Employee’s wishes); furthermore, if his
services will be needed for less than a full eight (8) hours (as in
cases when he may be needed only until the power shift
supervisors report for duty), then he shall be notified of same.

(2) In the event the Employee contacted does not arrive at the time
agreed to, an on-duty supervisor selected by seniority rotation may
work overtime. If the Employee not working (the one who was
called at home) arrives later, the Employee working overtime is
not to be replaced by the other Employee. The other Employee
will not work.

b. If phone contacts do not produce an Employee willing to work, then the
work can be assigned to an Employee selected in inverse seniority order
off of a precinct-wide seniority list. Also, depending upon needs, the
overtime in such cases may be ended prior to the end of the shift with the
vacancy (see paragraph 2 above).

F. Overtime Rotation List. The following guidelines will be adhered to with respect to

accounting for overtime that is worked: There shall be a seniority roster for each rank on
each shift, and the roster shall be kept up-to-date.

1.

CHI-1939680v6

Employees who elect to accept the offered overtime do not fall within the
Department payroll category “Recall Compensation” and the contractual
provisions concerning such are not applicable. Also, no minimum amount of
overtime is to be guaranteed beyond that agreed to on the telephone.

Employees who refuse the overtime or who cannot report for duty by the start of
the shift will lose their turn on the overtime rotation list and will not again be
offered overtime until their name is again reached in seniority order.

Employees who cannot be contacted by telephone (one attempt) shall be listed as
“unable to contact” (UTC) and shall retain their rotation position.

Limited duty personnel will not normally be offered overtime, however, such an
Employee shall not lose his position on the overtime roster. The Department may

25
offer overtime to an Employee, who can fill the position needed, even if he is on
limited duty.

Employees on furlough will be eligible for overtime opportunities on a voluntary
basis. The fact that they are on furlough shall be entered on the overtime roster.

Employees being carried sick or disabled on the preceding day need not be
contacted, unless such Employee has notified his work location that he is ready
for duty and will report for his next scheduled tour of duty. Sick or Disabled will
be entered on the overtime roster.

The Association steward and the shift lieutenant will verify the overtime roster
after each selection.

15. LEAVES OF ABSENCE

A. General Leaves of Absence.

A leave of absence without pay may be granted to Employees with at least three (3) years
of continuous service with the City as a police officer for a period not to exceed one (1)
year. The Employee shall submit the request for the leave of absence, in writing, to the
Chief of Police through channels. The request shall include the reason(s) for the leave
and the length of time requested. All recipients of educational leaves must present
continuing proof of enrollment for the specified period of absence. The Union shall be
notified when a leave of absence of thirty (30) days or more has been granted.

B. Medical Leaves of Absence.

1.

CHI-1939680v6

To be eligible for a medical leave of absence, an Employee must have a minimum
of one (1) year of continuous service with the City as a police officer from the
date of appointment to the effective date of the leave of absence. No Employee
shall be required to exhaust banked sick time or other accrued benefits as a
condition of taking a medical leave of absence.

A medical leave of absence without pay shall be granted to an Employee who is
suffering from a non-service connected sickness or disability for which the
Employee’s physician prescribes extended treatment or rest.

A written request for a medical leave of absence shall be submitted to the Chief of
Police. The request shall contain the diagnosis, treatment prescribed, and length of
absence required. It must be accompanied by a signed endorsement from a
physician describing a complete medical diagnosis.

In no case may a medical leave of absence extend beyond six (6) months except
with the permission of the Chief of Police. Before an Employee on medical leave
is returned to duty, a physician designated by the Department shall make a written
recommendation to the Chief of Police. Employees desiring rehire after the leave
of absence has expired shall apply for reappointment under the prevailing
Department policies.

26
Cc. Maternity Leaves of Absence.

1.

To be eligible for a maternity leave of absence, an Employee must have a
minimum of one (1) year of continuous service with the City as a police officer
from the date of appointment to the effective date of the leave of absence. No
Employee shall be required to exhaust banked sick time or other accrued benefits
as a condition of taking a maternity leave of absence.

Maternity leave without pay shall commence when it is deemed by competent
medical authority that an Employee is no longer able to perform all the duties
involved in taking proper police action; when an Employee thinks she can no
longer safely work; or when her medical condition or any other valid reason leads
the Department to believe a mandatory leave of absence is necessary.

Upon confirmation of pregnancy, the commanding officer of the Employee’s
entity must be notified without unnecessary delay. The Employee shall furnish to
her commanding officer and a physician designated by the Department written
medical evidence from her doctor verifying her condition, stating an expected
delivery date, and evaluating her physical ability to perform regular police duties.

 

Prior to commencement of the leave, the Employee shall prepare an Inter-Office
memorandum, DPD Form #568, addressed to the Chief of Police requesting a
leave of absence for maternity reasons. This memorandum shall be prepared in
quadruplicate and shall state the request for leave with date of commencement
and the expected date of return to duty. It shall be presented to the Employee’s
commanding officer along with the appropriate medical letter from her doctor.

Within sixty (60) days after delivery, an Employee shall report to a physician
designated by the Department for a determination of her ability to return to full
duty. At this time the Employee shall present a medical letter from her doctor
indicating the appropriate date of her return to work. Notwithstanding the above,
in no case may an Employee’s maternity leave of absence extend six (6) months
beyond the date of delivery except with permission of the Chief of Police. Before
an Employee on maternity leave is returned to duty a physician designated by the
Department shall make a written recommendation to the Chief of Police.
Employees desiring rehire after the leave of absence has expired shall apply for
reappointment under the prevailing Department policies.

D. Mandatory Leave of Absence.

The Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act of 1997 amended the federal gun control
act to make it unlawful for any person (including a law enforcement officer) to ship,
transport, possess or receive firearms or ammunition, if convicted of a crime of domestic
violence.

1.

CHI-1939680v6

A misdemeanor crime of domestic violence is defined as an offense that:

a. is a misdemeanor under federal or state law; and

27
b. has, as an element, the use or attempted use of physical force or the
threatened use of a deadly weapon, committed by a current or former
spouse, parent, or guardian of the victim, by a person with whom the
victim shares a child in common, by a person who is cohabiting or has
cohabited with the victim as a spouse, parent or guardian, or by a person
similarly situated to a spouse, parent or guardian of the victim.

2. Any member convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence will be
carried working in an administrative restricted duty capacity at any work location
as determined by management for nine (9) months from the date of conviction in
order to permit the member to have the conviction reversed, pardoned, set aside or
expunged, or if the disqualification is removed because of a change in legislation
or the act is invalidated.

3. If the conviction has not been removed after nine (9) months, the member will be
placed on a three (3) month unpaid leave of absence.

4. At the end of the three (3) month leave of absence, unless the conviction is
removed, the member’s employment shall be terminated. The member may
reapply for employment provided that the conviction is subsequently removed and
he meets all other criteria for employment, including requirements of the
Michigan Commission on Law Enforcement Standards (M.C.O.L.E.S.).

Termination of Leaves of Absence.

At least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of a leave of absence the Employee
shall submit to the Chief of Police written notice of intent to return to duty. For failure to
submit the above notice or failure to report at the expiration of the leave, the Employee
will be considered to be absent without leave.

Conduct on Leave.

Employees on leaves of absence shall maintain the same standards of conduct that are
required of sworn police officers. Acts of misconduct of a serious or grave nature that
are committed by an Employee while on a leave of absence may subject the Employee to
disciplinary action in accordance with this Agreement up to and including discharge from
the Department.

16. EMPLOYEES’ RIGHT - INVESTIGATIVE PROCEDURES

Each Employee shall be guaranteed the following rights but this section shall not be construed as
a section of limitation:

A.

Any Employee who is accused of violating any criminal law, City, State or Federal shall
be entitled to his or her full rights under the State and Federal Constitutions without being
disciplined for exercising such rights.

After an Employee is ordered to make any written statement in response to any alleged
misconduct or possible misconduct on his part, he shall have at least forty-eight (48)

CHI-1939680v6 28
hours from the time of the order in which to comply. The parties may extend this period
by mutual agreement. If any Employee is ordered to make an oral statement, he shall
comply subject to the receipt of Miranda or Garrity warnings or both and shall be given a
reasonable time to act in accordance with such rights.

Cc. An Association officer, counsel or both shall have the right to be present at all
disciplinary hearings at the request of the Employee and shall further have the right to be
present during all administrative and investigatory proceedings when the investigated
officer must be present.

Dz Throughout all disciplinary hearings, each Employee shall be presumed innocent.
E. No Employee shall be disciplined, discriminated against, or transferred because he
exercises any of his constitutional rights before any grand jury, investigative body, court

 

or law enforcement agency - Federal, State and Local as well as any investigative
committee of any legislative body - Federal, State and Local.

F. If any disciplinary procedures within the Department are changed during the term of this
Agreement in such a way as to render any of the provisions of this section inapplicable or
as to require additional provisions in this section or as to require modifications to this
section, the subject matter and provisions of this section will be subject to renegotiation
between the City and the Association.

G. No Employee shall be prohibited from engaging in political activity, either partisan or
non-partisan, except when actually on duty, or while in uniform or while acting in official
capacity as a police officer.

H. An Employee who is indicted or charged with a felony, a crime of moral turpitude, or a
misdemeanor with a potential jail sentence may be placed on unpaid administrative leave
without pay but with medical benefits pending the outcome of the criminal proceeding.
At the conclusion of the criminal proceeding, if the Department chooses not to pursue
disciplinary action, the Employee will be reinstated. If the Department pursues
disciplinary action for a matter arising out of the same set of facts and circumstances as
those surrounding the criminal proceedings, the Employee will be subject to the
discipline process pursuant to the terms and time frames set forth in Article 9.

 

An Employee indicted or charged with a crime less than a felony, a crime of moral
turpitude, or a misdemeanor with a potential jail sentence may be assigned to
administrative duties consistent with the needs of the Department or suspended with pay
pending resolution of the criminal proceedings.

 

I. In the event that an Employee is exonerated from criminal charges and subsequently
ordered to be reinstated by an arbitrator, that Employee’s back pay award will be
determined by the arbitrator based on the facts of the case subject to the limitations of
Section L. In no case will an Employee who admits to a felony, a crime of moral
turpitude, or a misdemeanor with a potential jail sentence or accepts a plea arrangement
be entitled to any back pay upon reinstatement.

CHI-1939680v6 29
J. Whenever a member is being questioned or interviewed by his/her Commanding Officer
and/or the Department or by any of its units or bureaus, for any reason which could lead
to criminal actions or charges, such questioning or interview shall be conducted under the
following conditions:

1.

CHI-1939680v6

The investigative interview shall be conducted at a reasonable hour, preferably at
a time when the member is on duty, unless the seriousness of the questioning is of
such a degree that an immediate investigative interview is required.

No investigative interview shall begin until the member has been notified that
he/she has a right to have counsel or an officer of the Association present.

An Employee will be given forty-eight (48) hours written notice prior to an
investigative interview in a non-criminal investigation, except in cases of
emergency. In non-criminal investigations, the Employee shall be supplied with a
copy of any complaints that have been filed against him/her and all relevant
information at the time he/she is ordered to appear at the investigative interview.

 

In those instances where a command level investigation of an informal citizen’s
complaint, as opposed to those on DPD 512, progresses to the point where a
written statement is ordered, the officer will be provided with an inter-office
memorandum stating the complaint made against him, the identity of the person
who filed the complaint, and the specific questions that the investigating
supervisor wants answered. This shall include investigations delegated to the
command to handle from other departmental agencies, such as the Internal
Controls Bureau.

Employees required to be interviewed by the Professional Standard Bureau will
be given forty-eight (48) hours written notice prior to the investigative interview.
Provided, however, that the obligation to give forty-eight (48) hours written
notice shall not apply: (1) to individuals who have been arrested; (2) to
individuals who are questioned under Miranda; and (3) where the seriousness of
the investigation is of such degree that an immediate interview is required.

No investigative interview shall begin until the Employee has been notified that
he/she has a right to have legal counsel and a representative of the Union present,
except that an officer who is called before the Internal Affairs Section who at the
time he/she is notified to appear is advised in writing that the purpose of the
questioning is not to charge him/her with any criminal conduct or to discipline
him/her and that he/she is only being called as a witness, shall not be entitled to
the presence of a Union representative during the investigative interview. In
investigations in which the suspect officers are unknown, the Department may
require the Union representative to be a Union officer.

 

 

 

The Employee being questioned shall be informed prior to such investigative
interview of the name of all persons present during the investigative interview. If
any of the interviewers are sworn police officers, at least one shall be present
during the investigative interview who is of a rank higher than that of the officer
being interviewed.

30
7. The attorney representing the officer shall be allowed to ask questions at the time
of the investigative interview.

8. Neither the home address nor the photograph of any member suspected of any
wrongdoing shall be given to the press or the news media without the written
consent of the member.

9. If a record is made at the time of the investigative interview and improper conduct
is alleged, the Employee shall be entitled to a copy of the tape or the transcript, if
a transcript is made, for the cost of duplication. If a transcript is made at the
Union’s request the Union will pay for the cost of the transcript.

K. The complete investigative interview of the member, including a notation of all recess
periods, shall be recorded and there shall be no unrecorded questions or statements. At
the request of the member, a copy of the investigative interview shall be furnished to him.

L. If an Employee’s disciplinary penalty is simply modified or lessened to the extent that
he/she has a claim for partial back wages during a period of suspension as the result of
the modification or the lessening of the penalty, claims for back wages will be limited to
the amount of wages that the Employee otherwise would have earned less any
compensation for personal services he may have received from any source during the
period in question but excluding previously Department authorized income earned
outside his regularly scheduled work period.

M. The Investigative staff of the Board of Police Commissioners will have the right to
question and interview Employees and such right will in no way abridge or change the
rights of Employees under this Agreement or under any Local, State, or Federal law or
the Constitution of the United States, or State of Michigan.

In no event will any recommendations or actions resulting from such investigative
interview or questioning lead to any discipline outside or inconsistent with any discipline
procedures or discipline matters maintained in this Agreement or as may be established
and maintained by the Department in accordance with this Agreement.

Further, no Employee, after he/she has been once disciplined by the Department, will be
re-disciplined, for any reason whatever for any matters arising out of the same set of facts
and circumstances surrounding the first disciplinary action.

N. An Employee will be notified in writing of the results of any departmental investigation
of him/her within sixty (60) days after the investigation is completed. If the Employee is
charged either criminally or departmentally, that will be the notification.

17. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION RATINGS

A. Rating Periods.

Performance evaluation ratings will be completed twice a year for all members. The
rating periods shall be from May Ist through October 31st and November Ist through
April 30th.

CHI-1939680v6 31
The May through October ratings shall be completed during the month of November and
forwarded by December 10th, to be reviewed per the distribution outline. Final
distributions will be completed by December 20th.

The November through April ratings shall he completed during the month of May and
forwarded by June 10th, to be reviewed per the distribution outline. Final distributions
will be completed by June 20th.

B. Each Employee shall be rated by his or her immediate supervisor.

Cc. Upon completion of the rating, each member will be personally informed of his
respective evaluations by the immediate supervisor who prepared the evaluation.

D. Any member who wishes to appeal his performance evaluation must make a written
request to the Chief of Police or his/her designee within thirty (30) days of receiving his
copy of the evaluation and must identify each aspect of the evaluation he is appealing and
cite a brief basis for appealing that rating.

18. LEAVE DAYS AND JOB ASSIGNMENTS

A. A prescheduled temporary absence from duty of twenty-four (24) hours duration shall be
defined as a leave day unless otherwise designated (e.g., sick leave, funeral leave,
compensatory time, etc.) by the Department. Leave days granted to Employees who
work Monday through Friday shall be Saturdays and Sundays. An Employee working an
eight hour shift schedule shall be entitled to eight (8) leave days in each twenty-eight (28)
day work period.

B. The present practice of Employees submitting leave day requests shall continue. Upon
submitting the request the Employee shall circle the days he wishes to be granted under
the conditions of this Article.

1. Employees shall be granted a minimum of four (4) circled days for each twenty-
eight (28) day work period; provided, that an Employee may select five (5) circled
days in four (4) work periods per fiscal year which shall be designated by the
Union and promulgated by special order.

2. Further, in the event that more leave day requests are submitted than the allowable
percentage to be off on any given day or days, then the most senior Employees
shall be granted their requests. When leave day requests are less than the
allowable percentage to be off, then all such requests for that day or days shall be
granted.

 

Cc. Under normal conditions, job assignments and leave days shall be posted seven (7) days
prior to the end of the current work period. After having been posted, leave days shall be
changed only by mutual consent of the officer and the Department, except when leave
days are canceled because of an emergency.

D. After leave days are posted, Employees may mutually agree, with prior written approval
of their supervisor, to exchange leave days.

CHI-1939680v6 32
19. UNIFORMS

A. Initial Uniform Allowance. At time of hire, Employees shall receive an initial uniform
allowance of eight hundred and fifty dollars ($850) or, in the alternative, the Department
may institute a uniform voucher system and issue Employees uniform vouchers in lieu of
a cash payment. In the event that the Department changes its specifications regarding
uniforms and/or equipment, Employees shall receive an initial uniform allowance as
provided above. The initial uniform allowance that Employees receive in the event of a
change in Department specifications shall be provided in lieu of the annual uniform
allowance as set forth in Section B. In no event shall any Employee receive both an
initial uniform allowance and an annual uniform allowance in the same year.

B. Annual Uniform Allowance. The Department will no longer issue replacement uniforms
and accessories. Except as provided in Section A, members will instead receive a
uniform allowance of eight hundred and fifty dollars ($850) annually for the procurement
and maintenance of all of the member’s required uniforms and_ accessories.
Alternatively, the Department may institute a uniform voucher system and issue
Employees uniform vouchers in lieu of cash payments. The member shall be responsible
for procuring uniforms and equipment according to Department specifications. This
allowance shall not include maintenance and procurement of bulletproof vests or other
specialty equipment, which the Department shall continue to procure and issue directly to
members.

Cc. Annual Cleaning Allowance. Employees shall receive an annual uniform cleaning
allowance of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250) per year payable the first payroll
period each fiscal year. Alternatively, the Department may institute a uniform cleaning
voucher system and issue Employees uniform cleaning vouchers in lieu of cash
payments.

Dz The annual uniform allowance shall be payable on July 1“ to Employees who were hired
on or before April 1* of that year. Employees who were hired after April 1* of that year,
will not receive an annual uniform allowance until the subsequent July 1*.

E. For purposes of calculating eligibility for payment of these allowances, all members shall
receive payment of these allowances with the following exceptions:

1. A member shall be considered off the payroll and ineligible for this allowance if
he/she has retired, resigned or has been discharged with an effective date before
July 1st of the fiscal year payment is to be made.

2. Members discharged and suspended without pay who have a pending appeal of
the discharge shall not receive payment of the uniform cleaning allowance unless
and until the discharge is overturned at an appellate level at which time they shall
be made whole.

3. Members on extended AWOL or ANP status on July Ist of the fiscal year
payment is to be made will not receive the uniform cleaning allowance unless

CHI-1939680v6 33
they return to active regular duty during the fiscal year at which time they will
receive full payment.

Members on an unpaid leave of absence on July Ist of the fiscal year will not be
entitled to payment for the uniform cleaning allowance until the next fiscal year.

20. HOSPITALIZATION, MEDICAL, DENTAL AND OPTICAL

CARE

A. During the term of this Agreement, Employees will be eligible to participate in the group
medical, prescription drug, dental, and vision plans (“Medical Plans”) offered by the
City. Unless the parties mutually agree otherwise, the City’s 2014 medical plan designs
(“Medical Plan Designs”) will remain in place during the term of this Agreement. For
purposes of this Section, the term Medical Plan Design will collectively refer to
deductibles, co-payments, covered services, networks, and third party administrators or
insurers.

1.

Notwithstanding this section A, the City will promptly analyze providing
ScriptGuideRx, Inc. as a pharmacy benefits manager (“PBM7”) for the self-insured
PPO option provided to police and firefighter active employees who enroll for
health insurance. The City agrees to include ScriptGuide as a PBM for its self-
insured option for active police and firefighter enrollees if (i) the City concludes
- in its sole discretion - that ScriptGuide can be provided on a cost neutral or
lower cost for the City during its first contract year of use and the Contract
term, and (ii) following an analysis by the City respecting ScriptGuide’s
applicable managed formulary, generic utilization, network and co-payment
structure, and sharing of that analysis and discussion with the Unions, the Unions
approve the City’s use of ScriptGuide as the PBM for its self-insured option for
active police and firefighter enrollees, even if the co-pay structure for generic,
brand or specialty prescription drugs necessary for cost neutrality requires higher
active employee co-pays for certain forms of prescription drugs. The City shall
determine whether ScriptGuide will be cost neutral or lower prescription drug
costs based on the cost for the entire active population.

 

 

B. Employees will be required to make monthly contributions for their benefits based upon
the plan and coverage tier selected by the Employee. Monthly contributions will be
deducted from Employee payroll disbursements on a pre-tax basis (if authorized by the
employee), in accordance with applicable law.

1.

CHI-1939680v6

For calendar year 2014, Employees’ monthly contributions under the City’s
Medical Plans will remain at the levels in place as of the effective date of this
Agreement.

 

For subsequent calendar years during the term of this Agreement, Employees’
monthly contributions under the City’s Medical Plans will be adjusted annually to
the level necessary to maintain an 80/20 proportional share of the cost of the
medical coverage, subject to the terms and conditions and limitations set forth in
this Article. Under this cost sharing arrangement, the City will pay eighty percent

34
(80%) of the costs of each coverage tier in the City’s Medical Plans, and
Employees participating in each coverage tier will pay twenty percent (20%) of
the costs for such coverage tier. Premiums will be calculated as follows:

a. For the Health Alliance Plan (“HAP”) health maintenance
organization (“HMO”) plan, a participating Employee will pay
20% of the premium charged by HAP for his/her coverage tier.
Such premiums will be established by HAP, subject to
confirmation by an independent enrolled actuary retained by the

City (“Enrolled Actuary’).

b. For the Blue Cross/Blue Shield (“BCBS”) preferred provider
organization (“PPO”) plan, monthly contributions will be set such
that Employees in each coverage tier collectively pay twenty
(20%) of the costs for that coverage tier. Such monthly
contributions will be calculated by the Enrolled Actuary. Monthly
contributions will be calculated in accordance with generally
accepted actuarial principles, and will take into account claims
experience from the prior fiscal year, inflation, actual and
anticipated administrative costs, actual and anticipated fees and
surcharges (including those associated with compliance with the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (“ACA”)), and any
other relevant costs or factors as determined by the Enrolled
Actuary.

Cc. C.O.P.S. Health Trust: For calendar year 2015 and for subsequent calendar years during
the term of this Agreement, Employees may elect to participate in medical benefit plans
offered by C.O.P.S. Health Trust (“COPS Trust”) in lieu of the City’s Medical Plans
subject to the following conditions:

1.

CHI-1939680v6

An Employee who participates in COPS Trust may not concurrently participate in
any City Medical Plan.

For each Employee who elects to be covered by COPS Trust, the City will make a
monthly contribution to COPS Trust that is equal to the lesser of (a) the City’s pro
rata contribution under the HAP Plan in the corresponding coverage tier (e.g.
single, two person, family) or (b) the City’s pro rata contribution under the BCBS
Plan for the corresponding coverage tier. Under no circumstances will the City’s
monthly contribution to COPS Trust exceed the City’s monthly contribution for
coverage under the lowest cost City plan for the applicable coverage tier.

The City will have no obligations in connection with COPS Trust other than to
make the payments described in this Section C. Specifically, the City will not
have any administrative involvement whatsoever in connection with employee
participation in COPS Trust, and any employee participating in COPS Trust will
be responsible for paying any additional monthly premium payments beyond the
City’s monthly contribution pursuant to Section C.2 of this Article directly to
COPS Trust. Under no circumstances will the City be deemed to be an

35
administrator or fiduciary with respect to any medical plans provided by COPS
Trust.

The Union agrees to indemnify the City, and hold the City harmless, against any
and all claims asserted by employees or third parties against the City or any of its
elected or appointed officials, employees, agents, attorneys, or consultants that are
in any way related to or connected with employee participation in COPS Trust,
any medical plans offered by COPS Trust, including but not limited to any claims
for benefits provided to, or denied, City employees by COPS Trust, as well as any
and all claims that are in any way related to any acts or omissions by COPS Trust,
or its officers, directors, trustees, employees, or agents.

 

Dz VSP: For calendar year 2015 and for subsequent calendar years during the term of this
Agreement, Employees may elect to participate in vision benefit plans offered by VSP in
lieu of the City’s vision plan subject to the following conditions:

1.

An Employee who participates in VSP may not concurrently participate in any
City vision plan.

For each Employee who elects to be covered by VSP, the City will make a
monthly contribution to VSP that is equal to the the City’s pro rata contribution
under the Heritage vision plan in the corresponding coverage tier (e.g. single, two
person, family). Under no circumstances will the City’s monthly contribution to
VSP exceed the City’s monthly contribution for coverage under the lowest cost
City plan for the applicable coverage tier.

The City will have no obligations in connection with VSP other than to make the
payments described in this Section C. Specifically, the City will not have any
administrative involvement whatsoever in connection with employee participation
in VSP, and any employee participating in VSP will be responsible for paying any
additional monthly premium payments beyond the City’s monthly contribution
pursuant to Section C.2 of this Article directly to VSP. Under no circumstances
will the City be deemed to be an administrator or fiduciary with respect to any
medical plans provided by VSP.

The Union agrees to indemnify the City, and hold the City harmless, against any
and all claims asserted by employees or third parties against the City or any of its
elected or appointed officials, employees, agents, attorneys, or consultants that are
in any way related to or connected with employee participation in VSP, any vision
plans offered by VSP, including but not limited to any claims for benefits
provided to, or denied, City employees by VSP, as well as any and all claims that
are in any way related to any acts or omissions by VSP, or its officers, directors,
trustees, employees, or agents

E. Except as provided in this Article, the extent of coverage under the City’s Medical Plans
will be governed by the terms and conditions set forth in the applicable Medical Plans
offered by the City during the term of this Agreement. Plan documents may be modified
or amended by the City from time to time in accordance with the terms of the applicable
plan documents, provided that such amendments do not violate the terms of this Article.

CHI-1939680v6

36
Any questions or disputes concerning any City Medical Plans will be resolved in
accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in the applicable insurance policies or
plan documents and will not be subject to the Grievance & Arbitration Procedures set
forth in Articles 7 and 8 of this Agreement.

F. The failure of any insurance carrier(s), PBM, or plan administrator(s) to provide any
benefit for which it has contracted or is obligated will not result in any liability to the
City, nor will such failure be considered a breach by the City of any obligation
undertaken under this or any other Agreement. However, nothing in this Agreement will
be construed to relieve any insurance carrier(s) or plan administrator(s) from any liability
it may have to bargaining unit Employees or beneficiaries of bargaining unit Employees.

G. Except as set forth in this Article, during the term of this Agreement, the City Medical
Plans will provide benefits with an actuarial value as determined by the Enrolled Actuary
that are at the “Gold” level (i.e., approximate actuarial value of 80%), as defined by the
ACA. In the event that the actuarial value of a City Medical Plan’s benefits falls below
the “Gold” level as determined by the Enrolled Actuary during the term of the
Agreement, the City will meet and confer with the Union to discuss potential
modifications to the Medical Plan during the subsequent plan year to raise the actuarial
value of the benefits to the “Gold” level.

H. Notwithstanding any provision in this Article that could be construed to the contrary, this
Article will not be construed to require the City to fall out of compliance with the
requirements Public Act 152 of 2011 (“PA 152”). MCL § 15.561 et. seg. The City’s
Enrolled Actuary will be responsible for periodically monitoring compliance with the
requirements of PA 152. In any event where the Enrolled Actuary determines that the
City is reasonably likely to fall out of compliance with PA 152, the City will meet and
confer with the Union for a period not longer than thirty (30) days in order to discuss
potential modifications to the terms of the Medical Plans or to the allocation of premium
payments by the City and the Employees. To the extent the City and the Union are
unable to reach an agreement within thirty (30) days, the City may make any necessary
modifications to ensure compliance with PA 152.

 

I. Surviving Spouses/Dependents. Current and future spouses and dependents of
bargaining unit employees who are killed in the line of duty will be eligible to continue to
participate in the City’s Hospitalization, Medical, Dental, and Optical Care plans on the
same terms and conditions as active bargaining unit members.

J. Retiree Medical Benefits.
1. Retiree Medical Subsidy. The City will contribute the following amounts towards

the cost of retiree health benefits for Eligible Retirees (the “Retiree Medical
Subsidy”):

a. On or before January 31, 2015 (and each subsequent January 31
during the term of this Agreement), the City will contribute a total
sum of one million dollars and no cents ($1,000,000.00) to the
COPS Trust VEBA to fund retiree medical benefits for City of
Detroit employees (and Eligible Retirees) in the bargaining units

CHI-1939680v6 37
CHI-1939680v6

represented by the DPOA, the Detroit Police Lieutenants and
Sergeants Association (DPLSA), the Detroit Fire Fighters
As: on (DFFA), and the Detroit Police Command Officers
Association (DPCOA) (collectively, the “Public Safety Unions”).
The amount contributed on behalf of the DPOA will be determined
by: (a) dividing the total DPOA bargaining unit headcount as of
July 1, 2014, by (b) the total active employee headcount in the four
Public Safety Unions as of July 1, 2014, and then (c) multiplying
the quotient by $1,000,000.00 (DPOA headcount + total Public
Safety Union headcount) x $1,000,000.00).

 

b. Any foundation money available to fund medical benefits for
Public Safety Union retirees shall also be contributed to the COPS
Trust VEBA.

No Additional Liability. Other than the Retiree Medical Subsidy, the City shall
not be required to pay any additional amounts including, but not limited to start-
up costs, to the COPS Trust VEBA, or to pay any other sums (including but not
limited to administration expenses), in connection with retiree health coverage for
Eligible Retirees during the term of the Agreement. Moreover, the parties agree
that COPS Trust shall have sole responsibility for maintaining and investing all
funds contributed by the City pursuant to this Article 20, Section J, and shall be
solely responsible for determining the benefit design and form, amount, and
timing of all benefit payments to Eligible Retirees pursuant to this Agreement,
and COPS Trust shall have sole responsibility to ensure that all of COPS Trust’s
acts or omissions with respect to the provision of benefits to Eligible Retirees
comply with applicable law. As such, other than its obligation to timely pay the
Retiree Medical Subsidy, the City shall have no responsibility and shall face no
liability to any party with respect to the provision of benefits to Eligible Retirees
pursuant to Article 20, Section J.

Indemnification. The Union agrees to indemnify the City, and hold the City
harmless, against any and all claims asserted by employees or third parties against
the City or any of its elected or appointed officials, employees, agents, attorneys,
or consultants that are in any way related to or connected with employee or
Eligible Retiree participation in the COPS Trust VEBA, including but not limited
to any claims for benefits provided to, or denied, City employees or Eligible
Retirees (or their spouses or dependents) by the COPS Trust VEBA, as well as
any and all claims by other persons that are in any way related to any acts or
omissions by the COPS Trust VEBA, or its officers, directors, trustees, employees,
or agents.

Eligibility. Employees who retire on or before December 31, 2014 shall
participate in the OPEB settlement available to existing retirees in accordance
with the Plan of Adjustment in In re City of Detroit, Case No. 13-53846.
Employees who retire and receive pension benefits from the PFRS on or after
January 1, 2015 (“Eligible Retirees”) shall be eligible for retiree health care

38
benefits from the COPS Trust VEBA as determined by such VEBA and as _ set
forth herein.

21. FURLOUGH SELECTION AND CANCELLATION

A. The annual furlough shall be divided into two (2) seasons, Summer and Winter. Each
furlough season shall consist of thirteen (13) furlough periods, corresponding with the bi-
weekly payroll periods. Each furlough period shall contain ten (10) consecutive days,
which shall also include the standard number of leave days and up to three (3) Bonus
Vacation Days granted in connection with the furlough.

An Employee drawing the first furlough in any given work period may attach five (5)
leave days and up to three (3) Bonus Vacation Days at the end of the furlough (F) days.
An Employee drawing the second furlough in any given work period shall have the
following options concerning the five (5) attached leave days and up to three (3) Bonus
Vacation Days with the furlough:

Option 1: Attach one (1) leave day at the beginning of the furlough period with the
remaining four (4) leave days attached at the end of the furlough period. Should one (1)
or more Holiday(s) fall within the furlough period, then those days replaced by the
Holiday(s) may be attached at the beginning or the end of the furlough period. When
Bonus Vacations Days are attached, they may be placed at the beginning and/or the end
of the furlough period.

Option 2: Attach five (5) leave days and up to three (3) Bonus Vacation Days at the end
of the furlough period.

This does not change the requirement that eight (8) leave days must be used in each
twenty-eight (28) day work period. Leave days will not be carried forward into another
work period.

B. The choice of furloughs shall be by seniority on a shift basis, consistent with the efficient
operation of the precincts, and entity. In a given precinct, or entity, normally not more
than ten percent (10%) of the total number of police officers shall be absent on furlough
at the same time, unless the Department determines that the operational needs of the
Department require otherwise. Employees assigned to special or desired jobs on Platoon
Two shall draw furlough assignments among themselves and the overall ten percent
(10%) limitation shall apply. Certain Employees of the Traffic Safety Section, whose
duty assignments must be coordinated with the school year, may be furloughed to the
greatest extent possible during the prolonged school holidays occurring during Christmas,
Easter and summer vacations and between semesters and the overall ten percent (10%)
limitation set forth above shall not apply. Where there is a fraction of a percentage over
the ten percent (10%), an additional furlough period shall be allowed unless such
fractional allowance is specifically vetoed by the Chief in writing and posted prior to the
furlough draw.

CHI-1939680v6 39
Cc. In the absence of an Employee, the officer in charge or another Employee designated as a
representative of the absent Employee shall select the furlough period for him/her in
accordance with his/her choice by seniority.

Dz Employees shall make their furlough selection in accordance with the established
schedule of furlough periods.

Drawing for Summer furlough will be conducted on February 15th. Drawing for winter
furlough will be conducted on August 15th.

If the scheduled drawing date falls on a Saturday, the draw will be held on the preceding
Friday. If the date falls on a Sunday, the draw will be held on the following Monday.

E. Leave days when added to a furlough shall not be canceled unless the accompanying
furlough is canceled.

F. If an Employee is sick or disabled immediately prior to his vacation, and the Employee
provides medical proof of such illness or disability, the vacation shall be rescheduled to a
date that is mutually acceptable to the Employee and his commanding officer.

G. Members may elect to sell up to one (1) week of furlough time (five (5) consecutive
days) per furlough period. An election to sell furlough time shall be at the time of the
furlough draw. Payment shall be made within thirty (30) days after the furlough draw.

H. Members shall have the option of selling or banking one additional week of furlough time
annually. Payment for the second week shall be at the officer’s current rate of pay.
Payments pursuant to this Article shall not be included in average final compensation for
purposes of determining pensions. Such an option shall be given, in writing, by the
member at the time of furlough selection. Failure to exercise the option, in writing, at the
time of furlough selection shall be a full and complete waiver of the option for that
furlough period.

22. STEP INCREMENTS

Step increments shall be applied on the first day of the pay period in which the anniversary step
date of an Employee falls.

All Employees shall receive annual step increments which shall be equal to one-fifth (1/5) of the
difference between the maximum and minimum rate for Police Officer, not to exceed the
maximum rate in the range, pursuant to the attached Official Compensation Schedule.

23. EMERGENCY/EXCUSED LEAVE DAYS

Emergency or excused days shall be granted to a member for an absence justified by urgent
reasons such as attendance to demanding personal business and other pressing matters which
cannot be covered by other banked time. Permission to use emergency days must be granted in
advance from the member’s commanding officer or the officer in charge of his/her entity.
Supervisory personnel may make reasonable inquiries in order to verify that the request is

CHI-1939680v6 40
legitimate but shall maintain the confidentiality of any personal information. Not more than five
(5) emergency or excused days may be granted in any one fiscal year under any circumstances.
All emergency or excused days will be deducted from the member’s accumulated sick bank, and
will consequently affect the accumulation of bonus vacation days.

Any member under the restrictions of the attendance control program (DPD 350) shall not be
allowed to have emergency or excused days deducted from his sick banks and will be carried
Absent No Pay.

24. DEPARTMENT FILES

A. All personnel records which include home addresses, phone numbers and pictures of
members shall be kept confidential and never released to any person other than officials
of the Department or upon the written authorization of the member involved.

B. A member shall have the right to inspect his official personnel record wherever kept,
twice a year or more often for good cause shown.

Cc. Inspection shall be during regular business hours of the respective repository and be
conducted under supervision of the Department. Said member shall have the right to
make duplicate copies for his own use at his own expense. No records, reports,
investigations, evaluations or similar data belonging in the Personnel File or Medical File
shall be hidden from a member’s inspection.

D. A member shall have the right to include in his personnel record and in any other file
kept by the Department, a written refutation of any material he considers to be
detrimental and to request its removal.

E. Members may inspect their personnel file upon retirement and nothing shall be inserted
in such files after the date of retirement.

F. The Department need not comply with the above provisions for inspection in those areas
where there is a current investigation of the officer. The officer must be told, however,
that he is being investigated and appraised of the subject matter of the investigation.

G. The language in this Article shall not be construed in a manner that would violate
applicable law.

25. POLICE RESERVES

In continuing its policy on police reserves, the City will in no event use police reserves to
perform the essential core duties of bargaining unit members or to circumvent the holiday
overtime and/or any other provisions of this Agreement. Should a dispute over the deployment
of reserves arise, the burden of proceeding and the burden of proof in any grievance/arbitration
matter shall be on the Employer to establish by probative, objective evidence, that its use of
reserves did not circumvent any provision of the collective bargaining agreement, and, but for
the deployment of reserves, bargaining unit members would not have been used to participate in
the particular event, duty, function, activity, etc.

CHI-1939680v6 Al
Subject to the Department’s management rights under Article 6, reserves cannot be assigned to
ride with Employees unless the Employee consents and reserves shall not ride with Employees
assigned to one person cars.

26. POLICE ASSISTANTS

A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, the Department, at its discretion,
may utilize Police Assistants to perform the functions listed in Section D.

B. In filling Police Assistant positions, the Department shall give first preference to
individuals with prior experience as Police Officers with the Detroit Police Department.
However, the Department shall have no obligation to hire any individual who had a
significant disciplinary record with the Department or any person who has been
previously dismissed from a Police Assistant position, and if the Department cannot
reasonably or timely fill all Police Assistant positions with persons who have prior
Detroit Police Department experience, it may utilize individuals who had previous
experience as police officers with other police departments in the State of Michigan.

Cc. The Department shall require that all Police Assistants, as a requirement for employment,
either currently are, or will become within ninety (90) days, Michigan Commission on
Law Enforcement Standards (M.C.O.L.E.S.) certified.

Dz The functions that may be performed by Police Assistants should be limited to the
following:

Court Officer

Crime Analysis

Crime Scene Services
Disciplinary Administration
Fire Arms Inventory

Fiscal Operations
Forfeiture

Labor Relations

Liquor License

Media Relations

Police Law

Police Medical

Police Personnel

Prisoner Transport/Processing
Property Control

Records Management
Recruiting

Resource & Facilities Management
Secondary Employment
Technology Bureau

Traffic

Training

CHI-1939680v6 42
E. Police Assistants will be part of the DPOA bargaining unit. Notwithstanding any other
provision in this Agreement, Police Assistants will work on a part-time basis and shall
serve at the discretion of the Chief. Accordingly, Police Assistants shall not have access
to the grievance procedure (Article 7), arbitration procedure (Article 8), or disciplinary
procedure (Article 9). Police Assistants shall be paid $21 per hour except that Police
Assistants shall be eligible for wage increases in 2016, 2017, and 2018 as set forth in
Article 40. Police Assistants will be eligible for uniform allowances in accordance with
Article 19 of this Agreement.

  

F. Except as set forth in Section E and as required by law, Police Assistants are expressly
excluded from participating in, or benefiting from, the following provisions of this
Agreement: Grievance Procedure (Article 7), Arbitration (Article 8), Discipline (Article
9), Seniority (Article 10), Funeral Leave (Article 12), Off-Duty Court Appearances
(Article 13), Hospitalization, Medical, Dental and Optical Care (Article 20) (unless
required to provide such benefits under applicable law), Furlough (Article 21), Step
Increments (Article 22), Emergency/Excused Leave Days (Article 23), Shift Differential
(Article 28), Holidays (Article 29), Floating Holidays (Article 30), Excused Time (Article
31), Pension (Article 32), Recall Pay (Article 33), Sick Leave (Article 34), Bonus
Vacation Days (Article 36), Jury Duty (Article 37), Death Benefits and Life Insurance
(Article 38), Service Weapons (Article 39.C), Lump Sum for Banked Time (Article
39.F). Furthermore, while Police Assistants formerly employed by the Department will
not lose any previously accrued pension benefits, Police Assistants will not be eligible to
earn or accrue additional pension benefits.

G. The Department’s use of Police Assistants shall not result in a reduction in force (lay off)
among other bargaining unit Employees, nor shall the Department utilize Police
Assistants while any Employees are on lay off. Employees performing functions
assigned to Police Assistants shall be reassigned to other duties in accordance with the
terms of this Agreement, provided that an Employee reassigned under the terms of this
Section shall have the first right of return to his or her former position if, within two
years, the Department elects to again utilize a Police Officer to perform the functions of
the Employee’s former position.

H. This Article shall not impact or diminish the Department’s rights under any other
provision of this Agreement, including but not limited to Article 25 (Police Reserves) and
Article 39.H (Miscellaneous — Civilianization).

I. The DPOA acknowledges that, as an express quid pro quo for the receipt of an 8% wage
increase instead of a 5% wage increase for Police Officers effective the first pay period
following ratification of this Agreement that it has agreed to (a) the City’s use of Police
Assistants in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in this Article, (b)
reduction in the number of holidays (Article 29) and the institution of floating holidays
(Article 30), (c) elimination of accumulation of seniority sick bank time and creation of
the City’s right to pay out annually accumulated sick time in excess of 400 hours at 85%
(Article 34), (d) elimination of 2% lump sum payment effective January 1, 2015 and 1%
lump sum payment effective July 1, 2015, and (e) creation of City right to pay out
accumulated compensatory time upon promotion out of the DPOA bargaining unit
(Article 11). The DPOA further agrees to waive all rights to seek modifications to the

CHI-1939680v6 43
terms and conditions for Police Assistants set forth in this Article to the maximum extent
allowable under applicable law.

27. LEGAL REPRESENTATION AND INDEMNIFICATION

The City will provide legal counsel and pay any costs and judgments that arise out of lawsuits
filed against Employees alleging any act committed while said Employee was in the good faith
performance of his duties. A contrary determination by the City is not final and binding as
provided by the Municipal Code of the City of Detroit but is subject to review by an arbitration
panel under the grievance arbitration provisions of this Agreement. Pending a final
determination of whether or not the Employee is entitled to defense and indemnification by the
City, the City shall promptly undertake such defense on behalf of such Employee.

This provision shall otherwise be in accordance with Section 13-11-3 of the Municipal Code of
the City of Detroit.

28. SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL

Shift premium shall be paid to all members whose regular tour of duty begins within the hours
prescribed as follows, and in the amounts as set forth herein; if the tour of duty begins between
11:00 A.M. and 6:59 P.M., the rate of shift premium pay is fifty-five cents ($.55) per hour. If the
tour of duty begins between 7:00 P.M. and 3:59 A.M., the rate of shift premium is sixty cents
($.60) per hour.

The shift premium is paid to a member in addition to his basic rate of pay, for the regular tour of

duty starting within the hours designated above and any overtime hours worked in conjunction
with an afternoon or midnight shift.

29. HOLIDAYS

A. Schedule of Holidays.

Each Employee shall be entitled to the following holidays in accordance with this

schedule.
New Years Day January 1
Thanksgiving Day Fourth Thursday in November
Christmas Day December 25"

B. Day of Celebration.

1. The paid holiday, for all Employees of the Department, will be the actual holiday
date. Should the holiday fall on a weekend, the paid holiday will still be the
actual holiday date.

2. All entities normally closed on weekends will close on Friday if the holiday falls

on Saturday or they will close on Monday if the holiday falls on Sunday. The
Friday or Monday will be the leave day.

CHI-1939680v6 44
4.

Should the holiday fall on Sunday and the Monday leave day begins the next
twenty-eight (28) day work cycle, the leave day will be the Friday prior to the
holiday or a day mutually agreed upon between the employee and the
Department. Should that Friday already be used in conjunction with Article 31
(Excused Time), then the leave day will be Thursday or a day mutually agreed
upon.

Leave days shall not be scheduled on any designated holiday.

Cc. Holiday Compensation.

1.

Holiday Premium. Employees who are required to work on a holiday shall
receive one and one half time (1.5x) premium pay in addition to the regular day’s
pay.

Hours and Shifts. Any Employee who works a shift during which four (4) or
more regularly assigned hours, excluding overtime, extend into a paid holiday,
shall be entitled to holiday pay for the entire duration of the shift; provided
however, that the application of this rule shall not entitle any Employee to more
than one shift of holiday pay for all regular hours worked on a single holiday.

Dz Rotation of Work Opportunity. The scheduling of Employees to work on holidays shall
be on a seniority rotation basis with separate rotating rosters for each precinct platoon, as
specifically outlined in sub-section E. 5. and for each non-precinct entity in accordance
with past practice.

E. Preparation and Maintenance of Holiday Rosters.

1.

CHI-1939680v6

Posting Holiday Details. Holiday detail sheets will be posted on bulletin boards
in each precinct, or entity.

Under normal conditions, holiday assignments for Employees shall be posted
seven (7) days prior to the holiday. In instances where two (2) holidays fall
within a fourteen (14) day period, assignments for the second holiday will be
posted a minimum of two (2) days in advance of that holiday. Should a position
become available after the holiday detail sheet is posted and the Department
decides to fill that position, supervisors will ask the next eligible Employee(s) if
that Employee desires to work the holiday. Those Employees who decline under
this circumstance shall not be considered a refusal, and shall be entered on the
roster as “Holiday-Late Posting” (HLP).

If the holiday detail sheet is posted prior to the required contractual posting time,
management maintains the right to make any change. If the change in the holiday
detail is made, management shall notify any Employee affected by such change as
soon as possible, as well as the local Union representative. The corrected holiday
detail sheet must be re-posted within the minimal contractual posting time
limitation.

45
CHI-1939680v6

Once the holiday detail sheet is posted, within the minimum contractual posting
time, it may be changed only to correct an error or to fill a vacancy, and after
notice to a local Union representative. Supervisors shall notify any Employee
affected by such change as soon as possible.

Holiday detail sheets are posted in order to give all parties advance notice of
assignments and to permit the Union steward or the Employee to bring any
mistakes to the attention of his or her immediate supervisor in a timely manner.
An Employee shall notify his or her immediate supervisor of an error on the
holiday detail sheet immediately upon discovery, so that it may be corrected
forthwith. If an Employee who knows or reasonably should have known of an
error fails to provide such notice of the error to his or her immediate supervisor,
the error is not grievable.

 

Removal and Addition of Names. Throughout the year, Employee names will be
removed and added to various holiday rosters due to transfers, shift changes,
recalls from lay-off, new hire, etc. Employees shall be added to a roster
according to their respective seniority date. An Employee being added to a roster
with a common seniority date of an Employee already on the roster shall be
placed on the roster immediately below the Employees already on the roster with
the same seniority date.

If the holiday detail sheet has already been posted, in accordance with the
contractual time limits for posting, these Employees shall be placed on the roster
for the next holiday and not considered for the holiday already posted, unless new
vacancies arise prior to the holiday.

Holiday Rotation. Holiday rotation shall continue in accordance with the
following rules:

a. The holiday rotation roster shall have continual rotation and will not start
anew each July Ist.

b. The following steps shall be utilized for preparing a holiday roster.

i. A supervisor preparing the holiday roster shall list all members, in
descending seniority order, who will be considered to work that
respective holiday. The removal and addition of names to the
holiday roster shall conform with the preceding contractual holiday
requirements. A member’s holiday status for the previous holiday
shall be taken into consideration regardless of where he worked or
what roster he was on.

ii. Once this step is completed, the supervisor shall begin by first
selecting, in descending seniority order, the members who were
carried with a “Special Red Designation” (i.e., Holiday-Furlough,
Holiday-Sick, Holiday-Jury Duty, Holiday-Suspended, Holiday-
Limited Duty, Holiday-Late Posting, Holiday-Disabled, Holiday-
Absent with Leave, Holiday-Funeral Leave) during the previous

46
CHI-1939680v6

iii.

iv.

holiday. When selecting members who were carried with a Special
Red Designation, the supervisor shall begin at the starting point of
the previous holiday and continue through the entire holiday roster
once before ending at the current holiday’s starting point.

Once the members with Special Red Designations have been
selected, members with a red “Holiday” designation shall be
chosen, in descending seniority order, beginning at the starting
point of the current holiday and shall continue through the entire
holiday roster, returning to the current holiday’s starting point.

Once all members with red designations are selected for work
opportunities, the continual rotation shall continue from where it
left off the previous holiday (the current “starting point”), selecting
in descending seniority order members with black “holiday
worked”, “holiday refused” or no previous status, until sufficient
personnel are obtained.

A new cut off point will then be marked immediately following the
last member selected for a holiday worked opportunity.

Members eligible to work are to be selected to work scheduled hours
which correspond to the roster from which they are selected.

Employees who have flexible starting times (such as Cruiser crews, 30
Series, Morality crews, etc.) shall have their normal starting times
designated at the beginning of the twenty-eight (28) day work cycle in
which the holiday(s) fall. This designation is to be used for holiday rosters
only and shall not impede management from changing their working
hours.

Precinct Rosters. All precinct personnel shall be included on one of the following
rosters with the exception as noted in E.4.e. below:

a.

Platoon One. All employees who start work between 12:00 a.m. and 3:59
a.m.

Platoon Two. All employees who start work between 4:00 a.m. and
10:59 a.m. (including staff personnel).

Platoon Three. All employees who start work between 11:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m.

Platoon Four. All employees who start work between 4:01 p.m. and
11:59 p.m.

The exception to the above is personnel assigned to Special Operations

(formerly Special Events Section) of the First Precinct. Only First
Precinct Special Operations shall maintain their own rosters.

47
CHI-1939680v6

NOTE: These start times shall not include roll call time, nor desk
personnel who start earlier than normal hours.

Entries on Roster. Entries on the holiday roster shall be made in the following
manner:

a.

b.

Worked -W- (Black) - indicates an employee worked the holiday.

Holiday Refused -HR- (Black) - indicates an employee was given the
opportunity to work, but refused.

Holiday -H- (Red) - indicates an employee was not up to work the holiday
and was on holiday.

Holiday Furlough -HF- (Red) - indicates an employee was eligible to work
the holiday but declined the holiday due to being on furlough. The
furlough period for this designation shall consist of the ten (10) furlough
days as well as the customary number of leave days and up to three (3)
Bonus Vacation Days attached to the furlough period.

Holiday Sick -HS- (Red) - indicates an employee was eligible to work the
oliday, but was unable to do so because of being sick.

Holiday Disabled -HD- (Red) - indicates an employee was eligible to
work the holiday, but was unable to do so because of being disabled.

Holiday Jury Duty -HJD- (Red) - indicates an employee was eligible to
work the holiday, but was unable to do so because of jury duty.

Holiday Limited Duty -HLD- (Red) - indicates an employee was eligible
to work the holiday, but was not allowed to do so due to the fact that there
was no job openings available for an employee on limited duty status.

Holiday Late Posting -HLP- (Red) - indicates an employee was not
eligible to work the holiday when the holiday roster was posted but after
the posting was asked due to a position becoming available and declined.

Holiday Suspended - HX - (Red) - indicates an employee was eligible to
work the holiday but was suspended on the holiday and had disciplinary
roceedings still pending or an employee who was serving a suspension of
more than thirty (30) days as a result of completed disciplinary action
(after all appeals have been exhausted).

 

An officer serving a suspension of thirty (30) days or less as a result of
completed disciplinary action (after all appeals have been exhausted) shall
be allowed to work a holiday if eligible.

Holiday Absent with Leave - HAWL - (Red) - indicates an employee was
eligible to work the holiday but was on an authorized absence with leave.

48
1. Holiday Funeral Leave - HFL - (Red) - indicates an employee was eligible
to work but was on funeral leave.

Insufficient Personnel. In the event that insufficient Employees volunteer to work
the holiday, reverse seniority shall prevail and Employees shall be ordered to
work.

Exceptions to this draft shall be as follows:

Employees on furlough (inclusive of the customary number of attached leave
days) shall be bypassed in a draft situation.

F. Special Rules Affecting Rotation.

1.

CHI-1939680v6

Sick or Disabled Absences. Employees who are scheduled to work a holiday, but
are unable to do so due to being sick or disabled, shall be carried “Holiday Sick”
(HS) or “Holiday Disabled” (HD).

Employees on Furlough. For purposes of this Article, a furlough period includes
the customary five (5) attached leave days and up to three (3) attached Bonus
Vacation Days. The furlough includes the holiday even if it should fall on the first
day of the regularly scheduled furlough.

Employees scheduled for a furlough period that would include a holiday shall not
be charged with a furlough day for the holiday.

Employees on furlough when a holiday occurs shall be offered an opportunity to
work the holiday if their names are reached on the roster. If the Employee accepts
the opportunity, the entry made on the holiday roster shall be the same as if the
holiday had been worked while not on furlough. In order to assure that the
holiday scheduling of such Employees can be properly managed, prior to starting
their furlough or prior to the minimum posting date, whichever is earlier, the
employees must inform their immediate supervisor in writing whether or not they
desire to work the holiday.

The supervisor shall take into account the Employee’s choice when making up the
holiday detail sheet. Furloughed Employees who have expressed a desire to work
shall be responsible for ascertaining from the Precinct Desk Supervisor or the
supervisor in charge, whether or not they are scheduled to work the holiday.
Furloughed Employees who have expressed the desire to work and who
successfully receive a holiday assignment are subject to all the employment and
payroll rules of other non-furloughed Employees also scheduled to work and
should they fail to report to their assignment, the fact that they are on furlough
will not be an acceptable excuse.

Employees on furlough when a holiday occurs, and who decline their opportunity

to work, shall not be considered as having refused holiday work and shall be
entered on the roster as “Holiday Furlough” (HF).

49
CHI-1939680v6

Employees on furlough when a holiday occurs and who did not have an
opportunity to work because their names were not reached on the roster, shall be
entered on the roster as “Holiday” (H).

Employees on Limited Duty. Employees on limited duty status are fully entitled
to participate in the normal continuous rotation of holiday work opportunities.
However, their opportunity to receive an assignment is restricted to those
assignments which can be performed by the Employee on limited duty. Limited
duty positions shall not be created by bumping regular assigned Employees from
their respective regular job assignments.

Employees Temporarily Assigned-Out to Other Commands. Employees
assigned-out to other commands shall remain on the holiday roster of their parent
command and are fully entitled to work a holiday assignment at that command
when their name is reached with the following exceptions:

 

a. Belle Isle Summer Detail (Harbormaster Section). Employees assigned
to this detail shall be removed from their parent command’s holiday roster
and placed on the appropriate roster maintained at the Harbormaster
Section.

b. Auto Theft. Employees assigned into this entity, on limited duty status
(usually long term limited duty employees), shall be removed from their
parent command’s holiday roster and placed on the appropriate holiday
roster maintained at the Auto Theft.

 

c. Telephone Crime Reporting Section. Employees assigned into this
section (usually long term limited duty employees), shall only be allowed
to work at TCRS if they are eligible to work on their parent command’s
roster. If no work is available at this section, the employee retains the
right to work at his parent command if a position is available.

 

d. Field Duty Officer - Driver. The Field Duty Officer may select a driver
of his choice for a holiday regardless of whether or not the employee is
eligible to work the holiday on the parent command’s roster.

e. Identification Section. Employees assigned into this section (usually
long term limited duty employees), shall only be allowed to work at the
Identification Section if they are eligible to work on their parent
command’s roster. If no work is available at this section, the employee
retains the right to work at his/her parent command if a position is
available.

f. 224-DOPE. Employees assigned into this section (usually long term
limited duty employees) shall only be allowed to work at 224-DOPE if
they are eligible to work on their parent command’s roster. If no work is
available at this section, the employee retains the right to work at his
parent command if a position is available.

50
g. Records and Statistics Section. Employees assigned into this section
(usually long term limited duty employees), shall only be allowed to work
at this section if they are eligible to work on their parent command’s
roster. If no work is available at this section, the employee retains the
right to work at his parent command if a position is available.

G. Job Assignment. Employees working a holiday shall normally work their regular
assignments. In the event that the Employee’s regular assignment is not scheduled to be
worked on the holiday, those Employees shall be assigned to other vacant detail sheet
assignments from within their respective roster. Job bumping shall not be allowed among
those Employees eligible to work the holiday.

30. FLOATING HOLIDAYS

Each employee shall be entitled to four (4) floating holidays. Each floating holiday shall be a
day off work at the regular straight time rate of pay. An officer may request to take his floating
holidays by submitting a request in writing to his commanding officer. An officer may request
to take his floating holidays in any sequence, provided, however, that a floating holiday may not
be attached to a furlough. This request will be reviewed for the availability of personnel by his
commanding officer. In all cases, preference shall be given for Employee requests for use of
floating holidays over requests for bonus vacation days (Article 36) or excused time (Article 31).
Seniority will be a prime consideration when several officers request to use a floating holiday on
the same day.

This article does not affect or limit the right of the Department to determine the number of
employees assigned to work. Consequently, there will be no increase in the total number of
employees who are absent and the effect of granting an employee’s request could be that the
seniority leave day request of another employee (even if more senior) will be denied.

Floating holidays must be used in the fiscal year that they are earned and shall not be carried
over to a subsequent fiscal year. The Department shall ensure that floating holidays are
expended proportionately throughout the year and are not carried until the last months of the
fiscal year; therefore, on April Ist, the commanding officer shall assign any unselected floating
holidays at his or her discretion.

31. EXCUSED TIME

Employees shall be granted eight (8) hours of “Excused Time” on Good Friday or the last eight
(8) hours on the last scheduled day prior to Good Friday, eight (8) hours of “excused time” on
Easter or the last eight (8) hours on the last scheduled day prior to Easter, and eight (8) hours of
“Excused Time” on the last scheduled paid day before Christmas Day and before New Year’s
Day and Martin Luther King’s Birthday provided they are on the payroll through the holiday in
question. Employees required to work any portion of the “Excused Time” on these days will
receive equal time off for hours worked or straight time cash at the option of the Chief of Police.
No holiday premium will be paid for work on these days.

CHI-1939680v6 51
32. PENSION PROVISIONS/PLAN OF ADJUSTMENT

During the term of this Agreement Employees will be entitled to retirement benefits in
accordance with the terms of the Memorandum of Understanding Regarding the Police and Fire
Retirement System of the City of Detroit, Michigan. The terms of the Memorandum of
Understanding may be modified to conform with any plan of adjustment approved by the United
States Bankruptcy Court.

33. RECALL PAY

Employees are entitled to recall pay at time and one-half (1% ) rate if recalled to duty after
reporting off duty and before their next tour of duty. A minimum of two (2) hours will he
granted to a recalled member. Travel time, not to exceed one-half (%) hour each way shall be
granted for travel to and from the duty station when the total time worked exceeds one (1) hour.

The recall rate shall not be paid when a member works continuously beyond his normal tour
without first being relieved. The recall rate shall terminate as of the time that his next regular
tour was scheduled to begin and he will not receive any travel time back to his residence.

Recall pay shall not be granted when:

A. A mobilization has been ordered;

B Leave, furlough, bonus vacation days or compensatory time days have been canceled;
Cc. A member has been directed to appear in court;

D A member is given notice of a change in shift starting time prior to his going off duty.

34. SICK LEAVE
A. Sick Banks.

1. Current sick bank is designated as that sick time accumulated at the rate of one (1)
day for every calendar month in which a member has been credited for not less
than eighteen (18) paid time days, excluding overtime.

2. Current sick time bank shall accumulate without limitation, provided that, for
Employees who on July 1st of any year have accumulated more than 400 hours of
sick time (including both unused current sick time and unused seniority sick bank
time), the Department at its discretion may pay out all or any portion of the
Employees’ accumulated sick time in excess of 400 hours. Such payments shall
be in accordance with the following terms:

a. The Department will announce whether it has elected to pay out sick time
under the terms of this Agreement up to one year in advance. For
example, as soon as practicable after the effective date of this Agreement,
the Department will announce whether it will elect to pay out sick time

CHI-1939680v6 52
accrued as of July 1, 2015. As soon as practical after July 1, 2015, the
Department will announce wither it will elect to pay out sick time accrued
as of July 1, 2016, and so on.

b. At the time it makes such announcements, the Department will also
announce the amount of sick time that it may buy out.

c. Any payments under this Section shall be made at 85% of the Employee’s
base rate of pay during the previous fiscal year. If the Department elects
to make a payment under this provision, the payment shall be made on the
first pay date after December 1, or earlier if agreed upon by both parties.
For example, any payment made based upon sick time accrued as of July
1, 2015 shall be made on the first pay date after December 1, 2015, unless
otherwise mutually agreed. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Agreement, an Employee may elect to have a payment made pursuant to
this Section contributed into the Employee’s Annuity Savings Account in
lieu of a cash payment.

3. Employees shall no longer accumulate additional seniority sick bank time.

B. Sick Time Credit. The term “sick time” shall be defined as absence due to illness or
injury of the member, to exposure to a contagious disease and to the attendance upon
immediate members of the family of the member of the Department living within his
household, including husband, wife, children, father, mother, sister, brother and relatives
living in the same household regardless of degree of relationship. The granting of sick
time for attendance upon these relatives is not limited to any given number of days per
fiscal year; however, no more than three (3) days will be granted in one instance.

This sick time is granted to permit the member to make arrangements for care of the ill
person so that he may return to duty. When it comes to the attention of the Department
that a member is abusing sick leave, the Chief of Police may cause an investigation to be
initiated. Such investigation may result in disciplinary action, consistent with this
Agreement.

Cc. Deductions from the Sick Bank. Sick banks, both current and seniority, are designed to
provide for non-duty connected illness or disability. No deduction from either current or
the seniority sick banks shall be made for any sick time resulting from a service-
connected illness or disability which is certified by a physician designated by the
Department.

Sick time shall be charged first to the current sick bank and secondly, to the seniority sick
bank, in periods of not less than half-days.

‘When a member starts his shift but is unable to finish the shift because of sickness, sick
time will be deducted in the following manner. If less than four (4) hours has been
worked, the Employee will be charged half a sick day and credited with half a work day.
If four (4) or more hours have been worked from the beginning of the shift, the Employee
will be credited with a full work day.

CHI-1939680v6 53
During a period of illness, only that time which would be actual working time will be
deducted from the sick bank. Illness or injury during furlough time may be changed to
sick time in lieu of the member’s furlough, provided such illness or injury during the
furlough shall be reported forthwith to the member’s commanding officer and to a
physician designated by the Department. Such illness or injury will be verified by the
physician designated by the Department. The unused portion of the member’s furlough
will be rescheduled and used immediately following recovery from the illness or injury
which made the change necessary.

Dz Reporting Illness or Disability. When any member becomes sick, the officer in charge
must be notified without delay and informed where the member is confined. If a member
is hospitalized, the officer in charge shall be notified and will cause a physician
designated by the Department to be notified, during the next regular office hours, of the
nature of the illness and the hospital to which the member was admitted. Members
unable to report for duty because of sickness shall have their duty station notified not less
than one (1) hour before roll call daily, in order to remain in a sick status. An Employee
calling in sick in accordance with this provision will not be allowed to work until his next
scheduled tour of duty. Under normal circumstances, a physician designated by the
Department will not make visits to an individual member’s home. When attending a sick
officer, a physician designated by the Department shall issue him a notice stating the
nature of the illness and whether or not the officer shall remain off duty. The notice must
be turned in to the commanding officer when the member returns to duty.

Employees on extended sick leave (more than three (3) work days) are required to keep
their commands informed of their incapacity and expected date of return. In this
instance, the Employee shall not be required to call in daily as specified above.
Employees on sick leave of thirty (30) days or more may be ordered to obtain verification
by a physician designated by the Department.

E. Limited Duty. Officers placed on limited duty by a physician designated by the
Department shall report immediately with their limited duty authorization slip to an
appropriate command designated by the Chief of Police. Said command will determine
an appropriate limited duty assignment and notify the member’s commanding officer.
Limited duty assignments are made by the Chief of Police under the authority granted by
Article VII, Chapter VIII, Section VI, paragraph (4) of the City Charter and are subject to
the limitations thereof.

An officer on limited duty normally shall not wear a uniform except under emergency
conditions when ordered by his commanding officer. In such cases, however, the officer
shall not leave the building or travel to and from work in uniform.

The number, location, and duration of restricted duty assignments, as well as whether a
restricted duty assignment vacancy exists, shall be within the discretion of the
Department.

The Department may give preference for restricted duty assignments to those Employees

whose injury or illness is determined to have occurred in the line of duty over Employees
whose injury or illness is determined to have occurred not in the line of duty. When the

CHI-1939680v6 54
Department determines that the number of restricted duty Employees exceeds the
available number of restricted duty assignments, in accordance with the limitations
enumerated below, Employees having or seeking a restricted duty position for a non-duty
related medical condition may be required to utilize sick time benefits. An Employee
who is required to utilize sick time benefits by operation of this paragraph but who has no
accumulated sick time will be allowed to use other accumulated time to cover the
absence.

When an Employee having a non-duty related injury or illness is displaced from a
restricted duty position, or when no restricted duty position is currently available, the
Employee shall be placed on a waiting list for assignment to an available restricted duty
position. Placement on this waiting list shall be by departmental seniority and placement
in restricted duty positions shall be made in seniority order provided the Employee is able
to perform the duties of the particular restricted duty position.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, Employees on restricted duty for a non-
duty related injury or illness and who are able to perform the duties of their regularly
assigned job shall not be subject to being displaced by either an employee having a duty-
related injury or illness or by a more senior employee having a non-duty related injury or
illness.

 

The Department shall maintain a continuous listing of those Employees who are
restricted duty which shall indicate their duty assignment, seniority date, whether the
status is for a duty or non-duty related reason, and other relevant data the parties may
from time to time agree upon. The Department shall provide the Association with a
copy of the list on any day that a change has been made.

 

Nothing in this Article shall affect the right of the Department under the Charter of the
City of Detroit to refer Employees for duty or non-duty disability pensions.

F. Determination of Sick or Disability Status. It is the responsibility of a physician
designated by the Department to determine whether the illness or injury of a member is
duty incurred. When a member sustains an original injury in the performance of duty
during his regular duty hours, and is unable to complete his tour of duty, he shall be
carried disabled. At all other times, he shall be carried sick until a final determination is
made by a physician designated by the Department. Under no circumstances shall the
status of a member being carried sick or disabled be changed in the time book or other
Department records without the written authorization of a physician designated by the
Department. A physician designated by the Department shall authorize such change by
preparing an inter-office memorandum. Employees are automatically assigned to Platoon
Two while disabled.

G. Report for Duty When Ordered. Any member reported fit for duty by a physician
designated by the Department who does not report at the roll call indicated by the
physician shall be considered absent without leave.

H. Return to Duty. To assure proper health safeguards for Department personnel, members
who are ordered off duty by a physician designated by the Department due to illness or
injury, whether service connected or not, shall not be returned to active or limited duty

CHI-1939680v6 55
A.

assignments without being certified for such assignment by a physician designated by the
Department.

Illness or Injury Services. In non and/or post emergency cases, police personnel who
have incurred a service connected illness or injury must obtain approval from a physician
designated by the Department before securing any type of medical attention or treatment
for the illness or injury, including x-rays and dental care. The Department will not be
liable for costs so incurred unless prior approval is obtained.

Officers who are duty disabled or on limited duty shall report for physical examinations
when directed by a physician designated by the Department. Furthermore as a condition
for continuing disabled or limited duty status and the benefits thereof, the officers must
submit to all reasonable examinations ordered by the Department. Failure to do so will
lead to immediate termination of such status and benefits.

Depletion of Sick Banks. If a member is unable to perform police duties when all his
sick banks are exhausted, he shall be dropped from the payroll unless he is eligible for
non-duty connected retirement benefits. A member exhausting his sick banks who has
completed five (5) or more years of service and who is otherwise eligible for non-duty
connected disability retirement, may be retired at his own request or at the request of the
Chief of Police subject to the approval of the Retirement Board.

A member may apply for reinstatement within two (2) years of being removed from the
payroll if he recovers sufficiently from his illness or injury to return to duty. He/She may
be reinstated in the same status as when he/she left upon proper certification by a
physician designated by the Department and appointment by the Chief of Police.

Retirement and Death Sick Leave Payment. Immediately preceding the effective day of a
member’s retirement, exclusive of duty and non-duty disability retirement, or at the time
of a member’s death, he or his estate shall be entitled to pay for his unused accumulated
sick banks as follows:

An Employee shall receive full pay for eighty-five percent (85%) of the unused
accumulated sick bank amounts.

If a member is granted a duty or non-duty disability retirement, he shall be entitled to a
reimbursement of unused sick time according to the preceding formula, upon attaining
his normal full duty retirement date and petitioning the Chief of Police for such
reimbursement.

35. REGULARITY IN THE USE OF SICK LEAVE BENEFITS

General. The Detroit Police Department is responsible for providing efficient law
enforcement services. Maximum attendance is required from all members if this
responsibility is to be fulfilled.

It is, therefore, necessary to identify and correct members who have developed a pattern
of regularity in the use of their sick leave benefits. Therefore, all commanding officers

 

CHI-1939680v6 56
are to review the records of their members quarterly: each January 10th, April 10th, July
10th and October 10th.

B. Counseling Regarding Regularity in the Use of Sick Leave Benefits. Upon review and
approval of the commanding officer, a ranking member shall counsel subordinates whose
records show such an indication. The counseling session shall include a discussion of the
pattern observed to date, and the member’s reason for absences. Where appropriate, the
supervisor shall explore positive future courses of available action with the member in an
effort to assist the member in adopting corrective measures. At the end of the counseling
session, the supervisor shall prepare a detailed report of the meeting and attach the report
to the member’s Detroit Police Department Attendance Card, D.P.D. 350-C. A copy of
this report shall be provided to the member. Note, however, that said counseling does not
constitute disciplinary action and as such may not be noted in the administrative
counseling register. Further, said detailed report shall be removed from D. P. D. 350-C at
the end of six months providing no further corrective action has been necessary since the
initial counseling session with the member.

 

 

Cc. Continued Pattern of Regularity in the Use of Sick Leave Benefits. If counseling does
not produce improved attendance, and the supervisor, after meeting with the member,
determines that no satisfactory reason exists which would justify said continued
regularity in sick leave usage, upon review and approval of the commanding officer, the
supervisor shall personally serve the member with a Notice of Regularity in the Use of
Sick Leave Benefits, D.P.D. 350, and forward the necessary copies as outlined on the
form. The supervisor shall inform the member of the requirement to obtain
documentation of the illness or of the illness of a family member which necessitates the
member’s absence from work. This documentation shall consist of a statement from a
physician concerning the illness for each sick day taken during the next three month
period. This requirement must be strictly adhered to during said period of time, except
where the commanding officer is convinced that a reasonable basis exists for not
requiring a physician’s note in conjunction with a particular absence. The member will
also be advised that said physician’s documentation shall be submitted on D.P.D. 350-A,
or an equally detailed doctor’s note, and shall be presented to the member’s section
commanding officer within three days after returning to duty. This documentation is
subject to the review of the department physician. Commanding officers shall ensure that
the copy of D.P.D. 350-A which is submitted by the member is forwarded to the Medical
forthwith for retention.

 

 

A member who has been served with a Notice of Regularity in the Use of Sick Leave
Benefits, D.P.D. 350, and is being carried sick due to personal illness or injury or for
attendance upon a sick family member, must secure permission from the officer in charge
of the member’s entity or, if the entity is closed, from the officer in charge of the precinct
in which the member resides before the member may leave the member’s place of
confinement. This restriction does not apply on leave days or non-duty hours.

“Improved attendance” as used herein shall mean that the member has consistently and

reliably demonstrated the capacity to provide proper and sustained attendance within the
meaning of this article. For purposes of interpreting the preceding sentence, the word

CHI-1939680v6 57
“sustained” shall be construed to mean an improvement which demonstrates that the
abuse has been eliminated.

The supervisor shall further advise the member that failure to satisfactorily comply with
the regulation will result in the designation of each working day taken as “Sick” to
“Absent No Pay.” The supervisor shall also advise the member that unless attendance
improves, additional disciplinary action may be imposed.

D. Improved Attendance. A member placed on a D.P.D. 350 will have his attendance
reviewed on a quarterly basis and will be removed from the restrictions of that provision
upon a showing of improved attendance within the meaning of the above definition.

E. Extended Medical Treatment. Members who document that their illness requires
treatment on a regular basis may submit D.P.D. 350-A for that ailment on a semi-annual
basis. The physician designated by the department, however, may want further
verification concerning said ailment, and accordingly the member may be required to see
the physician.

 

F. Failure to Present Documentation by a Physician. If failure to comply with the regulation
set forth on D.P.D. 350 occurs, the section commanding officer shall personally serve the
member with a Notice of Failure to Present Documentation by a Physician, D.P.D. 350-
B, and shall forward the necessary copies as outlined on the form. A designation of
“Absent No Pay” will be entered in timekeeping records.

G. Appeals. Any member may file a grievance regarding the imposition of a Notice of
Regularity in the Use of Sick Leave Benefits, D.P.D. 350. If the grievance is granted, the
arbitrator shall be empowered to provide an appropriate remedy, including
reimbursement of expenses for medical visits ordered by the Department.

36. BONUS VACATION DAYS

Bonus vacation days are granted for unused current sick time. Officers who have accumulated a
minimum of thirty-five (35) sick days including both current and seniority days and have a
minimum of six (6) years of service on July 1st of each year will be credited with one-half (1/2)
of the unused current sick time from the previous fiscal year up to six (6) days. An officer may
request to take his bonus vacation days in any sequence (except when attached to a furlough as
stated below) by submitting a request in writing to his commanding officer. This request will be
reviewed for the availability of personnel by his commanding officer. Seniority will be a prime
consideration when several officers request the same period of time off.

An officer shall be allowed to use up to three (3) bonus vacation days in conjunction with a
furlough. The request to utilize bonus vacation days in this manner must be included in the leave
day request. Bonus vacation days, when connected to a furlough, shall not be canceled unless
the accompanying furlough is canceled. This article does not affect or limit the right of the
Department to determine the number of employees assigned to work. Consequently, there will
be no increase in the total number of employees who are absent and the effect of granting an
employee’s request could be that the seniority leave day request of another employee (even if
more senior) will be denied.

CHI-1939680v6 58
The Department must insure that bonus vacation days are expended proportionately throughout
the year and are not carried until the last months of the fiscal year; therefore, on April Ist, the
commanding officer shall assign the remaining bonus vacation days at his discretion. Any
request to utilize unused bonus vacation days in conjunction with a furlough scheduled during
the months of April, May or June must be submitted to the commanding officer by April Ist or
those bonus vacation days will be assigned.

Bonus vacation time shall be deducted from the member’s bonus vacation bank before
compensatory time shall be taken.

37. JURY DUTY

A. All Employees who serve on jury duty on regularly scheduled work days exclusive of
leave days, furlough days and holidays will be paid the difference between their pay for
jury duty and their regular straight time pay for all days they are required to serve on jury
duty.

B. In the event that an Employee reports for jury duty but does not actually serve on jury, he
will be paid the difference between the jury pay received and his regular day’s pay and be
excused for the day.

Cc. In order to receive payment for jury duty supplementation, an Employee must have been
regularly scheduled to work on a non-overtime basis, must give reasonably prompt prior
notice to his supervisor that he has been summoned for jury duty, and must furnish
satisfactory evidence that he reported for or performed jury duty on the days for which he
claims such payment, provided that the commanding officer shall have discretion in
seeking to have the Employee excused when his services are essential.

Dz Employees shall have the option when called to jury duty to use vacation, bonus vacation
or compensatory time for such service. In that event, the Employee will not be required
to turn in his jury pay. However, the Employee must notify the Department of his desire
to exercise this option prior to the first date of jury service.

If the date for jury duty falls upon a day when the Employee is scheduled to work other
than Platoon 2, the Department, upon request of the Employee, will rearrange the
Employee’s working schedule so that he will be carried working Platoon 2 on that
date(s). If the date for jury duty falls upon a holiday an Employee is scheduled to work,
the Employee shall be allowed to attend jury duty without loss of the Employee’s holiday
work opportunity.

E. For payroll purposes, jury duty shall be considered as time worked.
F. An Employee on jury duty will be continued on the payroll and be paid at his straight
time hourly rate of his normally scheduled hours of work. Upon return from jury duty,

the Employee shall present evidence of the amount received from such jury duty and
return that amount to the City, less any mileage allowance paid for the jury service.

CHI-1939680v6 59
If an Employee fails to turn in his jury duty payment, the City will hold subsequent
payments due to the Employee until the City is reimbursed for all time lost due to the
alleged jury duty service.

G. Where Employees once impaneled are excused for days or parts of days, reimbursement
shall be made only for time served. Employees should otherwise be expected to report
for work.

38. DEATH BENEFITS AND LIFE INSURANCE

A. Death Benefits. Section 13-8-8 of the Municipal Code of the City of Detroit currently
provides a death benefit of ten thousand dollars ($10,000).

1. Membership shall be mandatory for regular Employees.

2. Contribution

By the City - $13.30 per year per Employee.

By the Employee - $.20 per week or $10.40 per year.

B. Payment for employees killed or permanently disabled in line of duty:

1. A lump sum duty death benefit of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be paid to
the beneficiaries or estate of Employees who are killed or who die as a result of
injuries sustained in the actual performance of their duties in accordance with the

City Council resolution of August 23, 1977, p. 1683, March 26, 1974, p. 627, and
March 2, 1954, p. 509.

2. A lump sum payment of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be made to any
Employee who is totally and permanently disabled from illness or injury arising
solely out of the actual performance of his duties. “Totally and permanently
disabled” shall be defined exclusively as follows:

a. Total and permanent loss of sight of both eyes.

b. Loss of both legs or both feet at/or above the ankle.

c. Loss of both arms or both hands at/or above the wrist.

d. Loss of any two of the members of facilities enumerated in a., b., c.

e. Permanent and complete paralysis of both legs or both arms or one leg and
one arm.

f. Incurable insanity or imbecility. Claims for this payment shall be made in

accordance with the City Council resolution of March 26, 1974, p. 627.

CHI-1939680v6 60
Cc.

A.

Cc.

D.

3. Employees who receive a permanent disability under this Article shall be
ineligible for the $10,000 Duty Death Benefit described in Section B.1. above.
Denial of the $10,000 Duty Death Benefit may be appealed directly to arbitration
in accordance with Article 8 (Arbitration) of this Agreement.

Group Life Insurance:

A group life insurance program for the Employee and his family is available for all
members of the Employees Benefit Plan on an optional basis, under the provisions of the
City Code, Chapter 13, Article 9.

1. Membership
Optional for members of the Employees Benefit Plan.
2. Contributions

The City shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the premium for insurance up
to and including thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000) for each member plus five
thousand dollars ($5,000) for each dependent.

Additional life insurance may be purchased through this plan at the Employee’s
expense.

Employees and their dependents who are on a duty disability retirement shall be
covered by this program.

39. MISCELLANEOUS

Relation to Regulations, etc. This Agreement shall supersede any rules, regulations,
ordinances or resolutions inconsistent herewith.

Savings Clause. If any article or section of this Agreement or any supplement thereto
should be held invalid by operation of law or by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or
if compliance with or enforcement of any article or section should be restrained by such
tribunal, the remainder of this Agreement and supplements shall not be affected thereby,
and the parties shall enter into immediate collective bargaining negotiations for the
purpose of arriving at a mutually satisfactory replacement for such article or section.

Service Weapon. All Employees shall be provided at no charge with their department-
issued service weapon upon full service retirement. An Employee will have no more
than thirty (30) days after separation to make such request to the Chief of Police. The
Department may refuse to give Employees their weapon for good cause shown. Good
cause will be established where an Employee has pending criminal charges or has been
convicted of a crime, is subject to departmental investigations, or psychological
restrictions. Employees who are involuntarily discharged will not receive a service
weapon.

Longevity Pay. There will be no longevity payments during the term of this Agreement.

CHI-1939680v6 61
E. Direct Deposit. Members of the bargaining unit may participate in the direct deposit
programs offered by the City.

F. Lump Sum for Banked Time. Whenever an Employee leaves employment with the
Department, such Employee will be paid for all banked time, other than sick time, at the
prevailing rate of pay in effect at the time of separation. This includes, but is not limited
to separation with a deferred vested pension or under a disability. DROP plan
participants will only receive payout for banked time when they permanently retire, not
when they enter the DROP plan. Payments will be paid within ninety (90) days if the
amount is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000), and if in excess of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000), the amount will be made in semi-annual installments over a three (3)
year period with the installments due on February 1 and August | with no interest due.

G. Correction of Overpayments and Underpayments. Where by payroll error an Employee
is underpaid or overpaid, the City is expressly authorized to correct the underpayment or
overpayment by payroll adjustment. The City shall notify an Employee in writing
fourteen (14) calendar days prior to making any payroll recovery. Each deduction by the
City shall be substantiated in the records of the City and shall be identified as to the
individual Employee.

 

H. Civilianization. Positions within the Department that do not require Michigan
sion on Law Enforcement Standards (M.C.O.L.E.S.) certification are subject to
civilianization at any time. Any reductions in force (lay-offs) resulting from
civilianization will comply with Article 10.1. (Seniority — Lay-off and Recall).

 

I. Ammunition. All members shall be provided with limited penetration, full expansion
rounds to be carried on or off duty. Members shall also be allowed to purchase (at their
own expense) and carry other Department approved limited penetration, full expansion
rounds.

J. Canine. With respect to any assignment made to Canine (K-9), the City may, at its
discretion, direct the member on said assignment to return all departmental dogs under
the age of five (5) and all departmental equipment to the department at such time as that
member is no longer assigned to Canine.

K. Care of Departmental Dogs. Employees will be paid at a rate of time and one-half for the
actual off-duty time spent caring for Department dogs, provided such work is authorized.
Employees may expend a maximum of forty (40) minutes per day caring for Department
dogs; provided, however, that Employees may expend additional time per day with the
prior approval of their supervisor. Employees caring for more than one Department dog
shall receive an additional fifteen (15) minutes per day, per dog. The Department retains
the discretion to determine whether time spent in excess of the above is necessary and
whether it shall be performed while the member is on duty or off duty. Employees shall
maintain a record, on a form to be established by the Department, of the time spent in the
performance of these duties, and submit the form to the Administrative Sergeant on a bi-
weekly basis. This time shall be reported on the bi-weekly Time and Attendance Report
as kind-of-time 66.

CHI-1939680v6 62
40. WAGES

A. Wages — September 2014 through June 30, 2019 — Base Salary:

° 8% wage increase effective first payroll period after the ratification of this
Agreement.

° 2.5% wage increase effective July 1, 2016.

° 2.5% wage increase effective July 1, 2017.

° 2.5% wage increase effective July 1, 2018.

In addition to the foregoing, DPOA members shall receive their pro rata share of the
lump sum payments described in Section 5 of the July 8, 2014 Term Sheet between the
DPOA and the City of Detroit. In all other respects, this wage provision supersedes any
prior agreement or term sheet between the parties.

B. Wage Scale. Employees’ wages during the term of this Agreement are set forth in the
attached Official Compensation Schedule.

Cc. Differential. Salaries for the following classifications will be maintained at the dollar
differentials indicated for the term of this Agreement.

1. Communications Officer - Police Officer (Class Code 33-12-11)

Start $450 over starting salary of Police Officer
After one year $450 over salary of one-year Police Officer
After two years $450 over salary of two-year Police Officer
After three years $450 over salary of three-year Police Officer
After four years $450 over salary of four-year Police Officer
After five years $450 over salary of five-year Police Officer

2. Band Director - Police Officer (Class Code 33-12-14)
$821 over maximum of salary of Police Officer

3. Assistant Supervisor of Motor Vehicles - Police Officer (Class Code 33-12-15)
$862 over maximum salary of Police Officer

4. Police Data Processing Programmer - Police Officer (Class Code 33-12-26)

Minimum: $589 over maximum salary of Police Officer
Maximum: $1,738 over maximum salary of a Police Officer

5. Radio Maintenance Officer - Police Officer (Class Code 33-12-12)

$862 over maximum salary of a Police Officer

CHI-1939680v6 63
6. Radio Systems and Planning Officer - Police Officer (Class Code 33-12-13)
$1,567 over maximum salary of a Police Officer

7. Senior Police Data Processing Programmer - Police Officer (Class Code 33-12-
36)

Police Lieutenant salary

8. Neighborhood Police Officer (Class Code __-__-__)
$1,198 over maximum salary of a Police Officer

9. Police Detective Trainee (Class Code __-__-_)
$1,198 over maximum salary of a Police Officer

10. Police Corporal (Class Code __-__-__)

Start $1,198 over maximum salary of a Police Officer
When engaged in field $2,396 over maximum salary of a Police Officer
training operations

41. PERMANENT SHIFT PROGRAM

A. The permanent shift program shall only apply to precinct job assignments on the day,
afternoon and midnight shifts that historically rotated among all three (3) shifts. In
addition, the permanent shift program shall apply to the Harbormaster which for purposes
of the program shall be treated as an entity distinct from the Northeastern Precinct and to
the Tactical Response Unit (TRU), Canine and the Public Housing Section. All
assignments shall be based on seniority provided the Employee is qualified.

B. There shall be no periodic re-bidding procedure and vacancies will be filled, if and when
the Department decides to fill them, in accordance with the following procedures:

1. A vacancy exists when an officer performing the assignment is permanently
transferred, permanently reassigned, resigns, retires, dies, is separated, or when
the Department increases the number of officers on a shift.

 

 

2. Employees having less than two (2) years of service may be assigned to shifts and
assignments within the discretion of management. At the end of two (2) years of
service, their positions shall be considered vacancies and shall be subject to the
procedures of this Article except where an officer has obtained a permanent job
reassignment through the blue slip procedure in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection 4 of this Section B.

3. Whenever the Department chooses to fill vacancies created as a result of officers

completing two (2) years of service, the positions to be filled shall be posted at
least ten (10) days before they are permanently filled.

CHI-1939680v6 64
4. Employees with less than eighteen (18) months service shall not be entitled to use
the blue slip procedure to bid on a permanent job assignment. Employees with at
least eighteen (18) months and less than twenty-four (24) months service shall be
entitled to use the blue slip procedure to bid on a permanent job assignment other
than a scout car.

5. In addition to the existing procedure for filling job assignments, Employees may
also submit a blue slip indicating their preference for a shift change. In
accordance with present practice, a blue slip that is accepted shall be reviewed
promptly to determine if the Employee is qualified. When vacancies occur the
most senior qualified Employee will have his blue slip request honored. All blue
slips will expire on October | of each year. The blue slip procedure is for the
filling of vacancies and no Employee may be bumped. The blue slip of an officer
requesting a particular assignment on a shift shall be honored before the blue slip
of an officer requesting the shift only.

6. In the event of an involuntary reassignment from one shift to another, the officer
having the least Department seniority shall be reassigned. This provision shall
not affect the Department’s right to reassign members in accordance with B.2.

7. Employees transferring into an entity participating in the permanent shift plan,
may be initially assigned to shifts and assignments within the discretion of
management, provided there are no blue slips on file for the requested shift or
assignment. Thereafter, except as limited by the provisions of Subsections 2 and
4 of this Section B., Employees may utilize the blue slip procedure in Article 10,
Section G.1. While Employees shall be entitled to submit a blue slip for a shift or
assignment they shall not be eligible to exercise seniority for shifts for a period of
six (6) months or assignments for one (1) year. When Employees are
involuntarily transferred to an entity participating in the permanent shift program
they shall not be eligible to exercise seniority for shifts for a period of three (3)
months or assignments for six (6) months.

 

Cc. A Joint Labor Management Permanent Shift Committee, consisting of not more than five
(5) representatives from the Association and five (5) representatives of the Department
shall meet within five (5) working days of the request by either party. The Committee
shall meet to discuss issues related to the transition from rotating to permanent shifts and
to the implementation and continuation of the permanent shifts concept. The Committee
will attempt to resolve any such es without the filing of a formal grievance with due
regard to the fact that in negotiating permanent shifts the parties may not have considered
all of the effects of such change and that flexibility is necessary and desirable to ensure
that an orderly transition from rotating shifts to permanent shifts is effectuated.

 

 

 

D. The Panel shall retain jurisdiction over the permanent shift award and, upon the request
of either party, for a period of one (1) year after permanent shifts are implemented, shall
convene, with substitute delegates if a party so designates, to resolve any dispute
concerning permanent shifts which has not been resolved by the Committee.

CHI-1939680v6 65
E. In the case of a bona fide hardship, reviewed and approved by the Chief of Police or the
appropriate Deputy Chief, management may change an Employee’s shift for a period not
to exceed thirty (30) days. No other Employee shall be displaced from his shift or
assignment as the result of such a reassignment. The Association will be notified of any
approved request. This provision shall be applicable not only to those entities
participating in the permanent shift plan, but to all assignments on a Department-wide
basis.

42. OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT

An Employee may engage in outside business activity or outside employment provided it is not
inconsistent or incompatible with or does not interfere with the proper discharge of the
Employee’s duties and responsibilities as a police officer.

Approval for outside business activity or outside employment must be obtained from the Chief of
Police, and shall be for a period of one (1) year. The Employee may request it be renewed after
one (1) year. If an Employee is on the Attendance Control Program (DPD 350), that Employee
cannot be approved for outside employment, and prior approval can be revoked at the discretion
of the Chief of Police.

Approval will not be granted for an outside business activity or outside employment which
would involve more than thirty (30) hours per week of work, or for work in businesses that are
regulated by the Detroit Police Department (e.g., bars, adult movies or adult bookstores, etc.)

Officers may not be in uniform when engaged in any outside employment. Officers may not
carry or use any equipment or accessories issued by the Department when engaged in any
outside business activity or outside employment in private or personal security.

Approval to engage in outside business activity or outside employment shall not be unreasonably
withheld.

43. WORK AREAS

The City will provide and maintain safe, clean, sanitary and healthful work premises, facilities
and equipment. The City shall have the responsibility and authority first to determine what
constitutes safe, clean, sanitary and healthful work premises, facilities and equipment.
Grievances alleging a violation, that is, whether or not the City has provided and maintained
safe, clean, sanitary and healthful work premises, facilities and equipment, shall be entered at the
last step of the grievance procedure and shall be subject to arbitration.

CHI-1939680v6 66
44. DURATION

This Agreement shall be effective and binding on the Union and the City as of October __, 2014,
and shall continue in full force and effect through June 30, 2019 (the “Term”). This Agreement,
including the Term, shall be incorporated into and become a part of both the plan of adjustment
and order confirming the plan of adjustment, and the Agreement shall be subject to the post-
confirmation ongoing jurisdiction of the Bankruptcy Court for the full Term, including without
limitation, whatever jurisdiction the Bankruptcy Court’s retains to enforce the Term. This
Agreement, including specifically, the Term, shall be duly authorized and approved by and
consented to by the Mayor of the City of Detroit, the Treasurer of the State of Michigan, and the
Emergency Manager, with these consents reflected by duly authorized signatures.

If either party desires to modify this Agreement, it may give written notice to the other party
during the month of March 2019.

In the event that the Department and the Association fail to arrive at an agreement on wages,
fringe benefits, other monetary matters, and non-economic items by June 30, 2019, this
Agreement will remain in effect on a day-to-day basis. Either party may terminate this
Agreement by giving the other party a ten (10) day written notice on or after June 30, 2019.

 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this

Agreement on this __ day of October, 2014.

 

 

 

 

DETROIT POLICE OFFICERS CITY OF DETROIT:
ASSOCIATION:

Mark Diaz, President Michael E. Duggan, Mayor

Bernard Cybulski, Vice President James Craig, Chief of Police

Donna Latouf, Secretary-Treasurer Office of the State Treasurer, Michigan
Linda Broden, Sergeant at Arms Michael A. Hall, Labor Relations

Kevyn Orr, Emergency Manager

CHI-1939680v6 67
EXHIBIT |
Official Compensation Schedule

CHI-1939680v6
