COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT

Between

ANCHORAGE POLICE DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES
ASSOCIATION

APDCA

Anchorage Police Department
Employees Association

 

and

MUNICIPALITY OF ANCHORAGE

July 1, 2015 — June 30, 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS. ......c.ccccssssssssssesssessscscsssssssrssersessesesesesessseeeesenensasssesasessesesetsieatones ii
PREAMBLE .......cccccsssssssseseseeeesevesssssesessseseeseneseseesssnsisisssssassssesucucnesesesessssevevsusersenensisiceneess 1
ARTICLE L....scesesssscesesessesesesescecsnsnsseneasssssasssevscscasecsnansnsscssssssseseseseeveseaesesesessasaveneeentiaesinaes 1

RECOGNITION AND BARGAINING UNIT

 

 

Section 1. RECOQNItION. 00... cece ceeeteseeecsereeeeeeeceeesessesessecsnescseeseesesessessesesentenees 1
Section 2. Membership. .........cccccescseccesseseeseeseseeeceeceesseesessssecseessssesesscsessesseseseeseasees 1
Section 3. Non-Discrimination. 00... ccccecseseeeeseeeeeeeseeeseeesececesseceesessaseeeesseseeeeneaeass 1
Section 4. Notice of Hire... cece eee eecscsceceeeecscseeeeesesseneseeesesaneneseeieeseeeess 2
Section 5. Initial Probationary Period... eeececesceeeeeeeeeseneneeereeseneneseeaeeeeeess 2
Section 6. Promotional Probationary Period. ...........::sescesesseeeeeeeeeeeenereeeeeeeeeeeseeaeaeeees 2
Section 7. Personnel Regulations. ..........ccscceesseseeseeseseesessceecsesseeeeeesaeeeenesneeeeeeneeets 3
Section 8. Contracting. ........cceecseseeseeseereeseeeeeeeneeeneee 8
A. SUBCONtFACTING 0... ee ee eects ceeesceeeceecaeceeeeeeeceesetaeeeseessecessscsacseecsseseeeeseseetseeeege 3
B. Citizens’ ACAd OMY. ....... ee ceeccescsscseesscecsesseeeceernetseeesenssaceacessscsessessesecseseeeeseneeneee 4
C. Port S@CUrILY. Loci ei ececeeeccseecscscseesecneseecsesecsessetseseseessaseacessecseceasacsesaeseseeeeesensed 4

ARTICLE Il...

 

SCOPE OF AGREEMENT.........ccsccsessesessesessscsseseessseesessseesssesuesesuesesueseseeseseansscanessseeneansses 5
Section 1. Management Rights..........cccccccsessssssssssseesesssessesseneetensseasasesssscseseetesnenees 5
Section 2. Change of Operations... cece ccc ceeseeeeereeeeeeeeteseceeeeessssseeessseeeeeaees 5
Section 3. Notices. .........ccccescsceecccsesseeceeeceseeescseseseescsesnseseassenscsesssssacseeseenetsenenenees 5
Section 4. Computation of Time and Dates. ........ccccceeeecceseeeeeeeseeseeeeseeseeeseeseeeeenetaees 5
Section 5. Meet and Confer. ........ccccccccccceseseeeesessseeseseseneeecseseneeecsesssenecseseeseeeseassees 5

ARTICLE Uo... eceeecsesesseseesesesesnsesesencscsseesesscseesesesssseascasesesecesssssesessesenesesseacacasecetisieaeaees 6

NO STRIKE CLAUSE ........cccccsscesessesssesseseseesssesesssscescscsssseseesesesnesssensseessseansasseneseeneaneess 6
ARTICLE IV .oo.eeececeeesscsceceeeescscsceesececeesesesecsssassnssesassasssessseeeecesesessessessesseseeesssasensetarseececed 6
CHECKOFPF ..00. ee eeeeescec cesses csesceececececseeeeecsceesesesassassessscsasseesececsesscesaesesessssesesssesasisneeeeecee 6
ARTICLE V oo. eececee sees eeeseecsescscceeesersesesesaraecesscecseseeessssesesesessssesesesessanscesecaeseneeeeasieseeaseed 6
BILL OF RIGHTS AND GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE .........ccccecseeeeecesceseeeeeeeeeseeeseaeneees 6
Section 1. Bill of Rights... ce eee eeeeeeseeesenecsecseeseeessessessesesseseseeceeaeeeseesaeeenasased 6
Section 2. Grievance Procedure... sesecesssesseseseseeseseseeeeseesesesseeeecseseescessseensens 10
ARTICLE V1 ....csccscsececceseceeeersessseescsceeescseseseeecsesececacsesscsesesesesassesenssesecsesesesesassseseeseseeeenes 12
GENERAL WORKING CONDITIONG.............ccccccseeeeesecseeseseessseneescscsesscecseseeseseneneneee 12
Section 1. Working Out of Classification and Acting Assignments. ...........0.0.0008 12
Section 2. Authorized Representatives. ...........ccccseseeessseseesestecssesseecesseseesersseeee 12
Section 3. Shop Steward and Association Officers..........:.:cescsseseesesseeeeceeneneee 12
Section 4. Examination of ReCords..........cccccccescceeeeeseeeecseseseeeeseseeessssesesseaseenenees 13
Section 5. Employee Roster. .........ccccccssecsccecsssscssscscseceeseseeseeseenecesaeseneseseeeees 14
Section 6. Meal Periods. ..0.........ccccceecececeeeeeeseneeeeesssseteeseseseseesesenenesesessaceeesseseeaeeeee 14
Section 7. Relief Periods. ..........ccccececscseeeeecneeeeseseseeseseseseeeeseseneeesecseesscsssesseenanees 14
Section 8. Pay Day. .......eeesccescsscessesseececseseeeecnesaeeeceeesecseesesecsecseseceessasaserseeeeeeeenanaes 14

 

Section 9. Elections.
Section 10. Safety and Liability... ee eeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeteessceecneeeesereeaeeeeeneaeeee 15
Section 11. Discipline and Proper Notice... ccccceceeeseesecssesceecseesceeeeeseeseeesaaeee 16

Section 12. Shift Changes. ..

 

Section 13. Job Assignments, Promotions, and Involuntary Transfer... 17

Section 14. Light Duty... cece csseeesseceeseseeeeceecsetsesecsessaceesscsessecseseseesentiaees 17

Section 15. Health Promotion.

 

Section 16. Supervisory Ratio For Special Events. ..........ccccscsessescseesereeeeeeeeeees 18

Section 17. Outside Employment. ..........:cceececeseesesseeecseeseeeenesaeeeeeeceeceereetaeeeeeeenaeaes 18
ARTICLE VII

 

 

 

HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME .......c.ccccecceseseeeeesesseeeneasseesseseseeseeseeseeseeseessesns 18
Section 1. Work Schedules. .........ccccccccccescseseceecscessesessseseeeeesssssnsneeseaessessssieaeeeees 18
Section 2. OVEFtIME. 0.0... ccc ceccccsseteeeeeeeeeessesessseserecseseeeeseseseneeeesssssansneessssenssseseeeaeees 19
Section 3. Starting Time. ..... +20
Section 4. Established Shift. ..........0.cccccccssesssesesseseteseeeesesseeneceeseseneessessensnsceeeeaeee 21
Section 5. Days Off... cc eeessssccscsesscsecsececeessssecseesesseeesseeeseeseeseaneseeseaseesseseeeeateges 21
Section 6. Court Appearance. .......c.cceccccceeseeceeeesseesessessaecseceseeceseeseesseesseeeeeeseaes 21
Section 7. Call Out... cece cece eseseceescsesenetseseeeseeessesssssecnesesscsceesesesseasieneseee 21
Section 8. Off-Duty Telephone Calls and Pager Responses. ..............::c:cccceeeeeeee 22
Section 9. Shift Differential. .......... cece cece ce ceeseeeceeeeeesesscseeesessceceeseeesesssneneneee 22
Section 10. Lengthy Work Shifts... cceeceeseeeeeeeeesseeesecsessesseeeesesseeseteeseeeeenasaes 22
Section 11. SWAT Team.....

Section 12. Court LiaiSon.........ccccccceeseceeeseesensesssssstsesesstsneesessnenseecsesseacsesseeeeeenenees 23
Section 13. Canine Demonstrations. ...........:ccececcsseceeeteteeeeeeesteneeeeseseeeesesseeeeeeeaes 23
Section 14. Standby... ccc cceeescssceecseseceececsecsessseecsesseseseeseaseseeseaseaseeeeseeteeeased 23

Section 15. CAP Team....

 

ARTICLE VIII oo. eeecceceseceeeeneeeeeeseeseececseseseneeseneeeeeeeceeeeisnensseeseecesseeneeevasesesteseseeaeaeeee 24
UNIFORMS... cece ce cescececeeccaseececseserecsesecesseseeessessssessesesececeesesesssgeesesacaeesssesienaees 24
Section 1. Uniform ISSue..........ec cece ce cece ceesensseeeesecseeesesesesaesesenesecasseseeseseeeeeees 24

Section 2. Non-uniformed Sworn Employees’ Clothing and Equipment Allowance.

ceceeeeeaeasesesescsesaeseeseecsesecasasssaeeeessesseseseseseseesecsssasesasaaeaceesesesecessesssececaesesesseseesaseeeeecea 24
Section 3. Miscellaneous Clothing and Equipment Allowance.............:ccssseeee 24
Section 4. Cleaning... cece cess cccsescseecseseeeeesseeeensesesesessenenenesasieeneeseeseeeeeeee 25

ARTICLE IX

 

SENIORITY
Section 1. Department Seniority. 0.0... eee ceeeeseecceeeeeesceeeeeeeeecseeeeeeesetaeseteetseeeteee 25

Section 2. Position Seniority. 0.0.0... ececeseceeeseeseeseeseseeeeeecseeeeeeeecsecaseecsesaeseseereseteee 25
Section 3. Use of Position Seniority. 0... eceeeeeeeeseeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeetaeeeeeeseeaeereaeeee 26
Section 4. Notice of Layoff... ccc eeeeseceeeeseeseeeeeeeeeecseeeceeneseeeerseseseeseesaeeeneesaeeee 27
Section 5. Recall Procedure. ........:.ccccscseeeeesesesseseseseeeeecscseeeeesseseseseseeesseseeeessasieees 27
Section 6. Work Outside Shift. 0.00.0... cscs eeeseseesescseeeescecseseeesececseeserecseeeneeeesen 28
Section 7. Job Assignment Standards. ...........cceeccecssseseesesseeeeseeeceeeseeereeresaeeeeateeee 28
Section 8. Retention on Return from Military Leave. ............::ccceseseseseeseseeeeeeeeee 28
Section 9. Extra Employees.........ccccccceeceeececseceeeeseeseeeseseseseeesesaseeesecaeneeeeeseeaea 29
Section 10. Break in Seniority..........cccccsesesesesssseseeeeesesssseseeseseneeesesescacecseesseaneess 29
Section 11. Compensation for Failure to Follow Seniority. ........0... cee 29
ARTICLE X oo.cecececseceeeseeseecscseceesceeeseeceeseeeeseeeecessesenesasaeeaeseseseetassesenesevesseeneseseseeeesenesea 29
SICK LEAVE... csceeesessssscseeeseeeeneseeeeeeseevencacacacseaeasacaeececaceeevenensesasaeasasacaneneeaeeneneeeeeseesenees 29
Section 1. ACCrUal. .........eccceececesessescecseececseneeessesesssaeeseeseecsenecessesessesseseeseeesaseeeeaees 29
Section 2. USC. oo... ceccccccececeseeseeessscescseeseeeessesesscscsesesesseeceeececseessseseesesacseseneeeeseeess 29
Section 3. Accrual During Leave. oo... .ccecceecceseseeseeesseeecsesaceecsesaeeaeseeaeeaeeeseetnesseaes 30

Section 4. Use During Leave: +30

 

Section 5. Violation... ecccseescseeeseeeceeeeesceeeeeeasseeecseseseeecesseesesesasanesenanseeseness 30
Section 6. Sick Leave Use for a Qualifying FMLA Condition. ........ccccseseseeeeeseeee 30

Section 7. Excess Sick Leave Bank. . +30

 

ARTICLE Xl ......cccccceccseseeeeccseseeseensescsceeesesesesesacseeecsesesecacseeassesesesesscseseeeeesecsseesesaeaseassease 31
OTHER PAID LEAVE ........cccccecccseseseseesesesesesecessesesecseseeecsenseesacsesscssseeeeeesesesesesessanaeesseeved 31

Section 1. Bereavement Leave...

 

Section 2. Training... ee cesscscsesseescesssceeecseseeeeeeesaeeeeeecseseeeecseseecaeeeseesesaeeeseeseeeees 31

Section 3. Military Leave... ccc ceeeeseeeeeesesseeeeseeseeeceecsetseeeeeecseeseeeeeeesetseeaeeecenees 31
 

Section 4. Jury DUtY.... ees cece csececeseseceereeeeceersesaseseesseseseessesaeeesaeeaseeeeeseeeeeseaes 31
Section 5. Blood Donation. .......cccccceseseeeseseeeeseseeessseeeeeessnesesessssssensessensensssessnees 32
Section 6. Contract Negotiations. ........ ccc eceeeseseeesseseeseescserseseeecseseseecseseseeseesaeeee 32
ARTICLE XL ...cccsecescesseseseseeseeeesesneenssneeeseeseeseeassresessnssssessesecenssersseseseeeseeseeneeneaneenees 32
ANNUAL LEAVE.......ccccecceccessesesnesseeenseesneaneseesnensessenseasscenseneassesseeseesesseeseeestuneneanenses 32
Section 1. ACCUAl. «cece ccccseesesessessecsesenesesecscsscsesesseeecssseseeesensesetessesssseneeaacee 32
Section 2. Extended Annual Leave..........ccceececccscesesessseesesesesseeeeeseseeessesstenseaeseee 32
Section 3. Accrual While on Leave. ..........cccecccsecececeeeeeseceseseneneeeeesseneseessassanseseaesees 33
Section 4. Accrual Limit. 00.0... ccc cece cnecseececseneeereeeenenenesenseenesenaesaseeseereeee 33
Section 5. Use. occ e ces eneeeeseeceeseeseeetesessesecseseeeceneseeenenenersssenenenanaseseenecee 33
Section 6. Annual Leave Cash-in... ccc ccccceeeeerseeenenenetseenenenaensnesesenecee 33
ARTICLE XII oo... cece cccsscsceeeeececseseeececsesessesaenssscseseseseeceesecsenesenesessaesesenseeeessseecee 33
LEAVE WITHOUT PAY ........cscssessesessssesesseeeessscseesssesessessessseessseensscssssssussssseseesesseneeesenses 33
Section 1. Personal Reasons. ..........scecceeseseseeseseenseenenessesesessssssasansneesersenesseseeeeenes 33
Section 2. Temporary Absences for Disability, Illness or Injury. ........ cece eee 34
Section 3. Chronic Absences for Disability, IIIness or Injury. .......... ccs 34
Section 4. Family Leave. .......ccccecccsceesseseceeesecesseseceecseeseeecessesessessaceseesseeerinesee 34
ARTICLE XIV.....ceccessssceseeseeceseeseseesesseeseessesssnesssseensenssussnsseesecserseeaseasesseeneassnsnecsesseeseesey 34
HOLIDAYS .....cccec ccc ccc ccecscesceesseceeeeeceesesessaseessessessacecscsasseeeevesseseesaasesseseassacsseesesneeesees 34
Section 1. Recognized HolidayS. ..........c.ccceccscsecsecseeeeseseeeeeesaseseesescsessessseseeeeseey 34
Section 2. Holiday Pay.......ccccecccscsccceseseescsssecsesseeeeeessecsseesaseseesassseeaeeaneesenseseed 35
Section 3. Holidays on Work DayS. ........cccccssecseeeescseesssssecsecseeecsesesteseesseeeeeeeaeee 36
Section 4. Holidays During Leave or Layoff.........0.csccsccesssscseeeeecneseeeenseeeerseneee 36
Section 5. Birthday Holidays.

Section 6.

Holidays on Day Off... ceceeceeeeeneeceeeeeseseeseesceesnersseersesaeseseeseeseeenesees 36

vi
Section 7. Personal Holiday........ccccccecsssseseeenseseeesscesceescsersessenesseseceeenesaeeeeeeeensen 36

ARTICLE XV... cecscecccsceeeseccscssesessscsescsesesenesessessseescsssesscssscasesessseassessesesesesessssseseserseieneenes 37
WAGES 1... eeseeecscsceseseeeseseecescseeesssseessesecsescsesecscseeasecseseeersessnessescasiaeesesinaseenesenaeeeeaeesenssea 37
Section 1. Starting Pay Rates. ........ cece cesses sneseee eee seeseeeeseceseessseseneseesaseeteaeee 37
Section 2. Step INCreases. ....... cc eceeeececeseeseseeseeeeeececeeeeeseeaeeesecaeeaseesaseaeeecaeeaeeeeatee 37
Section 3. Accelerated Step Advancement..........cccsccseeeessetsssseeeseseseeesseesennenes 37
Section 4. Wage INCreases.. ...... ee eececeececeseensceeeeseeeeeeeeeeseeseeseeeeeesaeeeeteaeseeeeeeeneraeeas 38
Section 5. Pay Enhancements and Premium Pay ........:ccscscsscseessseesesesseeeeeeeneasees 38
Section 6. Canine Handlers. ...........cccccccecesescseeeeesecseeeeeeessesesseseessesesseseseseeeesenenenene 39
Section 7. Performance Pay INCentive...........eeceeeseeseeseseeseesessceeseseceeeeeeeeeeeeetsenees 39

 

Section 8. 401(k) Savings Plan..
ARTICLE XV1....ccecesceseseseseeneneesesseesesescsesesescacacsescseenerensesesesssasasacenscsesesssacaeacecaestesaeeees 41
CLASSIFICATIONS 0.0... seceeeeseeeseesessseeseeesesecsesesenecaeaeeesesessenenseseseeetersseeseneneeaeesesenseaaens 41

 

Section 1. Classifications. .

 

Section 2. Senior Patrol OffiCeP. oo... ceeeceeeeeeseeeceeseetesetanesesesesseeenene 41
Section 3. Senior Clerk. 2.0.0... cccecccseeesececeecsesseeseesecseseseseeeceeseenesesanassesseseeeeeeene 42
ARTICLE XVII...
LONGEVITY ooo. ccc ee ceeeee recs enecscsesesessesecesecsseecesseenenesassecesseseseseseseasenevasseeeenesed 42
ARTICLE XVII... esc ccccee cece cseesceeeeeeecaeeecseseesscseenscsesesesessetsesecsesseseseeeecseneneneneeaseaenenee 42
HEALTH AND WELFARE ..........cccccccsescsesceceecseeesececsesesseseeescecsceececsesesaeseseseeeseraasanasenecea 42
Section 1. Group INSUraNnCe. «0.2.2... ccc cceeesees eens teeecseeeeeeeseserecseneeeesenseennenesaseeees 42
Section 2. Municipal and Employee Contributions/Premiums...........0.ccceeee 42
Section 3. Section 125 Plann... cscs ee seessesccssceeseneneeeceenesecesessasesesseseneneresneneee! 43
Section 4. Unpaid Leave... cece ceeescceeeseseesseneeesessseetscsesssseseeesenevacseeeneee 43
Section 5. Retirees. oo... ceeccec cece ccscssceecsecsscsesseseseeseeseeeesessesssecssesneeeseseeseeeseseess 43

vii
Section 6. Health Care Committee. 000.0... ccc eceeseesescsssceeesesceeeneeereseneeeeaesenss 43

ARTICLE XIX.....cccccesecseesesessssesscssesesssescseeesseseeseecessseesssnsssssasssesussesssacsneesseeasesencseensaeneey 44
OTHER INSURANCE, SAVINGS PLANS AND RETIREMENT........0.0:c:scsceseeseees 44
Section 1. Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment (AD&D) Insurance. ........ 44
Section 2. Supplemental Life INSUPANCE oo... cece eee eee eeee ete eeeteeeeteeteeseeseseeeeeeeseeee 44
Section 3. Dependent Life Insurance... cece eececeecseeseteesecaeeeesesseseessneeeseneeeee 44
Section 4. Long-Term Disability 0.0.0.0... cies cceecesceecseeseeerseseenessesaeseseesnesesensenee 44
Section 5. Short-Term Disability 2.0.0.0. eeeeeeeeeeecnecsecseecsscsesseseceesseneenenseaeee 44
Section 6. Savings Plan... cee cece eeeeeeetsceeeeeeeeeseeeececeesessesseeseneeseseeeaeae 44
Section 7. Retirement ..........cccccccecsseeeeeeseescsescsecsessseseeesaeseececeesesssenesessesaeeseeeeaeae 44
Section 8. Employee Assistance Program .......c.cccccccee ee eeseeseeeseseseseseeseeeseesseeeeeee 45

ARTICLE XX... cceecccsessescsessescseseeeceeacsesseeceeeecacsesscesscsesesesseneeseesssssceseceesesessssesenseessensacee 45

INJURY LEAVE .......cccccecessesescsessessssesessenesseceessesessessessecsussssesssecessssessesiseecasecessaeneass 45
Section 1. Eligibility... cece cesses seseceecesereeceesecsesscsecsersesessesseseseeseesaseetiesees 45
Section 4. First Three Days Following Date of INjury..............:.ccceeeeeneeseeseeeeees 45
Section 5. Insurance Coverage. ........cccccceccstseseeseessetetseseeseeeseseseneneessasenesesseaenenes 45
Section 6. Termination of Municipality's Responsibilities. 0.0.00... cece eeeeeeee 45
Section 7. Requirement. ........cccccecssesecsecseeseescsecsesseeesessssssecseesesecsesssseenesseneneenenaas 46

ARTICLE XX... cece ccc cesceeesceeeeeesecsesecseeenesesssscssseseseseesececeseeeesesesseesesessesaneneeeceeeas 46

TEMPORARY DUTY ASSIGNMENTS 1.0... ec cecc ccc ee ereeeeeneeeeecseseseneseesesenenenaeeeeeenee 46

ARTICLE XXIl oo. ceccee ee ccececeeeceeeceeeeeeeseseneceesecesecsesecassesesesasaaeesessesesesseseseesesaseeeeseeseataes 47

EDUCATIONAL BENEFITS.....00..ecceccccc cs eeseseseneeeeeeesneeesseneeeeesasssssssessseeseeseeeeeeesereaeee 47

ARTICLE XXII... cceccceeccecsscseeneseessecseesaceesecssesecsessesaeseesasesessassaceseesssceesessesseseseeeesaneaee 48

TUITION REFUNDS 0.0... eceecceceeessesesesceesseneecstesesneneacssenesteesessassnssesesseseaneseenenseneeeaneaeey 48

ARTICLE XXIV oo. .sccsessecsessescsesrseeeeeseeseeseessansusesseseessensacsserseeiseussnssnsseesessesaneensuneateneenenes 48
SEPARABILITY AND SAVINGS CLAUSE.....0.....cccceccccsessesesesesetenecsesesesetssesseeeeseneneaeea 48

Section 1. SUSPENSION. 2.0... cece ceceeceecssereseeneeeeseesseeeeeessaceseessaceeesauceesusaaeeeeeseesed 48
Section 2. Separability. 0.0... ccc cece cecetecsecesseseeseseesseseseecsessssecseeessecsesaasessesessed 48
ARTICLE XXV uo ecececcsecsesteseeseeeeeeetsecsescsesscseseesassssssessssesseacseesssesssseesseesssneseenensenseceaeesey 49
SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS 0... ccc cee cccceeceeseeeeeseseseesensesesesesessesenenesaseeeeneee 49
ARTICLE XXVI oo.scsescesseseseeseereseseeseeessceeesesessesesssnesssessssnsesensesseseeessneessvesssseneeneasansecsseeey 49
HOME CARS uu. ..eseceesceseseeseeeeeeseeseneeeeeseeesessaeseeesasseesesseeaenensesesesesessesesesesessesenenenaseeeeseee! 49
ARTICLE XXVIL o..eeseececeseeeeseeseseseeseseesesceseseecsssscsesseeesesuensesseseseesinsssssnsessesassesecaseeesetes 49
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES ...0....c.ccececsscccseeseceecsseseesscseesesssenenesesseeanesesssseneeesesacseesceeateneeees 49
TERM OF AGREEMENT ...........c:cccscesssssesecseseesnessssecsecsesseeseesseanseseasenseneeassatenssesaseneesecans 50
Section 1. TOrm, ....ccccscscecsessesesesesesssssesescssesssseseseeceesnsssessssseseesssensnensssaseeesesesseeneaes 50
Section 2. Notice. 2... eee ceeceeseseeeeesseececcescesecsessessneneeeeseseneseseesessasssesseeesesenenees 50
2015 SALARY SCHEDULE ........cccseecssesseseeseeseenesestesesesessssesesseseeseeneeeneeecaeess A-2
2016 SALARY SCHEDULE .........ccccccecccesescesceeesecseseeseseecsecseessessecsssessessaseseeseases A-3
2017 SALARY SCHEDULE... ccc eceeeeecaeseeeeeeseseseeseseeenesesseenenessaneeeeees A-4
2018 SALARY SCHEDULE 0.0.0... cece ceseeeesceceeeeceeseeeeresseneneetesesneesenseesets A-5
PREAMBLE

This Agreement entered into by the Municipality of Anchorage, hereinafter referred to as
the "Municipality" or "Employer" and the Anchorage Police Department Employees
Association, hereinafter referred to as the "Association," has as its purpose the
promotion of harmonious relations between the Municipality and the Association; the
establishment of an equitable and peaceful procedure for the resolution of differences;
the establishment of wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment to
encourage a more efficient and effective service in the public interest.

ARTICLE |
RECOGNITION AND BARGAINING UNIT
Section 1. Recognition.

The Municipality of Anchorage hereby recognizes, during the term of this Agreement,
the Anchorage Police Department Employees Association, as the exclusive bargaining
agent for all employees of the Police Department whose job classifications are listed in
Article XVI of this Agreement.

Section 2. Membership.

All employees covered under the terms of this Agreement shall make application to join
the Association within thirty-one (31) calendar days following the date of employee's
hire or signing of this Agreement, whichever is the latter, and must maintain
membership in good standing, as uniformly required by the Association, for the life of
this Agreement and any renewal thereof.

Refusal to join the Association or to maintain membership in good standing shall be
grounds for dismissal. If the Association fails to admit such an employee into the
Association membership, this shall not be cause for his/her dismissal. The Association
shall advise the Municipality in writing within thirty (30) days of any individual who has
failed to make application under the terms of this section. The Association agrees to
indemnify, hold harmless and pay all costs and attorney's fees which may arise from
any claim and/or liability of the Municipality for terminating an employee in good faith
pursuant to this section.

Section 3. Non-Discrimination.

It is hereby agreed that there shall be no discrimination by the Municipality against any
employee because of race, color, creed, age, sex, disability, recognizing bona fide
occupational qualifications, national origin, or because of membership in or lawful
activity on behalf of the Association. It is hereby agreed that there shall be no

4
discrimination by the Association against any employee or any employee desiring to be
a member because of race, color, creed, age, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or
national origin. The provisions of the Agreement shall be applied equally to all
employees without discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race, color, creed,
handicap, national origin, or political affiliation. The Municipality shall bear responsibility
for defending against allegations of violations of this section on the part of the
Municipality; the Association shall bear responsibility for defending against alleged
violations on the part of the Association. Further, the Municipality is committed to
positive, practical efforts in employment, promotion, and administration of personnel
actions pursuant to this Agreement to ensure equal employment opportunity to all
employees at all job levels. The Association recognizes and supports that commitment.

All reference to employees in this Agreement designate both sexes, and wherever the
male gender is used, it shall be construed to include male and female employees.

Section 4. Notice of Hire.

The Municipality will advise the Association in writing of all new Police Department
employees and their date of hire within fourteen (14) days of employment.

Section 5. Initial Probationary Period.

Employees who are hired/rehired in Police Officer, and Communications Clerk | and
Communications Clerk II positions shall be required to serve a 477-day probation
period. The probation period includes field training and an academy.

Employees who are hired/rehired in Community Service Officer positions shall be
required to serve a 365-day probation period.

All other employees who are hired or rehired shall serve a 180 day probation period
(except for the job classifications noted above). The probation period will include field
training and/or an academy, if applicable.

Probation periods may be extended in thirty (30) calendar day periods by mutual
consent of the Police Chief and the Association.

The Municipality's decision to terminate a new-hire probationary employee cannot be
overturned unless it is found to be arbitrary, capricious, discriminatory or made in bad
faith.

Section 6. Promotional Probationary Period.

Employees who promote or transfer to Police Officer, Communications Clerk | and
Communications Clerk Il positions shall serve a 477-day probation period. All other
employees who promote to a higher rank shall serve a 180-day probation period.

Employees who promote or transfer to Community Service Officer positions shall serve
a 365-day probation period.
Employees who transfer to a different classification at the same pay grade shall serve
only a sixty (60) day probation period.

Employees who fail to successfully complete the probation period for a position the
employee promoted or transferred to shall voluntarily be demoted back to the previous
position. If the position is filled, the new employee in the position shall be laid off, or
may displace another employee in accordance with AMC 3.30.112. In these cases,
there shall be no loss or break of position seniority as described in Article IX Section 2,
and the employee shall not accumulate position seniority in the position the employee
failed to successfully complete probation.

Section 7. Personnel Regulations.

Where this Agreement is silent, pursuant to AMC 3.70.170 the Municipality of
Anchorage Personnel Regulations shall apply to employees represented by the
Anchorage Police Department Employees Association.

Section 8. Contracting.

It is and has been the policy of the Municipality to make every effort to utilize its
employees to perform work when they are qualified to do so, but the Municipality
reserves the right to contract out indirect law enforcement.

In its exercise of this right, the Municipality agrees that subcontracting will be limited to
indirect law enforcement, and that it will not contract or subcontract work regularly
performed by other employees. The Municipality further agrees that it will not lay off any
employee because of its exercise of its contracting rights here.

A. Subcontracting

1. Pursuant to the terms and conditions in this article, the Municipality shall be allowed
to subcontract the following indirect law enforcement Prisoner transport, subpoena
service, the service of civil process, non-injury accident investigations, vehicle towing,
and the preparation of transcripts.

2. Any cost savings from subcontracting shall be used to provide additional staffing
and/or equipment for the Anchorage Police Department. The Department agrees to
meet and confer with the Association if equipment purchases are more than 10% of the
ratio of staffing costs to equipment purchases which existed for the Anchorage Police
Department in 2014.

3. No member of the APDEA shall be laid off or otherwise lose their job at the
Anchorage Police Department as a result of subcontracting.

4. Before subcontracting, the Municipality will conduct a study to determine the
cost\benefit of subcontracting. No subcontracting shall be undertaken unless to do so
produces savings to the Municipality. The APDEA shall be informed of any report or
study, shall be allowed input regarding the same, and will be provided with a copy of
any final report or study.

3
5. Before subcontracting is implemented, the APDEA will be given an opportunity to
present an alternative means of accomplishing the work proposed to be subcontracted
which does not involve subcontracting and which maintains the work as bargaining unit
work. The APDEA's proposal must be presented within fourteen (14) days of the receipt
of the Municipality's final report or study. If, in the reasonable opinion of the Municipality,
the APDEA's proposal meets or exceeds the savings expected to be achieved by
subcontracting, as set forth in the Municipality's final report/study, the APDEA's
proposal shall be implemented in lieu of subcontracting.

6. At the conclusion of a subcontracting contract, if the Municipality proposes to
continue the subcontracting, the provisions of Subsection B.5 shall be applied again. In
so doing, the APDEA proposal, if submitted, will be judged against the new, proposed
subcontract.

7. Where subcontracting involves access to confidential information or to law
enforcement investigations, the individuals used for the subcontracting will be subject to
the same background investigation, as permitted by law, as may be applicable to
APDEA members.

B. Citizens’ Academy.

Though ordinarily the making of follow-up telephone calls to crime victims would be
work performed by the APDEA, notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, the
Municipality shall be allowed to have volunteers from the Citizens’ Academy make such
follow-up telephone calls, and perform such other work as shall be agreed to by the
Chief and the APDEA.

C. Port Security.

1. The Municipality shall be allowed to subcontract security work at the Port of
Anchorage so long as the work duties and assignments of the contract are restricted to
the following: Limiting access of unauthorized persons to the Port, ensuring that
authorized persons do not bring unauthorized property into the Port, and ensuring
compliance of authorized persons with the Port’s safety and security regulations
pursuant to the Marine Transportation Security Act of 2002.

2. In order to facilitate cooperation between APD and the Port, the sergeant assigned to
Community Liaison or designated by the Chief will regularly meet with a security officer
of comparable rank to discuss issues that may interfere with the cooperation between
APD officers and security guards and to ensure that the information necessary to the
conduct of effective police and security activities in the Port are efficiently
communicated to the APD officers and security guards who need the information.

3. The Municipality recognizes that law enforcement on Municipal streets is a function of
the Anchorage Police Department.

4. The Municipality and the APDEA agree that the Port Security Contract will not be
expanded to permit security guards to perform work traditionally performed by APDEA
members at other locations or facilities within the Municipality. This agreement has no
impact on current contracts for private security guards at certain Municipal buildings.

4
ARTICLE Il
SCOPE OF AGREEMENT
Section 1. Management Rights.

It is recognized that the Municipality retains the right, except as otherwise provided in
this Agreement, to manage the affairs of the Municipality and direct its work force.

Section 2. Change of Operations.

Where new types of equipment are used which change the operations of the
Department, new classifications are created, or the duties of an existing classification
are substantially changed, the wages, hours, and working conditions covering such
operation or classification shall be negotiated between the parties. In the event that
negotiations cannot be finalized to the satisfaction of both parties, the issue shall be
submitted to the Employee Relations Department for its determination. Rates agreed
upon or awarded shall be effective as of the date the job classification becomes
effective. Establishment of wage rates under this section is subject to grievance and/or
arbitration.

Section 3. Notices.

All notices required by either party in this Agreement shall be in writing to the President
of the Association, Employee Relations Director, and Police Chief.

Section 4. Computation of Time and Dates.

The following definitions apply except where otherwise stated in this Agreement. Day
means calendar days except where otherwise stated in this Agreement. Business day
means Monday through Friday, excluding Municipal observed holidays.

Section 5. Meet and Confer.

The parties agree that they will meet and confer in good faith at reasonable times and
places concerning this agreement, and its interpretation or any other matter of mutual
concern to employee representatives and the municipality. The parties further agree
that either party may request, in a writing delivered to the other, that the parties confer
within 14 days after the date of delivery of the request, which request shall specify the
matter to be discussed. An inexcusable refusal to meet and confer in response to such
request shall be a violation of this agreement. There shall be no obligation on the part of
either party to reopen, modify, amend or otherwise alter the terminology or interpretation
of this agreement or to make any other agreement as a result of any such conferences
nor shall the requirement for such conferences alter the rights or obligations of the
parties under this agreement.
ARTICLE Ill
NO STRIKE CLAUSE

During the term of this Agreement, the Association, for itself and for all employees
covered by this Agreement, hereby agrees that no employee covered by this Agreement
shall exercise any unlawful means which the Association or employees may possess
against the Municipality nor shall the Association or employees engage in any unlawful
job action or unlawful conduct which has as its purpose to influence the employer or
other Municipal employees with respect to wages, benefits, working conditions, or other
incidents of employment with the Municipality of Anchorage. If any of the unauthorized
conduct, above specified, should occur, the Association will immediately notify the
employees engaging in the unauthorized activities to cease and desist, and will publicly
declare that such conduct is illegal and unauthorized. Any employee engaging in such
conduct shall be subject to immediate dismissal by the Municipality. Nothing in this
Article shall be construed to abridge any right of the Association or an employee
granted under the United States and/or Alaska constitutions.

ARTICLE IV
CHECKOFF

The Municipality, upon receipt of a written authorization signed by the employee (such
authorization shall not be revocable for the term of this Agreement) shall deduct from
such employee's wages Association dues. Association dues will be deducted from the
employee's wages each pay day. The Municipality will remit same to the duly authorized
representative of the Association, together with a list of the names of the employees
from whose pay deductions were made. The Association agrees to pay the costs of the
defense of the Municipality and to hold the Municipality free from all liability in
connection with dues collection except for ordinary diligence and care in transmittal of
the monies to the Association.

ARTICLE V
BILL OF RIGHTS AND GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Section 1. Bill of Rights.

Individual rights of employees in the Anchorage Police Department shall not be violated.
To insure this, the following shall represent the Employee's Bill of Rights:

A. An employee shall be entitled to representation from the Association or its designee
at each step of the Grievance Procedure set forth in this Agreement.

B. An employee shall be entitled to representation by the Association or its designee at
each stage of a disciplinary proceeding brought against an Association member.

6
Disciplinary proceeding is defined as any action taken against an employee by a
superior officer, that may affect his working conditions, integrity, hours or wages, and
which could reasonably lead to oral reprimand, written reprimand, suspension,
discharge, demotion or disciplinary transfer.

C. No employee shall be required by the Municipality to submit to an_ interview in a
disciplinary proceeding unless the employee is afforded the opportunity of having an
Association representative or its designee present. If the Employer has reasonable
cause to question an employee's fitness for duty, the Employer may require the
employee to undergo a physical or mental examination to determine continued fitness
for duty. If the employee disagrees with the results of such examination, or the results of
the first examination indicate that a further examination is required, then either the
employee or Employer may require a second examination. Should the findings and
recommendations of the examining physicians significantly differ, a third opinion from
another qualified physician selected jointly by the two physicians shall be obtained. The
third opinion shall be followed by the Employer, the Association and affected employee.
The first and, where applicable, third examination shall be paid for by the Employer and
the second examination shall be paid by the employee (to the extent that such
examination is not paid for through the Health and Welfare Plan) if the employee
requests the examination, or the Employer if the Employer requires the second
examination.

D. In all disciplinary hearings, the employee shall be presumed innocent until proven
guilty. This presumption does not increase the Employer's burden to establish just
cause in any disciplinary action.

E. An employee shall not be coerced or intimidated or suffer any reprisals either directly
or indirectly that may adversely affect hours, wages, or other terms and conditions of
employment as a result of the exercise of rights under this Agreement.

F, When an employee is (a) under investigation, and (b) subjected to interview by the
Department, (c) which could lead to disciplinary action (which is defined as oral
reprimand, written reprimand, suspension, discharge, demotion or disciplinary transfer),
the interview shall be conducted under conditions listed in this Section.

G. The following provisions shall apply to such interviews:

(1) Interviews shall be conducted at a reasonable hour, preferably when the employee
is on duty, unless the seriousness of the investigation requires otherwise.

(2) Employees shall be compensated if the interview occurs off-duty, at the appropriate
overtime rate of pay.

(3) Employees under non-criminal investigation shall be informed of the nature of the
investigation and provided a copy of the written complaint, if one exists, within four (4)
working days of when the complaint is received. Employees on leave status shall be
notified within four (4) workdays of the employee returning to duty. The APDEA shall be
contemporaneously provided with copies of all investigation notifications and
disciplinary action reports given to the employee. Where known, employees shall be
advised of the name of the complainant. Employees shall be informed of all details of
7
the investigation which are necessary to reasonably apprise the employee of the factual
background of the complaint. When, in the reasonable judgment of the Chief of Police,
disclosure of the complaint will seriously jeopardize an investigation of the complaint,
the notice requirement under this provision shall not apply.

(4) Interview sessions shall be for a reasonable period and under reasonable
conditions. Save when in the reasonable judgment of the Police Chief prior notice of an
interview will seriously jeopardize an investigation, an employee under investigation for
a non-criminal offense shall be provided with a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours
notice of any non-criminal interview.

(5) Employees being interviewed shall be informed that failure to answer questions
directly related to the investigation can result in disciplinary action, which includes
discharge, unless the incident is being investigated as a criminal act, in which case, no
employee shall be required to answer any questions and no disciplinary action can be
taken for failure to answer under these circumstances. No promise of reward shall be
made as an inducement to answering questions.

(a) If the incident may result in either a civil suit and/or a criminal action, the employee
may have an attorney, at his own cost, in addition to an Association Representative, be
present at all steps of the investigation, provided the attorney does not obstruct the
course of the investigation.

(6) The interview may be recorded, and if it is, the employee shall have access to the
recording, if any further proceedings are contemplated, or prior to any further interviews
at a subsequent time. The employee that is being interviewed shall also have the right
to bring his or her own recording device and record any and all aspects of the interview
and, if the employee does so, the employee shall provide the Municipality access to the
recording. No recording device may be used by any party unless the Association and
the Municipality are made aware of the fact prior to such interview. Employees shall be
entitled to a transcribed copy of any notes made by a stenographer.

(7) If prior to or during the interview of an employee, it is determined that the employee
may be charged with a criminal offense, the employee shall immediately be informed of
this fact.

(8) Interviews shall be conducted under circumstances devoid of abuse.

(9) Unless the circumstances of the investigation requires more time, an internal affairs
investigation shall be completed within 45 days of initiation. The Department's
disciplinary decision shall be finalized within 45 days of the completion of the internal
affairs investigation.

(10) Internal investigation files shall not be used for the purposes of training other
employees unless prior written consent is received from each employee mentioned in
the files.

(11) Employees who would like to review their internal affairs file should coordinate with

the Internal Affairs Unit to schedule a time to review the file. Internal Affairs will make

the file available for a reasonable amount of time so that an employee can review the
8
contents of the file. Employees shall be entitled to review and copies of their Internal
affairs files as follows:

a. In investigations where there are sustained complaints against an employee
and/or for which there is discipline imposed, the employee will have
access/copies to the entire investigation as part of due process rights.

b. In investigations where there is no sustained complaint against the employee,
the employee will have access to all portions of the file except the transcript or
recordings of interviews. Provided, however, that if the Municipality intends to
use the investigation narrative or the transcript or recordings of interviews for any
purpose impacting the employee’s wages, hours, or terms and condition of
employment, or if the Municipality is contemplating releasing the investigation
narrative or the transcript or recordings of interviews or executive summary to a
third party, the Municipality shall contemporaneously provide the employee with
access/copies to the relevant documents and recordings.

(c) The APDEA President shall have the right to review the entire contents of
Internal Affairs files that have resulted in other than a sustained complaint.

H. All disciplinary matters will be removed from the personnel file at the following
times and under the following conditions:

Oral Reprimand, Written Reprimand, Suspension, Demotion or Disciplinary
Transfer: One year after the date of imposition of an oral reprimand or written
reprimand, and two (2) years after the imposition of a suspension, demotion or
disciplinary transfer. Any similar violations occurring during the above time periods will
cause the existing disciplinary action(s) to be maintained in the personnel file for an
additional one (1) year period.

At any time after the effective date of this Agreement, employees shall have the
opportunity to notify the Municipality of any disciplinary records that are subject to the
provisions of this section. In all cases where the Municipality receives such notification,
and in all cases where discipline is imposed after the effective date of this Agreement,
the Municipality shall remove the disciplinary matters from the employee’s file on the
time schedule set forth in this section, and shall provide the employee with the original
of the documents removed from the file.

|. Unless otherwise described herein, all investigations will be conducted in accordance
with State and Federal law.

J. Except where obligated by law or with prior written consent of the affected employee,
the Municipality will not release information which is not otherwise a public record from
an employee's personnel file to any third party not associated with or acting on behalf of
the Municipality. Where release is required by law, the employer will make a reasonable
effort to notify the employee prior to release of the information.
Section 2. Grievance Procedure

A. A "grievance" is defined as any dispute between the Employer and an employee or
the Association regarding the interpretation or violation of this Agreement which has not
been resolved by prior submission of the problem through the chain of command, and
which has been accepted as a grievance by the Executive Board of the Association. A
“grievance” shall not include challenges based upon the Municipal Personnel Rules
promotional process or promotional decisions.

B. An employee who believes he or she may have a grievance is encouraged to
attempt to informally resolve the matter through the chain of command.

C. The grievant shall report to the Shop Steward or such other Association
representative as may be designated by the Association, any grievance that may arise
between the employee and the Employer. The designated Association representative
will attempt to resolve the matter by consulting with the employee's shift supervisor.

D. Step 1. If the grievance cannot be resolved, the designated Association
representative shall report the matter to the Association, and the Association
representative shall present the matter in writing to the Police Chief, or his/her
designee. The grievance filing must specify the Article or Articles allegedly in dispute,
date of the violation (if known), nature of the violation and remedy. All grievances shall
be presented to the Police Chief, or designee, with a copy to the Employee Relations
Department as soon as practicable after the occurrence upon which the grievance is
based, but in no event later than thirty (30) calendar days for a termination grievance, or
sixty (60) calendar days for all other grievances from the date on which the grievance
arose or the date on which the grievant should reasonably have learned of the
grievance. A grievance involving a change or alleged change in current policy or
procedure shall be dealt with solely under the terms of paragraph N of this section. The
parties may mutually agree to meet regarding the grievance. The Police Chief, or
designee, must give a written response to the grievance within ten (10) business days
of a termination grievance and twenty (20) business days for all other grievances from
receipt of the grievance.

E. Step 2. Failing to settle the grievance in accordance with paragraph D, above, the
appeal must be presented in writing by the Association to the Mayor or the Mayor's
designee within ten (10) business days after the response from the Chief is due or
received. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee shall respond in writing to the Association
with a copy to the employee within ten (10) business days.

F. The Employer may file a grievance against the Association by giving written notice to
the Association president, or designee, within thirty (30) calendar days of the event
giving rise to the grievance. The parties may mutually agree to meet regarding the
grievance. The Association must give a written response to the grievance within fifteen
(15) business days from receipt of the grievance.

G. Step 3. If the grievance cannot be resolved within the time frames above, the
Employer or the Association may request arbitration. The request for arbitration must be
made in writing within twenty (20) business days from the date of receipt of the Mayor's

10
or the Mayor's designee's or Association's response under subsection E or F, above, as
may be applicable. The arbitration request must specify the Article or Articles of this
agreement allegedly in dispute.

H. Method of Selection of Arbitrator: Upon receipt of the arbitration request by either
party to arbitrate a grievance, the moving party shall notify the next arbitrator on the
standing panel with a copy to the Employee Relations Department, in accordance with
2(Q) of this Section.

I. The parties may request that any dispute submitted to an arbitrator shall be heard by
the arbitrator within thirty (30) calendar days from the date submitted. An arbitrator shall
render a decision within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the dispute is tendered
to him, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the Association and the Employer.

J. The arbitrator shall have no authority to amend, alter or modify this Agreement or its
terms and shall limit recommendations solely to the interpretation and application of this
Agreement.

K. The decision of the arbitrator will be binding upon all parties hereto.

L. Arbitrator expenses shall be borne by the losing party, who shall be designated by
the arbitrator in his/her decision.

M. The failure of either party to follow the above time limits shall result in resolution of
the grievance against the party failing to meet the time limits. The parties may mutually
agree in writing to modify the time limits in any step of the grievance procedure.

N. If the Department implements a change in a current policy or procedure over which
the Employer has a mandatory obligation to bargain, or a dispute arises under the light
duty section of this Agreement, the designated Association Representative may grieve
such change, in writing, to the Police Chief or designee. Such grievance must be filed
within seven (7) business days of receipt of the proposed policy change. To the extent
possible, absent emergencies, notice of a policy or procedural change shall be issued
one (1) week in advance of the anticipated effective date.

When a grievance is filed under N above, the arbitrator must hear the grievance within
thirty (30) business days of receipt by the Chief and shall render a decision within two
(2) weeks of the conclusion of the hearing. No post-hearing briefs shall be submitted in
such cases. Upon the mutual agreement of the parties, any grievance may be submitted
through an expedited grievance procedure.

O. If the Association declines to pursue a termination grievance of a non-probationary
employee and the employee still wishes to grieve the termination, the employee shall
notify the Police Chief, or designee, and the Employee Relations Department, or
designee, within three (3) business days of receiving notification from the Association
that it has declined to pursue the grievance. Upon receipt of the employee's request, the
Employee Relations Department shall select an arbitrator certified by the American
Arbitration Association. The arbitrator shall hear and resolve the grievance as provided
under paragraphs | through M above.

11
P. To the extent possible, when feasible and consistent with the requirements of AMC
3.70.020B, notice of a policy or procedural change affecting wages, hours or other
terms and conditions of employment shall be given to the President of the Association
one (1) week in advance of the anticipated effective date. However, nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed to mean that the Municipality has agreed to bargain, to
submit to grievance or arbitration, or to include within the terms of this Agreement, any
non-mandatory subject of bargaining or to waive any management right possessed by
the Municipality.

Q. Within sixty (60) days following the execution of this Agreement, the parties shall
meet to select a standing panel of seven (7) arbitrators to hear grievances, and
periodically meet as needed to update the panel. The arbitrator for grievances shall be
selected from the standing panel on a rotating basis, provided the arbitrator is able to
hear the grievance within the time frames set forth in this Agreement. The parties shall
utilize the pre-existing arbitrator selection process until the new system is in place.

ARTICLE VI
GENERAL WORKING CONDITIONS

Section 1. Working Out of Classification and Acting Assignments.

The Municipality agrees that unless otherwise specified, they will be governed by the
schedule of wages and working conditions in Articles XV and XVI. In the event that an
employee assigned either by expressed assignment of a superior officer or by the
accepted practices of the Department, to work out of classification (another union
position) or in an acting assignment (non-represented or executive position) in a higher
classification for a full shift or half shift, then the Municipality agrees to pay such
employee at ten (10) percent above the employee’s factored rate of pay for that time
worked. The Municipality shall choose the most qualified employee for the position.
Where qualifications are substantially equal, seniority will be the determining factor. The
decision whether to appoint an employee to a higher classification shall rest with the
Police Chief or designee. Nothing herein shall require that an employee be assigned to
a higher classification and/or supervisory position when such positions are vacant.

Section 2. Authorized Representatives.

The Association shall have as its representative an individual appointed by the
Association President who shall be authorized to speak for the Association in all matters
covered by this Agreement.

Section 3. Shop Steward and Association Officers.

A. Shop Stewards. Shop Stewards shall be appointed from among the Association
members who are employees of the Municipality at any given point by the Association,

12
at the Association's discretion and in a layoff situation shall be the last members laid off.
Shop Stewards and Association Officers shall be allowed to handle complaints and
grievances arising under this Agreement, and Association Officers shall be allowed to
attend to Association business during their normal working hours without loss of
compensation for time spent in the pursuit of their duties. Association Officers and Shop
Stewards shall be allowed a reasonable amount of time off with pay for the purposes of
attending the APDEA’s annual in-house shop steward training that occurs during their
regularly scheduled work hours and that is attended also by non-represented Police
Department employees. Association Officers and Shop Stewards shall also be allowed
on an annual basis to attend no more than 10 training classes for the aggregate of all
Association Officers and Shop Stewards.

The Shop Stewards or Association Officers shall attempt to notify his immediate
supervisor prior to leaving to attend to Association business. In the event the immediate
supervisor is not available, the Shop Steward or Association Officer shall notify
Dispatch. The maximum number of Shop Stewards shall not exceed twenty (20),
including a Chief Shop Steward, but not including the President, Vice President,
Treasurer, and Recording Secretary, during the term of this Agreement. Upon request,
the Association shall provide the Municipality with an updated list of current Shop
Stewards and Association officers.

B. APDEA President. Recognizing the mutual benefit to the parties of cooperative labor
relations and the resolution of grievances and potential grievances at the lowest
possible level, the Municipality will allow the APDEA President to work on such Union
related business. The Association shall reimburse the Municipality for 50% of the
APDEA President’s salary.

C. Retirement Board. APDEA members appointed to serve on the Police and Fire
Retirement Board shall be allowed to attend to the business of the retirement board
during their normal working hours without loss of compensation for time spent in the
pursuit of their Retirement Board duties.

Section 4. Examination of Records.

Except as otherwise provided by law, the Association or its designee shall have the right
to examine all records pertaining to bargaining unit employees for matters covered by
this Agreement on proper written notification in advance to the Municipality. The
Municipality shall make available original or copies of the original records for
examination by the Association or its designee upon two (2) business days notice from
the Association or its designee. Other than the records described in Article V(1)(G)(11),
the Association shall not have the right to examine medical records without the written
consent of the employee, and shall have no right to examine records the employee has
no right to examine.

The Municipality shall maintain a separate file containing test and selection information

and results on promotions and job assignments. Upon official request, the APDEA shall
be allowed to examine the records in the promotional and job assignment file.

13
Section 5. Employee Roster.

The Municipality agrees to furnish the Association once each quarter with a roster of all
employees working for the Department when same is required by the Association. The
Association agrees that it will furnish all forms required by the Municipality to be used in
complying with the provisions of this section.

Section 6. Meal Periods.

Except for sworn uniformed officers and other employees assigned to sections that
provide 24 hour service, regular employees shall receive an unpaid meal period of sixty
(60) minutes, which the Department will attempt to schedule mid-way of each shift, that
shall not be considered as time worked. At the employee’s option, on an individual case
basis and subject to the reasonable operating needs of the Municipality, the unpaid
meal period may be thirty (30) minutes in length.

For all sworn uniformed employees and regular employees working in sections that
provide 24-hour service, a paid meal period of up to thirty (30) minutes will be allowed,
which the Department will attempt to schedule mid-way of each shift

Employees who work more than three (3) hours before or held over more than three (3)
hours after their regularly scheduled shift, shall be provided an additional meal period of
thirty (30) minutes at the appropriate overtime rate of pay.

Subject to supervisory approval, an employee shall be allowed to combine either or both
of their relief periods with their lunch period, with the goal that the lunch period will be
taken in the middle portion of the shift.

Section 7. Relief Periods.

All employees shall be allowed two 15-minute relief periods during the work shift. The
Association and the Municipality shall mutually agree on reasonable rules governing the
taking of such relief periods as provided herein. When working other than the regular
shift, relief breaks shall be taken each (3) hours.

Section 8. Pay Day.

The Municipality shall establish a bi-weekly pay day on which employees shall be paid
during working hours, prior to the end of the regular shift. If a regular pay day falls on a
Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, then the last working day before such Saturday, Sunday,
or holiday shall be considered pay day. Failure of the Municipality to pay the employees
as described herein shall entitle the employees to wait time pay of four (4) hours pay for
each twenty-four (24) hour period thereafter, Saturday and Sunday inclusive at the
appropriate overtime rate.

14
Section 9. Elections.

Regular employees shall be granted time necessary to vote at Employer's discretion
and only when the employee can demonstrate that he/she could not vote on his/her own
time for the purpose of voting in Federal, State, and Municipal-wide General or Special
Elections. Proof of voting may be required. The Municipality will continue with its
present policy in regard to Association meetings.

Voting in Association elections shall be allowed during on-duty time at the employee's
work place.

Section 10. Safety and Liability.

A. No employee shall be required to operate any equipment which is unsafe. No
disciplinary action or other form of discrimination shall be instituted against any
employee for questioning whether a piece of equipment is safe.

B. Safety defects in equipment shall be reported by the employee immediately or at the
end of the assigned shift to his/her immediate supervisor or, in the event the immediate
supervisor is unavailable, the report shall be made to Dispatch.

C. When an occasion arises where an employee notifies the Employer of a question of
safety, there shall be an immediate investigation of the safety matter in question by the
supervisor. If the matter cannot be resolved between the employee and his supervisor,
there shall be an investigation by a committee of equal representation of the Association
and the Municipality. The committee must meet within fourteen (14) days from the time
the employee has notified the employer of a question of safety, if the problem has not
been resolved before that time. The committee's determinations on the matter shall be
followed.

D. Equipment deadlined by the committee shall be certified as “safe to return to duty" by
the Department Safety Officer in writing.

E. The Municipality will ensure parking for all non-sworn personnel assigned to a
substation.

F. No non-sworn employee shall drive a patrol car unless it is prominently marked "out
of service".

G. The Municipality and the Association shall cooperate in designing and carrying out a
safety program affecting all employees.

H. Employees shall report as soon as reasonably possible all vehicle accidents
involving municipal vehicles, or involving personal vehicles driven during work hours, in
accordance with Police Department policies.

|. Employees shall report all work related injuries/illnesses immediately to their
supervisors, and timely complete required injury/illness reports, in accordance with
Police Department policies.

15
Section 11. Discipline and Proper Notice.

The Municipality retains the right to discipline an employee for just cause but agrees
that the designated Association representative shall be notified of the reason of such
contemplated discipline in writing, prior to any action taken against the employee. An
employee may be temporarily suspended without pay if such suspensions are in accord
with the principles of due process contained in the Alaska and United States
Constitution. The Municipality further agrees that with the exception of drunkenness,
dishonesty, or gross disobedience, all regular employees shall be given two (2) weeks
notice or two (2) weeks pay prior to discharge. For the purposes of section, "gross
disobedience" shall mean willful refusal to obey a reasonable order. An employee shall
be permitted to withdraw a resignation from employment up to ten (10) business days
before the employee is actually separated from service.

Prior to discharge of an employee for disciplinary reasons, the employee shall be given
notice of the reason(s) for discharge and an opportunity to respond to the stated
reasons for the discharge. Should the employee request an opportunity to be heard, the
hearing shall be informal and shall be conducted by the Chief or his/her designee. The
employee may be represented by counsel, at his/her own expense, and/or by a
representative from the Association. A final determination regarding discharge shall not
be made until such a hearing has been conducted. Nothing herein shall affect the
Association's or employee's rights under Article V of this Agreement.

Section 12. Shift Changes.

The Department may only make temporary non-disciplinary involuntary changes in
shifts under the following circumstances:

1. The Department first attempts to gain the voluntary concurrence of the employee
and the Association to the change.

2. The Department gives the employee thirty (30) days written notice of the intent
to change shifts.

3. The change in shifts occurs on a shift rotation day.
4. The change is a period of no longer than one hundred and twenty (120) days.

5. The Department has reasonable cause to believe that the shift change is in the
best interests of the employee and the Department.

6. Unless the employee agrees, the shift change does not involve a change in days
off.

7. If the employee’s permanent shift qualifies for shift differential, the shift
differential is continued during the period of the changed shift.

8. The Department may not use its rights under this section to change an
employee’s shift more than once every three years.
16
9. The Department may not use its rights under this section to change the shifts of
more than four employees at any one shift rotation.

Additionally, with the joint approval of the Association and the Police Chief, employees
may change shifts and days off prior to the next scheduled posting of the monthly
roster. The foregoing does not apply to disciplinary action

Section 13. Job Assignments, Promotions, and Involuntary Transfer.

A. Job Assignments. Job assignments shall be made on the basis of qualifications,
as determined by the Employer: Qualifications being substantially equal, job
assignments shall be made on the basis of department seniority.

B. Qualifications. AMC 3.30.045 of the Municipality’s personnel rules shall not apply
to automatically disqualify an APDEA member from job assignments, promotions;
provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prevent the Municipality from
taking into account the factors listed in AMC 3.30.045 of the Municipality's
personnel rules, where appropriate under the circumstances, in making a
promotional or job assignment decision.

C. Involuntary transfers. An employee may be involuntarily transferred for non-
disciplinary reasons to a different job assignment within a division under the
following circumstances: (1) based upon the needs of the Department as
determined by the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, no more than once each
calendar year or (2) in an emergency. An employee who is being involuntarily
transferred for other than an emergency shall be given at least thirty (30) days
notice before the transfer is affected. Any involuntary transfer shall be subject to
review under the grievance and arbitration provisions of this contract and shall not
be upheld if determined to be arbitrary, capricious, discriminatory or made in bad
faith. The foregoing does not apply to job assignments as a result of disciplinary
action.

Section 14. Light Duty.

An employee who is unable to perform the duties of his/her classification because of
medical reasons shall be immediately placed on light duty status and assigned to
duties, at the discretion of the Chief or his/her designee, providing the physician's
medical limitations are met, Sections 13 and 14 of Article VI notwithstanding. If the light
duty assignment is less than 40 hours in length, there shall be no involuntary change in
shifts or days off. If the employee’s regular shift made the employee eligible for shift
differential, the employee shall be entitled to continue receiving shift differential for the
duration of the light duty assignment, even if the employee is changed to a different shift
while on light duty.

Section 15. Health Promotion.

The Association recognizes that the provision of the safe work environment and

promotion of a healthful workforce is the right and obligation of the Municipality. The

Association agrees to cooperate with the Municipality in its exercise of the obligation so
17
long as no right guaranteed under this Agreement is violated and with the recognition
that participation of its members in any or all health promotion programs made available
by the Municipality shall solely be on a voluntary basis on the part of the member(s).

Section 16. Supervisory Ratio For Special Events.

For every seven (7) employees scheduled for special event work described herein, one
(1) supervisor shall also be assigned. These special assignments will be posted no less
than five (5) days prior to the event where possible. A special event is defined as any
event that requires the presence of a Police Officer for Traffic or Crowd Control, i.e.,
School and College activities, Sporting Events, Concerts, Festivals, Parades and
Demonstrations.

Section 17. Outside Employment.

In accordance with applicable municipal laws, employees shall be allowed to engage in
outside employment subject to the approval of the Police Chief, which shall not be
unreasonably withheld. Outside employment must meet the following standards: (1) the
outside employment may not pose a conflict of interest with the employee’s status as an
Anchorage police employee; and (2) the outside employment must not detract from the
employee’s primary employment with the Department.

ARTICLE VII
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME

Section 1. Work Schedules.
The work schedules for regular employees shall consist of any of the following:

A. 5-8’s schedule, which consists of eight (8) hour shifts during five (5) consecutive
twenty-four (24) hour periods.

B. 4-10’s schedule, which consists of ten (10) hour shifts during four (4) consecutive
twenty-four (24) hour periods.

C. 3-12’s/1-8 schedule, which consists of twelve (12) hour shifts during three (3)
consecutive twenty-four (24) hour periods in one week, and twelve (12) hour
shifts during three (3) consecutive twenty-four (24) hour periods and one eight (8)
hour shift during the other week, for a total of 80 scheduled hours in one pay
period, with the schedule starting midway of the 8 hour shift.

D. 9-80’s schedule, which consists of nine (9) hour shifts during four (4) consecutive
twenty-four (24) hour periods one week, and one 8 hour shift and nine (9) hour
shifts during four (4) consecutive twenty-four (24) hour periods for the other
week, for a total of 80 scheduled hours in one pay period, with the schedule
starting midway through the one (eight) 8 hour shift.

18
By mutual written agreement, the parties may agree to alternate schedules.
Section 2. Overtime.

All work outside of an employee’s regularly scheduled shift (e.g. over eight (8) hours per
work day for those working five-eights (5-8’s); over ten (10) hours per work day for
those working four-tens (4-10's), over eight (8) or nine (9) hours per work day for those
working nine-eighties (9-80’s)), or in excess of forty (40) hours in a work week that
qualifying under Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) as overtime, shall be paid at the
overtime rate of pay.

The overtime rate is time and one-half (1-1/2), unless otherwise specified in this
Agreement.

The overtime rate of pay for all time worked outside of an employee’s regularly
scheduled shift but not qualifying as FLSA overtime shall be paid at the overtime rate
times the factored rate of pay, unless a higher rate of pay is applicable (working out of
classification or in an acting assignment),

The overtime rate of pay for all time worked that qualifies as FLSA overtime (in excess
of forty (40) hours in a work week and outside of the regularly scheduled shifts) shall be
paid at the overtime rate times the “regular rate of pay” as defined in the FLSA, unless a
higher rate of pay is applicable (working out of classification or in an acting assignment),

Paid leave (including, but not limited to, holidays, vacation, military leave, jury duty, and
sick leave) and unpaid leave are not considered “hours worked” for the purposes of
meeting the over forty (40) hour work week or outside of regularly schedule shift
thresholds.

If the employee works overtime on the second (2") day off, the employee shall be paid
at the overtime rate of two (2) times the factored or regular rate of pay, whichever is
applicable, Two times pay applies only on the second (2°) day off. Where training
assignments are posted at least five days in advance, employees attending training as
students during their off-duty hours shall receive the overtime rate of time and one-half
(1-1/2) for the hours spent in training, regardless of which day of the workweek on which
the training occurs.

Voluntary overtime, for work outside of normal shift, with advance notification of not less
than five (5) days, shall be paid at the overtime rate of one and one-half (1-7) times the
factored or regular rate of pay, whichever is applicable, for hours worked, regardless of
which day of the workweek the voluntary overtime occurs.

Overtime shall be paid for all work performed outside the regularly scheduled shift. If
overtime performance is less than one-quarter (1/4) hour, the time shall be considered
at one-quarter (1/4) hour and paid accordingly. If overtime performance is more than
one-quarter (1/4) hour, but less than thirty (30) minutes, the extent of time will be
considered as thirty (30) minutes and paid accordingly.

19
The employee may elect to receive compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay. All
overtime shall be multiplied by the appropriate rate for that overtime day, or that
overtime work, to determine the number of compensatory hours granted. Compensatory
time provisions will apply in accordance with current law. An employee may accumulate
a maximum of two hundred forty (240) compensatory hours, which will be treated in the
same manner as annual leave.

There shall be two types of compensatory time off: (1) Compensatory time off earned as
a result of hours worked which constitute overtime under the Fair Labor Standards Act,
which shall be referred to as “FLSA Compensatory Time”; and (2) Compensatory time
off for overtime hours worked which do not constitute overtime under the Fair Labor
Standards Act, which shall be referred to as “Non-FLSA Compensatory Time.” The
usage standards for FLSA Compensatory Time shall be those established by the Fair
Labor Standards Act. Non-FLSA Compensatory Time may be used by the employee
subject to the Municipality's reasonable operating needs. The Municipality retains the
discretion to deny a request to use Non-FLSA Compensatory Time if it would be
required to replace the employee desiring to use compensatory time with another
employee on an overtime basis. For purposes of the Fair Labor Standards Act, a
“reasonable period” of time in which to request the use of FLSA Compensatory Time is
fourteen (14) days in advance of the requested use. If a request for FLSA
Compensatory Time is not made fourteen (14) days in advance of the requested use,
the Municipality retains the discretion to reject the request. For purposes of the
compensatory time off provisions of this agreement, the parties acknowledge that the
Municipality may utilize the partial overtime exemption found in Section 207(k) of the
FLSA.

An employee’s compensatory time off must be exhausted before the employee may use
paid annual leave.

Section 3. Starting Time.

A. One regular starting time shall be established for each shift. With the exception of
paragraph B of this section, an established starting time may not be changed prior to
the next shift roster without the concurrence of the Association and the Police Chief or
designee.

B. Where the special needs of the Department require, an individual employee's starting
time for a shift may be changed, as the Police Chief or designee may require. An
employee so affected shall be notified at least seven (7) days in advance; such change
in starting time shall not last more than two (2) consecutive shifts; and no employee's
starting time shall be changed more than once every one hundred and eighty (180)
days.

C. There shall be no flex time without the joint concurrence of the APDEA and the
Municipality. Provided, however, that on a case-by-case occasional basis at the request
of the employee, a supervisor and an employee can agree on an adjustment of a
starting time for non-operational reasons in order to accommodate the employee’s
personal concerns.

20
Section 4. Established Shift.

A. Regular shifts or regularly scheduled shifts are established shifts that consist of a
specified number of consecutive hours and, subject only to paragraph B of Article VII,
Section 3, the starting and ending times of each established shift shall be the same for
each work day of the work schedule.

B. In accordance with Article IX, Section 5, and Article VI, Section 14, assignment to
such shifts shall be governed by seniority.

Section 5. Days Off.

Subject to the needs of the Department for an employee to work overtime, all
employees shall have consecutive days off.

Any work performed on scheduled days off shall be paid at the appropriate rate of pay
as outlined in Section 2 of this Article.

Section 6. Court Appearances.

A. When an employee has a work related court appearance outside the employee’s
regular shift, the employee shall receive court duty compensation at the appropriate
overtime rate and shall be guaranteed a minimum of three (3) hours overtime pay. In
the event that the court appearance is for more than three (3) hours, the employee shall
be paid for the guaranteed three (3) hours, as well as for the time after the three (3)
hours on an hour-for-hour basis at the appropriate overtime rate.

B. Any court appearance within one (1) hour of employee's shift shall be paid at the
appropriate overtime rate for the amount of time of the court appearance.

Section 7. Call Out.

A. When an employee has completed the regularly scheduled shift and is called out to
perform work within four (4) hours after the regular shift, the employee shall be
compensated at the appropriate overtime rate of pay, receiving a guaranteed minimum
of four (4) hours pay at the appropriate overtime rate.

B. When an employee is called out to perform work previously incorrectly performed by
the employee and the correction must be performed before the employee’s next
scheduled shift, the work will be compensated only for the actual time worked at the
appropriate overtime rate of pay, exclusive of transportation time.

C. When an employee is called to work prior to the regularly scheduled starting time,
and continues to work into the regular shift, the employee shall be paid for the time
worked at the appropriate overtime rate. If an employee is called in at any other time,
except to perform work previously incorrectly performed, the employee shall be
guaranteed a minimum of four (4) hours pay at the appropriate overtime rate.

21
Section 8. Off-Duty Telephone Calls and Pager Responses.

Employees responding to off-duty telephone calls and pager notification will be
compensated in fifteen (15) minute increments (Article VII, Section 2) for time worked at
the applicable rate. Excluded from this provision is telephonic testimony for which the
employee is subpoenaed and which will be paid at the Court Overtime Rate.

Section 9. Shift Differential.

Employees covered by this Agreement shall receive a shift differential equal to three
percent (3%) of their factored rate of pay for working swing shifts and six percent (6%)
of their factored rate of pay for working mid shifts. Employees eligible for shift differential
on their regular shifts shall continue to receive their normal shift differential during
training held outside of their normal shift hours provided the training is forty (40) hours
or less.

A. The day shift is any shift starting between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
B. The swing shift is any shift starting between the hours of 12:00 noon and 7:00 p.m.
C. The mid shift is any shift starting between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
Section 10. Lengthy Work Shifts.

Except in the event of a natural disaster or a civil emergency under AMC 3.80, non-
sworn employees shall not be required to work more than twelve (12) consecutive hours
nor have less than eight (8) consecutive hours off. Sworn employees shall not be
required to work more than eighteen (18) consecutive hours, with a minimum of six (6)
hours off, or work more than twenty (20) consecutive hours, with a minimum of ten (10)
consecutive hours off.

Employees working hours outside their regular work schedules are responsible to
ensure the appropriate break in service can occur prior to their scheduled return to
service. In exigent circumstances, with the approval of the Police Chief, these
restrictions can be altered. If employees are ordered to work outside of these
limitations, the additional work shall be paid at the appropriate overtime rate.

This provision supersedes any seniority provision of this Agreement with respect to the
allocation of overtime.

Section 11. SWAT Team.

Hours of work and shifts for those positions assigned to the SWAT team as their
primary duty may be established and adjusted as required to effectively respond to
crime patterns and time. Such hours and shifts shall be scheduled for at least a week's
duration. The SWAT team members so assigned will not be used to backfill Patrol.

All other SWAT team members shall work their normal duties and shall bid for shifts and
days off on the roster based upon position seniority. If they are required to work or train

22
at times other than their scheduled shift, they shall be paid overtime at the appropriate
overtime rate as set forth in Article VII, Section 2.

Section 12. Court Liaison.

The department will maintain positive court liaison and other efforts to minimize court
overtime requirements. On at least an annual basis, the Chief of Police, or his/her
designee, shall meet with the Association to discuss the best means of reducing court
overtime requirements.

Section 13. Canine Demonstrations.

The Municipality shall have the exclusive right to determine whether an APD employee
shall participate in a canine demonstration. If APD decides that an employee will
participate in a canine demonstration, and if the demonstration occurs outside normal
shift hours, the selection of the employee(s) to conduct the assignment shall be subject
to the normal overtime assignments provisions in the collective bargaining agreement.

Without regard to the previous paragraph, if a canine handler is asked to perform a
canine demonstration for the organization that purchased the canine, the handler may
perform the demonstration without regard to the normal seniority/assignment process. If
a canine handler is honored in an awards ceremony and is asked to perform a canine
demonstration as part of that ceremony, the handler will be allowed to work the
demonstration without regard to the normal seniority/assignment process. If a canine
handler is asked to perform a canine demonstration for school functions or youth
activities in which the canine handler’s child, family or friends are directly involved, the
handler may be allowed to do so without regard to the normal seniority/assignment
process.

If a canine demonstration occurs during an employee’s normal shift hours, no additional
compensation shall be paid to the employee beyond the employee’s normal
compensation. If a canine demonstration occurs outside an employee’s normal shift
hours, the employee shall be compensated at the overtime rate on an hour-for-hour
basis for the time spent in the demonstration. The employee shall have the right to
determine whether to receive the overtime compensation in the form of cash or
compensatory time off.

Section 14. Standby.

In cases where it is found necessary to have employees remain available for work in a
standby status after regularly scheduled hours, on scheduled days off, or on holidays,
they shall receive two hours pay at the employee's straight time factored rate for each
day of such duty.

No employee shall be in standby status unless scheduled for such by a Division

Captain. Time spent in standby status does not count as hours worked for the purposes
of computing eligibility for overtime pay.

23
Section 15. CAP Team.

Work schedules and shifts for those positions assigned to the Community Action Patrol
(CAP) team as their primary duty may be established and adjusted as required to
effectively respond to crime patterns and time. Schedules shall last for at least one
week's duration, and may be changed no more frequently than three times per shift
rotation. The CAP Team shall not be used to backfill Patrol.

ARTICLE VIII
UNIFORMS
Section 1. Uniform Issue.

A. Each new sworn employee and community service officer will receive as original
issue four (4) winter shirts, four (4) summer shirts, four (4) pair of trousers, one (1)
parka, one (1) police jacket, one (1) rain jacket, one (1) summer hat, and one (1) winter
hat.

B. Each new non-sworn uniformed female will receive as original issue one (1) police
jacket, two (2) vests, four (4) skirts or slacks, or combination thereof, four (4) winter
shirts, and four (4) summer shirts.

C. Each new non-sworn uniformed male employee will receive as original issue one (1)
police jacket, four (4) winter shirts, four (4) summer shirts, and four (4) pair of trousers.

D. The Department may issue alternative non-sworn uniforms or substitute original
issue clothing items, as appropriate for the working conditions. In addition to the
alternative uniforms, all non-sworn employees will be issued a minimum of one uniform
as described above in Paragraph B and C.

E. Once full accumulation is reached, articles will be replaced when they become
unserviceable due to damage or wear.

Section 2. Non-uniformed Sworn Employees’ Clothing and Equipment Allowance.

All non-uniformed sworn employees shall receive Seven Hundred Dollars ($700.00) per
year clothing and equipment allowance.

Section 3. Miscellaneous Clothing and Equipment Allowance.

All uniformed sworn employees shall receive Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) once
every two years for miscellaneous items of clothing and equipment.

All Community Service Officers shall receive Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) once
every two years for miscellaneous items of clothing and equipment.

24
Section 4. Cleaning.

The clothing articles listed below will be cleaned at Municipal expense on an as needed
basis for APDEA members.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sworn Uniformed
Men & Women and Uniformed
Non-Sworn Non-Sworn Non-Uniformed Non-Uniformed
Uniformed Men Women Men Women
Parka (Sworn Only) Shirts Suits Jackets
Jackets Slacks Ties Skirts
Shirts Skirts Vests Pantsuits
Trousers Vests Overcoats Blouses/Sweaters
Hats Ties Shirts/ Sweaters Overcoats
Ties Jacket Trousers Dresses
Sports Coat
ARTICLE IX
SENIORITY

Section 1. Department Seniority.

Department seniority shall be established as follows: the regular employee having the
longest continuous term of service with the Police Department shall be number one on
the seniority list and all other regular employees likewise shall be listed according to
length of continuous service with the Police Department. Such list shall be updated and
posted quarterly and shall include the date of position seniority.

Section 2. Position Seniority.

Position seniority shall be established as follows: the regular employee having the
longest term of service within a position classification shall be number one on the
seniority list for that classification and all other regular employees within that
classification likewise shall be listed according to length of service within that
classification.

A. Position seniority shall not in any way affect the employee's overall department
seniority for the purposes of leave accrual and/or other fringe benefits.
25
B. Whenever an individual is promoted or demoted into a position classification that they
have previously occupied, the time in which they had previously occupied the position
shall be counted towards their position seniority (provided there has been no break in
seniority pursuant to Article IX, Section 10). Any time in another position shall not be
counted.

C. When two or more individuals are hired into a non-sworn classification on the same
date, their pre-hire screening scores will be used to determine seniority. The individual
with the highest score shall be placed above the individual(s) with the lower score(s). If
there is no pre-hire screening score in a particular classification, seniority shall be
determined by the Association.

D. When sworn personnel are hired on the same date, academic standing within the
academy shall be used to determine the individual with the highest seniority. Scores
from the academy shall be carried to the fourth decimal point for the purpose of
determining academy score for seniority purposes. When sworn personnel are hired
between academies, the sworn personnel so hired shall all be considered to have been
hired on the same date for purposes of this section, and shall have a position seniority
date of the first day of the Academy they attend. Position seniority for police officers
who are unable to finish the Police Academy and later complete the subsequent Police
Academy shall be set at the last day of the Initial Police Academy. Ties in seniority
among police officers who are unable to finish the Police Academy and later complete
the subsequent Police Academy shall be broken by academic standing in the
subsequent Police Academy. When sworn personnel are promoted on the same date,
scores on the promotional examination shall be used to determine the individual with
the highest seniority.

Section 3. Use of Position Seniority.

A. For purposes of shift preference, days off, layoff, and rehire, position seniority shall
govern. For the purposes of preference of days off and preference of shifts, position
seniority will prevail and changes will be allowed at the beginning of each four-month
period if the requested change is made by the fifteenth (15") day of the month two
months prior to shift change and will be allowed within position classification. The first
four-month period shall commence on February 1 of each year, with requested changes
due no later than December 15. At least five days before shift bids are due, the
Municipality shall notify employees as to the anticipated staffing on each shift and the
days off blocks for each shift. The Municipality shall post the result of the shift bid by the
fifteenth day of the month preceding the change. The change of days off and shifts
other than at the beginning of each four-month period shall be allowed with the approval
of the Association and the Chief of Police.

B. For the purposes of annual leave preference only, position seniority will prevail for
annual leave requests submitted more than ninety (90) days in advance of the
scheduled annual leave. The Municipality shall approve or deny such leave requests no
less than seventy-five (75) days before the dates requested off for leave. After that time,
the first request received will be honored except where requests for annual leave are
received on the same calendar day. In that case, position seniority will prevail.

26
C. If an employee has leave approved and voluntarily changes shifts or assignments,
the employee must resubmit a leave slip to the new shift commander, and it shall be
treated as a new request at that time.

Section 4. Notice of Layoff

A. Regular employees will be laid off by inverse Department seniority within a job
classification.

B. Notice of Layoff. The Chief shall give written notice to Labor Relations and to the
employees and Association on any proposed layoff. Such notice shall state the reasons
therefore and shall be submitted at least two (2) weeks before the effective date thereof.

C. Bumping Rights.

(1) A regular employee who has been notified that he or she is to be laid off may bump
into a position parallel in classification to the one from which he or she is to be laid off or
into a lower job classification provided he or she is higher in Department seniority than
the person occupying the position to be bumped into.

(2) No employee may bump into a higher classification.

(3) The employee must meet the entry level qualifications for the job he or she wishes to
bump into as defined by Municipality of Anchorage classification and pay.

(4) Once the employee has bumped into a position, the employee will have ninety (90)
days to successfully complete training in the new position.

(5) The employee will enter the classification bumped into at the lowest position
seniority but will maintain his or her Department seniority.

(6) An employee will be allowed one bump option per lay off notice.

(7) An employee shall be paid in accordance with the pay range applicable to the job
classification bumped into.

Section 5. Recall Procedure.

A. Regular employees shall be recalled starting with the laid off employee with the
highest Department seniority to be called first.

B. An employee who has opted to use bumping rights shall be recalled in accordance
with this section.

C. The recalled employee shall be paid in accordance with the pay range applicable to
the job classification to which the employee is recalled.

D. Laid off employees will maintain recall rights for a three (3) year period.

27
E. Police officers who have been laid off for more than one (1) year causing loss of their
APSC certification will be provided retraining to reinstate their certification.

F. Recalled employees shall have the lay off time added to their overall time on the
Department for purposes of Department seniority only.

G. Recall shall be by job classification. Lists for each classification shall be established.

H. Employees who are laid off from a position bumped into shall be entitled to recall to
the position from which originally laid off.

|. A laid off employee who declines recall to a position shall be moved from the recall list
and be considered as terminated.

Section 6. Work Outside Shift.

All work performed outside of the regularly scheduled workday shall be on a position
seniority basis within the section concerned, then the division, providing senior
employee/employees are qualified to perform the work required, unless otherwise
mutually agreed upon by both the Association and the Municipality. For purposes here,
Traffic and Patrol shall be considered one section.

For every seven (7) employees scheduled for the work described herein, one (1)
supervisor shall also be assigned. These special assignments will be posted no less
than five (5) days prior to the event, where possible.

Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, officers assigned as school resource
officers shall have the first opportunity to work school district functions for the schools to
which they are assigned. If the overtime assignment is not filled by those school
resource officers, then the overtime shall be offered on a division-wide basis.

Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the Department to call in an
employee on an overtime basis when the work can be done by an employee on duty
who is otherwise qualified to perform the assignment.

Section 7. Job Assignment Standards.

Job assignments shall be made on the basis of qualification. Qualifications being
substantially equal, job assignment shall be made on the basis of position seniority. For
the purpose of this Section, job assignment is defined as any transfer of an employee
from one section or division to another. Job assignments shall initially be offered within
the division in which the vacancy occurs. If positions cannot be filled by job assignment
within a division, they shall be filled on a department-wide basis. Any disputes arising
from job assignments shall be subject to the Grievance Procedure.

Section 8. Retention on Return from Military Leave.

An employee who returns from Military Leave timely shall be reappointed into the
position he had when he left on Military leave, or into one as nearly like as possible, and

28
shall be immediately allowed to exercise seniority for purposes of shift selection
provided such selection does not result in bumping.

Section 9. Extra Employees.

Non-bargaining unit extra employees and employees on light duty shall not deprive
regular employees of overtime under any circumstances.

Section 10. Break in Seniority.

Department and position seniority shall be terminated by the following conditions:
A. Proper discharge.

B. Lay-off of three (3) years duration.

C. Resignation.

D. Failure to return from leave of absence or annual leave on agreed date unless
approval is obtained from the Municipality. Emergencies excepted, and will be agreed
upon by both the Association and the Municipality.

Section 11. Compensation for Failure to Follow Seniority.

In the event an employee is not worked in his rightful position of seniority, as set forth in
this Agreement, he shall be compensated in the amount that was earned by the
employee who was worked in his stead, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by both
the Association and the Municipality.

ARTICLE X
SICK LEAVE
Section 1. Accrual.

Non-cashable sick leave shall accrue at the rate of six (6) hours per pay period, or
majority fraction thereof, to a maximum of Five Hundred and Twenty (520) hours, as
provided herein, from date of hire with the Municipality.

Section 2. Use.

Sick leave credits may be used on the third (3rd) day of each illness or injury until
accrued credits are exhausted for regular personnel. Sick leave shall be based on the
employee's actual grade and step, at the factored rate to which the employee is entitled.
Sick leave credits may not be used until the fifth (5) day of each illness or injury in the
employee's family, as defined in Section 6 in this article. Employees who have used
accrued sick leave benefits may continue to accrue sick leave at the monthly rate up to
the maximum accrual under the terms of Section 1 of this Article.

29
Section 3. Accrual During Leave.

Sick leave will continue to accrue during any approved paid leave, and during the first
thirty days of approved unpaid leave.

Section 4. Use During Leave.

Sick leave may be taken during an illness or non-compensable injury, whether on
annual leave, approved leave, or for the first thirty (30) days of approved unpaid leave.
However, an employee must furnish written proof of such illness or injury by a licensed
medical physician.

Section 5. Violation.
Any proven infraction of this Article shall be cause for discipline or dismissal.
Section 6. Sick Leave Use for a Qualifying FMLA Condition.

An employee may use sick leave for absences from work for conditions meeting the
definition of “serious health conditions” under the FMLA, either because of a serious
health condition on the part of the employee or to care for the employee’s spouse, child,
or parent who is suffering a serious health condition. The Municipality shall have the
right to request certification of the circumstances upon which the leave is based, and to
renew the request for certification on a periodic basis. The elimination period of Section
2, above, shall apply to such uses. For purposes of this section, neither pregnancy nor
caring for recently-born or adopted children shall qualify for the use of sick leave unless
the mother or the child suffer from a serious health condition.

Section 7. Excess Sick Leave Bank.

Effective upon the execution of this contract, an excess sick leave bank shall be
established and maintained subject to the following conditions:

A. Each pay period, the sick leave hours that would have been accumulated by APDEA
members above the 520 hour individual account maximum will be deposited in the
Bank. At no time shall there be more than 1,000 hours in the Bank.

B. Employees shall be allowed to draw hours from the bank for qualifying conditions
under Section 6, above, provided the employee does not have more than eighty (80)
hours in the employee’s individual sick leave account.

C. Employees shall submit written requests for use of Bank time to the Chief or the
Chief's designee.

D. Disputes concerning the eligibility of an employee to use the Bank shall be referred
to the expedited grievance procedure in this Agreement.

30
ARTICLE XI
OTHER PAID LEAVE
Section 1. Bereavement Leave.

A regular full-time employee shall be granted three (3) working days of paid
bereavement leave for a deceased immediate family member while in Alaska, or four (4)
working days if travel out of state is required.

For this section only, immediate family shall be defined as the employee's spouse, child,
mother, father, sister, brother, grandmother, grandfather, grandchild, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, or step-
relationship for those family members listed above, person for whom the employee has
been appointed as legal guardian, same-sex domestic partner as defined by the MOA,
or other family members who reside permanently with the employee. Child means the
employee's biological, adopted, or foster child, stepchild, or legal ward. Such
bereavement leave shall not be charged against any of the employee's leave accounts.

Section 2. Training.

Subject to the needs of the Department, paid time off shall be granted for Department
approved training, including attendance at seminars and schools, providing the work
situation permits a temporary absence without serious effect upon the department's
schedule of activities. If the training is conducted during the employee’s regular work
hours, the employee shall not be granted additional leave for the training, but shall be
allowed to attend the training during regular working hours.

Section 3. Military Leave.

Any regular employee who is ordered to report to active duty training or active duty in
the Army, Navy, Air Force, Coast Guard, Marine Corps, National Guard or organized
military reserves of the United States shall be allowed up to fifteen (15) work days leave
per calendar year for such purpose. At the discretion of the employee, they may elect to
use Annual Leave during the 15 day period rather than Military Training Leave. If the
employee elects to use Annual Leave, it will not be in addition to fifteen (15) days of
Military Training Leave.. During Military Training Leave, employees shall be paid the
difference in their factored rate of pay and military pay. Employees ordered to attend
additional periods of military duty may take leave without pay for such duty.

Section 4. Jury Duty.

A. Fees. The Employees shall submit to the Payroll Section a copy of the Clerk of Court
check stub within one pay period from when called to jury duty. The fees paid to the
employee will be deducted from the employee’s gross wages.

31
B. Jury Duty During Regular Shift. Employees who are required to attend jury duty on
their regular shift shall be granted leave to attend jury duty, but upon completion of jury
duty, shall be required to return to their regular shift if the duty is completed prior to the
shifts conclusion.

C. Jury Duty Outside of Normal Shift Hours But on Regular Work Days. Employees
required to attend jury duty during their regular working day but outside of their normal
shift hours, and who are required to serve less than two (2) hours in a calendar day
shall report for their entire regular shift. If required to attend jury duty in excess of two
(2) hours in any calendar day, then the employee shall be credited with jury leave and
shall be excused from his/her regularly scheduled shift for that day.

D. Certification of Attendance. All employees shall submit to the Payroll Section a copy
of the employee’s Certification of Attendance slip from the court system showing days
and times served.

Section 5. Blood Donation.

Employees shall be allowed the time necessary for donating blood. Employees must
show proof of donation.

Section 6. Contract Negotiations.

Employees shall be allowed reasonable time necessary for contract negotiations and
negotiations preparation.

ARTICLE XIl
ANNUAL LEAVE
Section 1. Accrual.

Upon the effective date of this collective bargaining agreement, leave accrual for regular
employees shall be as follows:

MONTHS OF SERVICE PER PAY PERIOD
(1) 1st through 60th 8.31 hrs
(2) 61st through 120th 9.23 hrs
(3) 121st and thereafter 10.15 hrs

Section 2. Extended Annual Leave.

An employee desiring extended annual leave shall secure written permission from both
the Municipality and the Association. Each employee shall be allowed thirty (30) days
extended vacation leave without pay upon proper request. Such leave shall be used in
conjunction with no less than a like amount of annual leave.

32
Section 3. Accrual While on Leave.

Leave shall continue to accrue during the time an employee is on approved paid leave.
Such additional accrual shall be canceled, however, if the employee quits and fails to
resume duty upon completion of approved leave.

Section 4. Accrual Limit.

An employee will not be required to use annual leave during the year and shall also
have the privilege to an unlimited accrual of annual leave. Cash-in lieu of accrued
annual leave may be obtained upon written request one payroll period in advance of the
time of cash-in subject to cash availability and budgetary limitations. In emergency
situations the required notice shall be waived and the matter handled expediently.
However, leaves for longer than sixty (60) calendar days may be taken only with the
approval of the Municipality and the Association.

Section 5. Use.

Annual leave may be used for any purpose desired by the employee upon proper
notification. For purposes of this section proper notification shall mean the employee's
immediate supervisor. In the case of emergency where the employee's immediate
supervisor is not available, Dispatch may be notified. Employees will not be able to use
leave accrued while on leave until they return to work for one complete shift. An
employee desiring extended annual leave shall secure written permission from both the
Municipality and the Association. Each employee shall be allowed thirty (30) days
extended vacation leave without pay upon proper request. Such leave shall be used in
conjunction with no less than a like amount of annual leave.

Section 6. Annual Leave Cash-in.

Cash-in lieu of accrued annual leave may be obtained upon written request one payroll
period in advance of the time of cash-in subject to cash availability and budgetary
limitations. In emergency situations the required notice shall be waived and the matter
handled expediently.

ARTICLE Xill
LEAVE WITHOUT PAY

Section 1. Personal Reasons.

The Police Chief, and/or designee, may at his/her sole discretion, grant up to ninety (90)
days leave without pay to an employee for personal reasons. Sick leave, annual leave
and seniority shall continue to accrue during the full ninety (90) days of such approved
unpaid leave.

The Municipality shall provide written notification to the Association of any leave without
pay over forty-five (45) days.

33
Section 2. Temporary Absences for Disability, Illness or Injury.

A regular employee having thirty (30) days or more of continuous service credit with the
Municipality and who is unable to perform his/her regular duties because of non-duty
related disabling illness or injury, but is certified by a medical doctor as having a
reasonable expectation to return to work after the date of original injury, disability or
illness, shall receive a leave of absence, but with service credit and seniority
accumulating.

Section 3. Chronic Absences for Disability, Illness or Injury.

A regular employee who has chronic disability, illness, or injury, and whose medical
prognosis indicates that the employee will be unable to perform the essential functions
of their position with reasonable accommodation, may be placed in layoff status from
their position. Nothing in this section in any way lessens the Municipality's obligation to
tfeasonably accommodate an employee's disability by assignment to another position
provided that, with reasonable accommodation, the employee can perform the essential
functions of the other position.

Section 4. Family Leave.

Family leave shall be granted in accordance with the requirements of the Family and
Medical Leave Act (FMLA), 29 U.S.C. Section 2600, et seq., the Alaska Family Leave
Act, AS 39.20.500 et seq. (AFLA), and AMC 3.30.1515, except to the extent that other
provisions in this Agreement provide a family leave benefit more generous to
employees than the FMLA and/or the AFLA.

ARTICLE XIV
HOLIDAYS
Section 1. Recognized Holidays.

A. For 2015, Holidays recognized are:
New Year's Day
President's Day (third Monday in February)
Seward's Day (last Monday in March)
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day

Veterans Day (November 11)

34
Thanksgiving Day

Day after Thanksgiving

Christmas Eve (1/2 day)

Christmas Day

Employee's Birthday
B. For 2016 and during the remainder of this Agreement, Holidays recognized are:

New Year's Day

Martin Luther King’s Birthday (third Monday in January)

President's Day (third Monday in February)

Seward's Day (first Monday in March)

Memorial Day

Independence Day

Labor Day

Veterans Day (November 11)

Thanksgiving Day

Day after Thanksgiving

Christmas Day

One Personal Holiday
Section 2. Holiday Pay.
Holiday pay shall be defined for a regular employee as the employee's factored rate of
pay for eight (8) hours for employees working a five (5) day work week, the applicable
eight (8) or nine (9) hours for employees working a 9/80’s schedule and nine (9) hours if

the holiday is on the employee’s regular day off, and for ten (10) hours for employees
working a four (4) day work week.

A regular employee working three (3) twelve (12) hour shifts with an eight (8) hour shift
every other week shall be paid for a twelve (12) hour holiday if the majority portion of
the employee’s twelve (12) hour shift falls on the recognized holiday, and for an eight
(8) hour holiday if the majority of the employee’s eight (8) hour shift falls on the
recognized holiday. If the recognized holiday is on the employee’s regular day off, then
the employee shall be paid for a twelve (12) hour holiday.

35
Holidays on days off for employees working alternative shift schedules shall be as
provided in the underlying agreement calling for the alternative shift schedule.

Holiday pay for a personal holiday is paid in accordance with Article XIV, Section 7.

Holiday pay does not count as hours worked for determining overtime eligibility in the
work week.

Section 3. Holidays on Work Days.

If the majority portion of a regular employee’s shift falls on a recognized holiday, at the
option of the Police Chief, the employee shall either not be required to work the shift
and get holiday pay, or if the majority portion of a regular employee’s shift that falls on
recognized holiday is worked, receive the overtime rate of pay of time and one-half (1-
1/2) in addition to the holiday pay.

Section 4. Holidays During Leave or Layoff.

A recognized holiday occurring during an employee's annual leave or illness shall not be
charged as a day of leave for employees who are in paid status when the holiday
occurs. Regular employees on lay-off shall be paid holidays if they have worked or
received compensation for any part of the month in which the holiday occurs.

Section 5. Birthday Holidays.

Birthday Holidays are recognized holidays for 2015 only. Employees whose birthday
falls on another recognized holiday during 2015 may select another day besides their
birthday during 2015 on which to celebrate with the mutual consent of their supervisor.

Section 6. Holidays on Day Off.

If a holiday falls on a regular employee's normally scheduled day off, the employee shall
receive, at the option of the employee, either holiday pay or the equivalent hours of
additional leave as provided in Article XIV, Section 2. Holidays on days off for
employees working alternative shift schedules shall be as provided in the underlying
agreement calling for the alternative shift schedule.

Section 7. Personal Holiday.

On January 1, 2016 and annually on January 1 thereafter, regular employees shall
accrue ten (10) hours of non-cashable annual leave as a personal holiday Accrual is
based on the employee’s status on January 1, 2016, and on January 1 thereafter.
Requests to take non-cashable annual leave shall be made and approved in the same
manner as annual leave.

36
ARTICLE XV
WAGES

Section 1. Starting Pay Rates.
A. New Employees

The starting pay rate for employees who are hired or rehired for any position shall be at
Step 1 of the pay grade.

B. Promotion

1. Employees who are promoted to a higher pay grade position shall be placed at Step
1 of the pay grade or at a step that provides at least a five percent (5%) increase,
whichever is greater.

2. Employees promoted to the positions of Sergeant, Communications Clerk Il,
Evidence Technician II or Police Clerk III shall be assigned a step in the new pay grade
that provides for at least a ten percent (10%) increase in base pay, up to the maximum
step in the pay grade.

Cc. Transfer

Employees who transfer within the same pay grade shall maintain their current step.

D. Demotion

When an employee is demoted, the step placement shall be in accordance with AMC.
3.30.124F. For disciplinary demotions, the pay grade will be determined as part of the

disciplinary action, and in accordance with Article VI, Section 12.

Section 2. Step Increases.

Employees in Patrol Officer, Community Service Officer, and Communication Clerk |
and II positions shall advance to Step 2 after one hundred and eighty (180) days, and
will advance to Step 3 upon successful completion of probation. Advancement to
successive steps shall be at one year increments following successful completion of
probation.

All other employees will advance to Step 2 upon successful completion of probation.
Advancement to successive steps shall be at one year increments following successful
completion of probation.

Section 3. Accelerated Step Advancement.

Nothing in this Article will prohibit any employee from being advanced at a faster rate
than prescribed above

37
Section 4. Wage Increases.

A.

Cc.

Wage Schedules. Wages paid to employees shall be as specified in Appendix A
of this Agreement. All employees will be compensated under a pay grade and
step system.

Wage Schedule Adjustments.

41. On January 1, 2016, one additional step will be added at the end of the
wage schedule, as provided in Appendix A. Employees who are at the last
step in their grade will advance to this additional step on their merit
anniversary dates.

2. On January 1, 2017, another additional step will be added at the end of
the wage schedule, as provided in Appendix A. Employees who are at the
last step in their grade will advance to this additional step on their merit
anniversary dates.

Wage Rate Increases. The wage schedule specified in Appendix A of this
Agreement shall be adjusted as follows:

1. Effective the first full pay period on or after July 1, 2015, the hourly wage
rates shall reflect an increase of one and one-half percent (1.5%) as specified
in Appendix A.

2. Effective the first full pay period on or after January 1, 2016, the hourly
wage rates shall reflect an increase of two and one-half percent (2.5%) as
specified in Appendix A.

3. Effective the first full pay period on or after January 1, 2017, the hourly
wage rates shall reflect an increase of one and one-half percent (1.5%) as
specified in Appendix A.

4. Effective the first full pay period on or after January 1, 2018, the hourly
wage rates shall reflect an increase of one and one-half percent (1.5%) as
specified in Appendix A.

Section 5. Pay Enhancements and Premium Pay

A. Premium Pay

Employees who are instructors at the Recruit Academy or formal in-service training,
FTO’s, FTO Trainers, TSU, Crisis Negotiations Unit, Major Collision Investigation Unit,

Crime Scene Team and Translators shall receive 5.5% premium pay for all time worked
while performing such work in these capacities.

B. Pay Enhancements

1. Patrol Officers/Senior Patrol Officers and Sergeants who are members of the
following Specialty Teams shall receive a 5.5% pay enhancements:

38
Domestic Violence Investigators
EOD

Canine Handlers

Traffic Fatality Investigation Unit
SWAT

Internal Affairs

CAP

Background Investigators

Pamoagesp

2. Patrol Officers/Senior Patrol Officers and Sergeants who are assigned as full-
time Detectives shall receive a 7% pay enhancement.

C. No employee shall be eligible for both the 5.5% Specialty Team pay enhancement
and the 7% Detective pay enhancement.

Section 6. Canine Handlers.

It is recognized that activities including exercising, training, grooming and care of
canines is to be performed during normal duty time. In recognition that canine handlers
may on occasion have to perform work-related duties in caring for their dogs while off-
duty, the Municipality shall pay each canine handler an extra 30 minutes per day at
time-and-one-half of the employee’s factored rate of pay to cover such activities, without
regard to whether the canine handler is, in fact, performing the duties on a particular
day. If a canine handler is required to spend any additional time in duty-related
functions, he/she shall first, if not an emergency situation, receive prior approval from
his/her supervisor. If an emergency requires such extra duty then the canine handler
shall promptly report the extra time to his/her supervisor. Under any circumstance, any
additional time worked over and above the 30 minutes per day shall be promptly
reported on the employee's time card. It is the policy of the Department that dogs in the
canine program will be kenneled at home.

Section 7. Performance Pay Incentive.

The performance pay incentive program ends on December 31, 2015, with only those
eligible employees who already qualify under the program as of December 31, 2014
entitled to performance pay incentive during 2015.

Section 8. 401(k) Savings Plan.

Employees shall be eligible to participate in the Municipality's 401(k) and 457 savings
plans under the same terms and conditions that the plans are available to other
municipal employees except as follows. The Municipality shall allow APDEA employees
to participate in the Municipality's 401(k) savings plan, into which APDEA members can
contribute a portion of their earnings subject to the limits specified by the IRS and/or the
plan document. The Municipality will match 100% of each APDEA participant's
contribution to their 401(k) account, up to a maximum Municipal contribution of 2.0% of
the employee's eligible earnings for any calendar year. There shall be two types of
Section 401(k) matching contributions made by the Municipality: (1) a “regular payday”
match; and (2) an “end of year”.
39
A. Regular Payday 401(k) Match: The Municipality will match 100% of each
APDEA participant's contribution to the employee’s 401(k) account, up to a
maximum Municipal contribution of 2.0% of the employee’s eligible earnings
for any pay period.

B. End of Year 401(k) Match: The end of year match will occur on the last pay
date in the calendar year. On that pay date, the Municipality shall total the
amount of the member's 401(k) contributions during the course of the
calendar year and shall total the amount of the regular pay day matching
contributions it has made during the course of the year. If the member's
contributions exceed the Municipality’s contributions, the Municipality shall
make an additional contribution within 45 days equivalent to the member’s
contribution, but not exceeding 2% for the calendar year of the member's
annual 401(k) eligible income, including overtime.

40
ARTICLE XVI

CLASSIFICATIONS

Section 1. Classifications.

Police Messenger 12
Police Clerk 14
Senior Police Clerk 15
Impound Technician 16
Specialty Clerk 16
Assistant |.D. Specialist 16
Police Clerk III 17
Evidence Technician | 18
Communications Clerk | 31
Payroll Specialty Clerk 17
Crime Lab Technician 19
Evidence Technician II 20
Communications Clerk II 32
Communications Clerk III 33
Community Service Officer 21
Crime Prevention Specialist 20
Data System Technician | 22
Data System Technician II 23
Identification Technician 23
Patrol Officer 35
Senior Patrol Officer 36
Sergeant 37

Section 2. Senior Patrol Officer.
All Patrol Officers with five (5) years of position seniority as Patrol Officer will be

reclassified to Senior Patrol Officer and shall be placed at the same step in the new pay
grade.

41
Section 3. Senior Clerk.

All Police Clerks with five (5) years position seniority as Police Clerk shall be
reclassified to a Senior Police Clerk and shall be placed at the same step in the new
pay grade.

ARTICLE XVII
LONGEVITY

Employees on the payroll as of January 1, 1981, shall be eligible for, and receive, 10%
longevity pay unless they resign, are laid off for longer than one (1) year without
reemployment, or are discharged for cause. Longevity pay shall not be paid to any
employees hired, rehired, or reemployed more than one (1) year from the date of layoff
after January 1, 1981.

ARTICLE XVIII
HEALTH AND WELFARE

Section 1. Group Insurance.

During 2015, the Municipality MOA will continue to provide for eligible employees a
Flexible Benefits Plan of medical, audio, vision, and dental benefits in effect prior to
effective date of this Agreement.

Beginning in 2016, the Municipality will provide to eligible employees the Health
Benefits Plan (Plan) that is offered to other municipal employees, including non-
represented employees, with three plan options (500, Co-Pay 1000, and PPO
1300/2600). An opt-out program to waive Plan coverage for employees with other
health insurance coverage is available. If an employee shows proof of other coverage,
the employee may choose to waive medical coverage and receive a $350.00/month
financial incentive. Opt-out program conditions and criteria will be established by the
Employee Relations Director, or designee. The Plan is subject to the provisions and
terms of the Plan documents. In the final quarter of the calendar year, the MOA shall
hold an open enrollment period for employees to enroll in or make changes to their
benefit elections to be effective January 1st of the following year.

Section 2. Municipal and Employee Contributions/Premiums.

A. Effective July 1, 2015, the Municipality shall contribute $2,386.66 monthly
towards the Health Benefits Flex Plan. Any remaining premium payments shall be the
responsibility of the member.

B. Effective January 1, 2016, for all employees who do not opt out of the
Municipality's Health Benefits Plan (Plan), the Municipality's premium payment shall be
94% of the cost of the 500 Plan, with employees paying the remainder of the premium

42
costs, if any, for the plan the employee selects. Employees selecting lower cost plans
shall have FSA/HSA options for the difference between the Municipality’s premium
obligation and the cost of the plan the employee selects.

Cc. Effective January 1, 2017 and January 1, 2018, for all employees who do not opt
out of the Municipality's Health Benefits Plan (Plan), the Municipality's premium
payment shall be 90% of the cost of the 500 Plan, with employees paying the remainder
of the premium costs, if any, for the plan the employee selects. Employees selecting
lower cost plans shall have FSA/HSA options for the difference between the
Municipality's premium obligation and the cost of the plan the employee selects.

D. Beginning January 1, 2017, the Association shall have the right to direct the
Municipality's contribution (90% of the 500 Plan) to a health care trust established or
joined by the Association. If there are excess non-IBNR and non-encumbered reserves
in the Municipality Plan attributable to Association members, the excess reserves shall
be transferred to the trust if legally permissible.

E. By September 1, 2017, either party may reopen the Agreement on health care
issues if changes in federal or state laws impact health care cost, premiums, care
coverage, taxes or penalties.

Section 3. Section 125 Plan.

The Municipality shall offer a Section 125 plan and any other tax-sheltering plans
available so that employee co-payments of premiums shall be on a pre-tax basis.

Section 4. Unpaid Leave.

If an employee is absent and on unpaid leave due to illness, approved leave, or an off-
the-job injury, the Employer shall continue to make contributions for the employee as if
here at work, for a period of forty-five (45) days. The Municipality will continue to provide
medical coverage for employees absent on paid leave including leave for periods of
injury in the line of duty.

Section 5. Retirees.

The Municipality shall provide medical coverage for all retirees from the Anchorage
Police Department who are not provided such coverage by another plan. Major medical
coverage including coverage for audio, visual and dental will be provided. Coverage
under this provision may not be diminished during the term of this Agreement.

Section 6. Health Care Committee.

The Municipality shall establish a Health Care Committee for the Municipality of
Anchorage Health Benefit Plans. The Union shall have a representative of its choosing
on the Committee. The Committee shall be comprised of represented, non-
represented/executive Municipal representatives. The Committee shall meet regularly,
as determined by the Committee. Written agendas will be jointly prepared in advance
by the staff representatives on the Committee. The Committee shall have a mission to

43
promote health value, consumer awareness and recommended plan designs and
savings. Recommendations shall be forwarded to the Association and the Director.

ARTICLE XIX

OTHER INSURANCE, SAVINGS PLANS AND RETIREMENT
Section 1. Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment (AD&D) Insurance.

The Municipality will provide basic life and AD&D insurance coverage in the amount of
$200,000 for each eligible sworn employee and in the amount of $50,000 for each
eligible non-sworn employee. Each employee can purchase an additional life and AD&D
insurance coverage at the monthly premium rate set by the insurance carrier.

Section 2. Supplemental Life Insurance

Effective January 1, 2016, Employees may purchase on a voluntary basis, additional life
coverage through post-tax payroll deductions in twenty five thousand dollar ($25,000)
increments, starting at twenty five thousand dollar ($25,000), up to a maximum of two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000). Coverage and premium rates will be determined
by the insurance carrier.

Section 3. Dependent Life Insurance

Effective January 1 2016, employees have the option to voluntarily purchase dependent
life insurance coverage at the employee’s own expense via post-tax payroll deduction.

Section 4. Long-Term Disability

Effective January 1, 2016, Employer paid long-term disability coverage in an amount
equal to a percentage of the employee’s annual salary up to a maximum of amount will
be provided, with the limits determined during open enrollment.

Section 5. Short-Term Disability

Effective January 1, 2016, employees may purchase on a voluntary basis, short-term
disability coverage through post-tax payroll deductions. Employees may select the level
of coverage. Coverage and premium rates will be determined by the insurance carrier.
Section 6. Savings Plan

Employees may participate in the MOA’s 401(k) and 457 savings plan subject to the
provisions of the plans.

Section 7. Retirement

The MOA shall maintain, for eligible employees, the State of Alaska Public Employees
Retirement System program as legislated by the State of Alaska.

44
Section 8. Employee Assistance Program

Employees may participate in the Municipality's Police Department Employee
Assistance Program (EAP) subject to the provisions of the program.

ARTICLE XX
INJURY LEAVE
Section 1. Eligibility.

A regular employee who is injured in the course of performing his/her duties shall be
eligible for injury leave as provided in this section. If a regular employee fails to return or
a physician states the employee does not have a reasonable expectation to return to
full-time work, the Chief may terminate that employee. A regular employee on injury
leave shall comply with all reporting requirements of the Department's sick leave policy.

Section 2. Termination of Employee.

If an employee’s medical prognosis is that he/she will be permanently unable to perform
his/her duties due to illness or injury, the Chief may layoff the employee or, at the
employee’s election, shall terminate the employee. If the employee is terminated, it shall
be considered to be an involuntary termination for all purposes.

Section 3. Supplemental Pay

The Municipality shall supplement workers' compensation payments to the extent that
the injured employee receives no more than ninety percent (90%) of current base pay,
with longevity and education

Section 4. First Three Days Following Date of Injury.

When an employee is injured on the job, the employee may use personal sick leave,
annual leave, compensatory time, or leave without pay for the first three (3) days
following the date of injury.

Section 5. Insurance Coverage.

While a regular employee is on injury leave, health and life insurance coverage shall be
continued until terminated pursuant to Sections 1 or 2 of this Article, or until any one of
the conditions of Section 6 of this Article are met.

Section 6. Termination of Municipality's Responsibilities.

The Municipality's responsibilities under this Article XX shall terminate upon the
occurrence of any of the following:

45
A. Forty-five days after the date on which the employee is declared by a physician to be
permanently disabled or on which a retirement plan commences to make disability or
retirement payments to the employee, whichever occurs first;

B. As of the date on which the employee engages in any full-time occupation for wage
or profit; or

C. As of the date on which the employee no longer receives temporary total or
temporary partial disability benefits.

Section 7. Requirement.

An employee shall be eligible for injury leave only upon satisfaction of the following
conditions:

A. The employee shall make a complete report of the injury to the Alaska Department of
Labor through the Chief or his/her designee;

B. The employee shall cooperate with the Department to prepare and submit all forms
and information related to the employee that may be requested;

C. The employee shall cooperate fully with the Municipality's Workers' Compensation
insurance carrier so long as the employee's Workers' Compensation claim has not been
contested and, where applicable, any rehabilitation agency working with the employee;
and

D. The employee does not use annual leave at any time while the employee is on injury
leave, except during the first three days after the employee is injured on the job.

ARTICLE XxXI
TEMPORARY DUTY ASSIGNMENTS

These procedures will be followed when temporary duty assignments (synonymously
called TDYs or TDAs) outside of the affected employee(s) division are made. These
provisions shall not apply to training activities, currently covered under separate
agreement.

1. Unless otherwise agreed by the APDEA and the Municipality, voluntary TDY
assignments shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days in duration. If such an
extension is sought, the Municipality shall formally post the position.

a. Employees in voluntary TDY assignments shall be eligible for overtime in the division
of the TDY assignment. In addition, the affected employee(s) shall only be eligible for
overtime in their permanently assigned division if the TDY assignment is for 40 hours or
less.

2. Involuntary TDY assignments shall not exceed one hundred sixty (160) hours. If such
an assignment exceeds that period, the APDEA and the Municipality shall meet and

46
confer within five (5) business days after the conclusion of the one hundred sixty (160)
hours or the date on which the Municipality decides to extend the TDY assignment,
whichever comes first. If mutual agreement cannot be reached, the matter is subject to
the grievance procedures outlined in Article V, Section 2(N).

a. Employees in involuntary TDY assignments shall be eligible for voluntary overtime in
both their permanently assigned division and in their TDY division; however, they will
not be subject to the routine involuntary (Call Out overtime of their permanently
assigned division.

b. Employees in involuntary TDY assignments shall not lose any shift differential that
they would otherwise be entitled to in their permanent assignment.

3. An employee in a TDY assignment shall continue to have department seniority
recognized for normal application (overtime selection, leave selection, and shift/days-off
selection in the TDY assignment), but only to distinguish between other employees
performing the same job on a TDY basis.

4. If the TDY assignment itself is an overtime assignment, the overtime shall be offered
in the following order on a seniority basis: To employees within the section of the TDY
assignment, then to employees within the division of the TDY assignment, then to
employees on a Department-wide basis.

ARTICLE XxXiIl
EDUCATIONAL BENEFITS

All employees shall receive educational benefits as follows:

The employer will pay the following pay increases for college degrees. This increase will
not apply to probationary employees. Amounts will be calculated under present
practices for employees currently pursuing their degree. For employees not currently
pursuing a degree, all amounts will be calculated at the employee's base rate.

Associate degree issued by an accredited institution as recognized by the
Council for Higher Education Accreditation (CHEA). 4%

Bachelor degree issued by an accredited institution as recognized by the Council
for Higher Education Accreditation (CHEA). 8%

The employees receiving educational pay benefits, prior to July 1, 1980, shall continue
to maintain those benefits, the amounts of which shall be calculated under those
practices. Employees receiving educational pay benefits prior to January 1, 2009, for
degrees not accredited by the Council for High Education Accreditation shall continue to
smaintain those benefits.

47
ARTICLE XXIll
TUITION REFUNDS

The Municipality agrees to pay 100% of tuition and required books for all employees
enrolled in accredited university courses at the University of Anchorage or Wayland
Baptist University which are taken as part of an associates, bachelor or master’s degree
program or courses which are of immediate and direct value to the Municipality.

The Municipality agrees to pay $300 per credit hour and required books for all
employees enrolled in other accredited university courses.

Total Tuition and book payments per employee per calendar year shall not exceed
$3600.

Tuition and books shall not be paid for courses taken as part of a degree program
where the Municipality has already paid tuition and books for another degree program of
the same level.

For employees hired after January 1, 2009, tuition refunds will be available only for
expenses incurred after the employee has been an APD employee for eighteen (18)
months.

Employees who terminate within twelve (12) months of receiving tuition payment(s) from
the Municipality are obligated to reimburse the same amount to the Municipality.

ARTICLE XXIV
SEPARABILITY AND SAVINGS CLAUSE
Section 1. Suspension.

Should it be determined that any Article of this Agreement is not applicable to any
portion of the Municipality's business because of any Federal or State law, then such
article shall be suspended.

Section 2. Separability.

In the event that any of the provisions of this Agreement shall be declared by a Court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any cause, such invalid provisions shall be
deemed to be nonexistent and the remainder of this Agreement shall continue in full
force and effect.

48
ARTICLE XXV
SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS

This Agreement shall be binding upon the successors and assigns of the parties hereto,
and no provisions, terms or obligations herein contained shall be affected, modified,
altered or changed in any respect whatsoever by the consolidation, merger, sale,
transfer or assignment of either party hereto, or affected, modified, altered or changed
in any respect whatsoever by the change in any kind of ownership, management, or
government entity of either party hereto, or any change, geographical or otherwise, in
the location of business of either party hereto.

ARTICLE XXVI
HOME CARS

The Department will provide take home vehicles to all permanent sworn officers and
Community Service Officers, but they may not be taken outside of the Municipality of
Anchorage, or South of Potter Flats. Probationary patrol officers may have limited use of
a home car as determined by the Police Chief. If there is a temporary shortage of home
cars, the available home cars shall be distributed on a position seniority basis for
uniformed and non-uniformed personnel. Following an initial written warning an officer
may lose his/her home car privileges if off duty activity remains unacceptable. Sworn
officers on light duty shall turn in their take home vehicle until such time as the officer is
returned to full duty.

The parties agree and acknowledge that no employee is required to use a home car.
Use of the home car while off-duty for normal vehicle activities not related to the
employee's law enforcement duties, including, but not limited to, commuting to and from
work, and any time spent maintaining the vehicle for such non-work-related activities is
not considered compensable time. Should an employee engage in any law enforcement
activities while off-duty, she/he shall report such activity and the time spent. Should the
use of the home cars be challenged under the FLSA, either party may reopen this
contract on the issue of home cars.

ARTICLE XXVII
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES

The Municipality may charge APDEA employees hired on or after May 17, 2004 a $2.50
per pay period for child support and student loan garnishments.

49
ARTICLE XXVIII
TERM OF AGREEMENT

Section 1. Term.

This agreement shall become effective on July 1, 2018 after mutual ratification and/or
approval by the partles and shal! remain In effect until June 30, 2018.

Section 2, Notice.

Either party shall give ninety (90) days written notice to the other prior to the expiration
date of this Agreement of Its desire that the Agreement shall be re-negotlated.

AO ¢
Agreed to this_2iday of Pied, 2015

 

 

MUNICIPALITY OF ANCHORAGE ANCHORAGE POLICE DEPARTMENT

: EMPLOYEE’S ASSOCIATION
Daniel Sullivan , Mayor Gerard Asselin, President
Willlam Mede, Lead Negotiator Will Aitchison, Attorney

‘
ec Sie ees Relations Director

¢
e 6 Ct ttt :

Nancy Bear Usera,
Acting Employee Relations Director

bec lue

Mark Mew, Chief af Police

 

50
MUNICIPALITY OF ANCHORAGE
ANCHORAGE POLICE DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEE ASSOCIATION

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND CERTIFICATION

Pursuant to Anchorage Municipal Code section 3.70.130 D, each and every collective
bargaining contract, agreement, modification, written interpretation, or other change,
alteration or amendment, no matter how denominated, shall include a summary of
requirements and remedial provisions, and the certification under oath or affirmation by
each duly authorized representative signing on behalf of a party. The undersigned duly
authorized representatives, on behalf of the parties to this agreement, hereby affirm and
certify as follows:

A. This agreement complies with Anchorage Municipal Code section 3.70.130.

B. Section 3.70.130 requires Assembly approval of all modifications and
amendments, no matter how denominated.

Cc. Absent Assembly approval as required by section 3.70.130, any modification or
amendment, no matter how denominated, shall be deemed null and void, and
any payments made shall be recoverable by the Municipality.

D. Absent Assembly approval as required by section 3.70.130, written clarifications
and interpretations within the definition of “administrative letter" are invalid.

E. Section 3.70.010 prohibits the use of administrative letters to vary the explicit
terms of a labor agreement.

F. Intentional! actions in violation of section 3.70.130 are subject to fines and
penalties under section 1.45.010.

G. Remedial actions: In the event the provisions of section 3.70.130 are violated by
administrative action, any labor agreement, agreement, modification, written
interpretation, or other change, alteration or amendment, no matter how
denominated, shail be null and void with no force or effect.

MUNICIPALITY OF ANCHORAGE ANCHORAGE POLICE DEPARTMENT
EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION

med YALL &

hn en cx

Si Este a GE 2. pba tne 1
“Devealee—

 

 

51
ANCHORAGE POLICE DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION
CERTIFICATION

| certify that the foregoing Agreement was ratified by a majority of the members of the

bargaining unit present and voting at properly called meetings on the 28° day of
— —
mar , 2015.

ANCHORAGE POLICE DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION

Sle2fis

   

DATED:
BY: ,
Its:

 
 

52
ANCHORAGE POLICE DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION
CERTIFICATION

| certify that the foregoing Agreement was approved by a majority of the members of the
Anchorage Assembly, at properly called meetings on the 12" day of May, 2015.

MUNICIPALITY OF ANCHORAGE

pareo: 3/2/15 _

BY:
Its:

   

53
APPENDIX A

NEW SALARY SCHEDULE
Salary Schedule Effective July 1, 2015

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 $19.14 $19.62 $20.60 $21.63 $22.71 $23.85 $25.04
14 $20.13 $20.63 $21.66 $22.74 $23.88 $25.07 $26.32
15 $20.71 $21.23 $22.29 $23.40 $24.57 $25.80 $27.09
16 $21.45 $21.99 $23.09 $24.24 $25.45 $26.72 $28.06
17 $22.13 $22.68 $23.81 $25.00 $26.25 $27.56 $28.94
18 $23.11 $23.69 $24.87 $26.11 $27.42 $28.79 $30.23
19 $24.06 $24.66 $25.89 $27.18 $28.54 $29.97 $31.47
20 $26.03 $26.68 $28.01 $29.41 $30.88 $32.42 $34.04
21 $26.03 $26.68 $28.01 $29.41 $30.88 $32.42 $34.04
22 $28.79 $29.51 $30.99 $32.54 $34.17 $35.88 $37.67
23 $31.35 $32.13 $33.74 $35.43 $37.20 $39.06 $41.01

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

31 $24.43 $25.04 $25.67 $26.95 $28.30 $29.72 $31.21 -
32 $29.15 $29.88 $30.63 $32.16 $33.77 $35.46 $37.23 -
33 $32.59 $33.40 $35.07 $36.82 $38.66 $40.59 $42.62 -
35 $31.35, $32.13 $32.93 $34.58 $36.31 $38.13 $40.04 -
36 $32.23 $33.04 $34.69 $36.42 $38.24 | ; $40.15 $42.16 $44.27

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A-1
2015 SALARY SCHEDULE

Salary Schedule Effective July 6, 2015 ~ 1.5% Increase

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 $19.43 $19.91 $20.91 $21.95 $23.05 $24.21 $25.42
14 $20.43 $20.94 $21.98 $23.08 $24.24 $25.45 $26.71
15 $21.02 $21.55 $22.62 $23.75 $24.94 $26.19 $27.50
16 $21.77 $22.32 $23.44 $24.60 $25.83 $27.12 $28.48
17 $22.46 $23.02 $24.17 $25.38 $26.64 $27.97 $29.37
18 $23.46 $24.05 $25.24 $26.50 $27.83 $29.22 $30.68
19 $24.42 $25.03 $26.28 $27.59 $28.97 $30.42 $31.94
20 $26.42 $27.08 $28.43 $29.85 $31.34 $32.91 $34.55
21 $26.42 $27.08 $28.43 $29.85 $31.34 $32.91 $34.55
22 $29.22 $29.95 $31.45 $33.03 $34.68 $36.42 $38.24
23 $31.82 $32.61 $34.25 $35.96 $37.76 $39.65 $41.63
31 $24.80 $25.42 $26.06 $27.35 $28.72 $30.17 $31.68
32. $29.59 $30.33 $31.09 $32.64 $34.28 $35.99 $37.79
33 $33.08 $33.90 $35.60 $37.37 $39.24 $41.20 $43.26
35 $31.82 $32.61 $33.42 $35.10 $36.85 $38.70 $40.64
36 $32.71 $33.54 $35.21 $36.97 $38.81 $40.75 $42.79 $44.93
37 $38.70 $39.67 $41.65 $43.73 $45.91 $48.20 $50.61 $53.14

 

 

 
2016 SALARY SCHEDULE

Salary Schedule Effective First Full Pay Period in 2016
2.5% Increase + 1 Step

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 $19.92 $20.41 $21.43 $22.50 $23.63 $24.82 $26.06 $26.71
14 $20.94 $21.46 $22.53 $23.66 $24.85 $26.09 $27.38 $28.06
15 $21.55 $22.09 $23.19 $24.34 $25.56 $26.84 $28.19 $28.89
16 $22.31 $22.88 $24.03 $25.22 $26.48 $27.80 $29.19 $29.92
17 $23.02 $23.60 $24.77 $26.01 $27.31 $28.67 $30.10 $30.85
18 $24.05 $24.65 $25.87 $27.16 $28.53 $29.95 $31.45 $32.24
19 $25.03 $25.66 $26.94 $28.28 $29.69 $31.18 $32.74 $33.56
20 $27.08 $27.76 $29.14 $30.60 $32.12 $33.73 $35.41 $36.30
21 $27.08 $27.76 $29.14 $30.60 $32.12 $33.73 $35.41 $36.30
22 $29.95 $30.70 $32.24 $33.86 $35.55 $37.33 $39.20 $40.18
23 $32.62 $33.43 $35.11 $36.86 $38.70 $40.64 $42.67 $43.74
31 $25.42 $26.06 $26.71 $28.03 $29.44 $30.92 $32.47 $33.28
32 $30.33 $31.09 $31.87 $33.46 $35.14 $36.89 $38.73 $39.70
33 $33.91 $34.75 $36.49 $38.30 $40.22 $42.23 $44.34 $45.45
35 $32.62 $33.43 $34.26 $35.98 $37.77 $39.67 $41.66 $42.70
36 $33.53 $34.38 $36.09 $37.89 $39.78 $41.77 $43.86 $46.05 $47.20
37 $39.67 $40.66 $42.69 $44.82 $47.06 $49.41 $51.88 $54.47 $55.83

 
2017 SALARY SCHEDULE

Salary Schedule Effective First Full Pay Period in 2017
1.5 % Increase + 1 Step

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 $20.22 $20.72 $21.75 $22.84 $23.98 eis $26.45 ena $21.79
14 $21.25 $21.78 $22.87 $24.01 $25.22 $26.48 $27.79 $28.48 $29.19
15 $21.87 $22.42 $23.54 $24.71 $25.94 $27.24 $28.61 $29.32 $30.05
16 $22.64 $23.22 $24.39 $25.60 $26.88 $28.22 $29.63 $30.37 $31.13
17 $23.37 $23.95 $25.14 $26.40 $27.72 $29.10 $30.55 $31.31 $32.09
18 $24.41 $25.02 $26.26 $27.57 $28.96 $30.40 $31.92 $32.72 $33.54
19 $25.41 $26.04 $27.34 $28.70 $30.14 $31.65 $33.23 $34.06 $34.91
20 $27.49 $28.18 $29.58 $31.06 $32.60 $34.24 $35.94 $36.84 $37.76
21 $27.49 $28.18 $29.58 $31.06 $32.60 $34.24 $35.94 $36.84 $37.76
22 $30.40 $31.16 $32.72 $34.37 $36.08 $37.89 $39.79 $40.78 $41.80
23 $33.11 $33.93 $35.64 $37.41 $39.28 $41.25 $43.31 $44.40 $45.51
31 $25.80 $26.45 $27.11 $28.45 $29.88 $31.38 $32.96 $33.78 $34.62
32, $30.78 $31.56 $32.35 $33.96 $35.67 $37.44 $39.31 $40.30 $41.31
33 $34.42 $35.27 $37.04 $38.87 $40.82 $42.86 $45.01 $46.13 $47.28
35, $33.11 $33.93 $34.77 $36.52 $38.34 $40.27 $42.28 $43.34 $44.42
36 $34.03 $34.90 $36.63 $38.46 $40.38 $42.40 $44.52 $46.74 $47.91 $49.11
37 $40.27 $41.27 $43.33 $45.49 $47.77 $50.15 $52.66 $55.29 $56.67 $58.09

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
2018 SALARY SCHEDULE

Salary Schedule Effective First Ful

Pay Period in 2018 ~ 1.5 % Increase

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 $20.52 | $21.03 | $22.08 | $23.18 | $24.34 | $25.57 | $26.85 | $27.52 | $28.21
14 $21.57 | $22.11 | $23.21 | $24.37 | $25.60 | $26.88 | $28.21 | $28.91 | $29.63
15 $22.20 | $22.76 | $23.89 | $25.08 | $26.33 | $27.65 | $29.04 | $29.76 | $30.50
16 $22.98 | $23.57 | $24.76 | $25.98 | $27.28 | $28.64 | $30.07 | $30.83 | $31.60
17 $23.72 | $24.31 | $25.52 | $26.80 | $28.14 | $29.54 | $31.01 | $31.78 | $32.57
18 $24.78 | $25.40 | $26.65 | $27.98 | $29.39 | $30.86 | $32.40 | $33.21 | $34.04
19 $25.79 | $26.43 | $27.75 | $29.13 | $30.59 | $32.12 | $33.73 | $34.57 | $35.43
20 $27.90 | $28.60 | $30.02 | $31.53 | $33.09 | $34.75 | $36.48 | $37.39 | $38.33
21 $27.90 | $28.60 | $30.02 | $31.53 | $33.09 | $34.75 | $36.48 | $37.39 | $38.33
22 $30.86 | $31.63 | $33.21 | $34.89 | $36.62 | $38.46 | $40.39 | $41.39 | $42.43
23 $33.61 | $34.44 | $36.17 | $37.97 | $39.87 | $41.87 | $43.96 | $45.07 | $46.19
31 $26.19 | $26.85 | $27.52 | $28.88 | $30.33 | $31.85 | $33.45 | $34.29 | $35.14
32 $31.24 | $32.03 | $32.84 | $34.47 | $36.21 | $38.00 | $39.90 | $40.90 | $41.93
33 $34.94 | $35.80 | $37.60 | $39.45 | $41.43 | $43.50 | $45.69 | $46.82 | $47.99
35 $33.61 | $34.44 $35.29 $37.07 | $38.92 | $40.87 | $42.91 | $43.99 | $45.09
36 $34.54 | $35.42 | $37.18 | $39.04 | $40.99 | $43.04 | $45.19 | $47.44 | $48.63 | $49.85
37 $40.87 | $41.89 | $43.98 | $46.17 | $48.49 | $50.90 | $53.45 | $56.12 | $57.52 | $58.96

 

 

 

A-5
