FOP, LopGE 123

COLLECTIVE
BARGAINING
AGREEMENT

Fiscal Year
2014-2015

 

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

BETWEEN
THE CITY OF OKLAHOMA CITY

and

THE
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
LODGE 123
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE TITLE PAGE

 
  
   

  

Management Rights and Responsibilities
Bargaining Agent Security.
Prohibition of Strike....
Mutual Responsibility .
Grievance Procedure
‘kill Incentive Pay
. Seniority...
..Personnel Reduction

   
  
  
  

 

WOONIADARWNHE

  
   

 
 

Holidays and Days of Employment ..
Overtime Compensation

  
  
 
 

..Manpower Utilization and Productivity.
..Promotional Program

. Right to Legal Representation
..Earned Leave Buy-Back .
..Trade Days....
Addendum A.
Addendum A-1— Pay Matri
Addendum A-2 — Wage Survey Methodology
Addendum B — Longevity Schedule.
Addendum C — Insurance.
Addendum D — Labor Management Committee
Addendum E — Bill of Rights
Addendum F — Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy .

 
 
 
 
    
  
 

 

 
FOP, LobGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-‘15

AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE CITY OF OKLAHOMA CITY
AND

THE FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, LODGE 123

ARTICLE 1

PURPOSE OF AGREEMENT

Section 1.1 This Agreement, entered into by the City of Oklahoma City, Employer, and The
Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge 123, (FOP) as the Collective Bargaining Agent, pursuant to
Title 11, Oklahoma Statute Section 51-101 et seq., as amended, is made to:

(a) Establish wages, hours, benefits, grievance procedures, and other conditions of
employment of represented officers of the Oklahoma City Police Department;

(b) Provide for quality law enforcement and policing services throughout Employer’s
boundaries on an uninterrupted basis for the benefit of the citizens of Oklahoma

City;
(c) Assist in the amicable adjustment of labor disputes.

ARTICLE 2
RECOGNITION

Section 2.1 The City Of Oklahoma City, hereinafter referred to as Employer, recognizes the
Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge 123, hereinafter referred to as FOP, as the exclusive bargaining
agent during the term of this Agreement. All commissioned officers, hereinafter referred to as
“employees”, as listed in Addendum A of this contract, shall be covered by this contract.

Section 2.2 (a) Police recruits who have not completed the police training academy are
not covered by this contract except as specifically hereinafter provided in subsection (c).

(b) Police recruits who have not completed the police training academy cannot avail
themselves of the grievance procedure set forth herein in Article 8.

(c) The FOP shall have the right to bargain on behalf of recruits who have not
completed the police training academy regarding the single issue of entry level

pay.
FOP, LODGE 123

Section 2.3

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

All. commissioned officers listed in the pay plan of this collective bargaining

agreement who have not successfully completed the twelve (12) month probationary period,
following graduation from the police training academy, shall be considered probationary
employees. The 12-month probationary period may be extended by agreement of the City and

the FOP.

Probationary employees must complete the following service requirements to have access to the
benefits listed below:

1.

Tuition reimbursement will be provided only to those probationary employees
who have successfully completed FTO Training;

Probationary officers shall not receive uniform allowance until after they have
completed their initial probation. They will be eligible to receive uniform
maintenance allowances.

Management will establish a Probationary Officer Review Board to hear
allegations of misconduct and/or unsatisfactory performance issues that may
result in a Class III Reprimand, loss of pay, disciplinary probation, or termination.
For the purpose of this section, a probationary officer shall be defined as an
employee who has completed the police training academy, but has not yet
completed the 12-month probationary period. The Probationary Officer Review
Board shall be chaired by the Directory of Training. The board shall consist of
one additional Major, one Lieutenant, and one officer/sergeant.

The probationary employee shall have the right to be represented by one
representative at the hearing. The probationary employee shall be provided with
the evidence supporting the allegation(s) at the hearing. The employee shall have
the opportunity to call witnesses, present exhibits, and cross examine witnesses at
the hearing. If an employee needs to continue the hearing in order to provide
additional evidence, or to respond to the evidence presented at the hearing, a
reasonable opportunity shall be provided.

After the board has heard the evidence and deliberated, the Director of Training
shall make a report and recommendation to the Chief of Police. The Chief of
Police will make the final decision regarding the classification of the allegation(s)
and disciplinary action, if any.

If the FOP disagrees with the decision of the Chief of Police, the Executive Board
may take the matter to arbitration.
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

ARTICLE 3
AUTHORITY AND TERM

Section 3.1 The Employer and the FOP have, by these presents, reduced to writing the
Agreement entered into by the Employer and the FOP through the collective bargaining process
as that term is defined in 11 OS 2001 Section 51-101, as amended.

Section 3.2 This Agreement shall be effective as of the 1“ day of July, 2014 2643 and shall
remain in full force and effect through the 30" day of June, 2015 2014 pursuant to the terms of
11 OS 51-101 et seq.

Section 3.3. The terms of this agreement, as well as bargaining and arbitration for the terms of
a successor agreement shall be governed by the terms of the Fire and Police Arbitration Act, 11
OS 51-101 et. seq.

ARTICLE 4

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Section 4.1 The City shall hire employees for the Oklahoma City Police Department without
regard to membership in the FOP, and any employee listed in Addendum A who is not a member
of the FOP shall receive and shall be entitled to all benefits, rights, privileges, and agreements
contained herein.

Section 4.2 The Employer expressly reserves the right to plan, direct, and control all
operations relating to the Police Department, and to hire, discipline, suspend, or discharge any
member of the Oklahoma City Police Department, subject to the provisions of this contract.

Section 4.3 The Employer shall have the exclusive right to determine the source or sources
from which new applicants for work in the Oklahoma City Police Department shall be secured;
and shall be the sole judge of qualifications of employees for retention with the Employer subject
to existing ordinances, state law, and the Merit Board and Grievance Procedures hereinafter
specifically set forth.

Section 4.4 Except as specifically modified by this Agreement, all the rights, powers and
authority the Employer had prior to the signing of this Agreement are retained by the Employer
and remain exclusively and without limitation within the rights of the Employer.

Section 4.5 The Employer and the FOP specifically recognize the necessity of continuous
improvement in efficient and effective police protection and services through the Employer’s
operations to all citizens of the City of Oklahoma City, and each party to this contract agrees to
cooperate with the other in accomplishing this result. In this regard there is hereby created an
employer-FOP Committee, to meet on an as needed basis, but not more than once monthly, to
discuss areas of mutual concern.
FOP, LopGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY ’14-‘15

Section 4.6 All rules, regulations, fiscal procedures, working conditions, departmental rules
and practices and manner of conducting the operation and administration of the Oklahoma City
Police Department in effect on the execution date of this agreement shall be deemed a part of this
agreement unless and except as modified or changed by the specific terms of this agreement.
This agreement shall also supersede any personnel policies of the City which conflict with its
terms. Except as stated above, only the terms and conditions of employment of those individuals
covered by this agreement shall not be altered except by agreement of the parties.

ARTICLE 5
BARGAINING AGENT SECURITY

Section 5.1 This Agreement shall be binding upon the successors and assignees of the parties
hereto during the term of this contract, and no provisions, terms or obligations herein contained
shall be affected, modified, altered or changed in any respect whatsoever by the consolidation,
merger, or annexation, transfer or assignment of either party hereto, or affected, modified,
altered, or changed in any respect whatsoever by any change of any kind in the ownership, or
management, of either party hereto or by change geographically, or place of business of either
party hereto.

Section 5.2 The employer agrees to deduct, bi-weekly, dues and assessments in the amount
certified to be correct by the Secretary of the FOP, from the pay of those employees who
individually request by means of payroll deduction card authorization that such deductions be
made.

The Employer further agrees to deduct, bi-weekly, a service fee from the wages of those
employees who are in the bargaining unit but who are non-members of the FOP, Lodge 123,
upon the condition that non-FOP employees execute and keep effective a valid payroll deduction
authorization. The amount of this service fee shall be uniform among all non-FOP employees.
The total amount of deductions shall be remitted by the Employer to the Treasurer of the FOP.

This authorization shall remain in force until canceled by the employee; cost for the Payroll
Deduction Service shall be charged by the City in accordance with the following:

(a) Any extra work or expense incurred by the City because of requests or delays in
furnishing information, materials, or supplies, by the FOP, or due to the
furnishing of indefinite, erroneous or conflicting data, shall be paid for or borne
by the FOP. The charges are to be based on the City’s actual cost and will be due
and owing to the City upon delivery of an itemized invoice to the FOP.

(b) For normal services contemplated by this section the FOP shall be charged Two
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) annually, covering the period of this agreement.
The FOP shall remit the above in twelve (12) equal installments prior to and
before the fifth (sy day of each month.
FOP, Lope 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 14-15

(c) The City shall not be liable either at law or equity for any damages incurred by
the FOP, which occurs from the City’s non-performance or delay of the duties and
obligations of this Article 5, Section 5.2 covenant, where such non-performance
or delay is due to fire, electrical or machine failure, strike, lockout, governmental
order or regulation, or any other failure similar or dissimilar beyond the City’s
reasonable control.

Section 5.3. The president of the Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge 123, shall be assigned
Special Duty out of the Police Chief’s Office to conduct FOP Lodge 123 business. Additionally.

a second position shall be assigned Special Duty out of the Police Chief’s Office to conduct FOP
Lodge 123 business, subject to the following conditions: FOP shall reimburse the City for the
full cost associated with the position, as specified in the Memorandum of Understanding
(“MOU”) executed by the parties. Upon assignment to the FOP duty, the officer will no longer
be eligible for receipt of any incentive payments or shift differential that may have been received
while on active department duty. The second Lodge position shall be limited to the rank of
Captain or below. The FOP shall remit payment to the City on or before the 5" of every month
once the FOP duty for the second position begins and payment shall be an amount equal to 1/12
of the annual sum specified in the MOU. If payment is not remitted, the special duty shall be
revoked and the member will be reassigned to duty with the Police Department. The FOP shall
determine which officer shall be assigned to this second position, and advise the Chief of Police
by February 1 of each year. The Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) containing the
amounts of the wages and benefits for the officer assigned to the second position shall be
executed by the parties prior to the assignment beginning, and updated each year for any
adjustments in pay or benefits, or for a different officer being assigned to the second position.
The beginning date of the second Lodge position shall be 14 days after notification to the Chief
from the FOP president. The FOP may discontinue this second position assignment upon 30

days notice to the Chief.

Section 5.4 Upon giving five (5) days written notice, representative(s) of the FOP Lodge 123
may be granted a reasonable period of time off with pay, by the Chief of Police, to conduct bona
fide FOP Lodge 123 business as determined by the Chief of Police. Business to be conducted
must be defined and specified at the time the written request is made. Specifically, FOP
Executive Board members may be granted up to forty-four (44) days off per fiscal year under
this section for purposes of performing their official duties, as set forth in the FOP constitution
and by-laws. No more than an additional one hundred (100) days per fiscal year, as a cumulative
total, will be granted for non Executive Board members. No group in excess of five (5)
individuals shall be granted identical time off under this provision. However, nothing shall
preclude, upon five (5) days notice as above, the use of vacation or other recognized time off
with pay by an individual or group of individuals for bona fide FOP Lodge 123 business.

Section 5.5 | Employer agrees not to enter into any other agreement, written or verbal, with any
employee association or department association which in any way conflicts with the provisions
of this Agreement. Employer further agrees not to discriminate against any employee for
activity in behalf of, or membership in the FOP Lodge 123.
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-‘15

Section 5.6 No officer shall be required to participate in any City sponsored or recognized
charity, nor shall any officer be discriminated against for failure to so participate. No officer
shall be subjected to a review of his/her personnel records to determine the officer’s participation
or non-participation in any City sponsored charity.

ARTICLE 6

PROHIBITION OF STRIKE

Section 6.1 The FOP and the Employer are well aware of the public policy and the necessity
that there shall be no strikes or other action which would tend to disrupt the provision of those
services traditional to Employer’s business; in that the public policy of the State of Oklahoma
has been expressly stated by the Oklahoma Legislature and codified as Title 11 O.S. Section 51-
101, as amended, that statutory provision is deemed to provide the spirit and intent under which
the following sections of this Article are provided and the parties hereto are bound.

Section 6.2 Neither the FOP, nor any of its officers, agents, or employees, or any of the
employees for which it bargains, shall in any manner coerce, intimidate, instigate, induce,
sanction, suggest, conspire with, promote, support, engage in, condone, or encourage any person
to participate in any strike, work stoppage or slowdown. The FOP shall not aid or assist any
persons, or parties, engaging in the above prohibited conduct nor shall the FOP provide funds,
financial and other assistance for the conduct or direction of such activities for the payment of
strike, unemployment, or other benefits to those persons or parties participating in such
prohibited conduct and activities; provided, however, that the FOP may provide legal
representation for itself or persons accused of such activities, or for any other purpose it may
deem necessary.

Section 6.3 Upon notification confirmed in writing, by the Employer to the FOP, that certain
of its members are engaging in a strike, the FOP shall immediately, in writing, order such
members to return to work at once and provide Employer with a copy of such an order and
responsible officials of the FOP shall publicly order them to return to work. Such
characterization of strike by the Employer shall not establish the alleged existence of a strike.

Such notification by the FOP shall not constitute an admission by it that strike is in progress or
has taken place or that any particular member is or has engaged in a strike. The notification shall
be made solely on the representation of the Employer.

In the event that a strike occurs, the FOP agrees to take all reasonable effective and affirmative
action to secure the members return to work as promptly as possible. The FOP shall not be in
breach of this Agreement where the acts or actions herein before enumerated are not caused or
authorized by the FOP.
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY’14-"15

ARTICLE 7

MUTUAL RESPONSIBILITY

Section 7.1 |The Employer and the FOP agree that for the duration of this Agreement, neither
the Employer or its agents, nor the FOP, its agents or members, shall discriminate against any
employee because of his membership or non-membership in the FOP.

Section 7.2 Pursuant to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended; the Civil
Rights Act of 1991; the Americans with Disabilities Act; the Family and Medical Leave Act of
1993; the Guidelines, Rules and Regulations of the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission; State of Oklahoma Human Resources Department Directives; and, the City of
Oklahoma City Policy on Equal Employment Opportunities; each party recognizes itself to be
legally bound to initiate and further the quality of employment for all persons receiving
beneficial rights under this agreement.

Section 7.3 In the event that any portion of this contract shall be determined as in conflict
with the statutory or administrative provisions identified in Section 7.2 above; or, should a
provision of this contract in any manner negatively or adversely affect the Employer’s
compliance with the provisions of Section 7.2 above; then in either of these particular situations,
the conflicting provision of this contract shall become null and void, without legal effect
whatsoever and notwithstanding prior dealings, traditions or status quo positions.

ARTICLE 8

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Section 8.1 The FOP or any employee may file a grievance within fifteen (15) days of said
occurrence, as hereinafter defined, and a grievance may also be filed by the FOP or any
employee covered by this Agreement regarding unsafe conditions of unsafe equipment.

Section 8.2 The Bargaining Agent may report an impending grievance to the Chief of the
Oklahoma City Police Department or the City Personnel Director in an effort to forestall its
occurrence.

Section 8.3. The purpose of this Article is to establish a mechanism for the fair, expeditious
and orderly adjustment of grievances and settlement of disputes involving the interpretation or
application of this collective bargaining agreement.

Section 8.4 Any formal grievance filed shall refer to the provision or provisions of the
Agreement alleged to have been violated and shall set forth the facts which supports a grievance
position that an alleged violation has occurred.
FOP, LODGE 123

Section 8.5

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY ’14-"15

A grievance shall not be subject to resolution under this procedure if the

aggrieved employee has submitted the dispute for resolution pursuant to procedures established
under the grievance procedure of the City Personnel Policies.

Section 8.6

Any controversy or dispute between the Employer and the FOP or any employee

concerning the interpretation, enforcement, or application of any provision of this Agreement, or
concerning the terms or conditions of employment, may be an occurrence giving rise to a
grievance which shall be adjusted in the following manner:

Step 1:

Step 2:

Step 3:

Step 4:

An employee shall, and his employee counselor may first discuss a
grievance with his immediate supervisor in an attempt to reach a
satisfactory solution. In this step, it is not mandatory that the grievance be
written. The supervisors are encouraged to counsel with the employee and
with their supervisors in their review and handling of the situation. The
supervisor’s decisions shall be orally made to the employee and his
employee counselor if he has one within five (5) calendar days. The
majority of grievances should be resolved at this step.

If the grievance is not resolved in Step 1, it shall be submitted in writing
within five (5) calendar days, from the receipt of the supervisor’s response
in Step 1 to the Department Director for adjustment. The FOP President
shall also send a copy of the grievance to the City Personnel Director.
Grievances involving discipline or discharge shall be signed by the
employee involved. The employee shall acknowledge that he/she elects to
use this grievance procedure and waives any right to process the grievance
through the grievance procedures in the City Personnel Policies.
Grievances regarding discharge may begin at this step providing they are
filed within the time limits of Section 8.1 of the Article.

[he grievant and the Department Director, or his designate, shall have a
ight to a conference at this step, at which time the employee shall have
he right to the employee counselor of his choice.

ao.

The Department Director shall submit his answer, in writing, to the
employee involved, and the FOP President within ten (10) calendar days.

 

f the grievance has not been settled at Step 3, the FOP President shall
send the grievance within ten (10) calendar days to the City Manager, or
lesignee for review, and possible resolution or if the parties mutually
agree, the grievance shall be submitted for mediation to the mediator of
the parties choice according to the rules of the Federal Mediation &
Conciliation Service, (FMCS). If the parties are unable to mutually agree
upon a mediator, the FMCS shall appoint a mediator to assist in adjusting
the grievance at this level. The parties shall each select one representative
to present their respective parties’ position to the mediator. Each party
shall also be represented by at least one individual with the authority to

 
FOP, LODGE 123

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 14-15

bind that party to any agreement made as a result of mediation. Each side
shall present a summary of its position to the mediator, which presentation
shall be limited to an hour per side. The presentation shall include a
summary of all relevant facts.

If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the parties have not settled the
grievance, the mediator shall make written findings of fact and
recommendations and submit them to the parties within ten (10) days of
the conclusion of the hearing. Said findings and recommendations shall
be advisory only and not be binding on the parties or admissible in any
subsequent arbitration hearing. If the parties do not mediate the grievance,
or mediation does not resolve the grievance, the City Manger shall submit
his answer to the Chief of Oklahoma City Police Department, the
employee(s) involved, and the Bargaining Agent Grievance Committee
within ten (10) calendar days. The FOP Executive Board shall constitute
the Grievance Committee.

Within twenty (20) days of receipt of the City Manager’s response, the
FOP Grievance Committee shall determine, in its discretion and
judgement, whether or not a grievance exists as defined in Section 8.6
above. If the FOP Grievance Committee finds a grievance does exist, and
that the grievance warrants further processing, it shall notify the City
Manager and give notice of arbitration. The grievance shall be submitted
to arbitration for adjustment as follows:

(a) Within seven (7) calendar days from the date of the notice to the
City Manager for arbitration, the FOP and the Employer shall
attempt to agree on an arbitrator.

If, on the expiration of the period allowed therefore, the Employer
and the FOP are unable to agree upon the selection of an arbitrator,
the FOP and the Employer shall request, within ten (10) calendar
days, the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to provide a
list of five (5) arbitrators.

Within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the list of arbitrators
from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, the
Employer and the FOP shall alternately strike the name of one (1)
arbitrator from the list of five (5) until one (1) name remains, with
the Employer making the first strike from said list.

(b) Within fourteen (14) days, the Employer and FOP shall agree on a
hearing date and place. The hearing shall be informal and the rules
of evidence prevailing in judicial proceeding shall not be binding.
Any and all documentary evidence and other data deemed relevant
by the Arbitrator may be received in evidence. The Arbitrator

10
FOP, LopcE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY ’14-"15

shall have the power to administer oaths and to require by
subpoena the attendance and testimony of witnesses, the
production of books, records, and other evidence relative or
pertinent to the issues presented to the Arbitrator for determination.

(c) Within an appropriate period of time after the conclusion of the
hearing, the Arbitrator shall issue a written award resolving the
grievance. A copy of said award shall be mailed or otherwise
delivered to the FOP and the employer.

(d) The Arbitrator’s award shall be final and binding on the parties to
this Agreement. The City maintains that should a conflict arise
between the terms of this Agreement and the City’s statutory and
Charter authority, the latter should prevail.

The FOP recognizes the City’s reliance upon statutory and Charter
reservations of authority but does not concede that any statutory or
Charter provisions prevent any of the terms or conditions in this
Agreement from being binding on the City.

(e) The cost of the Arbitrator shall be shared equally between the FOP
and the Employer. If a transcript of the proceedings is requested,
then the party so requesting shall pay for it.

Section 8.7 In matters of interest arbitration the parties will follow the procedures set forth in
11 OS Section 51-106 through 51-110, as amended.

ARTICLE 9

SKILL INCENTIVE PAY

Section 9.1 Officers who are assigned as field training officers (FTO) shall receive additional
incentive pay in the amount of two (2) hours pay per (10) hour shift and one and six tenths (1.6)
hours pay when assigned to eight hour shifts while attending FTO training and during any period
in which an FTO has a rookie assigned to him or her. This shall include trainers in the
Motorcycle Unit the K-9 unit, the Hit & Run unit, and the Signal 30 unit, when they have new
officers assigned to those units. This training pay incentive shall not apply to routine training
that may be conducted in the units periodically.

Section 9.2 Officers assigned as Investigative Training Officers shall receive additional
incentive pay in the amount of two (2) hours pay when assigned to ten (10) hour shifts and one
and six tenths (1.6) hours pay when assigned to eight hour shifts during each shift they are
assigned as trainers.

Section 9.3. Currently assigned Personnel who hold Investigation Bureau Badges, including
the Lieutenants and Captains that supervise them shall receive $50.00 per pay period, beginning

11
FOP, LopGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY ?14-15

with the first full pay period in Fiscal Year 2014-2015 2043-2014. In addition to the $50.00 per
pay period, these personnel will also receive 2 additional SDOs beginning with the first full pay
period of Fiscal Year 2007-2008. The skill incentive pay will automatically expire at the close
of business on June 30, 2015 264, unless both parties mutually agree to its continuation.

The Personnel eligible to receive this benefit are as follows:

 
  

 

Investigations Bureau Chief’s Office

Homicide rofessional Standards
Assaults . Internal Affairs

Robbery Office of Public Integrity
Missing Persons

Auto Theft pecial Projects

Burglary

Larceny Major Violators (Narcotics)
White Collar Criminal Intelligence

Child Abuse Gang Intelligence (Drive-By Inv.)
Domestic Violence Vice

Sex Crimes Computer Forensics

Crime Scene Unit Interdiction Unit

Additional Units

Hit and Run
Nuisance Abatement
Signal 30

Section 9.4 Officers who speak Spanish and/or Vietnamese and/or Sign Language fluently
will receive the following:

Basic $50/pay period
Intermediate $75/pay period
Advanced $100/pay period

Officers receiving such pay will be required to serve as interpreters on an as-needed basis.
Officers must provide proof of fluency to the Police Chief or designee before interpretive pay
will be approved. Fluency will be determined through a fluency exam administered by a college,
vo-tech, university or other agency mutually agreed to by the City’s Personnel Department and
the FOP. The Chief of Police or his designee reserves the right to verify the authenticity of the
certification. Any Officer who submits a falsified certificate is subject to disciplinary action.

Section 9.5 Officers who are certified and assigned to work clandestine lab cases only, will
receive thirty-five ($35.00) dollars per pay period.

12
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-‘15

Section 9.6 The Chief of Police established the Crisis Intervention Team (CIT) for the
purpose of providing officers trained and certified to respond to incidents involving the mentally
ill. Active and certified officers assigned to the CIT._including Lieutenants and the CIT
Commander, shall receive $25 $50 per pay period. Certified shall mean any police officer who
has successfully completed all required CIT training by the Oklahoma City Police Department.
Active means the officer is a listed member of the CIT. Any officer assigned to the CIT is
required to respond to incidents involving the mentally ill, whether self-initiated or upon request.

 

The Chief of Police or his designee, the Director of Training, shall have sole discretion to
determine suitability for selection and retention of all CIT officers Participating officers must be
assigned to the Operations Bureau. Officers may be removed from the CIT if unable to perform
routine field duties, placed on special assignment, promoted, transferred, or for any other reason
the Chief of Police or his designee determine the CIT officer can no longer meet the
requirements of the program.

Section 9.7 An Air Support Pilot who is a Certified Rotorcraft Flight Instructor may serve as a
flight training officer with the approval of the Uniform Support Division Commander. Officers
who are assigned as flight training officers to train new personnel assigned to the Police
Department’s Air Support Unit shall receive additional incentive pay in the amount of two (2)
hours pay per shift for the shifts the flight training officer provides training and completes a
DOR.

ARTICLE 10

SENIORITY

Section 10.1 “Seniority” as the continuous length of service of a commissioned officer with
the Oklahoma City Police Department within each job classification.

Seniority shall commence from the last date which the employee is employed in the Oklahoma
City Police Department as a commissioned officer; however, until the initial employment
probation is completed, the employee shall not attain seniority status. At the conclusion of said
probation, the initial probationary service shall count as a part of the officer’s seniority.
Throughout this contract job classification and rank are synonymous.

Section 10.2 Seniority shall be determined as between two or more employees by highest rank.
When two or more employees are of the same rank, seniority shall be determined by length of
service within the rank. As between two or more employees of the same rank, who have the
same length of service in said rank, seniority shall be determined by length of continuous service
as a police officer with the Oklahoma City Police Department. If, after the application of the
criteria set forth in this Section, there still remains a question as to seniority between two or more
officers, then, and in that event, seniority shall be determined between them by the highest grade
ranking in their Police Academy class.

13
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

Section 10.3 Except where impractical due to skill levels of officers, or where special working
conditions exist which would preclude certain officers from working specific shifts, sub-stations,
or days, and considering manning levels, (in which cases the ruling of the Chief shall be final)
seniority shall be the dominant factor to be considered by the Chief of Police in determining the
priority of each employee to:

(a) Time when annual vacation is granted

(b) His or her first choice as to scheduling time off on Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve,
Christmas, New Year’s Eve, and New Year’s, it being understood that New
Year’s Eve is not a designated holiday under this Agreement.

(c) Regularly scheduled days off
(d) Order of layoff and recall shall be as set forth in Article 11.

Section 10.4 Seniority shall have no bearing on promotion decisions except as outlined in
Article 24.

Section 10.5 Seniority shall be lost upon the occurrence of any of the following events:

(a) Discharge

(b) Resignation from employment

(c) Retirement

(d) Unexcused failure to return to work upon expiration of a leave of absence
(e) When an employee has been laid off for a period of more than two years.

Section 10.6 In the event an employee is reduced in classification, the seniority previously
accrued in the former classification shall not be lost; however, the employee so reduced shall not
be able to exercise his seniority with respect to Article 10, Sections 10.3 (a) through 10.3 (d) for
ninety (90) days.

Section 10.7 Vacancies and assignments will be made in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the Police Operations Manual.

Section 10.8 Employees who hold investigator positions will be assigned functional, non-
compensatory working titles to distinguish years of service in those positions. Employees will
be issued badges while assigned to the Investigator positions, which will remain the property of
the City of Oklahoma City, and must be relinquished upon transfer, promotion, resignation,
termination, or retirement from Investigator positions. Badges cannot be worn on uniforms.
Functional titles and badges will be assigned to employees according to years of service in
Investigator positions, based on date of assignment.

Employees with 0-5 years of service will be issued Detective badges, 5-10 years of service —

Investigator, and 10+ years or service — Inspector. Functional titles will not derive any monetary
review and will not impact the current rank classification structure.

14
FOP, LopGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

ARTICLE 11

PERSONNEL REDUCTION

Section 11.1 In the event it becomes necessary to layoff employees for any reason, employees
shall be laid-off in the inverse order of their seniority by job classification.

Section 11.2 When an employee is laid-off due to reduction in the work force, he shall be
permitted to exercise his seniority rights to bump or replace an employee with less seniority.
Such employee may, if he so desires, bump any employee in lower classification under the
following conditions:

(a) He has more seniority

(b) He can do the available work

(c) Such bump request is initiated within two (2) working days of the date the
employee receives written notice of lay-off.

Section 11.3 Employees shall be recalled from lay-off according to their seniority within the
job classification.

Section 11.4 Notice of recall shall be sent to the employee at his last known address by
certified mail.

If the employee fails to notify the Office of the Chief of Police within five (5) calendar days after
receipt of such recall notice that the employee intends to return and if the employee after giving
such notice of intent to return fails to be available to return to work within ten (10) calendar days
after receipt of such recall notice, such employee shall be deemed to have quit.

Section 11.5 No new employees shall be hired into a classification until all employees who are
on lay-off status from that classification have been offered recall.

ARTICLE 12

SICK LEAVE

Section 12.1 An employee injured on the job shall continue to receive the regular salary or rate
of pay during absence from work, not to exceed six (6) calendar months (1,044 hours); provided,
however, after the first ninety (90) days a physician’s statement verifying the officer’s inability
to perform assigned duties shall be required at 30-day intervals to carry said officer on “injured
on duty recuperative leave (1.0.D.)”. Provided, however, any disability payment received by
reasons of worker’s compensation coverage, for the same injury, during the period the officer is
carried on I.O. D. status shall be credited to the City.

15
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-"15

Section 12.2 Employees shall accrue five (5) hours of sick leave per pay period, with a
maximum allowable accumulation of two thousand (2,000) sick leave hours.

Section 12.3 Termination/payment for sick leave balance shall be fifty (50) percent of the sick
leave balance paid to the employee at time of retirement, voluntary resignation, disability
allowance or death in the municipal service; provided that, the fifty (50) percent maximum
payment will be reduced two and one-half (2 2) percent for each year less than twenty (20) years
of creditable service; one hundred (100) percent of the sick leave balance shall be paid to the
employee’s named beneficiary in the event an employee is killed in the line of duty, defined as
follows: A death in the line of duty occurs when suffered in the performance or discharge of a
duty required of the employee as a member of the Police Department.

Section 12.4 An employee who used no more than three (3) days (3 shifts) of sick leave during
the current year shall be granted an additional two (2) days (2 shifts) of vacation accrual on the
employee’s leave anniversary date.

Section 12.5 An Officer who incurs a non-work related illness or injury requiring that Officer
to miss work, and who has exhausted his or her sick leave, annual leave, and compensatory time,
may accrue additional sick leave donated by other Officers. Donated sick leave must be on an
hour for hour basis. Donating employees shall have 240 hours of accrued sick leave available in
order to be eligible to donate. The maximum amount of sick leave that can be donated to a
single Officer per fiscal year, by any one Officer, shall be an amount equal to twenty-four (24)
hours of leave of the injured or ill Officer. The donated leave shall be used in the order it is
donated.

Should the injured or ill Officer return to work, take disability retirement, or die, with donated
sick leave which was not used by the Officer, the unused donated leave shall revert to the Officer
who donated the leave.

ARTICLE 13

INSURANCE

Section 13.1 All terms, benefits, procedures, policies, methods and manner of operating and
administering the current health and dental benefits plans shall continue in full force and effect
except for those changes included in Addendum C. The FOP agrees to the changes
recommended in Addendum C.

Section 13.2 During the duration of this Agreement, the parties agree to continue participation
in the Oklahoma City Labor/Management Insurance Committee. Any changes recommended by
said Committee which affect members of the bargaining unit shall be presented to the FOP
negotiating team and members for a ratification vote.

Section 13.3 The parties agree the level of benefits, and the amount of employee contributions
toward health care for plan year 2015 2044 (January 1, 2015 2014 — December 31, 2015 2044) is
a resolved issue in collective bargaining negotiations for the Indemnity Plan and for the HMO, as

16
FOP, LopGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-"15

set forth in Addendum C. Should any legal restriction upon the term of this agreement make this
section voidable, the parties can reaffirm their intent in a subsequent agreement.

ARTICLE 14

EMERGENCY LEAVE

Section 14.1 Death in Family. In the event of a death in the immediate family of an employee,
the employee shall be granted up to three (3) calendar days off, with pay, at the time of the
emergency. Immediate family shall be defined as: spouse, children, step children, mother,
father, step mother, step father, brother, step brother, sister, step sister, grandparents, and
grandchildren of the employee and the employee’s spouse.

Section 14.2 Sickness in Family. In the event of sickness or injury to a member of an
employee’s immediate family, as defined by Section 14.1, above, which is serious enough to
warrant the presence of the employee, as certified by the attending physician, the employee shall
be granted up to three (3) calendar days off with pay.

In the event of sickness or injury to an employee’s immediate family member which qualifies
under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), the employee may be allowed to use personal
sick leave for the duration of the leave, as certified by a physician. For purposes of a FMLA-
qualifying event, the FMLA definition of an immediate family member shall be used and the
residency of the immediate family member shall not restrict the availability of the employee’s
personal sick leave.

Section 14.3 The emergency time off duty herein provided for applies only when the family
death, sickness, or injury does in fact require time off from regularly scheduled duty and does not
contemplate nor grant an accrual or other permissible leave with pay periods.

Section 14.4 All paid time off under Section 14.2 of this Article shall be deducted from
accumulated sick leave.

ARTICLE 15

VACATION

Section 15.1 All employees with zero (0) to five (5) years continuous service shall accrue
vacation leave at the rate of three and seven tenths (3.7) hours per pay period with a maximum
accrual of Two Hundred Fifty (250) hours.

Section 15.2 All employees with five (5) to ten (10) years continuous service shall accrue

vacation leave at the rate of four and three tenths (4.3) hours per pay period with a maximum
accrual of Two Hundred Fifty (250) hours.

17
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

Section 15.3 All employees with ten (10) to fifteen (15) years of continuous service shall
accrue vacation leave at the rate of five and three tenths (5.3) hours per pay period with a
maximum accrual of Four Hundred (400) hours.

Section 15.4 All employees with fifteen (15) or more years of continuous service shall accrue
vacation leave at the rate of six and two tenths (6.2) hours per pay period with a maximum
accrual of Four Hundred (400) hours.

Section 15.5 All employees under this contract will be required to schedule at least a minimum
of fifty six (56) hours vacation time each calendar year. Exceptions to this requirement must be
reviewed and approved by the Chief of Police.

Section 15.6 All employees under this contract may convert up to forty (40) hours of sick leave
to vacation leave if the vacation leave balance is below the maximum accrual. Employees can
only convert sick leave to vacation leave in four (4) hour increments and converted sick leave
must be taken in the pay period in which it is converted. Employees who elect to participate in
the Sick Leave Conversion Program are not eligible to participate in the Earned Leave Buy-Back
Program.

ARTICLE 16

HOLIDAYS AND DAYS OF EMPLOYMENT

Section 16.1 Officers of the Oklahoma City Police Department who work a regular 40 hour
week rather than a shift schedule shall receive ten (10) holidays annually as follows:

1. New Year’s Day 6. Veteran’s Day

2. Martin Luther King, Jr.’s Birthday 7. Thanksgiving Day

3. Memorial Day 8. Day After Thanksgiving
4. July 4m 9. Day before Christmas
5. Labor Day 10. Christmas Day

Section 16.2 Under the current eight (8) and ten (10) hour shift system, the days off shall be as
follows:

(a) Eight (8) hour shift — average nine (9) days off per month plus seven (7)
additional days off per calendar year;

(b) Ten (10) hour shift — average thirteen (13) days off per month plus nine (9)
additional days off per calendar year.

Section 16.3 Whenever new shifts are established by the Employer, the days off per month and
per year shall be prorated on the same ratio as those currently established.

Section 16.4 If other organized groups of employees are awarded an additional holiday(s),
officers shall also receive said additional holiday or additional day off depending on their
assignment.

18
FOP, LopGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT Fy ’14-"15

Section 16.5 Officers assigned to serve as Field Training Officers (FTOs) shall be allowed to
carry a maximum of three (3) Special Days Off (SDOs) into the first quarter (January-March) of
the next calendar year, if due to the business needs of the Police Department, they will not be
allowed the use of the SDO time before December 31". It is understood that any carry-over SDO
time not used within the first quarter of the calendar year will be forever forfeited by the officer.
All other existing terms and conditions of the SDO leave time program will remain in full force
and effect. Officers in their initial probationary period after hire shall also be allowed to carry
over SDOs on the same terms as FTOs.

Section 16.6 SDO time may be taken in increments of two (2) hours.

ARTICLE 17

OVERTIME COMPENSATION

Section 17.1 The City agrees to pay time and one-half for all authorized overtime worked in
excess of the regularly scheduled working hours. By mutual agreement between the employee
and the employee’s supervisor, there may be flexibility in making temporary adjustments to an
employee’s regularly scheduled working hours to accommodate employee _requests_and
departmental operational needs. In the event that flexible scheduling adjustments are made, the
adjustment shall be treated as the employee’s regularly scheduled working hours. Such payment
shall either be in dollars or comp time off. The method of payment shall be selected by mutual
agreement between the employee and a divisional supervisor. If a mutual agreement is not
reached, the method of payment shall be in dollars. An officer may accrue a maximum of 480
hours of compensatory time. Once the maximum amount has been reached, overtime shall be
paid in dollars.

Compensatory time accumulation records shall be kept in each division and shall be accessible to
any affected officer during regular office hours.

Section 17.2 The City shall pay each officer time and one-half for all court appearances, other
than during regularly scheduled duty time, or in the alternative, shall provide the officer with
compensatory time off at the rate of time and one-half for all court appearances, other than
during regularly scheduled duty time.

A minimum of two hours for municipal court, state district court or federal district court
appearances shall be applied when calculating said court time.

Section 17.3 Effective October 5, 2007, Officers who are subpoenaed to appear in court and
are placed on-call outside of their regularly scheduled work hours by the Police Department’s
Court Liaison shall receive one (1) hour of pay for each day the Officer is placed on-call. On-
call pay shall not apply to officers who are subpoenaed and placed on-call for court during their
regularly scheduled work hours.

19
FOP, LODGE 123

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 14-15

ARTICLE 18

EDUCATION INCENTIVE PAY

Section 18.1 Educational incentive pay shall be paid as follows:

(a) Associate Degree $75.00_Per Month
(b) Bachelor Degree $150.00 Per Month
(c) Advanced Degree $175.00 Per Month

Section 18.2 All officers covered by this agreement shall receive tuition reimbursement for
college level courses according to the following conditions:

(a)

(b)

(c)

@

Courses must be taken for credit hours at an accredited college, university, or
junior college. Courses not taken for credit (course monitoring, etc.) are not
covered.

The City will reimburse officers 100% of their tuition costs and mandatory fees
for courses which are satisfactorily completed up to a maximum of $1,250 per
semester. Satisfactory completion shall mean a grade of C minus or above or
evidence of satisfactory completion in a non-graded course.

The FOP and Police Department will jointly determine the degrees which will
qualify for reimbursement.

Employees shall be _notified_of the approval/denial/modification of the tuition

reimbursement application within 20 days of the day the application is received
by the Director of Training. The employee will receive notification via their

Departmental e-mail.

ARTICLE 19

RETIREMENT

Section 19.1 The Employer and the FOP agree to follow the provisions of the State of
Oklahoma Police Pension and Retirement Systems law.

Section 19.2 Officers choosing to remain with the Department past their 20" year of
employment will not lose seniority rights by virtue of participation of the “deferred option plan”
of the State Pension System.

20
FOP, LopcE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

ARTICLE 20

WAGES

Section 20.1 The parties hereto agree that a determination of appropriate wage limits for
members has been derived by a market approach using the average rates of pay as determined
from the agreed to survey method and the ability of the City to pay. The survey methodology to
be used by the parties is outlined in Addendum A-2. For FY 2014-2015 2043-204, the parties

have agreed on the pay plan attached as Addendum A-1. Additionally, the parties have agreed to
a one-time stipend for each bargaining unit member in the amount of $349.80 for FY 2014-2015.

Section 20.2 A representative of the Union and the Management will meet during the term of
the contract to agree on a methodology of how total compensation will be defined and

incorporated into the salary survey next year.

Section 20.3 The positions which compose the Bargaining Unit shall be:

Police Officers Captain
Sergeant Major
Lieutenant Deputy Chief

Section 20.4 Longevity payment will be as set forth in Addendum B.

Section 20.5 Officers who are permanently assigned to the second or third shift shall receive
shift differential pay of $0.50 per hour for second shift, and $0.75 per hour for third shift. The
Police Chief retains the exclusive right to re-assign all personnel to any shift as deemed
necessary, pursuant to current policy (refer to General Policy, Section 110.40, of the Police
Operations Manual).

Section 20.6 Any employee covered by the terms of this Agreement in the rank of Lieutenant
or above, who is temporarily assigned to do the work of a higher classification for a minimum of
a continuous 80 hours due to a vacancy or absence (vacation leave, sick leave, job injury,
administrative leave, etc.), shall be paid in accordance with the higher classification for the
period of the temporary assignment. The temporary assignment into the higher classification
shall be authorized by the appropriate Deputy Chief. The employee shall be paid at Step A of
the higher classification worked for so long as the officer performing the duties of the higher
classification. When the temporary assignment ends, the employee will return to his/her
previous rate of pay.

Section 20.7 Lieutenants assigned by the Department to a Saturday through Saturday overlap
shift will receive incentive pay in the amount of seventy-five ($75.00) per pay period while so
assigned.

21
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

ARTICLE 21

UNIFORMS
Section 21.1 Each officer is to receive in payment for uniform allowance the following sums:
(a) $450.00 payable with the last payroll check in November.
(b) $450.00 payable with the last payroll check in May.
(c) $35.00 per pay period.
The minimum withholding allowed by law will be withheld for this payment.

Section 21.2 The City shall repair or replace uniforms including leather goods, detective’s
garments, and watches (not to exceed $75), damaged or destroyed in the line of duty.
Prescription eyeglasses will be replaced at full value. Personal body armor will be replaced by
the City only if said armor is damaged or destroyed in the line of duty or through normal wear
and tear.

Section 21.3 The Department shall provide a uniform cleaning allowance of $35.00 per pay
period for those officers covered by a Memorandum of Understanding between the parties dated
June 27, 1991.

Section 21.4 Staff Sergeant/Master Sergeant Insignias — Officers who have served in the
Sergeant classification for five (5) or more continuous years are eligible to purchase and wear, at
the Officer’s expense, the Staff Sergeant insignia. Specifications for the Staff Sergeant insignia
and proper placement on the uniform will be developed and approved by the Police Department
Uniform Committee. Officers who are eligible to wear and elect to purchase the Staff Sergeant
insignia will not receive any additional compensation and will not have any greater authority
than the Sergeant classification.

Officers who have served in the Sergeant classification for ten (10) or more continuous years are
eligible to purchase and wear, at the Officer’s expense, the Master Sergeant insignia.
Specifications for the Master Sergeant insignia and proper placement on the uniform will be
developed and approved by the Police Department Uniform Committee. Officers who are
eligible to wear and elect to purchase the Master Sergeant insignia will not receive any additional
compensation and will not have any greater authority than the Sergeant classification.

22
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

ARTICLE 22

POLICE MERIT BOARD

Section 22.1 The Police Merit Board, as duly constituted, shall function as an advisory board to
the Chief of Police on the following matters:

(a) To hear initial appeals to make recommendations on an employee’s disagreement
with job performance evaluations submitted by supervisory personnel;

(b) To hear initial appeals and make recommendations concerning promotional
testing procedures and results; provided, however, that the Chief of Police may
elect to accept or reject the Merit Board’s recommendations without prejudice to
the employee’s option of seeking review of the Chief of Police’s decision through
the Grievance Review Board or the contract grievance procedure described in
Article 8.

Section 22.2 Composition and Replacement of Member

(a) The Merit Board shall consist of five members; two (2) of the same rank as the
person appearing before the board and one (1) each of the next three (3) higher
ranks.

(b) The Chief of Police shall appoint Merit Board members for each case which is to
appear before the Board.

Section 22.3 Conduct of Police Merit Board Business
(a) Chairperson of the Board shall be the highest ranking officer.

(b) The Board will meet when called by the Chief to review any of the
aforementioned appeals.

(c) Minutes of each Board meeting shall be given to the Chief following conclusion
of the meeting. A copy will be provided to the officer appealing to the Board at
the officer’s request.

(d) The Board may collect information it deems necessary to make a determination of
an appeal.

(e) The meetings of the Board shall be conducted in good order without the air of an
adversarial proceeding and without resort to strict rules of evidence provided,
however, the appellant will have the right to employee counsel to appear before
the Board.

23
FOP, LODGE 123

@

(g)

Section 22.4

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 14-15

No member of the Board shall sit in review of a matter over which he has had
prior dealings or contact. Substitutes will be allowed where a member of the
Board has so declined to sit.

In the event the sitting members are unable to reach majority agreement, the
appellant may seek direct resolution of the issues from the Chief of Police with
full right of appeal from the decision of the Chief of Police to the Grievance
Review Board or the grievance procedure described in Article 8 of this contract.

As to matters of Board procedures only, not provided for herein, the Board may as
its option employ “Robert’s Rules of Order” as proper guidance.

An appeal to the Police Merit Board by an employee shall be taken in good faith

only as to matters in issue relating to:

(a)

(b)

(©)

Section 23.1

1. Job performance evaluations submitted by the employee’s immediate
supervisor;

2. Promotional testing procedures and results directly affecting the
employee;

3. The omission of his/her name from any eligibility roster or the relative

position of his/her name on any such roster. The Board shall be without
jurisdiction to hear and/or decide any other matter or issue; provided,
however, the Board shall have jurisdiction to determine if an appeal is
properly before it is for consideration.

No appeal shall be entertained by the Board and no recommendation made if the
appellant has failed to make application with the Chief for the Board’s review
within five (5) days of receipt of the action complained of.

Upon receipt of notice from the Chief, the Board shall schedule the matter for
review within fifteen (15) days and notify the appellant of the date, time and
location of the review.

The employee making the appeal shall appear before the Board as scheduled to
present pertinent information and witnesses concerning his appeal. The Chairman
of the Board shall request appearance by those witnesses desired of appellant and
the Chief of Police.

ARTICLE 23

MANPOWER UTILIZATION AND PRODUCTIVITY

The Employer and the FOP agree to cooperate together to promote productive

utilization of manpower and equipment to best secure for the Mayor, the City Council and the

24
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

citizens of Oklahoma City the maximum productivity for the tax dollars that they invest in police
services.

ARTICLE 24

PROMOTIONAL PROGRAM

Section 24.1 The purpose of this procedure is to ensure all employees a fair and equitable
opportunity for advancement.

Section 24.2 The goal of this procedure is to identify the most qualified individual for
advancement in a demonstrably measured and organized manner.

Section 24.3 Testing and scoring will be administered under the direction of the Chief of Police
and the Director of the Oklahoma City Personnel Department, as provided below. The Chief of
Police will out source the development, testing, and scoring of all written examinations and/or
assessment centers identified in Sections 24.4, 24.5, 24.6, and 24.7.

Section 24.4 Sergeant

(a) Eligibility — Applicants shall achieve the position of sergeant who have been
employed as a police officer by this department for a period of feur4) five (5)
continuous years of service afterthe-completion-of new-hire-or re-hire probation
from the graduation date of their recruit class or completion of re-hire probation
and who have successfully completed the competency testing. An applicant may
not be on disciplinary probation or suspension on the date the competency testing
is administered.

(b) Procedure — A Certification for Promotion Form must be completed by the
applicant and submitted to the Director of Training at least two (2) days prior to
the date of the examination. The competency test will be administered twice
within a fiscal year. The test will be given on the third Wednesday in October
and the third Wednesday in April. The examination will consist of 100 questions
which covers materials in the Police Department Operations Manual. To meet the
competency requirement, a minimum qualifying score of 70% must be achieved.

The qualifying score is defined as the sum of the written test score, the last
Performance Evaluation score, and the points awarded for advanced education (1
point for an Associate’s Degree, 2 points for a Bachelor’s Degree, and 3 points for
an advanced degree). If an officer achieves the minimum qualifying score, as
determined by the Director of Training, a memorandum is sent to the Chief of
Police recommending the officer’s advancement to the position of sergeant.

For purposes of this Article, Sergeant shall not be considered a rank.

25
FOP, LODGE 123

Section 24.5

(a)

(b)

()

Section 24.6

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-"15

Eligibility for Supervisory Ranks

Lieutenant — Applicants for the rank of Lieutenant are required to have attained
the position of Sergeant two (2) continuous years prior to the promotional list
going into effect for the fiscal year the Promotional Eligibility List is being
established and to have been satisfactorily performing their duties in that position.
Applicants must not be on disciplinary probation or disciplinary suspension, on
the date upon which the written promotional examination is administered or the
date of actual promotion. The examination will be given in the last two (2) weeks
of January, of even-numbered years.

Captain — Applicants for the rank of Captain are required to have attained the
rank of Lieutenant and to have served in that rank for three (3) continuous years
prior to the promotional list going into effect for the fiscal year the Promotional
Eligibility List is being established. Applicants must have been satisfactorily
performing their duties as a Lieutenant.

Applicants may not be on disciplinary probation or disciplinary suspension on the
date upon which the written promotional examination is administered or the date
of actual promotion. The examination will be given in the last two weeks of
January, of even-numbered years.

All applicants for the rank of Lieutenant and Captain shall have completed a
minimum of one (1) college course in basic police management, criminal justice
or business management with at least a letter grade “C”. Said course work must

be taken ¢ at an accredited en or university. ‘Fhe-eoursefs}-must-be-taken

 

Representatives of the Chief of
Police and the FOP shall select the course(s). Any course taken pursuant to this
section shall be automatically eligible for tuition reimbursement. Individuals
hired on or after July 1, 2003, must have 60 college credit hours to test for the
rank of Lieutenant and a Bachelor’s Degree to test for the rank of Captain.
Current employees who have 60 credit hours or an Associates Degree or higher
will not be required to complete the management course.

If an Officer leaves the employment of the Oklahoma City Police Department and

is later rehired by the Department, that Officer’s prior service with the Department shall not be
counted toward the years of service required in Sections 24.4 and 24.5.

Section 24.7

(a)

Promotional Process for Supervisory Ranks

Lieutenant

26
FOP, LODGE 123

(b)

Section 24.8

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-"15

The promotional process for the rank of Lieutenant shall consist of two (2) phases
in which points are awarded based on the achievement of the individual
candidates.

The first phase is the promotional examination in which a total of 100 points
could be achieved. The second phase is the assessment center in which a
candidate could earn up to 100 total points.

Each applicant’s promotional examination points and seniority points will be
totaled to determine the thirty (30) highest scoring candidates who will appear
before the Lieutenant Assessment Center. Seniority points are calculated based
upon % point for every completed, continuous year of service with the
department, from the candidate’s last date of hire with the department to the date
of the written examination. In the event of a tie for the 30" position on the
Lieutenant test, placement at the 30" position shall be determined by (1) date of
employment and (2) recruit school class standing. The points achieved in the
promotional examination will be combined with the points achieved on the
assessment center, to obtain the rankings for the final Lieutenant eligibility list of
twenty (20). The promotional examination and seniority points will count 1/3 and
the assessment center will count 2/3 toward the final composite score.

The Personnel Department will be responsible for compiling the total scores (test
and assessment center) in rank order and submitting the final Lieutenant
Promotional List to the Chief of Police. In the event of a tie, placement shall be
determined by (1) date of employment and (2) recruit class standing.

Captain

The promotional process for the rank of Captain shall consist of four (4) phases.
The first phase will be a written examination. The second phase will be an
assessment center. The third phase will be a staff review process. The final phase
will be selection by the Chief of Police.

Each applicant’s promotional examination points, seniority points and Lieutenant
service points will be totaled to determine the fifteen (15) highest scoring
candidates to appear before the Captain Assessment Center. Seniority points will
be calculated as detailed in Section 24.7 (a) of the contract. Lieutenant service
points will be calculated based on % point for every completed continuous year of
service at the rank of Lieutenant from the date of promotion to Lieutenant to the
date of the written examination. In the event of a tie for the 15" position on the
Captain test, placement at the 1s® position shall be determined by seniority as
defined in Section 10.2 of the contract. The ten (10) highest rated candidates
determined by the scores achieved in the assessment center will be alphabetically
listed as an eligibility pool and advanced to the staff review phase.

Procedural Steps

27
FOP, LODGE 123

(a)

(b)

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-‘15

Promotional Examination — A Certification for Promotion form must be
completed and submitted to the Director of Training. The examination for both
Lieutenant and Captain ranks will consist of one hundred (100) objective
(multiple choice) job knowledge questions. The sources, from which the
questions are derived, will be the OCPD Operations Manual, Municipal
Ordinances and State Statutes, the FOP and AFSCME contracts, the Oklahoma
City Personnel Policies, and contemporary police leadership/management/
supervision strategies from published articles as agreed upon by the Chief of
Police and the President of the FOP. The time and location of the test sites will be
announced by the Director of Training. The examination will be developed by an
entity outside the Police Department who will be selected by the Chief of Police
or his/her designee. A control identification number will be assigned to each
candidate at the beginning of the examination and the assessment process. Any
posted scores shall be by the control identification number rather than by
individual name. The Director of Training will establish and announce a date
within ten (10) working days of the posting of test scores on which individual
candidates may review the questions which they missed and the correct answers
to those questions. The review will be conducted one candidate at a time by the
Director of Training. A working day will be defined as 0800 hours to 1700 hours,
Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. Any appeal of the examination to
the Police Merit Board shall be pursuant to Article 22 and must be perfected
within five (5) days following the last candidate’s review. The Director of
Training through Departmental e-mail, will announce the initiation of the five (5)
day period. The Police Merit Board will make recommendations to the Police
Chief. The Police Chief will make the final decision regarding appeals of
promotional examinations.

Assessment Center — The Assessment Center will be no less than a three-day
process consisting or not more than three (3) exercises for each candidate. The
Police Department will conduct assessment training for the Personnel Department
of the City of Oklahoma City. During the first half of the first day of each
Assessment Center, at which time assessor training/orientation takes place, the
Chief of Police or his designee and the FOP President or his designee will be
included to brief assessors on issues specific to the Oklahoma City jurisdiction.

The Police Department will furnish to the Personnel Department the scenarios to
be used in the assessment process for the ranks of Lieutenant and Captain.

The Assessment Center will use assessors, of comparable rank or no more than
one rank above, who are selected from other police departments. The Assessment
Center will be conducted exclusively by the Personnel Department. Assessors
will not come into contact with members of the Oklahoma City Police
Department, prior to or during the process, except in the course of their
assessment duties. Any questions that might arise will be resolved by contact

28
FOP, LODGE 123

©

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY ’14-‘15

between the Police Department’s Director of Training and the Personnel
Department.

The last exercise of the Lieutenant Assessment Center will allow for evaluation of
candidates’ career achievements. Completed standardized resumes will be
required to be submitted to the candidates’ division commanders fourteen (14)
working days prior to the assessment center and will be reviewed for authenticity
by the candidate’s chain of command and the Director of Training prior to
submission to the assessor panel. Division commanders will be required to
submit the candidates’ resumes to the Director of Training within seven (7)
working days prior to the assessment center. The term “working days” shall be
defined as 0800 hours to 1700 hours, Monday through Friday, excluding holidays.

A candidate will not be allowed to participate in the assessment process if on the
date the assessment begins, the candidate is on disciplinary probation or
disciplinary suspension. Should any of the candidates for either assessment center
become ineligible to participate in the assessment center, their position will be
filled by the next highest scoring candidate, up until two (2) weeks of the
scheduled start of the assessment process. Vacancies occurring in the list of
eligible candidates within two (2) weeks of the scheduled start of an assessment
will not be filled.

The Police Department agrees that every consideration will be afforded those
applicants for both Lieutenant and Captain Assessment Centers to utilize
authorized leave time, excluding sick leave, to help them prepare for the process
and be fully rested.

Staff Review Process for Captain — the ten (10) highest rated Captain candidates,
after the results of the assessment center as defined in Section 24.7(b), will be
placed in an eligibility pool and advanced to the staff review phase. There will be
a staff review of the candidates in the Captain eligibility pool for each promotion
to Captain, except as defined later in this section. During the staff review phase,
the eligibility pool will be evaluated by seven or more sworn members of the
command staff. The command staff is comprised of all existing Majors and
Deputy Chiefs. Completed standardized resumes will be required to be submitted
to the candidates’ division and/or bureau commanders prior to the staff review
and will be reviewed for authenticity by the candidates’ chain of command.
Division and/or bureau commanders will be required to submit the candidates’
resumes to the Director of Training prior to the staff review. In the event of a tie,
Section 10.2 of the contract will determine placement in the pool.

The following selection criteria for the staff review phase has been established to
provide structure to the process, thereby allowing staff to recommend in
alphabetical order, the best five (5) candidates to the Chief of Police for each
captain promotion.

29
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

The criteria to be considered in the staff review phase may include, but not be
limited to the following:

- An oral review board

- A review of the candidates’ resumes

- Attendance records (leave sheets)

When multiple Captain vacancies exist at the time of a Staff Review, or exist
within 90 calendar days of the most recent Staff Review, an additional review will
not be necessary.

When multiple vacancies exist at the time of a Staff Review, or exist within 90
calendar days of the most recent Staff Review, Staff will present a non-ranked
alphabetical list of names to the Chief of Police so the Chief has five names to
choose from for each promotion. (Example, if one vacancy exists, the Chief will
receive a list of the five best candidates. If two vacancies exists, the Chief will
receive a list of the six best candidates. If three vacancies exist, the Chief will
receive a list of the seven best candidates, etc.)

Whenever the eligibility list for Captain candidates is five or less, there will not
be a Staff Review Process. The remaining names on the list will be forwarded to
the Chief of Police in alphabetical order.

Section 24.9 Lieutenant Promotional Eligibility List/Captain Promotional Eligibility Pool

The top twenty (20) candidates for Lieutenant, as determined by the compilation of scores by the
Personnel Department, will be placed on the Promotional Eligibility List for two (2) full fiscal
years beginning July 1, of even numbered years and ending upon promotion or expiration of the
list on June 30 two years after the list becomes effective. The top ten (10) candidates for Captain
will be placed in the eligibility pool for two (2) full fiscal years beginning July 1 of even
numbered years and ending upon promotion or expiration of the pool on June 30, two years after
the pool became effective. Any candidate thus established on the promotional eligibility list or
in the eligibility pool who is thereafter placed on disciplinary probation or disciplinary
suspension shall not be eligible for promotion during the term of his or her suspension or
probation. Should the candidate’s disciplinary suspension or disciplinary probation end prior to
the expiration of the list/pool, he or she shall assume his/her previous eligibility.

Section 24.10 Promotional Selection

The Chief of Police will make all promotions. He will make promotions to Captain from each
alphabetical list of candidates submitted to him by command staff. He will promote in rank
order from the top of the list, in making promotions from the Lieutenant’s Eligibility List. All
position vacancies in the ranks of Lieutenant and Captain shall be filled within thirty 30 days of
the date the vacancy occurs, unless the list is exhausted before the end of the fiscal year.

Section 24.11 Major and Deputy Chief

30
FOP, Lope 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

No written test or assessment center shall be required before a promotion can be made to the
ranks of Major and Deputy Chief. Selections for promotion to Major shall be made from the
rank of Captain.

Section 24.12 Other Issues

(a) Applicants whose names appear on the Promotional Eligibility List will be
allowed to attend specialized supervisory and/or management training offered by
the department to prepare them for promotion to the rank they are seeking.

(b) The positions of helicopter pilot, K-9 officer, documents examiner, and
photographer, for the purposes of pay, will be assigned to the position of Sergeant
or above by the Chief of Police.

(c) Officers previously promoted to Specialist, Senior Police Officers or Detectives
are eligible for reassignment to other duties upon request and with the approval of
the Chief of Police. Any involuntary reassignment or transfer is grievable.

(d) The purpose and intent of the Sergeant position is to provide career opportunity
for tenured officers of the Oklahoma City Police Department. The intent is not to
change the current assignments of officers who enter that position. However, the
Chief of Police shall have the discretion to assign other duties within the position
of Sergeant subject to past practice and voluntary transfer requests.

Section 24.13 Upon promotion to a new rank or position, employees shall be placed in a one (1)
year probationary period to allow the employer a sufficient amount of time to measure the
efficiency and productivity of the probationary employee.

The probationary employee’s immediate supervisor shall complete a performance evaluation on
the probationary employee at three (3) month intervals and in accordance with Oklahoma City
Police Department procedures. Prior to the completion of the one (1) year probationary period,
all performance evaluations shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police to determine if the
employee(s) shall retain their rank/position as a permanent status. The Chief retains the right to
demote an employee for cause, if the employee(s) is unable to fulfill the duties of the
rank/position.

Section 24.14 Investigations Bureau
(a) When vacancies exist within the functional job title of “Jnspector, Investigator, or
Detective”, those officers presently occupying one of those functional job titles
will be given first opportunity to transfer into one of those vacancies.
(b) Any vacancies remaining in the functional job titles “Jnspector, Investigator, or

Detective” following the exercise of the provisions of Subsection A, above, shall
be advertised to the entire department. An announcement will be made to the

31
FOP, LODGE 123

()

@

(e)

@

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-"15

entire Department regarding the vacancies in the functional job title of “Jnspector,
Investigator, or Detective” with a cut off date for those to respond in ten (10)
working days, if interested. A “work day” shall be defined as 0800 hours to 1700
hours, Monday through Friday, excluding observed holidays.

Candidates for transfer into the functional job titles of “Jnspector, Investigator, or
Detective” who do not currently occupy one of those functional job titles must
have attained the position of Sergeant.

Those officers who have attained the position of Sergeant and have provided the
information listed in subsection (d) will constitute the eligibility pool of those
who will be allowed to request transfer into the functional job titles of
“Inspector, Investigator, or Detective”.

As vacancies are announced, candidates will notify the Chief of Police or
designate of their intention to request a transfer to the functional job title of
“Inspector, Investigator, or Detective” by providing to the Director of Training,
the following information packet within ten (10) working days:

1. Recommendations of three supervisors, the officer’s Lieutenant, Captain
and Major in most instances;

2. The officer’s last performance evaluation;

3 Activity records for the previous twelve (12) months or a facsimile of such

depending on the officer’s current assignment;

4. Leave records for the previous twelve (12) months.

5. A copy of two (2) arrest reports completed by the officer within the last
twelve months that he/she considered to be his/her best reports.

Candidates must update the above information each time they wish to be
considered for an announced vacancy. The Director of Training or his designee
will delete all names and other identifiers from the packet of documents, then
shall assign a control number in lieu of names to each packet. A control number
list shall be maintained by the Director of Training. The packets will then be
delivered to the Chief of Police or designee.

The Central Review Committee will be selected by the Chief of Police, or his
designee, and be composed of three (3) Investigators, one (1) Lieutenant, and one
(1) Captain which will be currently assigned to the Investigations Bureau. The
Committee will be convened to review all candidate information packets
submitted in response to the posted vacancy announcement. The Committee will
recommend the names of candidates for consideration which will double the
number of vacancies posted. The Committee will forward their recommendations
to the Office of the Chief of Police or designate for review and consideration.

The Chief of Police or his designate will review the information packets, the
recommendations from the Committee, the control number and name list provided

32
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

by the Director of Training, and will make the final selection of candidates to fill
the vacant positions in the functional job titles of “Jnspector, Investigator, or
Detective”.

ARTICLE 25

SAVINGS CLAUSE

In the event any Article, Section or portion of this agreement should be held invalid and
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall apply only to the
specific Article, Section or portion thereof specifically held invalid in the court’s decision; and
upon issuance of such a decision, the employer and the FOP agree to immediately negotiate a
substitute for the invalidated Article, Section or portion thereof.

ARTICLE 26

RIGHT TO LEGAL REPRESENTATION

All police officers who are sued for violation of constitutional rights while acting in the capacity
of a police officer in which they are individually named as Defendants and punitive damages are
sought shall have the right to representation by outside counsel. The officer shall be represented
by private counsel who is approved by FOP Lodge 123 and the City Council as having expertise
in the defense of police officers in civil rights actions.

The City agrees to pay the reasonable fees and costs for said services as set forth in the contract
between the City and outside counsel and pursuant to 11 O.S § 23-101.

ARTICLE 27

EARNED LEAVE BUY-BACK

Section 27.1 During fiscal year 2014-2015 2013-204 only, the employer will buy-back up to
forty (40) hours of earned vacation leave or sick leave from bargaining unit employees, at their
regular straight-time hourly rate of pay. The buy-back program shall occur semi-annually in the
months of November and May. Employees will be allowed to sell back sick leave, vacation
leave, or any combination of their vacation leave or sick leave for a maximum buy-back of
twenty (20) hours per buy-back period. Under no circumstances will employees be allowed to
sell back more than a total of twenty (20) hours of earned leave during any one buy-back period.

Employees wishing to participate in the buy-back program must give written notice of their
intent to participate on a form provided by the employer, and the number and type of earned
leave hours the employee wishes to sell back. The notice must be given to the Police

33
FOP, LoDGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 14-15,

Department’s Personnel Office prior to October 1* for the first buy-back period and prior to
April 1° for the second buy-back period. Payment will be made in the first pay check in
November, 2014 2643 and May, 2015 2044. The minimum withholding allowed by law will be
withheld for this payment.

The earned leave buy-back program shall automatically expire on June 30 2015 2044, unless
both parties mutually agree to its continuation. Employees who elect to participate in the Earned
Leave Buy-Back Program are not eligible to participate in the Sick Leave Conversion Program.

Section 27.2 Plan B participants may sell back up to 100 hours of sick leave per fiscal year at
their regular straight-time hourly rate of pay during their first four (4) years of participation in
Plan B, and up to 200 hours of sick leave at their regular straight-time hourly rate of pay during
their fifth (5") year. Plan B participants who retire prior to the fifth (5") year shall only be
allowed to sell back a maximum of 100 sick leave hours for the fiscal year in which they retire.

Plan B participants are not eligible to participate in the Earned Leave Buy-Back or Sick Leave
Conversion Programs.

ARTICLE 28
TRADE DAYS

Section 28.1: During fiscal year 2014-2015 2013-2044 only, the employer agrees to initiate a
pilot program for the purpose of affording bargaining unit members the opportunity to trade days
with other bargaining unit members, subject to the following conditions:

(a) Only officers assigned to the Operations Bureau are eligible to participate in the
trade days program; and

(b) Officers desiring to trade days must be assigned to the same division and the same
shift; and

(c) Trade days must be traded within a 28-day work cycle; and

(d) An officer is allowed to avail himself/herself of a shift exchange opportunity two
(2) times per 28-day work cycle; and

(e) All time exchanged in the trade days program shall be recorded as hours worked
by the officer originally assigned to work that shift in accordance with the Fair
Labor Standards Act (FLSA).

Section 28.2: Since the time needs to be tracked by the Division Time Keeper, the level of
authority to approve the shift exchange shall be at a Captain’s level at least. However, the Chief
of Police retains the right to determine the level of authority at which trade days shall be

approved.

34
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY?*14-15

i
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands thiscD day of

2015.

THE CITY OF OKLAHOMA CITY

BY:
MAYOR

Wty
oo “ny

Ney,

      
   
 
 

  

ZL
CITY CLERK

  

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
LODGE 123

BY: LE 2 LZ Leer
PRESID!

REVIEWED FOR FORM AND LEGALITY.

ASSISTANT MUNICIPAL COUNSELOR

35
FOP, LopGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-"15

ADDENDUM A

An employee is eligible for Step B pay of Police Officer Recruit after completing the
Recruit Academy.

It is understood and agreed that advancement between steps in each classification should
be based on acceptable performance, improved job skills, and length of service within the
classification. Advancement to the next step shall occur upon completion of said officer’s annual
performance evaluation (anniversary date).

The performance of employees shall be evaluated at least annually and performance
evaluation forms submitted to the Personnel Department for inclusion in the personnel history
folder. Employees in the classifications of Major and Deputy Chief may receive pay increases
upon approval of the department head’s recommendation and completed performance evaluation
which substantiates levels of performance sufficient to merit the increase. Pay increases for all
other classifications shall be automatic unless the member is under disciplinary probation.

36
vL0z ‘L Ainr enoey3

vrESscel ZI LG66Zl 8OGLOLZL 88 OGZHZ| SrCHSLZL YESPS8lL PBESZTILL A
COLLOLL 9262801 968501 LYSEOL vS'8ZL0L 80066 7E8896 w
€9'€9 vee 98°09 bg'6S bees 76°95 89'Ss H 002 J2149 Aindeq

SVZLLELL ZLSOLLLL O8'P8L80l ZL'Z9E90L QIyZOPOL PZ SPLIOL OZ E666 O800DELE A
vO'9L76 9L'€926 Ov'S906 9g'e988 898998 7O'6L¢8 OL Lé6zs8 or's018 Ww
9'rS bees OLes 60S 28 '6y €L'8y solr 09'9r H 861 Jofew

876Z1S6 SZ LHOSS §=CESIOI6 §=cezE06S §=pBAZOL8 = BB'VOIGG A
by Le6L py ESL. 99'r8G2 9e'6 LHL ceesel 27602 W
9S°SP 99'r 6S'er v9 tr 8o'ly 9L0r H ZBL

 

go8pzes OO'ZEVIS PySI96L ~CGI98LL A
se Lesg 00°9829 c9'VEQO 97 8879 Ww
28°6E 00'6e €L Be 6a le H OLL queue}ner]

BY8ZL9L BO'8SHFL OZIL87L Pr'EOZLL Pr'LEIGQ ZETSI89 ~y8'E9999 YEL8ISO ZGL9LEQ ZEOLPZ9 Br 06609 OFzZI96ES A
vO'vVEo v8v0TI O9'7L09 zo'eE6S Z1'808G 9649S 7s'ssss 8@'zerS Q6'ELES 98'00¢S vS'280S OL L967 W
H

9r'9F 99'Se 06've elves Bees v9E £6'LE ee Le vS0F 68°62 b26% Sg'8z SSL queabieg
QLe6S09 9G9EZEG ONZPELS PyLYO9G OLELEGG LOPS 9G'7LE7TI A
8670S se'9e6y os'szer z790cly Sr yLor OS eLSy 8erley Ww
20°62 E87 GLle eb le eg'9% v6'SZ Le°S7 H 8zL JEoO,
Ql vLZ6y O8BEer A
SL LOly eL'GL9e W
LEZ 82:02 H OLL wnsoey
1 » r I H 9 d a a 3 aq v HONVY ATLL

XIALVIN AV

I-V WAdNdddyv

SI.-bl. Ad ALNSWAaYOY ONINIVOUY FJALLOATIOD €Z1 AOGOT ‘dOA
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-‘15

ADDENDUM A-2

WAGE SURVEY METHODOLOGY

The City of Oklahoma City and FOP Lodge 123, entered into a collective bargaining
agreement for FY 2006-2007, and are currently negotiating a collective bargaining agreement for
FY 2007-2008. One of the issues in negotiations concerns amendments to the market survey
methodology. The parties have a past practice of utilizing a market survey methodology as the
factor in determining appropriate wage levels for bargaining unit members, subject to the City’s
ability to pay. The market methodology dictates the comparison of the City’s top rate of pay for
each rank to the average of the top rates of pay for each rank in each of the ten (10) peer cities.
In the event a peer city does not have a corresponding rank to compare to one of the City’s ranks,

then a “no match” is reported and that City is not factored in to that specific rank comparison.

To facilitate an agreement for FY 2007-2008, bargaining team representatives for the
City and the Union have agreed to compare the minimum and maximum base pay of police
officers to that of previously established police officer ranks in the agreed universe of cities, with
the following exceptions:
1. The comparison of the maximum base pay of the Oklahoma City - Police Sergeant
will include the Tulsa - Police Corporal, Range PD 02, Step P pay rate.
2. The comparison of the maximum base pay of the Oklahoma City - Police Major will
include the Nashville - Police Commander, Range PS09 pay maximum.
3. The comparison of the maximum base pay of the Oklahoma City - Police Officer,

Range 128, Step G, will be compared to: Austin - Police Officer, Grade H, Step 80

38
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-"15

pay rate; El] Paso — Advanced Police Officer, Grade P2, Level 4 pay rate; Ft. Worth -
Police Officer, Range X03, Step G; Kansas City — Police Officer, Class 806, Range
30, Step H; Nashville — Police Officer II, Grade PS04, Step 7, Omaha — Police
Officer, Class Code, 9010, Range 3 UP, Step F; St. Louis — Police Officer, Base Pay,
Year 8; Tucson — Police Officer, Grade 302, Step 8; Tulsa — Police Officer, Grade PD
01, Step P; and Wichita — Police Officer, Range 723, Step H.

4. The comparison at the Deputy Chief rank is a match to Assistant Police Chief at
Austin, excluding the Chief of Staff position.

5. The comparison at the Police Major rank is a match to the Police Commander

position at Austin.

The agreements made in this Memorandum of Understanding are made for the purpose of
establishing the salary survey methodology to be used during negotiations for a collective
bargaining agreement for fiscal year 2008-2009, and successor collective bargaining agreements,

unless the parties agree to a different process.

39
FOP, Lopce 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
ADDENDUM B
LONGEVITY SCHEDULE

Years Hourly Monthly

of Longevity Longevity

Service Pay Pay

3 $0.62 $107.88
4 $0.83 $144.42
5 $1.04 $180.96
6 $1.25 $217.50
7 $1.45 $252.30
8 $1.66 $288.84
9 $1.87 $325.38
10 $2.08 $361.92
11 $2.29 $398.46
12 $2.49 $433.26
13 $2.70 $469.80
14 $2.91 $506.34
15 $3.12 $542.88
16 $3.32 $577.68
17 $3.53 $615.22
18 $3.74 $650.76
19 $3.95 $687.30
20 $4.16 $723.84

An officer rehired by the Oklahoma City Police Department may combine all years of service for
purposes of longevity calculation. Longevity does not go into effect until the beginning of the fourth
year and the maximum that can be received is twenty (20) percent. Longevity is calculated by taking
one (1) percent of the beginning pay rate for Police Officer Recruit times the years of service.
Employees previously assigned as Rangers prior to 7/1/89 shall enter this longevity plan with credit

for all years of service as a Ranger.

Effective July 1, 2014

40

FY 714-15

Annual
Longevity
Pay

$1,294.56
$1,733.04
$2,171.52
$2,610.00
$3,027.60
$3,466.08
$3,904.56
$4,343.04
$4,781.52
$5,199.12
$5,637.60
$6,076.08
$6,514.56
$6,932.16
$7,370.64
$7,809.12
$8,247.60
$8,686.08
FOP, Lopce 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

ADDENDUM C

INSURANCE

Management representatives for the City of Oklahoma City and the Fraternal Order of
Police, Lodge 123, have reached tentative agreement on the following insurance issues for fiscal

year 2014-2015 2013-204:

A. The City of Oklahoma City will continue to offer group health insurance through
comprehensive health care (medical indemnity plan) as amended and Health Maintenance
Organization provider (HMO plan) for fiscal year 2014-2015 2043-2014.

B. HMO PLAN

1. (a) Effective January 1, 2015 2044, employees enrolled in the HMO plans
shall make a monthly contribution toward the cost of providing the HMO, at the
rate of 15% of the actual premium charged by the HMO for plan year 2015 2044,
(as based upon the plan design going into effect February 1, 2014). The monthly
contribution shall be divided equally and withheld during the first two pay periods
of each month. The monthly contribution is as follows for the following tiers:

 

Employee Only $ 83:27 89.11
Employee plus spouse $487.38 200.51
Employee plus child $445.74 $155.95
Employee plus children $479.05 $191.60

 

Employee plus spouse, plus children $258.44 $276.24

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

41
FOP, LODGE 123

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY ’14-15

 

 

 

(e}—Effective February 1, 2014, the parties adopt the level of benefits for the
United Healthcare(formerly known as Pacificare) medical plan of N8V/N9V and
prescription drug plan of ON7. The general features of these plans are as follows:

 

Calendar year deductible
Individual $0
Family $0
Primary Care Physician (PCP) Office Visits $15 copayment
Specialist Physician (PCP) Office Visits $15 copayment
Inpatient Hospitalization $100 copayment/admission
Outpatient Surgery $50 copayment
Emergency Room Services $50 copayment

($0 if admitted as an inpatient from the ER)
Annual out-of-pocket maximum

Individual $1,500

Family $3,000
Retail Generic Formulary Prescriptions $10
Retail Brand Formulary Prescriptions $25
Retail Non-Formulary Prescriptions $40
Mail Order Generic Prescriptions $20
Mail Order Brand Prescriptions $50
Mail Order Non-Formulary $80

For other benefits available under these plans, please refer to plan documents
N8V/N9OV and ON7 from United Healthcare.

Should any legal restriction upon the term of this agreement make this addendum
voidable, the parties can reaffirm their intent in a subsequent agreement.

The parties will continue to evaluate proposals with the intent of maintaining or
improving benefit levels, through the HMO Selection Committee and the Joint
Insurance Committee. Any changes made in benefit levels must be mutually
agreed upon by the Fraternal Order of Police and The City.

42
FOP, LopGE 123

C.

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

INDEMNITY PLAN

1.

Effective January 1, 2015 2644, the City will provide the following medical
indemnity plan benefit level through December 31, 2015 2044, subject to
additional changes approved in this Addendum and changes under Section C.
The following changes to the medical indemnity plan have been approved:

(a) Employee Contributions

Effective January 1, 2015 2014, Employees enrolled in the
Comprehensive Healthcare Plan (Medical Indemnity Plan) shall contribute
a rate equivalent to 20% of the projected premium equivalent rates as
calculated for the period ending, June 30, 2014, (as reflected in the Blue
Cross and Blue Shield of Oklahoma actuary report dated August 11, 2014,
for plan year 2644 2015 only. Premium equivalent rates for future years
shall be established by the August immediately preceding the next plan
year. Employees shall be notified of the projected premium equivalent
rates and the required premium contribution prior to the annual open-
enrollment period. The monthly contribution for plan year 2015 2044 shall
be based on the following tiers and shall be divided equally and withheld
during the first two pay periods of each month. The monthly contributions
are as follows.

 

 

 

 

Employee Only: $43459 $154.47
Employee plus spouse: $260.04 $291.94
Employee plus child: $492.62 $216.25
Employee plus children: $247.66 278.05
Employee plus spouse, plus children: $350-85. $393.89

 

(b) Deductibles
Individual deductibles will be $300 for non-network and $250 for network

providers. Family Deductible will be $900 for non-network and $500 for
network providers.

(c) Co-Payments

Network Office Visit Co-payments will be $15, which applies to the
deductible, but not to coinsurance.

43
FOP, LODGE 123

@

(e)

(g)

(h)

@

@

()

Y

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-‘15

Co-Insurance

Individual out-of-pocket maximum will be $1000 in network plus
deductible and $3000 family out of network plus deductible.

Mental Health — Substance Abuse

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act treats these benefits as
other medical benefits. Deductibles, copayments, and co-insurance apply.

Outpatient Mental and Nervous

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act treats these benefits as
other medical benefits. Deductibles, copayments, and co-insurance apply.

Outpatient Hospital Services

Same as in-patient services, coverage at 90% in network, with prior
authorization.

Outpatient Surgery Services

Same as in-patient services, coverage at 90% in network, with prior
authorization.

Spinal Manipulation/Chiropractic Care

There is a $15.00 copay for chiropractic visits, which applies to the
deductible, but not to coinsurance.

Preventative Care Allowable Maximums

Coverage at 100% in-network for essential benefits pursuant to the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, and as determined by the United
States Secretary of Labor.

Filing Requirements

Claims must be filed within 12 months of date of service.

No-Claims Bonus

The bonus for no claims filed against the Plan by the participating
employee has been eliminated.

44
FOP, LopGE 123

(m)

(y)

()

@)

@

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY ?14-‘15

Breast Implants

The City’s medical indemnity plan will be amended to reflect that the
removal of breast implants will be a covered medical expense if medically
necessary and, will be covered consistent with other medical coinsurance
benefit coverage.

Services Provided by a Christian Science Practitioner

The City’s medical indemnity plan will be amended to reflect that the plan
covers services provided by a Christian Science Practitioner, if he or she is
deemed by state law to be the same as a legally qualified physician and is
acting within the lawful scope of this license, subject to all plan provisions
including deductible and coinsurance.

Coordination of Benefits -- Benefit Credits

The City’s medical indemnity plan will be amended to eliminate the
practice of calculating a benefit “credit,” for use at a later date within the
plan year, when applying coordination of benefits provisions of the plan.

Hospice

The City’s health indemnity plan will be amended to define a Hospice
Facility as a public or private organization licensed and operated
according to the law, primarily engaged in providing palliative support,
and other related care for a covered person diagnosed as terminally ill with
a medical prognosis that life expectancy is six months or less. The
Hospice must have an interdisciplinary medical team consisting of at least
one physician, one registered nurse, one social worker, one volunteer and
a volunteer program. A Hospice is not a facility or part thereof which is
primarily a place for rest, custodial care of the aged, drug addicts, or
alcohols, or a hotel or similar institution.

Co-payment Percentages

The City’s medical indemnity plan will be amended for the purpose of
changing the co-payment percentages on services provided by non-PPO
providers as follows:

The medical indemnity plan does not pay 30% of certain covered medical
expenses of an individual when treatment, supplies or services are
provided by a non-preferred provider (non-PPO) and a preferred provider
(PPO) is available within the area. (Benefits are payable at 70% of those
expenses from a non-PPO provider when a PPO provider is available in
the area). The co-payment amount will remain at 20% of certain covered

45
FOP, LODGE 123

()

(s)

Y

(w)

()

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-‘15

medical expenses of an individual when a PPO provider is not available
within the area. (Benefits will remain payable at 80% for those expenses).
The co-payment amount will remain at 10% for certain covered medical
expenses of an individual that are provided by a PPO provider (Benefits
remain payable at 90% for those expenses). When the 30%, 20% or 10%
reaches the co-payment limit in a calendar year, this plan will pay a
benefit equal to 100% of such reasonable and customary expenses
incurred in the rest of that year.

Eligible Dependents

The City’s medical indemnity plan document will be amended to redefine
an eligible dependent as follows: An eligible dependent will mean a
spouse; a common law spouse as defined by Oklahoma law; children to
the age of 26 as provided under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act; unmarried children who are physically or mentally incapable of self-
support on the date coverage would otherwise end. The word “Children”
will include natural, stepchildren, adopted children, and children for whom

the employee is the legal guardian and qualify as a dependent under the
Internal Revenue Code.

Inpatient Hospitalization

There is a $50.00 copayment for inpatient hospitalization.

Emergency Room Services

There is a $50.00 copayment for emergency room services.

TMJ Benefits (temporomandibular joint disorder)

There is a $2,000 lifetime maximum benefit for the treatment of TMJ.
Hearing Benefits

There is a $500 maximum benefit for hearing benefits available to plan
participants every 24 months.

The parties will continue to evaluate proposals to maintain or improve current
benefit levels, through the Joint Insurance Committee.

46
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-"15

D.

PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLAN

Employees participating in the Prescription Drug Plan will pay the following co-
pays during plan year 2015 20/4, effective January 1, 2015 2044:

1. Retail Generic Drug Co-pay $15.00
2. Retail Brand Drug Co-pay $30.00
3. Mail Order Generic Drug Co-pay $30.00
4. Mail Order Brand Name Drug Co-pay $60.00

Effective February 1, 2014, the formulary for the Prescription Drug Plan will be a
closed formulary as defined by the Pharmacy Benefit Manager fer-204, and is
currently referred to as the ESI National Preferred formulary.

SECTION 125 CAFETERIA PLAN
For fiscal year 2014-2015 2013-2044, the parties agree to continue participation in the

cafeteria plan, authorized under Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code, on the same
terms now in effect.

47
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

ADDENDUM D

LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES
CITY OF OKLAHOMA CITY AND FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, LODGE 123

1. Joint Labor-Management Committee will be formed during FY 2014-2015 2013-2044 to
address the following issues:

a) Evaluation of a total compensation formula prior to conducting the annual salary
survey for the FY 2014-2015 2013-2014 wage adjustment consideration. Such
formula will be used to calculate the survey results;

b) Promotions;

c) Performance Measures/Evaluations;

d) Minimum Staffing Levels for Operations;

e) Travel Reimbursement Policy

f) Wellness Program

g) Professional Development and Training

h) Drug Testing Collection Site

One or more Labor-Management Committee(s) will be formed to address all the above
issues. The Committee will consist of no more than three (3) members from Labor and
no more than three (3) members from Management. Article 5, Section 5.4 will control
F.O.P. committee member time off for committee work, provided time off is necessary.

2. The Labor-Management Committee will meet and submit any recommendations to the
bargaining committee by March 1, 2015 2044.

48
FOP, LODGE 123

Section 1:

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY ?14-15

ADDENDUM E

POLICE OFFICER BILL OF RIGHTS

The Chief of Police shall establish and put into operation a system for the receipt,

investigation and determination of complaints against Police Officers received from any person.

Section 2:

Whenever a member of this bargaining unit is under administrative investigation

for allegations of misconduct and is subject to an interrogation or interview or a request for a
written statement as part of an internal investigation by members of the police department, City
attorney’s office, or City Manager’s office, for any reasons which could lead to the officer being
disciplined in any manner, such interview or interrogation shall be conducted under the
following conditions:

A.

If known, the officer shall be informed of the name of all complainants. Upon
request, the officer under investigation shall be given a copy of a complaint or a
statement of the factual allegations upon which the complaint is based if there is
no written complaint.

The Officer’s Bill of Rights shall not apply to routine questioning or inquiries of
officers by a supervisor during the normal course of duty unless the involved
officer or supervisor determine that disciplinary action may occur as a result of
the officer’s activities. Preliminary discussions with supervisory personnel within
the Police Department not involved in the investigation shall be limited to giving
notice to the officer of the complaint received. Preliminary discussions shall not
include questioning or require oral or written documentation about the complaint.

The officer under investigation shall be informed of the rank, name, and
command of the officer or official in charge of the investigation, the name of the
interviewing official and all persons present during the interrogation or interview.
All questions directed to the officer during the interview shall be asked by and
through one and only one person at any time and the employee shall be given an
opportunity to respond.

The officer under investigation shall be informed the nature of the investigation is
administrative prior to any interrogation.

The involved employee will be afforded his/her constitutional rights in an
administrative investigation, in accordance with the “Garrity Decision”. The
employee will also have the right to consult with a representative of his choosing
and have the representative present during any questioning or interviews. The
representative is present to assist the employee, and may attempt to clarify the
facts or suggest other employees who may have knowledge of them. The

49
FOP, LODGE 123

Section 3:

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY ?14-"15

interviewer, however, is free to insist that he is only interested, at that time, in
hearing the employee’s own account of the matter under investigation.

All interviewing shall be specifically, directly and narrowly related to the officer’s
actions which formed the basis for the investigation.

Interviewing sessions shall be for reasonable periods of time and shall be timed to
allow for such personal necessities and rest periods as are reasonably required.

The officer being interviewed shall not be subjected to any questioning intended
to confuse or entrap the officer into providing conflicting responses or to
offensive language or threatened with transfer, dismissal, or disciplinary action.
An officer can be informed a failure to answer questions may result in
disciplinary action. No promise or reward shall be made as an inducement to
obtain testimony or evidence.

The interviewing of the officer under investigation may be taped and/or recorded
in written form at the discretion of the investigating officials. Officers under
investigation may record the proceedings with the officer’s own equipment at the
officer’s own expense. Records and tapes compiled by the City shall be retained
by the city, and may be used at the discretion of the City in administrative
hearings or for other administrative purposes.

1. The FOP can request the employer make a presentation of the sustained
allegations of an administrative investigation to the FOP Executive Board
at step 4 of the grievance procedure, on behalf of an officer who has been
disciplined in the form of a class III reprimand, demotion, loss of pay or
termination, and has filed a grievance with the FOP under section 8.6, step
2, of the grievance procedure. Should the Executive Board need further
information beyond the presentation, the FOP president (or designee) and
the FOP attorney can meet with the employer and review the
documentation of the investigation. The parties acknowledge the need for
confidentiality of a personnel hearing at this stage of the grievance
procedure. Only two FOP representatives shall be allowed to review an
investigation for any single case. Should the grievance proceed to
arbitration, the parties agree to continue their practice of exchanging
information under an agreed protective order.

An officer under administrative investigation shall receive written notification

from the Chief of Police or his designee as to the status of the investigation and why it is still

continuing if

the investigation has not been completed within 90 days. An officer under

investigation shall receive written notice from the Chief of Police or his designee as to the
outcome of any investigation.

Section 4:

No officer shall be discharged, disciplined, demoted, or denied promotion,

transfer, or reassignment, or otherwise discriminated against in regard to the officer’s

50
FOP, LopcE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-‘15

employment, or threatened with any such treatment, by reason of an officer’s exercise of rights
granted by this Article.

Section 5: Prior to discipline that may include a Class III reprimand, demotion, loss of pay,
or termination there shall be a pre-determination hearing. The officer shall be entitled to certain
rights, including:

1. Written notice of the charges against him at least 10 days prior to the pre-
determination hearing;

2. An explanation of the employer’s evidence;

3. An opportunity to present his side of the story;

4. A choice of three due process options
a. A Departmental Review Board as outlined in Procedure 160.10.

b. A hearing chaired by the Chief’s designee, or
c. Upon admission of guilt to all allegations, may appear before the Chief.
5. The right to a representative appointed by the FOP to assist him in the pre-
determination hearing.
6. The right to call witnesses on his behalf and the right to personally respond to the
allegations and evidence in the pre-determination hearing.

7. The right to examine any witnesses presented during the pre-determination
hearing.
8. If an employee needs to continue the hearing in order to provide additional

evidence, a reasonable opportunity shall be provided.

51
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

1.

ADDENDUM F

OKLAHOMA CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING

POLICY

The City of Oklahoma City (City) and the Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 123 (FOP),
jointly recognize that as a condition of employment each employee must abide by the terms
of the City of Oklahoma City’s Drug Free Workplace Policy, Policy 245 Use of Intoxicants
of the Police Operations Manual, Procedure 126 Use of Intoxicants in the Police Operations
Manual; Rule 355.0 Consumption of Alcohol and Intoxicants of the Police Operations
Manual, and the Drug and Alcohol Policy approved by the City Council on March 27, 1990,
as amended and incorporated into this collective bargaining agreement, except to the extent
that any provision of this Addendum conflicts with such in which case the provisions of this
Addendum will control.

It is further the goal of this Policy to eliminate or absolve such substance abuse and to
educate employees concerning the danger of substance abuse, provide assessment referral to
appropriate counseling services and/or monitor employees with identified substance abuse
problems. Any employee found using, possessing, selling, distributing, testing positive, or
under the influence of an illegal chemical substance and/or alcohol during working hours
will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination, according to the
provisions of this Addendum, the above-referenced policies and/or the collective bargaining
agreement, as applicable, unless the use or possession is necessary in the performance of an
official assignment by the Police Department or a joint task force with the Police
Department.

The drug and alcohol testing done by authority of this Addendum shall be done for
administrative purposes only. Because the testing is compelled as a condition of
employment, the results may only be used in administrative or disciplinary actions as set
forth in this policy and no other.

SCOPE OF APPLICATION

The procedures outlined in this Addendum for drug and alcohol testing shall apply to all
employees covered by the Collective Bargaining Agreement between the City of Oklahoma
City and FOP, Lodge 123. Employees may choose to have a union representative present at

any time during this process, except during sample collection, but the representative may not
interfere or impede in the agreed process.

POSTING REQUIREMENTS

In addition to its inclusion in the collective bargaining agreement, each Police Department
facility shall post a copy of this Addendum in a prominent place accessible to employees. In

52
FOP, LopGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY ’14-‘15

addition, each employee and applicant, upon receiving a conditional offer of employment,
shall be provided a copy of this Addendum.

4. EDUCATION AND GENERAL INFORMATION

Employees should know the dangers of substance abuse in the work place, including the
City’s policy regarding substance abuse and available assistance concerning such abuse.

The City of Oklahoma City has an Employee Assistance Program available to its employees.
Through the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), the City will institute an educational
program for all employees concerning the dangers of substance abuse in the work place.
This education program will include the distribution of the City-wide policy regarding
substance abuse, the danger of substance abuse in the work place, and the penalties that will
be imposed for substance abuse violations occurring while on duty and/or on City premises.
The City will also provide supervisory training to assist in identifying and addressing
substance abuse in the work place.

Employees who voluntarily participate in the EAP, or are required to participate as a
condition of continued employment, will be referred on a confidential basis. Participation in
an assistance program may be covered by the employee's health insurance plan. However,
any costs associated with the employee’s participation in an assistance/rehabilitation program
which are not covered by the employee’s insurance plan will be borne by the employee.
Accrued leave may be used during the time an employee is participating in an in-patient
treatment program. Leave without pay may be granted for those employees who have
insufficient accumulated leave to complete the program.

5. DRUG/ALCOHOL TESTING

The City of Oklahoma City Police Department will require testing for drugs and/or alcohol in
the following circumstances, and the employee may choose to have a union representative
present, but said representative may not interfere or impede in the process. The union
representative may remain with the employee at all times while at the collection site, but
shall not be present in the room while the employee is providing a sample. The FOP
representative must report to the facility within either 60 minutes from the time of the
employee’s notification or 30 minutes of the employee’s arrival for testing. If the FOP
representative is not present with these times, the testing may proceed without the FOP
representative.

Prior to testing, the employee will be required to sign a drug/alcohol testing consent form
(attached hereto as “Attachment 1”). The consent form will include the time the employee
left the worksite to travel to the testing facility. Failure or refusal to sign the consent form
and to submit to testing will be cause for a conclusion of a “non-negative” test and
appropriate disciplinary action up to and including termination may be administered in
accordance with this policy and the CBA.

All testing shall be done in accord with the Oklahoma Standards for Workplace Drug and
Alcohol Testing Act, Title 40, Okla. Stat., §§ 551 ef seq., and the regulations under said Act

53
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-‘15

implemented by the Oklahoma State Department of Health (DOH), and regulations of the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMSHA) as applicable per
the DOH regulations.

5.1 Pre Placement Testing

All external applicants for police officer positions shall undergo drug and/or alcohol
testing prior to assignment. Such notice shall be placed in each job application
announcement. Job applicants shall only be tested after a conditional offer of
employment is made. Refusal to undergo a test, or a confirmed positive test, shall result
in a withdrawal of a conditional offer of employment.

5.2 Reasonable Suspicion Testing

A. If objective evidence exists establishing reasonable suspicion to believe an
employee’s work performance is impaired due to drug or alcohol abuse or violation
of this policy, the employer will require the employee to undergo a test consistent
with the conditions set for in this Addendum. Reasonable suspicion testing shall be
initiated after the circumstances are reviewed and agreed upon by at least two (2)
supervisor level personnel (Lieutenant, Captain, Major, Deputy Chief, or Chief).
However, only one supervisor is necessary to require an employee to submit to
drug/alcohol testing if an officer observes the employee ingest, smoke or use a
controlled substance or alcohol. Supervisors are prohibited from demanding or
encouraging drug or alcohol testing without reasonable suspicion.

B. If reasonable suspicion exists, the employee must be prohibited from working or
continuing to work and should be placed on administrative leave with pay. Written
documentation of the observations of the officer/supervisor leading to a drug and/or
alcohol test shall be created prior to the end of the shift in which the behavior was
observed and forwarded to the Chief’s office. Additionally, when possible, the
officer/supervisor should communicate the basis for the reasonable suspicion to an
Assistant Municipal Counselor through the Chief or his designee, prior to requiring
such a test.

C. The employee shall be transported immediately to the designated testing facility by a
supervisor. The employee will not be permitted to return to work prior to receiving
the results of the drug/alcohol test. The supervisor shall make arrangements for safe
transportation to the employee’s residence or a place selected by the employee or a
relative or friend of the employee, if the employee appears incapable of making a
selection.

D. If the results of the drug/alcohol test prove to be negative, the employee shall be

returned to work. If the drug/alcohol tests prove to be positive, the process of Section
14 of this Addendum shall apply.

54
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY?14-‘15

5.3 Random Testing

A. All sworn employees are subject to random drug testing in accordance with this
Addendum.

B. All sworn employee names will be provided to the testing agency for placement into a
computer program for random selection. A random list containing ninety-one (91)
names of sworn personnel employed by the Oklahoma City Police Department shall
be generated by the testing agency at the beginning of each quarter and shall be
known as the random list. The random list shall be provided in a sealed envelope
marked as confidential to the Personnel Department drug testing coordinator. The
Personnel Department’s drug testing coordinator shall keep the random list in a
secure location to which only this individual has access, and the random list shall
remain completely confidential to only this individual. The drug testing coordinator

shall review the random list daily to determine which employees on the random list
are on-duty by confirmation with the Deputy Chief of the Administrative Bureau or
his designee, who shall notify the selected employee’s supervisor informing the
supervisor to ensure the employee reports as soon as possible to the identified testing
facility. The Deputy Chief of the Administrative Bureau or his designee, shall ensure
that on-duty employees are scheduled for the random testing during the first shift
available, and he/she will have flexibility in scheduling during that shift. All
employees on the random list must be tested during that quarterly period, or on the
first shift assigned to work thereafter, not to exceed 15 days after the end of the
quarter. The drug testing coordinator shall indicate on the random list the date and
time the Deputy Chief of the Administrative Bureau or his designee, and the
employee’s supervisor was notified. In cases where an employee is on leave time for
the entire quarterly period, they will be stricken from the random list for that
quarterly period and a notation will be added to the list explaining why the individual
was removed. A representative from Lodge 123 will review the random list every
uarter, upon the completion of testing of each individual on the random list, to verify
the selections ensuring that no employee is being unfairly singled out or protected. In
all cases, the names on the random list shall not be disclosed to anyone other than the
drug testing coordinator and the Deputy Chief of the Administrative Bureau or his
designee, prior to the individual being directed to testing.

 

 

C. Employees selected for random testing shall report as soon as possible to the testing
facility upon notification from their supervisor. Prior to the test, the employee will be
required to sign a drug/alcohol testing consent form.

D. The sample will be collected in accordance with Section 6 of this policy.

E. The Occupational Health Manager, located in the City’s designated medical facility,
shall receive and retain all drug and alcohol testing related information, and provide
the results to the Labor Relations Division of the Personnel Department.
Drug/alcohol test results will only be disclosed to those persons who have a “need to
know”. The laboratory will advise no one, other than the Medical Review Officer, of

55
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

results. The Medical Review Officer can only release the results of a positive drug
test to the Employer through the Occupational Health Manager once the Medical
Review Officer has completed his/her review, and analysis of the laboratory’s test,
and an interview with the employee involved.

Willful disclosure of test results to persons not involved in the disciplinary procedure
or who do not have a need to know, or failure to uphold the strictest confidentiality in
dealing with the random list, or tampering with the random list, or intentionally
deviating from these procedures shall result in appropriate disciplinary action, up to
and including termination.

. The parties agree the City shall use its current practice of requiring Random Drug

Testing wherein a 50% equivalency (45 officers) of individuals on the random list are
tested for the 5 panel drug screening as provided for under Section 8; a 25%
equivalency (23 officers) of individuals on the random list are tested for alcohol, and
a 25% equivalency (23 officers) of individuals on the random list are tested for both
the 5 panel drug screening and alcohol.

5.4 Post Accident Testing

A.

Post vehicle collision (as defined in Procedure 132.10) drug and alcohol testing
shall be conducted on employees involved in a vehicle collision resulting in death
or an injury to a non-department employee. For the purpose of this section, an
injury is defined as a non-department employee being transported from the
vehicle collision by ambulance to a hospital.

All other accidents or collisions will be evaluated for drug and alcohol testing by
the standards of reasonable suspicion, as defined in Section 5.2 of this Addendum.

Employees subject to post accident or collision testing shall be tested for drugs
and alcohol after an accident or collision.

If such testing cannot be administered within two (2) hours of an accident, the
supervisor shall prepare and maintain a written record of the reasons. After eight
(8) hours, such efforts to administer testing shall cease and a copy of the written
record shall be forwarded to the City’s Occupational Health Manager through the
Chief/designee.

5.5 Post-Rehabilitation Testing

The City of Oklahoma City Police Department may require an employee to undergo drug or
alcohol testing without prior notice for a period of two (2) years, after the employee’s return
to work following a confirmed positive test, or following participation in a drug or alcohol
dependency program under a City benefit plan or attended on a mandatory basis, as a
condition of continued employment. Post-rehabilitation testing shall be conducted in
addition to any other testing the employee is subject to under this policy.

56
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-"15

6. SAMPLE COLLECTION

The collection and testing of the urine or breath samples shall be performed only by a
laboratory and by a physician or health care professional qualified and authorized to
administer and determine the meaning of any test results. The laboratory performing the test
shall be one that is certified by the State Department of Health (DOH) and the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). The laboratory used shall
also be one whose procedures are periodically tested by the DOH and/or SAMHSA. The
results of employee tests shall be made available to the Medical Review Officer, who is a
physician.

Collection of urine samples shall be conducted in a manner, which provides the highest
degree of security for the sample and freedom from adulteration. Recognized strict chain of
custody procedures must be followed for all samples as set by DOH and SAMHSA. City
agrees that it will make every effort to respect the privacy and dignity of the employee during
the testing process, and City agrees to make any reasonable accommodation necessary to aid
the employee in the testing process.

The Union and the Employer agree that security of the biological urine sample is absolutely
necessary; therefore, the Employer agrees that if the security of the sample is compromised
before a confirmatory test, test results shall be invalidated.

Urine samples will be submitted as per DOH standards. The employee shall have the right to
notify his/her FOP representative and have representation at the testing facility, provided the
representative can report to the facility within either 60 minutes from the time of the
employee’s notification or 30 minutes of the employee’s arrival for testing. If the FOP
representative is not present with these time periods, the testing shall proceed without the
FOP representative.

A split urine sample for drug screening shall be reserved in all cases for an independent
analysis in the event of a challenge to a positive test result of the main specimen. All
samples must be stored in a scientifically acceptable, preserved manner as established by
DOH and SAMHSA. All positive confirmed samples and related paperwork must be
retained by the confirmatory testing facility for a minimum of one year. Tests shall be
conducted in a manner to ensure that an employee’s legal drug use and diet does not affect
the test results.

7. CHALLENGING TEST RESULTS
Employees wishing to challenge the results of the City’s test as provided for in, 6. Sample

Collection, above, must do so at his/her own expense and in accordance with the standards
set forth by DOH and SAMHSA.

57
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-15

8.

10.

DRUG TESTING

The laboratory shall test for only the substances and within the limits for the initial and
confirmation test as provided within DOH standards. The initial test shall use an
immunoassay, which meets the requirements of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
for commercial distribution. The substances for which tests may be given includes the
related metabolites:

1.) Marijuana

2.) Cocaine

3.) Amphetamines

4.) Opiates and semi-synthetic and synthetic narcotics
5.) Phencyclidine (PCP)

If initial testing results are negative, testing shall be discontinued. Only specimens identified
as positive on the initial test shall be confirmed using the Gas Chromatography/Mass
Spectrometry (GC/MS) techniques as provided within the DOH and SAMHSA standards. If
confirmatory testing results are negative, all test results are considered negative.

ALCOHOL TESTING

A breath-alcohol testing device shall be used to screen for alcohol use. A testing facility
certified by the Oklahoma Department of Health shall perform the testing. Initial test results
less than .020 shall be considered negative. Initial test results of .020 or higher shall require
confirmatory testing. Confirmatory testing less than .020 are considered negative.
Confirmatory testing of .020 or higher are considered positive.

MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER

The City of Oklahoma City shall engage the services of a State Board of Health qualified
Medical Review Officer who must be a licensed physician with knowledge of substance
abuse disorders. The Medical Review Officer shall be familiar with the characteristics of
drug tests, the laboratories running the tests and the medical conditions and the work
exposures of the employees. The role of the Medical Review Officer will be to review and
interpret all non-negative test results. No test shall be confirmed positive until the Medical
Review Officer examines alternate medical explanations for the results. This action shall
include conducting an interview with the affected employee, review of the employee’s
medical history, examining the possibility that any positive drug tests could be the result of
an exposure in the line of duty, and review of any other relevant biomedical factors. The
Medical Review Officer must review all documents made available by the tested employee
when a confirmed positive test result could have resulted from legally prescribed medication,
and he/she must also review any work related explanation for a confirmed positive test
result. The Medical Review Officer is the only person who may advise the Employer,
through the Occupational Health Manger, of an employee’s positive test result.

58
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-‘15

11.

12.

13.

LABORATORY RESULTS

The laboratory will report all negative test results to the Occupational Health Manager. The
laboratory will advise no one, other than the Medical Review Officer of any non-negative
test results. Once the review and analysis of the laboratory’s test has been completed, the
Medical Review Officer may only release the results of a positive drug test to the employer
through the Occupational Health Manager. The results of a positive drug test can only be
released to the Employer by the Medical Review Officer once he has completed his review
and analysis of the laboratory’s test. All negative test results will be reported from the lab or
Medical Review Officer directly to the Occupational Health Manager. The Occupational
Health Manager will file the negative test results in the appropriate files until they are
destroyed per the city’s document retention policy, and said records are considered as
confidential medical and personnel records.

COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH TESTING

The City of Oklahoma City Police Department is responsible for costs associated with drug
or alcohol testing. However:

1.) If an employee requests a retest to challenge the findings of a confirmed positive test, the
employee is responsible for the cost of the test, unless that test is negative, in which case
the City of Oklahoma City Police Department is responsible for the cost and for
reimbursing the employee for the cost of the test.

2.) Any test requested by the City of a current employee must be performed during or
immediately contiguous to the employee’s scheduled work period, if reasonably possible.
If this process extends beyond the employee’s scheduled work period it will be deemed
compensable work time as applicable under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).

3.) In the event that the challenge results in a negative result, the City will reimburse the
employee for the incurred expense.

REFUSAL TO UNDERGO TESTING/TAMPERING WITH SAMPLE

Employees refusing to undergo testing according to the terms of this policy shall be subject
to disciplinary action up to and including termination. Refusal, as used in this policy, means
that the employee will not provide a sample for testing, does not arrive for a scheduled drug
or alcohol test without having been excused or will not leave their worksite after having been
required to proceed to the testing facility. Employees found supplying or attempting to
supply an altered sample or a substitute sample, not their own, by alternative means, shall be
subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.

59
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY ?14-15

14. EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (FAP)

Any employee who tests positive for drugs or alcohol shall be evaluated and counseled by an
EAP counselor. Subsequent to this counseling, an employee shall be given one opportunity
during the employee’s career to continue employment after an initial occurrence of a positive
drug or alcohol test, provided that if the employee has a second positive test for alcohol or as
a result of addiction to a medically prescribed drug for treatment for an actual, medically
documented injury, the Chief may determine to allow the employee an additional
opportunity to retain employment with discipline and/or counseling. Any other second
positive test shall result in the employee’s termination per Section 15. Non-probationary
employees who test positive and successfully complete a rehabilitation program will be
afforded continued employment contingent upon the employee being required to undergo
random periodic drug and/or alcohol post-rehabilitation testing for a period of two (2) years,
and satisfactorily participating and completing the Employee Assistance Program. If in-
patient rehabilitation treatment is required, the employee may be permitted to use leave
under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), which includes accrued vacation leave
and sick leave. Compensatory time may be used for an FMLA reason but cannot be applied
toward FMLA leave.

An employee may voluntarily enter rehabilitation without a requirement or prior to
notification of testing. Employees who enter a program of their own initiative shall not be
subject to the two-year, post-rehabilitation testing; however, they will continue to be subject
to random testing in the same manner as all other sworn employees. To the extent that there
are treatment and rehabilitation costs over and above the employee’s insurance coverage, the
difference shall be the responsibility of the employee.

If an employee subject to post-rehabilitation random testing tests positive any time during
the twenty-four (24) month, period, they shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and
including termination.

If any employee has completed a treatment regimen set forth by a physician as a result of a
documented on-the-job injury and the treatment regimen included the prescription of an
addictive or habit forming drug, and if the drug is no longer prescribed and the employee
tests positive for that drug, or if the Medical Review Officer determines in his/her
professional opinion that the drug being abused is a result of the OJI treatment regimen, then
the employee will not be subjected to the disciplinary standards of this policy. The employee
will be required to submit to a treatment and recovery program as prescribed by the EAP
counselor. Upon completion of the prescribed treatment and recovery program, the
employee will be subject to the two-year post-rehabilitation testing period. In these cases, an
employee who has successfully completed the prescribed treatment and recovery program
and post-rehabilitation testing may petition to have his/her medical file purged of any
reference to his/her drug problem immediately upon completing the post-rehabilitation
testing period.

60
FOP, LopGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-‘15

15.

16.

17.

DISCIPLINARY ACTION

The City of Oklahoma City shall not take disciplinary action against an employee who tests
positive for drugs or alcohol unless the test results are confirmed by a second test performed
on the same sample, using one of the methods prescribed in this policy. After a first positive
test in an employee’s career, the employee shall be given one opportunity to successfully
complete a rehabilitation program and continue employment, per Section 14. On a second
positive test in an employee's career for alcohol or as a result of addiction to a medically
prescribed drug for treatment for an actual, medically documented injury, the Chief shall
determine the appropriate discipline, up to and including termination. Any other second
positive test shall result in the employee’s termination.

If an employee refuses to test or tampers with a test in violation of the provisions of this
policy, he or she will be subject to discipline up to and including termination.

At no time shall the City of Oklahoma City discipline an employee who tests positive as a
result of said employee’s lawful exposure to or contact with drugs or alcohol. An officer
shall be expected to explain any lawful exposures arising out of the course and scope of the
employee’s job, if not documented in official police reports.

Continued employment after a first positive test shall be contingent upon the employee being
required to undergo random or periodic drug and/or alcohol post-rehabilitation testing for
two (2) years, and satisfactorily participating and completing the Employee Assistance
Program. If in-patient rehabilitation treatment is required, the employee may be permitted to
use leave permitted under the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), which includes accrued
vacation leave, sick leave, and compensatory time.

DUTY ASSIGNMENT AFTER TREATMENT

Once an employee successfully completes rehabilitation, and/or obtains a release to return to
work, from the treatment provider he/she shall be returned to full-duty upon submission to
the Labor Relations Division of a negative drug and/or alcohol test obtained at the
employee’s expense. However, management reserves the right to determine the suitability of
the officer’s full-duty assignment as it pertains to drug and/or alcohol exposure. Once
treatment and any follow-up care is completed, and two (2) years have passed since the
employee successfully completed the program, the employee may petition to have his
medical file purged of any reference to his/her drug or alcohol problem. Such information
should at no time be a part of or included in the employee’s personnel file.

RIGHT OF APPEAL

The employee has the right to challenge the actions of management alleged to be in violation
of this Addendum, the results of the drug and/or alcohol tests and any discipline imposed in
the same manner that any other Employer action under the terms of this agreement is
grievable under Article 8.

61
FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY 714-‘15

18. CONFIDENTIALITY

The City of Oklahoma City shall maintain confidentiality in the administration of the drug
and alcohol testing program and shall treat all tests and all information related to such tests,
including interviews, memoranda, reports and statements as confidential, except where
release of information is required under the Open Records Act.

1.) All records to drug/alcohol testing shall be kept separated from personnel records.
2.) Such records may not be used in any criminal proceeding or civil or administrative

action, except in actions taken by the City of Oklahoma City or otherwise involving the
subject employee and the City, unless there is a valid court order authorizing the release

of such records.

3.) Records shall be the property of the City of Oklahoma City and will be made available to
the affected applicant or employee for inspection and copying upon written request.

62
 

FOP, LODGE 123 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FY °14-‘15

 

 

 

OCPD
Drug And Alcohol Consent Form

In compliance with the collective bargaining agreement between the City of Oklahoma City and FOP, Lodge
123 the undersigned employee shall appear for drug and/or alcohol testing at the Professional Office Building
Laboratory at St. Anthony Hospital.

 

 

 

 

Employee Name Employee ID# Shift

 

Supervisor Name Print Supervisor Signature

Departure Time

 

 

 

I consent to provide a urine and/or breath sample for a pre-employment, random, post accident, post
rehabilitation or reasonable suspicion drug and/or alcohol test. I further consent to allow the laboratory at St.
Anthony Hospital to make the results of the test available to the City of Oklahoma City Occupational Health

Clinic and/or Medical Review Officer, Dr. Randy Morgan.

 

 

 

 

Employee Signature Date

 

63

 

 
