LABOR AGREEMENT
Between the
PORTLAND POLICE ASSOCIATION

yyy

Beer

 

and the

 

CITY OF PORTLAND

November 11, 2016
Through
June 30, 2020
TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREAMBLE.
ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION...
ARTICLE 2...
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
ARTICLE 3.....
EXISTING STANDARDS
ARTICLE 4.....
PRODUCTIVITY...
ARTICLE 65...
AID TO OTHER UNIONS...
ARTICLE 6
CHECKOFF ..
ARTICLE 7.....
FAIR SHARE
ARTICLE 8.....
NO DISCRIMINATION
ARTICLE 9
ASSOCIATION SECURITY AND RESPONSIBILITY
ARTICLE 10...
ASSOCIATION REPRESENTATIVES .
ARTICLE 11...

 

 

 

 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

 

ASSOCIATION BUSINESS...

ARTICLE 12...
CONTRACT NEGOTIATIONS ...
ARTICLE 13...
SPECIAL CONFERENCES
ARTICLE 14...
STRIKES...
ARTICLE 15...
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES AND OTHER ORDERS
ARTICLE 1
NOTICE OF PROMOTIONAL SIGNUP!

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
ARTICLE 17...
MANUAL OF RULES AND PROCEDURES AND CONTRACT.
ARTICLE 18...
LIST OF OFFICERS
ARTICLE 19...
BULLETIN BOARDS.
ARTICLE 21
DISCIPLINE
ARTICLE 21...
DISCHARGE AND DEMOTION
ARTICLE 22...
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE.
ARTICLE 23...
SENIORITY ....
ARTICLE 24...
VACATIONS
ARTICLE 2:
ACCRUAL OF VACATION CREDIT;
ARTICLE 26...
SICK LEAVE
ARTICLE 27...
DEATH LEAVE.
ARTICLE 28...
PREGNANCY, PARENTAL AND FAMILY LEAVE...
ARTICLE 29...
LEAVE OF ABSENCE...
ARTICLE 30...
EDUCATIONAL LEAVE.
ARTICLE 31...
MILITARY SERVICE LEAVE ....
ARTICLE 32...
OTHER LEAVES OF ABSENCE ..
ARTICLE 3:
RETURN FROM LEAVE OF ABSENCE
ARTICLE 34...

SALARY DIFFERENTIAL BETWEEN BASIC CIVIL SERVICE
CLASSIFICATIONS...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

  
 

 

 
ARTICLE 35...
HAZARD PAY AND SERGEANT PREMIUM
ARTICLE 36...
BI-WEEKLY COMPENSATION
ARTICLE 37...
WORK ASSIGNMENT IN HIGHER CLASSIFICATION
ARTICLE 3:
CLOTHING ALLOWANCE
ARTICLE 339...
EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE...
ARTICLE 40...
VEHICLE USE AND CARE
ARTICLE 41...
MILEAGE RATE...
ARTICLE 42...

EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM AND EDUCATION
PREMIUM.....

ARTICLE 43...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ADVANCE NOTICE IN CHANGE OF SHIFT OR DAYS OF!
ARTICLE 45...

REPORTING PAY...
ARTICLE 46...

EMERGENCY PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 47...

HOLIDAY COMPENSATION
ARTICLE 48...

HEALTH AND WELFARE
ARTICLE 4!

CONTINUATION OF CITY-PAID HEALTH AND WELFARE BENEFITS
TO OFFICERS WHO ARE INJURED ON THE JOB OR WHO HAVE AN
OCCUPATIONAL ILLNESS OR INJURY ....

ARTICLE 50...
DOMESTIC PARTNERS.

ARTICLE 5:
LIABILITY INSURANCE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

iii
ARTICLE 32...
LEGAL FEES
ARTICLE 53...
FUNERAL EXPENSES ...
ARTICLE 54...
SHIFT AND DAY OFF TRADES.
ARTICLE 5:
SHIFT AND ALTERNATIVE SHIFT SCHEDULE:
ARTICLE 56...
RETRAINING PROVISIONS...
ARTICLE 57...
EXTRA EMPLOYMENT
ARTICLE 58...
FIREARMS AND PROTECTIVE VESTS...
ARTICLE 59...
PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS.
ARTICLE 61
SAFETY COMMITTEE.
ARTICLE 61...
PORTLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ BILL OF RIGHTS PREAMBLE....
ARTICLE 62...
INDEPENDENT POLICE REVIEW (IPR).
ARTICLE 63...
COACH PAY
ARTICLE 64...
SAVINGS CLAUSE..
ARTICLE 65...
RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION INCENTIVES
ARTICLE 66...
OVERPAYMENT..
ARTICLE 68...

TERMINATION AND DURATION
SALARY RATES...
RATES AS OF JULY 1, 2016
RATES AS OF JANUARY 1, 2017....

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
  
 
CONTRACT
between
CITY OF PORTLAND
and
PORTLAND POLICE ASSOCIATION

PREAMBLE

THIS CONTRACT entered into on this 11th day of November, 2016 between
the CITY OF PORTLAND, OREGON, hereinafter referred to as the City, and the
PORTLAND POLICE ASSOCIATION, hereinafter referred to as the Association,
has as its purpose the promotion of harmonious relations between the City and the
Association; the establishment of an equitable and peaceful procedure for the
resolution of differences; and the establishment of rates of pay, hours of work and
other conditions of employment.

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION

1.1 The City recognizes the Association as the sole and exclusive bargaining
agent for the purposes of establishing salaries, wages, hours, and other conditions
of employment for all sworn Police personnel presently recognized, who have
taken the oath of office, are authorized to execute warrants and are charged with
law enforcement responsibilities. The term “sworn Police personnel” is applied
without regard to sex, rank (except as provided herein), division, or duty to
personnel employed by the City of Portland, Oregon, Bureau of Police.

1.2 As.used in this contract, “officer” shall refer to members of the Association’s
bargaining unit unless otherwise specifically indicated.

ARTICLE 2
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

2.1 The City shall retain the exclusive right to exercise the customary functions
of management including, but not limited to, directing the activities of the Bureau,
determining the levels of service and methods of operation including
subcontracting and the introduction of new equipment; the right to hire, lay off,
transfer and promote; to discipline or discharge for cause, to determine work
schedules and assign work and any other such rights not specifically referred to in
this Contract. Management rights, except where abridged by specific provisions of
this Contract or general law, are not subject to the Grievance Procedure.

2.2 When the City is contemplating civilianizing a position, it shall provide the
Association with sixty (60) days’ notice of its intent to civilianize. The City shall

1
provide the Association with all materials developed supporting the decision to
civilianize the position, and any additional materials requested by the Association
to evaluate the economic feasibility of the change in status of the position. If
requested by the Association, the City and the Association shall meet to discuss
alternatives to civilianization. The City retains the discretion to either partially or
completely implement the civilianization, or to retain the position in sworn status.

2.3 Nothing in this Contract shall preclude the Bureau of Human Resources from
exercising its authority to classify, or reclassify positions and to establish entrance
and promotional examination requirements. Officers shall perform all work
assigned that is reasonably within the scope and terms of the classification
specification, though not specifically described herein.

ARTICLE 3
EXISTING STANDARDS

3.1 Standards of employment related to wages, hours and working conditions
which are mandatory for collective bargaining except those standards modified
through collective bargaining shall be maintained at not less than the level in effect
at the time of the signing of this Agreement. Any disagreement between the
Association and the City with respect to this section shall be subject to the
grievance procedure.

 

ARTICLE 4
PRODUCTIVITY

4.1 It is the intent of the parties to achieve and sustain maximum productivity per
officer during the term of this Agreement. In return to the City for the wage rates
and conditions herein provided and consistent with the principle of a fair day’s
work for a fair day’s pay, the Association pledges its agreement with the objective
of achieving the highest level of officer performance and efficiency consistent with
safety, good health and sustained effort.

ARTICLE 5
AID TO OTHER UNIONS

5.1 The City will not aid, promote or finance any labor organization nor make
any agreement with any such group for the purpose of undermining the
Association.

ARTICLE 6
CHECKOFF

6.1 The City agrees to deduct the Association membership initiation fee and
insurance, and once each month, dues and any additional recurring and periodic
2
Political Action Committee and other assessments made by the Association which
have been agreed to by the member, from the pay of members. The amount to be
deducted shall be certified to the City by the treasurer of the Association, and the
aggregate deductions of those members shall be remitted, together with an itemized
statement, to the treasurer of the Association by the first day of the succeeding
month, after such deductions are made.

6.2 The City shall also deduct from wages and transmit to the Association
monthly, whatever amount is determined to be the fair share of those officers who
do not authorize the deduction of dues and initiation fees.

6.3 The Association agrees that it will indemnify and save the City harmless from
all suits, actions, and claims against the City or persons acting on behalf of the City
whether for damages, compensation or any combination thereof, arising out of the
City’s faithful compliance with the terms of this Article. In the event of any suit or
proceeding brought to invalidate this Article, both parties will actively defend the
suit or action at their own expense. However, in the event any determination is
made by the highest court having jurisdiction that this Article is invalid, the
Association shall be solely responsible for any reimbursement.

 

ARTICLE 7
FAIR SHARE

7.1 All officers covered by this Contract shall within thirty (30) days following
the completion of their eighteen (18) months’ probationary period, either (1)
become and remain a member of the Association, or (2) tender to the Association
the officer’s fair share assessment. If the officer has not joined the Association by
the required time, the Fair Share will be automatically deducted from the officer’s
pay check by the City and paid to the Association. Provided that no officer will be
required to pay a fair share pursuant to this Article if the officer’s refusal is based
on bona fide religious tenets or teachings of a church or religious body of which
such officer is a member. Such officer shall pay an amount of money equivalent to
regular dues to a non-religious charity or to another charitable organization
mutually agreed upon by the officer and the Association. The officer shall furnish
written proof to the City that this has been done.

7.2 Upon receipt of written certification from the Association that it has
implemented a procedure which complies with the United States Supreme Court’s
decision in Chicago Teachers Union v. Hudson and the amount of the fair share fee
under that procedure, the City shall implement the fair share deduction.

7.3 The Association agrees that it will indemnify and save the City harmless from
all suits, actions, and claims against the City or persons acting on behalf of the City
whether for damages, compensation or any combination thereof, arising out of the
City’s faithful compliance with the terms of this Article. In the event any suit,
action or proceeding is brought by any officer, citizen, or other party, to invalidate
this Article, both parties will actively defend the suit, action or proceeding at their
own expense. However, in the event any determination is made by the highest court

3
having jurisdiction that this Article is invalid and the reimbursement to the Fair
Share must be made to officers affected, the Association shall be solely responsible
for the reimbursement.

7.4 The Association agrees to comply with federal and state law with respect to
fair share payments.

ARTICLE 8
NO DISCRIMINATION

8.1 The provisions of this contract shall be applied equally to all officers in the
bargaining unit without discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race, color,
creed, religion, national origin, family and medical leave use, disability, sexual
orientation, gender identity, source of income, familial status, union affiliation, or
political affiliation. Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed to prohibit
actions taken because of bona fide job qualifications.

8.2 All references to officers in this Contract designate both sexes, and wherever
either gender is used, it shall be construed to include male and female officers.

ARTICLE 9
ASSOCIATION SECURITY AND RESPONSIBILITY

9.1 The City agrees not to interfere with the rights of officers to become
members of the Association, and there shall be no discrimination, interference,
restraint or coercion by the City, or any City representative, against any officer
because of Association membership or because of any officer’s activity in any
official capacity on behalf of the Association.

ARTICLE 10
ASSOCIATION REPRESENTATIVES

10.1 Members of the bargaining unit selected to serve as authorized
representatives of the Association shall be certified in writing to the Chief, Bureau
of Police. Each representative will be expected to perform their duties as a
representative of the Association on their own time. However, it is recognized that
from time to time it will be necessary for Association activities to be carried on
during working hours, for example, investigation and processing of complaints,
disputes, and grievances, and attendance at Executive Board and general meetings
(not to exceed 1,056 hours per year). The maximum yearly allowance shall be one
hundred ninety-two (192) hours, for any one Executive Board member, with no
restriction on the number of hours per month which may be utilized by the member.
It is further recognized that there are reasonable limited deviations from this policy,
such as posting of Association notices and distribution of union literature, which do
not require substantial periods of time. Where such activities are necessarily or
reasonably to be performed during working hours, they may be done without loss

4
of pay to the representative involved, provided the representative notifies their on-
duty supervisor, whenever possible, prior to taking time from duty to engage in
Association business that exceeds one hour. All Association activity will be
reported on an appropriate time reporting form provided by Management.

10.1.1 Executive Board members not regularly assigned to day shift
shall be considered to be assigned to day shift for Executive Board meetings.
However, no more than one member from the same Reporting Unit and shift
(afternoon, nights) shall be so assigned.

10.2. Upon sufficient notification, the Chief of Police shall place officers or
representatives of the Association on special duty for the purpose of attending as
official delegates, union conventions or conferences to the extent that such special
duty does not interfere with the reasonable needs of the Bureau of Police. However,
the total time for all such leaves will not exceed three hundred and twenty (320)
hours per contract year. The Association will reimburse the City for such time the
members spend on Special Duty.

10.3. Recognizing that it is mutually advantageous to the City and the Association
to maintain continuity of Association representatives, the City agrees not to transfer
such representatives except in cases of promotion or necessity.

ARTICLE 11
ASSOCIATION BUSINESS

11.1. The City agrees to continue to pay to the Association President full pay and
fringe benefits, in order to protect the President’s pension accrual. Provided that in
consideration of the full-time release of the Association President from police
duties, the Association agrees to reimburse the City for one hundred percent
(100%) of the Association President’s police salary and fringe benefits. The City
shall submit a monthly statement to the Association itemizing the amount of the
Association’s reimbursement obligation. The Association shall reimburse the City
within ten (10) days of receipt of the statement.

11.2. The City shall continue to allow the Association to purchase the President’s
fringe benefits provided members of the bargaining unit covered by the collective
bargaining agreement between the City and the Association at the group rates, and
shall continue to allow the President to accrue pension credit.

11.3. Accrued vacation, compensatory time off, holiday compensatory time off
and sick leave will remain on the books until such time as the President either
returns to the Bureau as a full-time officer or the President's service with the City is
terminated, whereupon the use of such accruals shall be governed by the
appropriate contract provisions in effect at that time. No additional vacation,
compensatory time, holiday compensation time or sick leave will accrue during the
term of presidency of the Association.

11.4 During the times when the Association President and the City mutually agree

5
that the President shall be assigned to police duties, the City agrees that the
Association’s reimbursement obligation under this Agreement shall be suspended.

ARTICLE 12
CONTRACT NEGOTIATIONS

12.1 Not more than five (5) members of the Association negotiating team
(excluding the Association President) shall be permitted to engage in collective
bargaining with the City’s designated bargaining representatives without loss of
pay. The shift and days off of negotiating team members shall be adjusted for the
dates on which negotiations are held so that attendance at negotiations is on an on-
duty basis. Members of the Association’s negotiation team shall provide advance
notice to their supervisors of the days on which negotiations are held. During mid-
term bargaining, the Association shall limit the number of members of its
bargaining team to the minimum number necessary to fully address the issue. On
such days, the negotiating team member shall be entitled to a full day’s pay
regardless of the duration of the negotiation session. However, under no
circumstance shall a negotiating team member be entitled to overtime pay if the
negotiation session is longer than the member’s regularly scheduled work day. The
date, time and place for negotiating sessions shall be established by mutual
agreement between the parties.

ARTICLE 13
SPECIAL CONFERENCES

13.1. Special conferences for important matters will be arranged between the
Association President and the City or its designated representatives upon request of
either party. Such meetings shall be arranged in advance, and an agenda of matters
to be discussed at the meetings shall be presented at the time the conference is
requested. Association members, limited to two (2), shall not lose time or pay for
time spent in such conferences.

ARTICLE 14
STRIKES

14.1 The Association agrees that during the life of this Contract, there shall be no
strikes, work stoppages, slow-downs, speed-ups, or any other non-protected
concerted action to bring pressure on the City. However, nothing shall limit or
impair the right of any officer to lawfully express or communicate a complaint or
opinion on any matter related to the conditions of employment.

14.2 Nothing herein shall be construed to restrict the Association’s rights to
engage in legal concerted action under the Public Employee Collective Bargaining
Act.
ARTICLE 15
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES AND OTHER ORDERS

15.1 The Police Bureau and the Bureau of Human Resources will furnish the
Association with copies of all policies and procedures, special, disciplinary and
personnel orders when they are issued. Such materials shall include, but not be
limited to, position announcements, job announcements, and training bulletins.
When the Police Bureau is contemplating changing its policies and procedures, it
shall provide the Association with all drafts of the to-be-amended policies and
procedures and provide the Association with an opportunity to comment on the
drafts. When the Bureau of Human Resources is contemplating changing its
policies and procedures, it shall provide the Association with at least fifteen (15)
days’ advance notice of the proposed changes.

ARTICLE 16
NOTICE OF PROMOTIONAL SIGNUPS

16.1 The City shall distribute to all reporting units and the Association at least 30
days written notice of the opening dates for promotional examination signups. The
remedy for the violation of this Article shall be the delay of the signup(s) until at
least 30 days’ notice has been provided, unless no officer is adversely impacted by
the failure to give the appropriate notice.

ARTICLE 17

MANUAL OF RULES AND PROCEDURES AND
CONTRACT

17.1 The City agrees to furnish each officer of the bargaining unit with a copy of
the Contract. The cost of producing the Contract will be borne by the Association.
New officers will be provided with the above at the time of their appointment to the
Bureau. A complete and current Manual of Policy and Procedures will be made
electronically available to all officers when the manual is revised. Policies and
Procedures, Special Orders and Chief’s memos will be read or summarized as
necessary at roll call or circulated to the officers. The information will also be
posted. If an officer requests, the City will provide the officer with a paper copy of
the complete and current Manual of Policy and Procedures.

17.2. The City will provide the Association with access to the City’s electronic
information systems as follows:

17.2.1 Unless otherwise prohibited by law or third-party contract, access
shall be provided to: the City’s intranet, NCIC/LEDS, CAD, ePPDS, EIS,
Snapshot, R-View, and CAMIN.

17.2.2 Access shall be as currently extended to sworn officers in the

7
Bureau. The Association agrees that only sworn Portland Police Bureau-
member officers will be allowed access to the electronic information systems.

17.2.3. The Association shall be responsible for any cost of extending
access as described herein.

ARTICLE 18
LIST OF OFFICERS

18.1 The Bureau of Police will furnish the Association with the current list of its
members on a regular basis, identifying the officer’s name, address of residence,
phone number, date of appointment and place of Bureau assignment. Such list shall
be kept confidential, used only for official Association business, and returned to the
Bureau. The Association agrees not to disclose the names, addresses or telephone
numbers of non-Association members to any person who is not an elected or
appointed Association representative.

ARTICLE 19
BULLETIN BOARDS

19.1 The City agrees to furnish and maintain separate suitable bulletin boards in
convenient places in each work area to be used exclusively by the Association. The
Association shall limit its posting of notices and bulletins to such bulletin boards,
and such notices and bulletins shall be signed.

ARTICLE 20
DISCIPLINE

20.1 Disciplinary action or measures shall include only the following: written
reprimand, suspension, or in licu thereof, with the officer’s concurrence, loss of
vacation or non-FLSA compensatory time. Disciplinary action shall be for just
cause and will be subject to the following grievance procedure. This section shall
not apply to counseling and instruction. Verbal reprimands will not be used as the
basis for subsequent disciplinary action unless the officer is notified at the time of
reprimand, and if notified, the matter will be subject to the grievance procedure.

20.2. If the City has reason to reprimand or discipline an officer, it shall be done in
a manner that is least likely to embarrass the officer before other officers or the
public.

20.3. If the City requires an officer to submit to a fitness for duty evaluation, the
officer shall have the right to obtain copies of all documents generated as a result of
the evaluation. If the City’s evaluation is that the officer is not fit for duty, the
officer shall have the right to obtain a second non-binding opinion at the officer’s
own expense. The expense of the second opinion may be submitted for

8
reimbursement to the City’s health insurance system consistent with the City’s
Health Plan.

20.4 The City’s Employee Information System and the information developed
therein shall not form the basis for disciplinary action but may be used for non-
disciplinary notice purposes, such as development of work performance plans and
letters of expectation. The reports from EIS may not be used by the City for
disciplinary, transfer or promotion decisions. However, if the underlying data that
appears in EIS is maintained separately by the City and is simply reflected in the
EIS, nothing in this agreement prevents the City from making appropriate use of
the underlying data in disciplinary, transfer or promotion decisions.

20.5 Employees who intentionally or negligently lose or damage City property are
subject to discipline consistent with the terms of the collective bargaining
agreement.

ARTICLE 21
DISCHARGE AND DEMOTION

21.1 Discharge or demotion shall be for just cause, and in such case, an officer in
permanent status may choose between two avenues of appeal:

21.1.1 The officer may exercise appeal rights under Chapter 4 Civil Service,
Article 5 of the City of Portland Charter, or

21.1.2 The Association may, in lieu of those provisions established pursuant to
the City Charter, be allowed to take up the matter at Step II of the Grievance
Procedure.

21.2 These two avenues of appeal do not apply to an officer who:

21.2.1 Is separated during the eighteen (18) months’ entry level probationary
period, or

21.2.2 Fails to successfully complete the twelve (12) months’ probationary
period in a promotional position and is reverted to the officer’s former
classification, or

21.2.3 Is separated during the twelve (12) months’ lateral probationary period
or during the six (6) month’s lateral probationary extension period.

21.2.3.1 The Chief of Police or the Chief designee may reasonably extend
the twelve (12) month’s lateral probationary period by six (6) months.

21.3. The City retains the right to restrict or suspend an officer’s police powers
during the pendency of investigation and imposition of discipline, criminal
investigation, or pending clearance in a medical or psychological fitness for duty
examination. The City retains the right to end premium pay for officers with
restricted or suspended police powers. The City will comply with ORS 181.789(4)

9
when ending premium pay for officers with restricted or suspended police powers.
Removal of police powers shall not be considered disciplinary.

ARTICLE 22
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE

22.1 To promote better employer/employee relations, both parties pledge their
cooperation to settle any grievances or complaints that might arise out of the
application of this Contract by use of this procedure. One purpose of the grievance
procedure shall be to attempt to settle grievances at the lowest level possible.

22.2 Step 1. Any officer or the Association claiming a breach of any specific
provision of this Contract may refer the matter in writing to the officer’s immediate
supervisor outside the bargaining unit. This grievance shall be presented within
twenty (20) calendar days from the earliest date that either the employee or the
Association (by an Association officer, steward, or other representative) knew or
reasonably should have known of the alleged violation.

22.2.1 When the City has mathematically erred in computing or paying an
officer’s pay or other benefits, such pay or benefits shall be awarded the officer
at the time the error is discovered by the City or otherwise brought to the City’s
attention.

22.2.2 The supervisor shall respond to the grievance within twenty (20)
calendar days, and shall make such response to the grievant and the Association.

22.3. Step II. If after twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the submission
of the grievance to the supervisor, or from the date of the supervisor’s reply, the
grievance still remains unadjusted, the Association shall have twenty (20) calendar
days to present the grievance in writing to the Chief of Police.

22.3.1 The Chief shall have twenty (20) calendar days in which to reply. If the
Chief does not respond within the twenty (20) calendar days, or from the date of
the Chief’s response, if the grievance remains unadjusted, the Association shall
have twenty (20) calendar days to present the grievance to the Bureau of Human
Resources.

22.4 Step III. The Bureau of Human Resources shall have twenty (20) calendar
days in which to reply. If the Bureau of Human Resources does not respond within
twenty (20) calendar days, or from the date of the Bureau of Human Resources”
response, the Association will have twenty (20) calendar days to notify the Bureau
of Human Resources, in writing, of its intent to arbitrate.

22.5 To invoke arbitration, the City or the Association shall request from the
Oregon Employment Relations Board, a list of the names of five (5) arbitrators.
The arbitrator shall be selected by the method of alternate striking of names under
which the first strike shall be determined by lot. The final name left on the list shall
be the arbitrator. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the parties from agreeing

10
upon a permanent arbitrator or permanent list. The arbitrator’s decision shall be
final and binding, but the arbitrator shall have no power to alter, modify, amend,
add to or detract from the terms of the contract. The arbitrator’s decision shall be
within the scope and terms of the Contract and in writing.

22.5.1 The arbitrator shall be asked to submit an award within thirty (30) days
from the date of the hearing. The decision may also provide retroactivity not
exceeding sixty (60) days prior to the date the grievance was first filed with the
Chief and shall state the effective date.

22.5.2 Each party shall be responsible for paying the costs of presenting its
own case in arbitration, including the payment of witness fees, if any. The costs
by the arbitrator, court reporter (if any), and the hearing room shall be borne by
the losing party. Following the rendering of the arbitrator’s decision, the parties
shall meet and attempt to agree which is the “losing party”. If the parties are
unable to so agree, the question of who the “losing party” is shall be submitted
to the arbitrator who rendered the decision in question. The arbitrator’s
subsequent designation of the “losing party” shall be final and binding. If the
arbitrator cannot designate which party is the loser, each party will pay one-half
(1/2) the cost of the arbitration.

22.6 All grievances shall be in writing and clearly identified as a “Grievance.” All
grievances shall include the following information:

© The date the grievance is filed;
© The name of the grievant(s);

© The article(s) of this Agreement alleged to have been violated, or the
discipline alleged to have been imposed without just cause;

© The place, date and time the grievance occurred;

e A short narrative explaining the facts and reasons supporting the grievance;
and

© The remedy being sought.
© Upon request of the City, any missing information shall be supplied in a

timely manner.

22.7 All responses to grievances shall be in writing and clearly identified as a
“Grievance Response.” All responses to grievances shall be sent to the aggrieved
officer(s) with copies to the Association. All responses to grievances shall include
the following information:

© The date of the response to the grievance;
© The name of the person making the response;
© The decision affirming or rejecting the grievance;

© The proposed remedy if the grievance is affirmed; and

11
e A short narrative explaining the facts and reasons supporting the affirmation
or rejection of the grievance.

© Upon request of the Association, any missing information shall be supplied in
a timely manner.

22.8 The members of the PPA Grievance Committee shall be allowed up to a
maximum of two (2) hours on-duty time per meeting for meetings of the
Committee if the meeting is attended in part by a representative of the City
authorized to adjust grievances on its behalf.

ARTICLE 23
SENIORITY

23.1 Seniority shall be defined as the length of uninterrupted service by the
officer in the Bureau within the officer’s Civil Service classification following the
officer’s most recent appointment. Time spent in the Armed Forces, on military
leaves of absence, other authorized leaves and time lost because of duty-connected
disability shall be included in length of service. If an officer who has been
promoted reverts to a position the officer formerly held, the officer’s seniority shall
be the sum of the seniority earned in the promotional class and in the class to which
the officer reverts.

23.2 Subject to manpower needs and maintaining efficiency of the
Division/Detail, seniority shall be the prime factor in the selection of shifts and
days off provided the officer is otherwise qualified. Seniority shall govern in the
selection of vacation and holidays.

 

23.3 In the case of voluntary transfer and/or assignment, the seniority of an officer
shall apply immediately to the officer’s choice concerning holidays and vacations.
The transferring officer may not use seniority to bump another officer’s shift or
days off until 45 days from the date of the written request.

23.4 In the case of involuntary transfer and/or assignment, the seniority of an
officer shall apply immediately to the officer’s choice concerning holidays and
vacation. In the event of an involuntary transfer, the City shall accommodate the
shift and/or days off preferences of transferring officers immediately, and shall not
involuntarily bump any other officer for at least thirty (30) days from the time the
bumped officer receives notice of the bump.

23.5 For the purposes of this section, the phrase “Transferring Officer” shall refer
to an officer desiring to change shifts, days off, or assignments, or an officer who is
involuntarily transferred.

23.5.1 Within ninety (90) days of the execution of this Agreement, the Bureau
shall prepare a form to be used by officers desiring to transfer between reporting
units and/or from one shift, assignment, or day off configuration to another
within the same reporting unit. For the purposes of this Agreement, this form

 

  

12
shall be referred to as the “Transfer Request Form.” The Transfer Request Form
shall contain a place for transferring officers to indicate their preferences with
respect to shifts and days off.

23.5.2 A transferring officer may complete a Transfer Request Form at any
time. If the officer is seeking or anticipating a transfer, the officer shall file the
Transfer Request Form with the Personnel Division of the Portland Police
Bureau (Bureau). If the officer is seeking a change in days off or shifts which do
not involve a transfer between reporting units, the Transfer Request Form shall
be filed with the officer’s shift commander. The Bureau will forward a copy of
the Transfer Request Form to the location of the anticipated transfer.

23.5.3 In the event of a transfer between reporting units, the time frames
referred to in Articles 23.3 and 23.4 of the collective bargaining agreement shall
begin to run when the Bureau completes an Assistant Chief Action Form
authorizing the transfer.

23.5.4 In the event of a change in days off or shifts that do not involve a
change in reporting units, the time frames referred to in Articles 23.3 and 23.4 of
the collective bargaining agreement shall begin to run when the transferring
officer submits the Transfer Request Form.

23.5.5 When the Bureau knows that an officer’s preferences as indicated on a
Transfer Request Form will result in the displacement of the shift or days off of
another officer (referred to herein as the Transferred Officer), the Bureau shall
notify the Transferred Officer as soon as possible of the fact that they may be
bumped.

23.5.6 The City shall accommodate the shift and/or days off preferences of
transferring officers on a faster time schedule than that contained in Articles
23.3 and 23.4, if, in the Bureau’s judgment, it is operationally sound to do so,
provided that no other affected officer is bumped from their days off or shift
who objects to the accommodation.

23.6 An officer may exercise seniority to bump another officer for shift and days
off only once in ninety (90) days.

23.7. Vacations. Officers shall be allowed to select two vacation periods on the
basis of seniority. Each vacation period must be of a minimum duration of one day.
Vacation time shall be scheduled by the Bureau with due consideration being given
to requests from officers which shall be determined among officers of equal rank
by seniority; provided, however, that each officer shall be permitted to exercise the
right of seniority only once each year. The sign-up deadline for the exercise of
seniority in the selection of vacations shall be March 15 for the calendar year
running from April 15 through April 14 of the following year. An employee cannot
sign up for vacation in an amount in excess of the maximum accrual of vacation
(defined for purposes of this section as paid vacation leave and paid holiday
compensation leave) that the employee would have accrued as of the start of the
vacation.

 
23.8 Layoff. In the event of a layoff for any reason, officers shall be laid off in
the inverse order of their seniority in their classification. Any officer who is to be
laid off who has advanced to the officer’s present classification from a lower
classification in which the officer held a permanent appointment shall be given a
position in a lower classification. Seniority in the lower classification shall be
established according to the date of permanent appointment to that classification.
Officers shall be called back from layoff according to seniority in the classification
from which the officer was laid off within the Bureau. No new officers shall be
hired in any classification until all officers on layoff status in that classification
have had an opportunity to return to work.

23.9 Holiday Assignment. Where the shift strength is reduced or increased on
holidays, consistent with the needs of the City, assignments shall be offered to the
most senior officer. Except for an emergency, the City shall provide a minimum of
ten (10) days’ notice of any deviation from normal shift strength so that officers
may plan the use of their time.

23.9.1 Where shift strength is reduced, the most senior officer scheduled for
duty on the shift shall be offered the option of working or not. Where shift
strength is increased, the most senior officer on the shift shall be offered the
option of working or not.

23.9.2 For the purposes of this section, New Year’s Eve and Christmas Eve
shall be treated as holidays.

23.10 Seniority for Vacation Purposes upon Transfer. If an officer is
involuntarily transferred, the Bureau shall honor the officer’s preselected vacation
times, and shall not disrupt the preselected vacation times for other officers in the
division to which the officer is involuntarily transferred. If an officer accepts a
voluntary transfer, the Bureau shall attempt to accommodate, to the extent possible,
the officer’s preselected vacation times.

23.11 Shift Overtime. Where the overtime is not directly related to activities
begun by an officer during the officer’s regular shift, and where the planned
overtime is anticipated to be four (4) hours or more in duration, the overtime shall
be offered, in the order of seniority, to officers in the reporting unit. Once each
eligible officer has had the opportunity to work shift overtime in a pay period,
officers may once again use their seniority to work shift overtime as described
above, and the seniority list shall rotate in the same fashion thereafter for the
balance of the pay period. The City shall maintain a list in each reporting unit upon
which officers must place their names indicating a willingness to work shift
overtime. If an officer is incorrectly passed over for shift overtime, the officer shall
be allowed to work a makeup overtime assignment within the next two pay periods
following the discovery of the error. The officer and the Bureau shall mutually
agree upon the makeup overtime assignment, which shall not displace another
officer’s already-selected overtime assignment. An officer who has been incorrectly
passed over shall not be otherwise entitled to compensation for the missed
overtime. This section shall not apply to overtime assignments of which the City
has less than twenty-four (24) hours’ notice.

14
ARTICLE 24
VACATIONS

24.1 Earned vacation, based upon years of service, shall be accrued at the
following rates:

Bi-Weekly Accrual Annual Accrual

Years of Service Rate Rate

0 to 4 years 3.08 hours 80 hours
5 to 9 years 4.62 hours 120 hours
10 to 14 years 5.38 hours 140 hours
15 to 19 years 6.15 hours 160 hours
20 to 24 years 6.92 hours 180 hours
25 years + 7.69 hours 200 hours

24.2 As used in this Article, “years of service” shall include (1) time taken while
on leave of absence without pay for military service; (2) time under temporary
appointment in City service, and employment by the Dock Commission, the
Exposition-Recreation Commission, and the Portland Development Commission;
(3) Includes any continuous absence because of injury in the line of duty and, in the
Bureau of Fire and Bureau of Police, because of occupational or service-connected
disability approved by the Fire and Police Disability and Retirement Fund Board, if
after that absence the officer returns to duty on a full-time basis for a continuous
period of at least 30 days; and (4) Time taken while on approved leaves of absence
without pay designated as pregnancy, parental and family leave under state and
federal law. “Years of service” shall not include time in City service for which an
officer receives pension benefits.

24.3 In the event that an officer is required by subpoena to appear to testify in
court about a matter arising out of the officer’s official duties or is called back to
work for any other reason during an authorized paid leave period, including
vacation, days off, or on a holiday, the officer shall be paid for every day that an
appearance is required as follows:

24.3.1 have the vacation day, holiday, day off, or other paid leave restored;
and

24.3.2 straight-time pay for hours actually worked, with a minimum payment
of 4 hours at the straight-time rate.

24.3.3. Article 24.3 shall apply to days off that are contiguous to a block of two
or more paid leave days or to a day off that is contiguous to a day off which is
contiguous to a block of two or more paid leave days. For purposes of this
section, a “block” of paid leave days shall include two or more paid leave days
which are taken on the days preceding and/or following the officer’s regularly-
scheduled days off. Days off shall be restored through the addition of the
amount of hours in the officer’s normal work shift to the officer’s paid leave
accrual.

15
ARTICLE 25
ACCRUAL OF VACATION CREDITS

25.1 Vacation credits will accrue bi-weekly to the officer’s account. Such credits
may be accumulated up to a maximum of two (2) years’ earnings as of the end of
the first payroll period in January. Any credits in excess of that amount will be
forfeited at that time. If an officer has approved vacation scheduled during the
month of November or December that would allow the officer to avoid the
forfeiture of vacation accrual and the time is not used due to illness, injury or the
Employer requires the officer to work, the amount of vacation the officer was
unable to take may be carried over in addition to the two (2) years’ accumulation;
however, the officer must use any vacation credit carried over in this manner within
six (6) months. The scheduling of such vacation time shall conform with the
manpower requirements established by the Bureau.

25.2 Upon the termination of an officer from service for any reason, or in the
event of the officer’s death, the officer or the officer’s heirs shall be entitled to an
immediate lump sum payment for accrued vacation and holiday credits, including
the credits accrued in the current calendar year.

25.3 Officers who sign a commitment to retire in a specific calendar year shall be
allowed to accrue vacation in addition to the provisions of section 25.1 of this
Article for the purposes of vacation payment upon termination of employment. The
amount of vacation paid shall not exceed three years’ accrual and all vacation in
excess of three years accrual shall not be considered accrued vacation and shall be
forfeited. Officers making a commitment to retire shall specify the date of their
retirement and shall forfeit any accrued vacation in excess of the carryover limit set
in section 25.1 above if they do not retire on that date.

ARTICLE 26
SICK LEAVE

26.1 A member shall be allowed to use sick leave for the member’s own illness or
injury, or for illness or injury in the immediate family under the terms of subsection
26.7 of this Article.

26.2 Any officer may be required to furnish a doctor’s certificate for each day of
sick leave use. Any officer who is found to be misusing sick leave may be subject
to discipline. If the Association has reason to believe the requirement for a doctor’s
certificate has been imposed unfairly and without cause, the Association may take
the matter to the Chief or the Chief’s designee for review. The requirement for a
doctor’s certificate shall be for a designated period which may be renewed should
there be no improvement in sick leave usage.

26.3 Officers shall not use any prescription or non-prescription medications which

interfere with the safe and effective performance of duties or operation of City

equipment or vehicles, without notifying their supervisor prior to beginning work
16
or operating the equipment or vehicles. If an officer is using a prescription or
nonprescription medication which may interfere with the safe and effective
performance of duties or operation of City equipment or vehicles, the officer shall
consult with the treating physician or pharmacist to determine if the medication
will, in fact, have such an effect.

26.4 Officers shall earn sick leave from their date of hire, and they shall
accumulate sick leave at the rate of four-tenths (4/10ths) hour per work day, or four
(4) hours per bi-weekly payroll period. Such leave may be used after three (3)
months’ service. Time used for medical and dental appointments will be charged
against accrued sick leave. For purposes of the use of sick leave, there shall be no
maximum accrual of sick leave.

26.5 Unused Sick Leave Upon Retirement: Fire and Police Disability and
Retirement Fund & Oregon Public Services Retirement Plan Members. An
officer who is FPD&R Tier | or 2 or FPD&R Tier 3/PERS OPSRP who has
accumulated sick leave at the time of retirement shall receive credit in an amount
equal to thirty percent (30%) of the first four hundred and eighty (480) hours of
such accumulated sick leave, fifty percent (50%) of the second four hundred and
eighty (480) hours, and seventy percent (70%) of all accumulated sick leave in
excess of nine hundred and sixty (960) hours up to a maximum of 2,064 hours. The
cash value of such credit will be calculated on the basis of the officer’s pay rate at
the time of retirement.

26.5.1 Upon retirement, an officer shall receive a lump sum cash payment for
the sick leave credit.

26.5.2 Unused Sick Leave in the Event of Death. The City will pay a lump
sum cash payment equal to one hundred percent (100%) of unused sick leave to
the surviving dependents of any officer who dies prior to retirement. If the
ordinance, statute, or rules for calculating the death benefit of a member of
either the Fund or the PERS are amended to include the value of unused sick
leave; this section will be amended to assure that double recovery does not
occur.

26.5.3. This provision shall not apply to unit members who are PERS Tier | or
2.

26.6 Public Employee Retirement System Members. Individuals covered by
the Public Employee Retirement System (PERS) Tier 1 or 2 shall be permitted to
convert unused sick leave upon retirement in accordance with ORS 238.350 and
PERS administrative rules.

26.7 In situations where an officer’s spouse, parent, child or other person for

whom the officer is legal guardian, becomes ill or injured and alternate means of

transporting or caring for such person cannot be arranged immediately by the

officer, the officer shall be permitted to use vacation time or sick leave. A

maximum of five (5) days (40 hours) sick leave per year may be used as provided

in this subsection. The officer may be required to submit a doctor’s certificate for
17
any absence of three (3) days or more within a period of five (5) working days.

ARTICLE 27
DEATH LEAVE

27.1 Up to three days shall be allowed an officer without deduction in pay by
reason of the death of a member of the officer’s immediate family. With the
approval of the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee, an additional three days
leave with no deduction in pay may be allowed for necessary funeral travel time. If
the death is of the officer’s spouse or child, the Chief shall have the discretion to
approve up to a total of thirty (30) days of paid death leave, including the leave
described elsewhere in this article. The Chief’s decision shall be final, and shall not
be subject to the grievance procedure.

27.2 As used in this Agreement, an officer’s immediate family includes, the
officer’s spouse, parents, step-parents, children, step-children, brother, step-brother,
sister, step-sister, grandparents, step-grandparents, grandchildren, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, and
grandparents-in-law. The word “spouse” shall include “domestic partners” and “in-
laws” shall include a domestic partner’s father, mother, sister, brother, son,
daughter, and grandparent.

27.3. Subject to the reasonable staffing needs of the City, officers in the same
Reporting Unit as a member who dies shall be allowed four (4) hours of funeral
leave to attend the funeral or memorial service held for the deceased member.

ARTICLE 28
PREGNANCY, PARENTAL AND FAMILY LEAVE

28.1 Pregnancy Leave. Leave will be granted for pregnancy. The time for
commencing and terminating such leave will be a medical decision certified by the
attending physician. Sick leave, compensatory time off, and vacation credits may
be used to cover all or part of the absence. Leave without pay for a pregnancy-
related disability will be granted upon request.

28.2 Parental Leave. Parental Leave under state law shall be provided in
accordance with City Code 4.24.180 and the City’s Administrative Procedures.
Officers on parental leave shall be allowed to use sick leave, vacation credits or
compensatory time off during the period of parental leave as provided by state law.
Parental leave entitlement under federal and state law may only be taken on an
intermittent basis with RU manager approval for each instance of intermittent leave
requested.

28.3. Family Leave. Family Medical Leave under state law and Family Leave
under the federal Family and Medical Leave Act (referred to collectively as family
leave) shall be provided in accordance with applicable state and federal laws. For

18
purposes of family leave, the City agrees that “spouse” includes “domestic
partner‘.

28.4 If an officer has qualified for family leave and has exhausted all other forms
of paid leave, the officer may use sick leave in cases of a “serious health condition”
(as defined in state law) in the officer’s immediate family (as defined in ORS state
law and Articles 48.4 and 50 Domestic Partners of this Labor Agreement). If the
duration of the officer’s family leave is longer than the amount of the officer’s
accrued paid leave (not including sick leave), the officer may choose to be placed
on unpaid leave of absence or sick leave for the duration of the family leave after
using all other accrued paid leave. However, an officer may choose to reserve a
total of 80 hours of combined compensatory and vacation leave for future use. In
no event may an officer use sick leave under this section to extend family leave
beyond twelve (12) weeks per calendar year.

ARTICLE 29
LEAVE OF ABSENCE

29.1 Upon showing good cause, an officer may be granted a leave of absence
without pay for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days upon approval by the Chief
of Police or the Chief’s designee. The Chief, or the Chief's designee, will show
good cause for denying such leaves. Such leaves may be renewed or extended for
any reasonable period by the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee.

ARTICLE 30
EDUCATIONAL LEAVE

30.1 An officer may upon approval of the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee
be granted a leave of absence without pay for educational purposes at an accredited
institution when it is related to the officer’s employment. The Chief, or the Chiefs
designee, will show good cause for denying such leaves. The period of such leave
may be for up to one (1) year, but may be renewed or extended at the request of the
officer, and at the discretion of the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee.

ARTICLE 31
MILITARY SERVICE LEAVE

31.1 Any officer who is a member of the National Guard or the Military or
Reserve Forces of the United States, and who is ordered by the appropriate
authorities to attend a prescribed training program or to perform other duties under
the supervision of the United States or this State, shall be granted a leave of
absence with pay up to fifteen (15) calendar days, or eleven (11) working days per
year; provided, however, that the officer must have been an employee of the City
for six (6) months prior to the request for leave as provided in Human Resources
Administrative Rule (HRAR) 6.7.

19
ARTICLE 32
OTHER LEAVES OF ABSENCE

32.1 Officers may also upon approval by the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee obtain leaves of absence with or without pay for educational purposes to
attend conferences, seminars, briefing sessions or other activities of a similar nature
that are intended to improve or upgrade individual skills or professional ability.

 
     

ARTICLE 33
RETURN FROM LEAVE OF ABSENCE

33.1 Any officer who has been granted a leave of absence and who, for any reason
except sickness or physical disability, fails to return to work at the expiration of
said leave of absence, shall be considered as having resigned their position with the
City effective the date the leave commenced.

ARTICLE 34

SALARY DIFFERENTIAL BETWEEN BASIC CIVIL
SERVICE CLASSIFICATIONS

34.1 There shall be maintained a minimum differential of fifteen percent (15%)
between the ranks of officers.

ARTICLE 35
HAZARD PAY AND SERGEANT PREMIUM

35.1 Officers who are assigned to two-wheel motorcycle duty shall receive a
hazard premium to be paid bi-weekly at the rate of six percent (6%) of the officer’s
base salary, for every pay period or portion thereof the officer was assigned to
motorcycle duty.

35.2. Six percent (6%) hazard premium pay shall be paid to all officers assigned
full-time to the Drug and Vice Division (DVD), Special Emergency Reaction Team
(SERT) and the Explosives Disposal Unit (EDU). Effective January 1, 2014, six
percent (6%) hazard premium shall be paid to all officers assigned full time with a
canine. Officers assigned to more than one unit that qualifies for hazard pay under
Article 35.2 shall receive no more than a six percent (6%) premium under Article
35.2, DVD Sergeants who are receiving a three percent (3%) premium pursuant to
Article 37, Work Assignment in Higher Classification, shall receive no greater than
a six percent (6%) premium.

 

35.3. Members holding the rank of Sergeant who are in a full-time, uniformed
assignment and who patrol or respond to calls for service shall receive a premium
of five percent (5%). This premium shall apply to all Sergeants assigned full time

 

20
 

to the Operations Branch (precincts, Traffic Division, Transit Division, Youth
Services Division) and Tactical Operations Division (two uniformed Gang
Enforcement Team Sergeants and one uniformed Gun Task Force Sergeant). The
parties agree to supplement this list of assignments that qualify for the Sergeant
premium should the Police Bureau create new assignments in which members
holding the rank of Sergeant are in a full-time, uniformed assignment and patrol or
respond to calls for service.

35.4. Sergeants eligible for hazard pay under Article 35.1 or 35.2 and the Sergeant
premium under Article 35.3 shall receive both the hazard pay premium and the
sergeant premium.

ARTICLE 36
BI-WEEKLY COMPENSATION

36.1 Bi-weekly compensation of officers shall be paid by the second Friday
following each pay period. The officer’s compensation check and annual W-2 form
shall be in an enclosed, sealed envelope. All newly hired officers will receive their
compensation through direct deposit to their designated financial institution and
their itemized wage statements (remittance statements) will be available
electronically through PortlandOnline. Newly hired officers may request to receive
paper checks in lieu of direct deposit or receive paper remittance statements.

36.2 Unless an officer requests a paper remittance statement, officers shall receive
electronic remittance statements, which shall clearly state as separate line items the
description of all compensation and benefits earned for the pay period and year-to-
date, including but not limited to wages; each premium and each form of overtime;
all deductions; all pay outs; all forms of leave; and all taxes and other withholdings.

ARTICLE 37
WORK ASSIGNMENT IN HIGHER CLASSIFICATION

37.1 During routine operations, when an officer within the bargaining unit is
assigned temporarily to fulfill substantially all the duties and responsibilities of a
classification higher than the officer’s own for a period of one full shift or more, the
officer shall be paid regular salary plus 8.25%, or the entrance rate of the higher
classification, whichever is higher. When a sergeant works out of classification as
an acting lieutenant and incurs overtime, the sergeant’s overtime rate of pay shall
be based on the sergeant’s regular salary plus 8.25% plus any other applicable
premiums. If more than one officer is used at different times to fill the same
position of the higher class and the position is vacant for one full shift or more, the
officers filling the position will be paid the higher rate for all time worked in the
higher class. Whenever an officer is permanently or temporarily assigned as a
supervisory sergeant or as a detective or criminalist supervising detectives or
criminalists in the Investigations or Forensic Evidence Division, the officer shall be
paid for all time so worked at the highest rate paid for Sergeant, Detective, or

 

21
Criminalist, plus three percent (3%).

37.2. In the event an officer properly authorized to work out-of-classification has
done so for sixty continuous days, and the officer uses paid leave while still
assigned to the out-of-classification work after sixty continuous days, the leave will
be paid at the out-of-classification rate. A partial-shift day shall not break
continuity, but also shall not be counted towards completion of the sixty continuous
days required.

ARTICLE 38
CLOTHING ALLOWANCE

38.1 The clothing allowance for plainclothes officers shall be $390.00 per year.
The Chief of Police will designate in writing the duty assignments which require
dress other than the prescribed uniform and, for such designated duty, the officers
will be paid a cash clothing allowance prorated for the number of full months
served in said assignment. The written designation of unit and/or positions eligible
for clothing allowance will be distributed and posted prior to the start of the fiscal
year in which the clothing allowance benefit is to accrue and units or assignments
so designated are not to be retitled during the fiscal year except by mutual
agreement with the Association.

38.2 Payment shall occur no later than the second pay day in August of each year.

ARTICLE 39
EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE

39.1 The City will also arrange for purchase of uniforms on a fit-to-size basis.
Each uniformed officer shall receive $90.00 per year for the purchase of job-related
equipment (example: gloves, and other incidentals, etc.).

39.2. The City shall furnish officers all required equipment, to include flashlights
and handcuffs. The recommended standards for required equipment and clothing

shall be set by the Safety Committee and the Uniform Committee. However, the

final decision will be left to the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee.

39.3 Payment shall occur no later than the second pay day in August of each year.

ARTICLE 40
VEHICLE USE AND CARE

40.1 An officer assigned to active motorcycle duty will be permitted to garage the

officer’s assigned City motorcycle at home. If an officer is required to take a City

vehicle home as part of a job assignment, the City shall not assess the officer any

fees for the use of the vehicle unless required to do so by the Internal Revenue

Code or the regulations enacted thereunder. Washing and maintenance service of
22
the vehicle will be done during regular duty time.
ARTICLE 41
MILEAGE RATE

41.1 Whenever an officer is authorized to utilize their own vehicle in the
performance of the officer’s official City duties, the officer shall be compensated at
the current rate paid by the City.

ARTICLE 42

EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM AND
EDUCATION PREMIUM

42.1 For the purpose of encouraging officers to pursue appropriate formal
education, the parties agree to continue the present Education Reimbursement
Program on the following terms:

42.2. Eligibility: In order to qualify for the Education Reimbursement Program,
an officer must either (a) have completed eighteen (18) months of service as a
sworn member of the Portland Police Bureau attained a minimum of two (2) years”
approved college credit of ninety (90) quarter hours or sixty (60) semester hours, or
(b) have completed five (5) years of service. Disbursement shall only be made to
City employees.

42.3. Education Reimbursement: Upon verification of successful completion of
at least three (3) hours of pre-approved college credit earned at an accredited
college or university, an officer shall be entitled to reimbursement of education
costs. If the reimbursement is for a course taken as part of an undergraduate degree
program, the amount of reimbursement shall be limited to the actual cost of tuition
of up to thirteen and one-half (13.5) quarter hours per fiscal year, and registration
fees at Portland State University, subject to proration in the event the fund
maximum is met. If the officer already has an undergraduate degree, or if the
course is not taken as part of an undergraduate degree program, the officer shall be
entitled to a lump sum reimbursement of $260.00 for education costs, subject to
proration in the event the fund maximum is met. For purposes of this section, one
semester hour shall be the equivalent of 1.5 quarter hours.

42.4 Approved Courses: Payments made under the Education Reimbursement
Program will be confined to courses: (a) commenced after the officer has
completed the appropriate service time required to qualify for the program, and (b)
approved for each officer by the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee. All
courses must be taken on the officer’s own time. Courses successfully challenged
will not be eligible for payment under this program.

42.5 The City’s maximum obligation under the Education Reimbursement
Program shall be Eighteen Thousand Dollars ($18,000) per year for eligible

23
applications submitted by the appropriate due date.

42.6 An officer holding a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or
university shall receive an additional premium of two percent (2%) of Top Step
Police Officer wage, paid in equal installments each pay period, as an Education
Premium.

ARTICLE 43
OVERTIME

43.1 As used in this Contract, overtime means time an officer is authorized to
work in excess of eight (8) hours in a work day, or forty (40) hours in a work week,
or ten (10) hours in a work day or forty (40) hours in a work week for those
personnel engaged in the Four-Ten Plan, including time on duty, compensatory
time off, a holiday off with pay, or leave for which full salary is paid. Appearances
before the Collision Review Board and the Civilian Review Committee shall be
compensated on an hour-for-hour basis, rounded up to the nearest hour.

43.2 Compensation for all overtime work shall be at one and one-half (1-1/2)
times the officer’s established rate of pay as set forth in Schedule A. Compensation
for overtime will be in pay except, at the option of the officer, compensatory time
off shall be granted in lieu of overtime pay subject to the provisions below. Each
occurrence of overtime may not be split between pay and compensatory time off.
Except where otherwise expressly provided in the collective bargaining agreement,
no other form of pay may be taken in the form of compensatory time off.

Officers may accrue a maximum of one hundred sixty (160) hours of compensatory
time off in a calendar year. An officer shall be permitted the use of such
compensatory time off upon written request to and approval by management’s
designated and authorized representative, generally the officer’s RU Manager, as
follows:

43.2.1. The City shall have absolute discretion to grant, deny or cancel requests
for compensatory time off for any reason if the request is received by
management’s designated and authorized representative thirty (30) calendar days
or less prior to the date of the requested time off.

43.2.2 The City retains discretion to grant, deny or cancel requests for the use of
compensatory time off received by management's designated and authorized
representative more than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the date of the
requested time off, but will consider the following factors, as well as other
operational concerns, in making that decision:

43.2.2 .1 Compensatory time off ordinarily will not be granted if the time off
will reduce staffing levels within the Precinct/Division below desired levels
as proscribed by the RU Manager as necessary for effective Precinct/Division
operations.

24
43.2.2 .2 Compensatory time off ordinarily will not be granted if the Police
Bureau Reporting Unit will incur an overtime expense to hire an officer to
replace the officer requesting/using compensatory time off.

43.2.2 3. Compensatory time off shall not be granted, and previously approved
compensatory time off may be cancelled, when a Branch Chief or RU Manager
determines that a planned or unplanned special event or significant incident
requires increased staffing levels in order to meet policing and event
management needs. Compensatory time off scheduled in conjunction with
vacation time as part of the annual vacation signup can be cancelled only under
the circumstances under which vacation time can be cancelled.

43.2.2 .4 Compensatory time off shall not be granted on City recognized
holidays where reduced staffing vacation opportunities are granted to officers
based upon seniority, and the use of compensatory time off would conflict
with seniority-based vacation selection.

The City’s decision shall not be overturned unless there is a demonstrated abuse
of discretion.

Any compensatory time off remaining at the end of the calendar year shall be
compensated in pay. Notwithstanding the provisions of 43.2 above, all grant-
funded and Special Duty overtime will be compensated as pay; compensatory
time off is not available.

In the event any portion of 43.2 ef seq. is rendered unenforceable by arbitration
decision, Employment Relations Board decision, or court ruling, the City and
Association agree to negotiate a successor provision.

43.3. In addition to calendar-year-end pay out, an officer may request cash pay out
of accrued compensatory time off twice per calendar year. Requests must be made
in writing no later than the close of business June 30 and November 20 and will be
processed in the following pay period.

43.4. Where the City and the officer mutually agree for a specified period to a shift
change, a change in days off or split shift, the overtime pay shall not apply,
provided the officer is scheduled for four (4) days off in each payroll period, or at
least six (6) days off in each payroll period if the employee works a 4/10 shift.

43.5 Officers, other than instructors, assigned to or from training programs shall not
receive overtime as a consequence of their reassignment, provided the officer is
scheduled for four (4) days off (or six (6) days off for employees on 4/10 shifts) in
each payroll period, which includes a reassignment. The City reserves the right to
assign officers to selected training courses at out-of-town training sites. As this
professional training is beneficial and mutually desirable to the City and the
officers, no overtime will be authorized for travel. Officers authorized to travel to
out-of-state training sites will be relieved from duty for the equivalent time

25
necessary to travel to and from the out-of-state site.

43.5.1 When an officer is required to attend training scheduled for six hours or
longer, and the training does not last a full day, the officer shall be excused from
work after the completion of the training for the full day without any loss in pay.

43.5.2 If the training is out of town, the officer shall be credited for a full
day’s work for each day training is scheduled and attended.

43.5.3. Officers shall receive a paid meal period during training if required to
attend training in uniform.

43.6 An officer shall normally be paid at the overtime rate only for those hours
worked.

43.6.1 However, if the officer works less than four (4) hours, the officer shall
be paid at the overtime rate the lesser of:

43.6.1.1 The time elapsed from the beginning of the overtime to the
beginning of the shift; or

43.6.1.2 The time elapsed from the end of the shift to the end of the
overtime; or

43.6.1.3. Four (4) hours.

43.6.2 If.an officer works more than one overtime assignment, each will be
paid separately. However, if there are 60 minutes or less of unpaid time between
the assignments, they will be paid as if they were one continuous assignment. If
an officer is required to make morning and afternoon court appearances on the
same calendar day, and if the officer has worked a scheduled full shift (which
includes any paid leave used prior to midnight) that has ended after 0001 on the
same calendar day as the court appearances, the officer shall be compensated no
less than from 0700 until the end of the afternoon court appearance.

43.6.3. There will be no pyramiding of overtime pay.

43.6.4 An officer who is required to make court-related overtime appearances
on the officer’s day off without seventy-two (72) hours of advance notice, shall
be compensated at the overtime rate for a minimum of five (5) hours. However,
the no pyramiding provisions of Article 43.6.3 above still apply.

43.7 Ifa member is recalled to duty, the callback shall commence at the time the
member is required to appear for duty. A callback is defined as a call to return to
work after the officer has left the City’s premises at the end of the member’s last
shift. Callbacks shall be paid at the overtime rate for a minimum of four (4) hours.
Callbacks with less than three (3) hours’ time elapsed from the end of the shift shall
be paid at the overtime rate for a minimum of five (5) hours. In any event, when an
officer is called and is required to report to work immediately, the officer will be
paid starting at the time of the notification.

43.8 For timekeeping purposes, officers off-duty on sick leave, disability benefits,
26
approved leave of absence with pay, and suspended-from-duty-with-pay status will
be considered to be on the Morning Relief with Saturdays and Sundays off.

43.8.1 When an officer on sick leave appears in court, the amount of time
spent in court, or four (4) hours, whichever is greater, will not be charged
against the officer’s sick leave credits.

43.8.2 Officers on approved leave of absence with pay or disability benefits
will be authorized overtime for court appearances in excess of eight (8) hours in
a day or forty (40) hours in a work week.

43.9. Officers who are on duty status and who appear during their off-duty hours in
their own or other officer’s defense in disciplinary hearings will be authorized
overtime only if the accused officer is cleared of the charges.

43.10 Whenever an officer is subpoenaed to appear in court on a civil or criminal
case, as a consequence of the officer’s official duties, on the officer’s off-duty time,
the officer shall receive overtime pay for the time spent in court per Article 43.6
above. The officer must report the subpoena to their superior at the earliest
opportunity.

43.11 Overtime Limitations. With the exception of court-related or emergency
overtime, officers may decline overtime work in excess of fifty-two (52) hours’
duty time in any work week or twelve (12) hours’ duty time in any work day. No
overtime premium will be paid to officers working out of town unless prior
approval is obtained for such overtime.

43.12 Transport of Prisoners. Expenses to cover actual costs of meals, lodging
and transportation will be allowed officers while transporting prisoners.

43.13 Witness Fees. Officers will collect only the witness fees provided for by
statute when testifying in court; such fees will be turned over to the City Auditor
for reimbursement of costs to the City. Failure to turn over to the City Auditor any
witness fee received for any appearance in any litigation in which the officer
appears as a result of the officer’s police duties and responsibilities shall be subject
to Articles 20 and 21 of this Contract.

43.14 Retired Officer Court Time. Any member of the bargaining unit who
retires on or after July 1, 1977, shall be compensated by the City when subpoenaed
to appear in court as a prosecution witness in a criminal case, as a consequence of
the officer’s official duties prior to retirement. The compensation shall be the
current maximum rate for the class of Police Officer. Payment will be at straight
time for the hours in court, with a minimum payment of four (4) hours for each day
of such service. Claims for payment of validated service shall be filed with the
Fiscal Administration Unit.

43.15 Work-related Telephone Calls When Not On-Call. If the City makes a
work-related telephone call to an officer at home outside of regular work hours, and
the officer is required as a result to perform work for the City, the officer shall be
compensated for the actual time worked on the telephone call, rounded up to the

27
nearest 15 minutes. Phone calls to an officer for the purpose of asking the officer if
they are available to perform extra work are not compensable.

43.16 On-Call and On-Call Telephone Calls. The employer shall compensate
officers placed in on-call status at the rate of 10.0% of a day’s base pay for each
day or portion thereof spent in on-call status, plus pay pursuant to Article 43.15 for
time spent on telephone calls. For purposes of this article, a “day” shall mean an 8-
hour workday, and “base pay” shall be the top step base pay for the employee’s
classification.

43.16.1 For purposes of this article, (1) “on-call” status means all time when
the employer requires the officer to remain available for and to respond to a
call to duty, to be immediately reachable by pager or by telephone, time on
the telephone, and where the employer subjects the officer to possible
disciplinary action for failing to comply with either of the foregoing
requirements; and (2) “day” means the 24-hour period starting at 12:01 a.m.

43.16.2. Officers who are in on-call status who are called in to work shall be
compensated for the time spent working as provided elsewhere in this
Agreement.

43.17 DMV Hearings. The City shall pay officers who testify during off-duty time
at DMV hearings as follows:

43.17.1 If the officer chooses to report in person to the DMV hearing
location and testify in person, the City shall pay the officer under Articles
43.6 and 43.10.

43.17.2. If the officer chooses to report in person to a PPB precinct or PPB
Traffic Division to testify by telephone at the DMV hearing, the City shall
pay the officer under Articles 43.6 and 43.10.

43.17.3 If the officer chooses to testify telephonically from a location other
than DMV, a PPB precinct, or PPB Traffic Division, the City shall pay the
officer: (i) “on-call” pay for the day of the hearing under Article 43.16; (ii)
one hour of pay at the overtime rate under Article 43; and (iii) for the actual
time spent on the telephone call beyond the first hour in 15 minute
increments at the overtime rate under Article 43.15.

43.17.4 Officers shall reflect on their time sheets the location of the
telephone call and the length of the DMV hearing.

43.18 If an officer is injured while working during a shift, which requires the
officer to seek medical care from an urgent care center or hospital emergency room
during that shift, and the medical care is not concluded by the end of the officer’s
regularly scheduled shift, then the actual time spent in the urgent care center or
hospital emergency room after the officer’s regular shift will be paid at the officer’s
overtime rate, up to a maximum that is one-half of the length of the officer’s

28
regular shift.

ARTICLE 44

ADVANCE NOTICE IN CHANGE OF SHIFT OR D
OFF

 

44.1. An officer will normally be given adequate advance notice of any change in
the officer’s regular hours of work, except where an emergency (an emergency is
defined as an unforeseen event affecting the precinct’s or division’s ability to
perform its mission) exists. Notice given less than forty-eight (48) hours (or
seventy-two (72) hours under the Four-Ten Plan) before the officer is to begin work
under the changed schedule entitles the officer to compensation at the overtime rate
for those hours not exceeding eight (8) hours that are earlier, later, or different from
the hours the officer last worked in a work day. A police officer is not entitled to
compensation under the overtime rate if the officer is otherwise entitled to
compensation under the same hours of work, or if shift changes are the result of a
voluntary transfer or promotion.

ARTICLE 45
REPORTING PAY

45.1 An officer who reports for scheduled duty, but is excused because no work is
available, shall be entitled to one shift’s pay. If the work in question is a pre-
arranged overtime assignment, the minimum guarantee shall be the planned length
of the overtime assignment. If an officer is scheduled and reports for overtime duty,
and if the Bureau determines that the officer is no longer needed, the officer shall
have the option of voluntarily leaving early with the permission of the officer’s
supervisor. If the officer elects to leave early, the officer shall not be entitled to the
guaranteed minimum pay found in this Article.

ARTICLE 46
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS

46.1 If the safety of the officer during emergency conditions or other City-directed
operational needs makes it necessary for the City to prescribe the areas in which
officers may eat their meals, the City shall be obligated to furnish adequate meals.

ARTICLE 47
HOLIDAY COMPENSATION

47.1 In addition to the officer’s regular pay for time worked on a holiday, an
officer shall receive premium compensation at time and one-half. Unless the City
and the officer agree to cash payment, such premium compensation shall be in the
form of compensatory time off. This compensatory time off, not exceeding sixty

29
(60) hours, may be carried from one calendar year to the next.

47.2. An officer whose scheduled day off falls on a holiday shall receive a
postponed holiday, with pay, to be taken at the mutual convenience of the officer
and the City.

47.3. Eligibility for holiday pay is contingent upon the officer’s being employed by
the City for ten (10) days before the holiday and in pay status on the work day
preceding the holiday and on the work day following the holiday.

47.4 Should an officer be on an authorized leave when a holiday occurs, that
holiday shall not be charged against the officer’s leave.

47.5. The following days shall be recognized and observed as guaranteed paid
holidays.

47.5.1 New Year’s Day
Dr. Martin Luther King Day
President’s Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Christmas
Holidays 2016 2017 2018 2019 [2020
New Year's Day | Jan 1 Jan I Jan I Jant_[Jan 1
Dr. Martin Luther [Jan18 | Jan16 | Jan15 | Jan21_ | Jan 20
King Day

President's Day Feb 15 | Feb20 [Feb 19 | Febi8 | Feb17
Memorial Day May 30_| May 29 | May 28 [ May 27 | May 25
Independence Day [July4 | July4 | July4 July4_[July4
Labor Day SeptS | Sept4 | Sept3 | _Sept2 | Sept7
Veteran's Day Nov1l_| Nov10_[Nov12_| Nov 11 [Nov Il
Thanksgiving Day _[Nov24 [| Nov23_|Nov22 | Nov28 | Nov 26
Christmas Dec 25 | Dec25 | Dec25 [| Dec 25 | Dec 25

 

47.5.2 Four (4) days per year to be taken at a time mutually agreeable to the
officer and the City.

47.5.3 Any day designated by the President of the United States or the
Governor of the State of Oregon as a universal holiday affecting all citizens.

30
ARTICLE 48
HEALTH AND WELFARE

48.1 Benefits and Eligibility

48.1.1 Permanent full-time officers shall be eligible for medical, dental, vision
and life insurance coverage the first of the month following thirty (30) days of
eligible service. Medical, dental, vision and life insurance benefits will be paid
at 100% of the City contribution for those officers who have a Standard Hours
designation of at least seventy-two hours in a pay period in a benefits eligible,
budgeted position.

48.1.2 Permanent part-time officers will be eligible for medical, dental, vision
and life insurance coverage the first of the month following 174 hours of eligible
service. Medical, dental, vision and life insurance benefits will be paid at 50% of
the City contribution for any permanent officer who has a Standard Hours
designation of at least forty hours but less than seventy-two hours in a pay

period in a benefits eligible, budgeted position.

48.1.3 Medical, dental, vision and life insurance benefits may be denied to
officers who are in a pay status for less than eighty (80) hours during a calendar
month by the withholding of City-paid premiums for the subsequent month.

31
48.1.4 Upon the effective date of this provision, officers shall be afforded the

following medical care benefits:

Benefit In Network
Type of Plan PPO
Deductible Individual, $150
Family, $450
Inpatient Hospital 80% after
deductible
Outpatient Hospital 80% after
deductible
Office Visit Co-Pay 80% after
deductible
Primary Care Co-Pay 80% after
deductible
Specialty Care Co-Pay 80% after
deductible
Diagnostic Lab & X-Ray 80% after
deductible
Emergency Room (co-pay _$50 co-pay, then
waived if admitted) 80%
Ambulance (no deductible) 80% of UCR
Alternative Care 80% after
(acupuncture, naturopaths, deductible

and chiropractor)
(chiropractor limited to 35

visits per year)

Diabetes Education/Self 80% / $1,000 annual

Management maximum
Smoking Cessation 80% / $500 annual
maximum
Well-Child Care 100%, no deductible
Adult Physical Exams 100%, no deductible
PSA Exams 100%, no deductible
Women’s Exams 100%, no deductible
Immunizations 100%, no deductible
Generic (30-day supply) 90%, $5 min - $ 35
max
Preferred (Brand) (30-day 80%, $5 min - $ 35
supply) max
Non-Preferred (Brand) (30-70%, $5 min - $ 35
day supply) max

32

Out Of Network

PPO

Individual, $450
Family, $1,350
60% of MPA after
deductible

60% of MPA after
deductible

60% of MPA after
deductible

60% of MPA after
deductible

60% of MPA after
deductible

60% of MPA after
deductible

$50 co-pay, then 60%
of UCR

80% of MPA
60% of MPA after
deductible

60% / $1,000 annual
maximum

60% / $500 annual
maximum

60% of MPA after
deductible

60% of MPA after
deductible

60% of MPA after
deductible

60% of MPA after
deductible

60% of MPA after
deductible

60% after deductible

60% after deductible

60% after deductible
Benefit In Network Out Of Network

Mail Order — 90 Day Supply 1 x copay to $50. N/A

max
Annual Out Of Pocket Individual, $1,000 Individual, $3,600
Maximum Family, $2,500 Family, $9,000
Opt-Out Rebates To Employee, $50
Employees Two Party, $90

Family, $125

48.1.5 The City shall provide to PPA members dental and vision coverage,
with benefit levels no less than the most generous benefit levels afforded to non-
represented employees.

48.1.6 Beginning in Plan year July 1, 2017, benefit levels under Articles
48.1.4 and 48.1.5 (the PPA CityNet Medical and Delta Dental plans) will
become self-insured. The benefit levels under Articles 48.1.4 and 48.1.5 will not
be reduced through the City’s move to self-insurance, unless through agreement
by the PPA and the City.

48.1.6.1 The City will set up an account establishing the PPA Health
Operating Fund. All active, retiree, COBRA and other continuation
participant premiums/other payments will be deposited in the PPA Health
Operating Fund and used for the payment of claims and all other costs
associated with the administration of the Fund. The City will not co-
mingle funds between the City Health Operating Fund and the PPA Health
Operating Fund related to the payments of claims, external carrier
administrative fees, and/or stop-loss insurance premiums.

48.1.6.2 The City will establish a retention reserve within the PPA Health
Operating Fund and will be funded through retention dollars held by Moda
Health, Inc. related to the insured medical and dental plans in place as of
June 30, 2017. All payments of retention dollars by MODA Health, Inc.
will be paid and deposited in the PPA Health Operating Fund no later than
December 31, 2018. The City will maintain the PPA Health Care
Operating Fund with adequate reserves to meet Fund obligations, unless
through agreement by the PPA and the City.

48.1.6.3, Excess reserves are the monies in the PPA Health Care
Operating Fund that are not needed to meet Fund obligations. Excess
reserves will remain in the PPA Health Care Operating Fund and will be
subject to separate reporting to the PPA.

48.1.6.4 The City will maintain the PPA Health Operating Fund and all
reserves associated with the Fund in an interest bearing account according
to City investment policy. Fund reserves will be pooled and will not be
allocated on an individual employee basis

48.1.6.5 To protect PPA Health Operating Fund assets, the City will
purchase stop-loss insurance and the City will include the premium cost in
the overall monthly rates as determined by tier.

33
48.1.6.6 The City will include external administrative fees in the overall
monthly rates as determined by tier and paid through the PPA Health
Operating Fund.

48.1.6.7 The City will provide the PPA with internal administrative fee
detail as part of each annual renewal. The internal administrative fee is set
by the City on an annual basis and is included in the monthly rates as
determined by tier. The internal rate is determined and calculated by the
City, provided to the actuary, and includes the following:

Personnel Costs

External Materials and Services

Internal Materials and Services

BOND ~— Debt Service contribution

City Overhead

All required health care local, state and federal taxes/fees
applicable to self-insured plan administration

© Any required Citywide assessment by City Council

48.1.6.8 Monthly rates by tier are set on an annual basis by the City’s
actuarial consultant through a collaborative and transparent process with
the PPA by March 15 of each calendar year. The PPA and the City will
establish regular meetings resulting in plan design recommendations
provided to City Council through the annual renewal of the City’s Health
Plan Document and related Summary Plan Descriptions. The City will
make available to the PPA all relevant information for the PPA Health
Operating Fund, including actuarial information, excess reserve
information, claims paid information, stop loss insurance information, and
administrative fee information. City Council shall retain the discretion to
implement or reject any of the recommendations.

48.1.6.9 The PPA will not grieve the City’s setting of monthly premium
rates (including medical, prescription, internal and external administrative
fees, and mandatory federal state fees/taxes of a self-insured plan). No
retroactive adjustments to the established rates will be made.

48.1.6.10 The benefit levels under Articles 48.1.4 and 48.1.5 will be
maintained, unless through agreement by the PPA and the City.

48.2 Plan Costs

48.2.1. The cost of the provision of the benefits listed in Articles 48.1.4 and
Article 48.1.5 shall be divided as follows: 95% of the costs shall be paid by the
City, and 5% of the costs shall be paid by the PPA member. For the purposes of
this article, “costs” and “premiums” shall be calculated based upon the PPA’s
claims data, together with administrative and other costs routinely taken into
account in calculating health care expenses.

34
48.2.2 Any portion of plan costs paid by officers under the terms of this article
shall be paid through a monthly payroll deduction.

48.2.3 City Contributions.
48.2.3.1 Effective July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2018.

48.2.3.1.1 Self-Insured Medical Plan effective Plan Year July 1,
2017 through June 30, 2018. Effective in Benefit Plan Year July 1,
2017 through June 30, 2018, the City shall contribute ninety-five
percent (95%) of the basic medical, vision and dental rates adopted
by City Council for the one party, two-party or family enrollees
(whichever applies) for each full-time regular employee who elects
the Self-Insured Medical Plan (benefits listed in Articles 48.1.4 and
48.1.5). The City reserves the right to expand family tier descriptions
if it is in the best interest of the employee enrollee and it has been
accepted by the PPA and subsequently approved by City Council.

48.2.3.1.2 Insured Kaiser Medical and Vision and Choice of
Dental Plan effective Plan Years July 1, 2017 through June 30,
2018. Effective in Benefit Plan Years July 1, 2017 through June 30,
2018, the City shall contribute for employees enrolled in the Insured
Kaiser Medical and Vision Plan and choice of dental plan for each
full-time regular employee, one hundred percent (100%) of the City
Contribution under article 48.2.1 for the one party, two-party or
family enrollees (whichever applies).

48.2.3.2. Effective July 1, 2017 and for subsequent plan years.

48.2.3.2.1 High Deductible Health Plan (HDHP) effective Plan
Year July 1, 2017. Beginning with Benefit Plan Year July 1, 2017,
and effective in subsequent plan years, the City shall contribute one
hundred percent (100%) of the medical and vision rates and ninety-
five percent (95%) of the dental rates adopted by the City Council
and elected by the employee for the one party, two party or family
enrollees (whichever applies) or any variation of the tiered rates
accepted by the PPA and subsequently approved by City Council, for
full-time regular employees who elect the HDHP.

48.2.3.3.1.1 Effective July 1, 2018 and for subsequent plan years.

48.2.3.3.2 Beginning with Benefit Plan year July 1, 2018, and
effective in subsequent plan years, the City shall contribute ninety-
five percent (95%) of the basic medical, vision and dental rates
adopted by the City Council and elected by the employee for the one
party, two party or family enrollees (whichever applies), or any
variation of the tiered rates accepted by the PPA and subsequently
approved by City Council, for each full-time regular employee who

35
elects the Self-Insured Medical Plan (benefits listed in Articles 48.1.4
and 48.1.5); provided the employee has received a preventive health
care examination within the prior three (3) full calendar year period
(from January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2017). In subsequent
plan years beginning July 1, 2019, the preventive health care
examination look back will be the prior two (2) full calendar year
period.

48.2.3.3.3 Beginning with Benefit Plan year July 1, 2018 and
effective in subsequent plan years, the City shall contribute for
employees enrolled in the Insured Kaiser Medical and Vision Plan
and choice of dental plan for each full-time regular employee, one
hundred percent (100%) of the City Contribution under article 48.2.1
for the one party, two-party or family enrollees (whichever applies);
provided the employee has received a preventive health care
examination within the prior three (3) full calendar year period (from
January I, 2015 through December 31, 2017). In subsequent plan
years beginning July 1, 2019, the preventive health care examination
look back will be the prior two (2) full calendar year period.

48.2.3.3.4 Beginning with Benefit Plan year July 1, 2018, and
effective in subsequent plan years, the City shall contribute ninety
percent (90%) of the basic medical, vision and dental rates adopted
by the City Council for each full-time regular employee who has
elected the Self-Insured Medical Plan (benefits listed in Articles
48.1.4 and 48.1.5) and who has not received a preventive health care
examination within the prior three (3) full calendar year period (from
January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2017). In subsequent plan
years beginning July 1, 2019, the preventive health care examination
look back will be the prior two (2) full calendar year period.

48.2.3.3.5 Beginning with Benefit Plan year July 1, 2018 and
effective in subsequent plan years, the City shall contribute one
hundred percent (100%) of the City’s ninety percent (90%)
contribution under Article 48.2.3.3.3 for each full-time regular
employee who has elected the Insured Kaiser Medical and Vision
Plan and choice of dental plan and who has not received a preventive
health care examination within the prior three (3) full calendar year
period (from January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2017). In
subsequent plan years beginning July 1, 2019, the preventive health
care examination look back will be the prior two (2) full calendar
year period.

48.2.3.3.6 Beginning with Benefit Plan year July 1, 2018, and
effective in subsequent plan years, the City shall contribute ninety-
five percent (95%) for newly hired full-time employees who elect the
Self-Insured Medical Plan (benefits listed in Articles 48.1.4 and

36
48.1.5). Newly hired full-time employees will have one (1) full
calendar year after being hired to receive a preventive health
examination to retain the City’s ninety-five (95%) contribution. The
City shall contribute ninety percent (90%) for the Self-Insured
Medical Plan in the subsequent plan year for each newly hired full-
time employee who does not receive a preventive health examination
within the first full calendar year of service after being hired.

For example, for an employee hired in November 2018, the City
will contribute 95% through June 30, 2020. If the new employee
receives a preventive health care examination in calendar year
2019, the City’s 95% contribution will continue effective July 1,
2020. If the newly hired employee did not receive a preventive
health care examination in calendar year 2019, then the City’s
contribution level would change to 90% effective July 1, 2020.

48.2.3.3.7 Beginning with Benefit Plan year July I, 2018, and
effective in subsequent plan years, the City shall contribute one
hundred (100%) of the City Contribution under Article 48.2.1 for
newly hired full-time employees who elect the Insured Kaiser
Medical and Vision Plan and choice of dental plan. Newly hired
employees will have one (1) full calendar year after being hired to
receive a preventive health examination to retain the City’s
contributions. The City will make contributions as applicable and
described in 48.2.3.3.4 in the subsequent plan year for each newly
hired full-time employee who does not receive a preventive health
examination within the first calendar year of service after being
hired.

48.2.3.4 City and Employee Contributions for Part-Time
Employees. Contributions for part-time regular employees are governed
by this Article. Once plan rates for each benefit year have been adopted
by the City Council, the respective City and Employee contribution
amounts shall be computed and the Unien PPA shall be provided written
notice of the amounts.

48.2.4 Employee Contributions.
48.2.4.1 Effective July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2018.

48.2.4.1.1 Self-Insured Medical Plan effective Plan Year
July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2018. Effective in Benefit Plan Year
July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2018, each payday, except for the third
payday in a month, each full-time regular employee who elects the
Self-Insured Medical Plan (benefits listed in Articles 48.1.4 and
48.1.5) shall contribute five percent (5%) of the total basic medical,

37
vision and dental rates by applicable tier and adopted by City
Council.

48.2.3.1.2 Insured Kaiser Medical and Vision and Choice of
Dental Plan effective Plan Years July 1, 2017 through June 30,
2018. Effective in Benefit Plan Years July 1, 2017 through June 30,
2018, each payday, except for the third payday in a month, each full-
time regular employee who elects the Insured Kaiser Medical and
Vision Plan and choice of dental plan shall receive 100% of the City
Contribution under article 48.2.1 for the one party, two-party or
family enrollees (whichever applies).

48.2.3.2 Effective July 1, 2017 and for subsequent plan years.

48.2.3.2.1 High Deductible Health Plan (HDHP) effective
Plan Year July 1, 2017. Beginning with Benefit Plan Year July 1,
2017, and effective in subsequent plan years, each payday, except for
the third payday in a month, each full-time regular employee who
elects the HDHP plan shall contribute zero percent (0%) of the total
medical and vision rates, and five percent (5%) of the dental rates
adopted by City Council for the applicable tier (whichever applies).

48.2.4.3 Effective July 1, 2018 and for subsequent plan years.

48.2.4.3.1 Beginning with Benefit Plan year July 1, 2018, and
effective in subsequent plan years, each payday, except for the third
payday in a month, each full-time regular employee who elects the
Self-Insured Medical Plan (benefits listed in Articles 48.1.4 and
48.1.5) shall contribute five percent (5%) of the total medical, vision
and dental rates adopted by City Council for the applicable tier
(whichever apply); provided the employee has received a preventive
health care examination within the prior three (3) full calendar year
period (January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2017). In subsequent
plan years beginning July 1, 2019, the preventive health care
examination look back will be the prior two (2) full calendar year
period.

48.2.4.3.2 Beginning with Benefit Plan year July 1, 2018 and
effective in subsequent plan years, each payday, except for the third
payday in a month, each full-time regular employee who elects the
Kaiser Medical and Vision Plan and dental plan choice shall receive
100% of the City Contribution under article 48.2.1 for the applicable
tier (whichever applies); provided the employee has received a
preventive health care examination within the prior three (3) full
calendar year period (January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2017).
In subsequent plan years beginning July 1, 2019, the preventive

38
health care examination look back will be within the prior two (2)
calendar year period

48.2.4.3.3 Beginning with Benefit Plan year July 1, 2018, and
effective in subsequent plan years, each payday, except for the third
payday in a month, each full-time regular employee who elects the
Self-Insured Medical Plan (benefits listed in Articles 48.1.4 and
48.1.5), shall contribute ten percent (10%) of the total medical, vision
and dental rates adopted by City Council for the applicable tier
(whichever apply) if the employee has not received a preventive
health examination within the prior three (3) full calendar year period
(January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2017). In subsequent plan
years beginning July 1, 2019, the preventive health care examination
look back will be within the prior two (2) full calendar year period.

48.2.4.3.4 Beginning with Benefit Plan year July 1, 2018 and
effective in subsequent plan years, each payday, except for the third
payday in a month, each full-time regular employee who elects the
Insured Kaiser Medical and Vision Plan and choice of dental plan,
shall receive one hundred percent (100%) of the ninety percent
(90%) of the City Contribution under article 48.2.3.3.3 for the
applicable tier (whichever apply) if the employee has not received a
preventive health examination within the prior three (3) full calendar
year period (January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2017). In
subsequent plan years beginning July 1, 2019, the preventive health
care examination look back will be within the prior two (2) full
calendar year period.

48.2.4.3.5 Beginning with Benefit Plan year July 1, 2018, and
effective in subsequent plan years, each payday, except for the third
payday in a month, each newly hired full-time regular employee who
elects the Self-Insured Medical Plan (benefits listed in Articles 48.1.4
and 48.1.5) shall contribute five percent (5%) of the total medical,
vision and dental rates adopted by City Council for the applicable tier
(whichever apply). Newly hired full-time employees will have one
(1) full calendar year after being hired to receive a preventive health
examination to retain the employee’s five percent (5%) contribution.
Newly hired full-time regular employees will contribute ten percent
(10%) for the Self-Insured Medical Plan in the subsequent plan year
for each newly hired full-time employee who does not receive a
preventive health examination within the first full calendar year of
service after being hired.

For example, for an employee hired in November 2018, the
employee will contribute 5% through June 30, 2020. If the new
employee receives a preventive health care examination in
calendar year 2019, the employee’s 5% contribution will continue

39
effective July 1, 2020. If the newly hired employee did not
receive a preventive health care examination in calendar year
2019, then the employee’s contribution level would change to
10% effective July 1, 2020.

48.2.4.3.6 Beginning with Benefit Plan year July 1, 2018, and
effective in subsequent plan years, each payday, except for the third
payday in a month, each full-time regular employee who elects the
Insured Kaiser Medical and Vision Plan and choice of dental plan,
shall receive one hundred (100%) of the City Contribution under
Article 48.2.1. Newly hired employees will have one (1) full calendar
year after being hired to receive a preventive health examination to
retain the City’s contributions. The City will make contributions as
applicable and described in 48.2.4.3.4 in the subsequent plan year for
each newly hired full-time employee who does not receive a
preventive health examination within the first calendar year of
service after being hired.

48.3. Domestic Partner Benefit. The benefits described in Article 48.2 shall
include domestic partner coverage.

48.4 Retiree and Survivor Benefits

48.4.1 The City shall make available to a retired officer, spouse and children,
or to the surviving spouse and children, or to the surviving spouse, the same
medical, dental, and vision benefits offered to active officers. The cost of the
plans shall be borne by the retiree or the retiree’s spouse.

48.4.2 In order to be eligible to receive the retiree health coverage provided
for herein, the retiree must have had coverage under one of the City’s active
employee health plans in the month preceding the retiree’s retirement. Retiree
health coverage must be requested within 60 days of retirement unless the
retiree/spouse has had other employer-sponsored group coverage continuously
between the retiree’s effective date of retirement and the date when the coverage
described above is to commence.

48.4.3 Coverage shall continue to be available to a retired officer until the
retiree becomes eligible for federal Medicare coverage. Coverage shall continue
to be available to a retiree’s surviving spouse until the spouse is eligible for
federal Medicare coverage. Dependent coverage for the retiree’s unmarried
children shall continue to be available until the retiree’s child reaches the age of
majority under the applicable health plan. In the event that any coverage
provided to a retiree or a retiree’s surviving spouse is terminated by the
retiree/surviving spouse prior to the time the retiree/surviving spouse becomes
eligible for federal Medicare coverage, the future availability of such coverage
will be contingent upon the retiree or retiree’s surviving spouse maintaining
continuous coverage through some other employer-sponsored group health plan
between the date of termination and the date the retiree or retiree’s surviving
spouse wishes to re-enroll in a City-provided health plan.

40
48.4.4 A retiree or a retiree’s surviving spouse who elects to participate in an
insured health plan maintained by the City (e.g., Kaiser) will pay rates charged
by the insurer for participants in their age group. If the insurer charges a higher
rate for participants who are over 65, the City will allow the participant to switch
to its City Net plan. A retiree or a retiree’s spouse who elects participation in a
City Net health plan offered by the City will pay the rate charged for active
employees.

48.5. The City shall provide to the spouse and dependent children of an officer who
is killed on the job, the same medical, dental and vision benefit plans available to
active officers. The City agrees to continue the City contribution for the spouse and
dependent children until the spouse reaches age sixty-five, remarries, or becomes
Medicare eligible, whichever comes first, and for each dependent child to the age
which meets the eligibility requirements of the health plan in which they are enrolled.
The promise of the City to provide insured plans is dependent upon the continuing
availability of such plans from an insurance carrier and the qualification by the
retired officer with the plan while the retiree was employed with the City. Should an
insurance carrier terminate the plan, the City shall attempt to replace it.

48.6 Life Insurance

48.6.1 The City shall provide each officer with a life insurance policy; said
policy shall be secured and maintained in accordance with the City’s existing
practices,

48.6.2 The value of the policy shall be no less than $50,000.

48.6.3. The City shall make available supplemental life coverage on a
voluntary, employee paid basis.

48.7. Deferred Compensation. The City shall allow officers under this contract to
participate in the Deferred Compensation Program that is currently available to
officers. However, if the program is determined not to be allowable as a tax deferral
under the Internal Revenue Code, the participating officer shall hold the City and
the unions harmless against any and all claims, demands, or other forms of liability
arising as a result of any invalidation of the terms and conditions of the Program.

48.8 Federal Health Legislation. If the Federal Government enacts federal health
legislation, or if any taxing authority taxes or otherwise limits or restricts health
care benefits paid by the City, the City and the Association will immediately
negotiate on the effect of that legislation as it pertains to this Article.

48.9 Tax Sheltering. The City shall offer to PPA members the opportunity to

participate in tax sheltering and/or avoidance health care programs and accounts,
under the same terms and conditions provided to non-represented employees.

41
ARTICLE 49

CONTINUATION OF CITY-PAID HEALTH AND
WELFARE BENEFITS TO OFFICERS WHO ARE
INJURED ON THE JOB OR WHO HAVE AN
OCCUPATIONAL ILLNESS OR INJURY

49.1 Officers who incur an on-the-job injury or service connected disability shall
continue to receive City-paid medical, dental, vision and life insurance continuation
for themselves and their eligible dependents for twenty-four months while on non-
paid status. Thereafter, the officer is responsible for payment of medical, dental,
vision and life premiums.

49.2 The City shall pay no more than a total of twenty-four (24) months of
benefits (medical, dental, vision, life) per injury or disability in a thirty-six (36)
month period from the date of the initial injury or disability. The City shall only be
responsible for the City’s share of any premium due.

49.2.1 Example A: Officer “A” incurs a service-connected injury “A’s” hand.
“A” is off work for sixteen months. City-paid benefits continue while “A” is off
work. Two years after the initial injury, “A” re-injures “A’s” hand and is off for
nine months. The City will continue “A’s” benefits (medical, dental, vision,
life) for the first eight months. “A” is responsible for self-paying “A’s” benefits
for the ninth month if the officer wishes to continue benefits.

49.2.2 Example B: Officer “B” incurs a service-connected disability. “B” is
off work for twenty-six months. City-paid benefits continue for the first twenty-
four months while “B” is off work. “B” returns to work. Four years after the
initial disability, “B” is again disabled and is off work for six months. City-paid
benefits continue while “B” is off work.

49.2.3. Example C: Officer “C” incurs a service-connected injury to “C’s”
hand. “C” is off work for twenty-four months. City-paid benefits continue while
“C” is off work. Two years after the first injury, “C” injures “C’s” leg and is off
for nine months. City-paid benefits continue while “C” is off work.

49.3. If an officer is medically separated from service due to personal injury
suffered as a direct result of a traumatic injury sustained while on duty on or after
the ratification of this Agreement while responding to an emergency situation, in a
hot pursuit, or in an on-duty traffic accident, the City shall pay for the medical,
dental, vision and life insurance premiums for the officer, and the medical, dental
and vision insurance premiums for the officer’s eligible dependents, for the
duration of the disability as limited below. Traumatic injury means a wound or a
condition of the body caused by external force, including injuries inflicted by
bullets, explosives, sharp instruments, blunt objects or other physical blows,
chemicals, electricity, climatic conditions, infectious diseases, radiation and
bacteria, but excluding stress and strain.

42
49.3.1 Medically separated means the officer has been determined to be
medically stationary and unable to perform the officer’s required duties two
years after the date of injury.

49.3.1.1 If the officer is not medically stationary two years after the date
of injury the officer shall be considered to be medically separated under
the following conditions:

49.3.1.1.1 The officer remains unable to perform the officer’s
required duties; and

49.3.1.1.2 The bureau has received information from the FPD&R.
or the Worker’s Compensation Department that the officer is incapable
of any substantial gainful activity; and

49.3.1.1.3 The officer cooperates in treatment of the disability or in
vocational rehabilitation; and

49.31.14 The officer agrees to submit to an independent medical
and/or vocational assessment at the discretion of the bureau; and

49.3.1.1.5 The officer signs any necessary release(s) to the
FPD&R, the Worker’s Compensation Department and treatment
providers to allow the bureau to verify any of the requirements in
49.3.1 above.

49.3.2. If the officer is not medically stationary sooner, the officer shall
be treated as medically stationary for purposes of Article 49.3 on the fourth
anniversary of the date of disability, regardless of the officer’s condition and
shall be considered medically separated from the City on that date.

49.3.3. Traumatic injury means a wound or a condition of the body
caused by external force, including injuries inflicted by bullets, explosives,
sharp instruments, blunt objects or other physical blows, chemicals,
electricity, climatic conditions, infectious diseases, radiation and bacteria, but
excluding stress and strain.

49.3.4 The provisions of Section 49.3 shall not apply if:

49.3.4.1 The personal injury is the result of stress; strain; occupational
illness; or a chronic, progressive, or congenital disease (such as heart or
pulmonary disease), unless there is a traumatic injury that is a substantial
contributing factor to the personal injury; or

49.3.4.2 The personal injury is caused by the intentional misconduct of the
officer; or

49.3.4.3 The officer was voluntarily intoxicated or under the influence of
a controlled substance at the time the officer received the personal injury;
or

49.3.4.4 The officer was performing the officer’s duties in a grossly
negligent manner at the time of the personal injury.

43
49.3.5 Inorder to be eligible for this insurance benefit, the officer must
be incapable of engaging in employment in a job which pays a salary or
produces income equivalent to 50% of the current top wage in the
classification the officer held at the time of the traumatic injury.

49.3.6 The determination of whether an officer is capable of
employment under Article 49.3.2 will be made through a vocational
assessment conducted by a vocational rehabilitation specialist contracted to
perform such assessments by the City.

49.3.7 The insurance benefit provided in this section shall be
subordinated to other health insurance covering the officer, including
Medicare.

49.3.8 The obligation of the City to provide the insurance benefit to the
officer and the officer’s eligible dependents ceases when:

49.3.8.1 The officer is able to return to work as an officer; or

49.3.8.2 The officer becomes capable of engaging in employment in a job
which pays a salary or produces income equivalent to 50% of the current
top wage in the classification the officer held at the time of the traumatic
injury; or

49.3.8.3 The officer is otherwise eligible to retire.

49.3.8.4 The parties agree that for purposes of Article 49.3.8, the officer
shall cooperate with City requests for annual medical updates and semi-
annual earnings information. In order to avoid duplication of effort, this
may include signing necessary releases to obtain the required information
from the FPD&R or the Worker’s Compensation Department.

49.3.9 If the City’s obligation to provide the insurance benefit to an officer
ceases under Article 48.3.8.2, and the officer’s condition subsequently
changes to where the officer is again not capable of engaging in employment
which pays a salary or produces an income equivalent to 50% of the current
top step wage in the classification the officer held at the time of traumatic
injury, the officer’s benefits under this article will be reinstated assuming the
officer is not disqualified under Article 49.3.8.1, 49.3.8.3 or 49.3.8.4.

49.3.10 Notwithstanding any other provision of Article 49.3, a disabled
officer receiving or eligible to receive benefits under Article 49.3 shall not
receive any such benefit under the following conditions:

49.3.10.1 If the officer is discharged; or

49.3.10.2 For any periods of time during which the member is
incarcerated subsequent to and for the conviction of a crime.

49.4. An injury or occupational illness is considered service connected if it is an
accepted worker’s compensation claim for PERS participants or is determined to be
service connected by the Fire and Police Disability and Retirement Fund.

44
49.5 PERS officers who have a deferred worker’s compensation claim will be
treated as if they have an accepted worker’s compensation claim for purposes of
City-paid medical, dental, vision, and life premiums. If an officer’s claim is
accepted, they will be eligible to receive up to a total of twenty-four months of
City-paid coverage as described in section 49.2 above. If an officer’s claim is
denied, City-paid coverage will continue through the end of the month in which the
denial is issued.

49.6. An officer who has a non-service connected disability or injury is eligible to
participate in City group benefits (medical, dental and vision) at City group rates
until Medicare eligible, no longer disabled, termination, or they fail to make the
required premium payment. Officers shall be responsible for payment of premiums
including any administrative charges that the City is entitled to charge self-any
participants under federal and or state law.

ARTICLE 50
DOMESTIC PARTNERS

50.1 For purposes of this Agreement, the word “spouse” shall include “domestic
partners”, as that term is defined by the Labor-Management Benefits Committee.

ARTICLE 51
LIABILITY INSURANCE

51.1 The City agrees to provide adequate liability protection for police officers.

ARTICLE 52
LEGAL FEES

52.1 The City agrees to reimburse an officer or the Association for all reasonable,
usual and customary legal fees charged by an attorney as a direct result of criminal
charges or a criminal investigation arising out of the officer's involvement in
actions in the performance of their duty as a police officer.

52.2 The reimbursement will not be made if:

52.2.1 The officer is convicted by verdict or plea, or pleads no contest to
criminal charges arising out of the incident; or

52.2.2 The Bureau sustains disciplinary charges on the basis of the officer’s
actions which formed the basis for the possible criminal liability, and the
Bureau’s sustaining of the charges is upheld on any appeal of discipline.

52.3 Any reimbursement required shall be made only at the conclusion of all
criminal and disciplinary proceedings against the officer arising out of the incident.

52.4 To receive reimbursement under this Article, the officer must select one

45
attorney from a list of no less than ten (10) that has been mutually agreed upon by
the Portland Police Association and the City Attorney. Neither party shall
unreasonably oppose the inclusion of an attorney on the list. Within sixty (60) days
of the execution of this Agreement, the Association shall submit to the City
Attorney the names of the attorneys it proposes for inclusion on the list. If the City
Attorney does not object to an attorney on the list within ten (10) working days, the
attorney shall be included on the list. The names on the list shall be reviewed every
six months upon the request of either party. If no attorney on the list is available to
represent an officer, the officer may obtain another attorney, and if the Association
notifies the City of the selected attorney by the close of the next working day, the
City shall reimburse the officer for the Attorney’s fees provided all other
requirements of this Article are met.

52.5. Before becoming obligated under this Article, the City shall be presented
with a sworn affidavit by the attorney listing an hourly breakdown of time spent
and describing briefly the purpose of such time. If the City in its discretion feels the
charges exceed reasonable, usual and customary fees normally charged, the City
may submit the bill to the Oregon State Bar Association for review. The Oregon
State Bar Association’s determination will be final and binding for the City’s
obligation under this Article.

ARTICLE 53
FUNERAL EXPENSES

53.1 In the event an officer is killed in the line of duty, or dies from injuries
sustained in the line of duty, the City shall pay the sum of twelve thousand dollars
($12,000.00) toward funeral and connected expenses to the officer’s surviving
spouse (or, if none, to the officer’s heirs), regardless of amounts paid from other
sources.

ARTICLE 54
SHIFT AND DAY OFF TRADES

54.1 Subject to prior supervisory approval, and consistent with the Fair Labor
Standards Act, non-probationary officers within the same classification shall be
allowed to voluntarily trade days off and/or shifts. Supervisory approval shall not
be unreasonably denied. The City shall not incur overtime solely as a result of the
trade. Trades shall be in minimum increments of half shifts, and shall be on a
temporary basis. Officers who use their seniority to obtain a holiday off may not
trade with another officer and subsequently work the holiday.

54.2 The Association and the City agree to the principle that there should be the
option available for job sharing and part-time work. Should the parties receive a
request for job sharing or part-time work, the parties agree to immediately meet to
develop the terms and condition of the work.

46
ARTICLE 55
SHIFT AND ALTERNATIVE SHIFT SCHEDULES

55.1 Officers assigned to and working Night Shift shall observe any holiday leave
to which they are entitled on the day before the City’s observed holiday.

55.2. Officers assigned to and working Night Shift shall receive a Shift Differential
premium of four percent (4%) for all hours worked, and officers assigned to and
working Afternoon Shift shall receive a Shift Differential premium of two percent
(2%) for all hours worked.

55.2.1 Any shift that begins between 1200 and 1859 shall be designated
as an Afternoon Shift. Any shift that begins between 1900 and 0259 shall be
designated as a Night Shift.

55.2.2. The shift differential premium shall be included in calculating the
overtime rate for officers designated to work Afternoon or Night Shift for a
pay period or more and shall be paid on all overtime, including all court-
related overtime; however, the shift differential premium will not be included
in Special Duty overtime pay under Article 57.2.

55.2.3 The shift differential premium will not be paid on hours not
worked, including sick leave, vacation leave, administrative leave, and leave

without pay.

55.2.4 Officers who are temporarily assigned to an Afternoon or Night
Shift for a pay period or more shall receive the shift differential premium as
set forth above in paragraphs 55.2 and 55.2.1 through 55.2.3.

55.3. Should the Chief of Police decide to implement a Four-Ten schedule for
certain units within the Police Bureau, such schedule will consist of four (4) ten-
hour days, or eight (8) days per pay period. Any time worked over ten (10) hours
per shift, or forty (40) hours per week, will be considered as overtime.

ARTICLE 56
RETRAINING PROVISIONS

56.1 In the event of an involuntary transfer of a member from one function to
another function, or a transfer due to the phasing out of a particular function, the
officer will be given adequate training to become proficient in the newly-assigned
function.

47
ARTICLE 57
EXTRA EMPLOYMENT

57.1 Secondary Employment. Officers other than probationary police officers
shall be allowed to engage in secondary employment, subject to the following
conditions:

57.1.1 Officers shall obtain an extra employment permit before
engaging in secondary employment. If the Bureau disapproves of the type of
outside employment requested by the officer, the officer shall not engage in
the outside employment unless the Bureau’s decision is subsequently
changed or overturned.

57.1.2. The outside employment shall not pose a conflict of interest with
Bureau employment.

57.1.3. The outside employment shall not detract from the officer’s
performance as a Bureau employee.

57.1.4 The officer’s Bureau employment must always remain the
officer’s primary job.

57.1.5 No officer shall work more than 20 hours per week of secondary
employment. Excluded from the twenty (20) hours is vacation,
compensatory, or holiday time an officer takes off to work at an off duty job
(ie., an officer could take forty (40) hours vacation and work forty (40) hours
plus the allowed twenty (20) hours for a total of sixty (60) hours of work in
the secondary employment during a week).

57.1.6 If the officer challenges the denial of a request for secondary
employment, the officer shall have the burden of proving that the City’s
decision was arbitrary and capricious. The parties agree to reassess this
standard of proof when the contract is next open for negotiations.

57.2. Special Duty for Second Employers. During the term of this Agreement,
the Bureau shall implement a system whereby officers other than probationary
police officers are allowed to perform special duty work for a second employer. For
the purposes of this Agreement, “special duty work” shall mean uniform or non-
uniform work outside the officer’s regular shift contracted by the Bureau with
secondary employers. The Bureau shall have the discretion to design the system,
subject to the following limitations:

57.2.1 The Association shall be responsible for the scheduling of the
special duty work. Officers desiring special duty work shall notify the
Association of the days of the week and hours on which they will be
available for work, and of any particular type of work they do not desire to
perform.

48
57.2.2 The Association shall allocate the work on a rotating basis to
officers who have indicated a desire to perform special duty work. When an
officer has worked special duty, the officer shall be dropped to the bottom of
the rotation list. If the special duty employer requests officers with special
skills, the work shall be allocated to the individuals highest on the rotation list
who possess the special skills. The Bureau has the right to honor a special
duty employer’s request that a particular officer or officers not be assigned
the requested special duty work. Disputes concerning the manner in which
the Association administers its responsibility to schedule officers for special
duty work shall be raised exclusively with the Association, and shall not be
subject to the grievance procedure in this Agreement. The City shall have the
right to refuse to assign an officer special duty work if the special duty work
detracts from the officer’s performance as a Bureau employee, or if the
special duty work is inconsistent with the officer’s employment status with
the Bureau (e.g., the officer is on disability status). The City shall not be
liable to officers for good-faith mistakes in the allocation of special duty
work.

57.2.3. The Bureau reserves the right to establish reasonable
qualifications for specific types of special duty work.

57.2.4 Special duty work shall be performed at no lower hourly rate of
pay than that received by a straight-time top-step police officer without
regard to the rank of the officer performing the work. However, if the Bureau
determines that a sergeant should be assigned, and the sergeant performs
supervisory duties while on special duty, the hourly rate of pay for the
sergeant shall be no lower than the hourly rate of pay received by a straight-
time top-step sergeant. If no sergeant is willing to perform the work, the
officer working in the sergeant’s role shall be paid no lower than the hourly
rate of pay received by a straight-time top-step sergeant.

57.2.5 The Bureau shall provide portable radios to each officer
performing special duty work.

57.2.6 Officers shall remain employees of the City of Portland while
performing special duty work.

57.2.7 If particular special duty work requires specialized training, and
if the Bureau either conducts or coordinates the training, officers who have
indicated an interest in the work which requires the specialized training shall
be selected for the training in the order of seniority. The Bureau reserves the
right to establish the appropriate number of officers necessary to be trained in
order to fill the needs of the second employer.

57.2.8 All special duty work shall be voluntary.

57.2.9 No officer shall work more than 20 hours per week of special
duty work. Excluded from the twenty (20) hours is vacation, compensatory,

49
or holiday time an officer takes off to work at an off-duty job (i.e., an officer
could take forty (40) hours vacation and work forty (40) hours plus the
allowed twenty (20) hours for a total of sixty (60) hours of work at the special
duty job during a week).

57.2.10 No officer shall solicit special duty work from a special duty
employer.

57.2.11 For purposes of retirement under Chapter 5 of the Portland City
Charter (Fire and Police Disability, Retirement and Death Benefit Plan),
special duty work outside of an officer’s regular work hours constitutes
overtime. In the event that the Board of Trustees includes special duty pay in
“base pay” for purposes of retirement under Chapter 5, the parties agree to
meet and negotiate a substitute provision.

57.2.12 For purposes of retirement under the Public Employee
Retirement System (PERS), special duty work for a second employer is not
intended to constitute “salary”. In the event that PERS determines that special
duty work for a second employer requires employer/employee contributions
to PERS, the parties agree to meet and negotiate a substitute provision.

57.2.13 In the event that the U.S. Department of Labor or the Oregon
State Wage and Hour Division finds any provision of the special duty section
of this Article to be in violation of federal or state wage and hour provisions,
the parties agree to meet and negotiate a substitute provision.

57.2.14 The Bureau shall be responsible for negotiating all special duty
contracts with second employers. When the Bureau receives a request for
special duty work from a second employer with whom a contract has been
reached, the Bureau shall notify the Association of the request. If the
Association receives a request for special duty work directly from a second
employer, the Association shall notify the Bureau of the request and shall
ensure that the City has reached a contract with the special duty employer
before it allocates the work in question.

57.2.15 The parties recognize that the Association’s role in administering
this Article will require the expenditure of the time of Association officers as
well as miscellaneous additional expenses. For these reasons, and because the
parties jointly recognize that the special duty employment of police officers
will be of benefit to the City, the City agrees to assign the Association’s
Secretary-Treasurer to the Association's office for the purpose of
administering this Article. The Association agrees to reimburse the City for
50% of the Association Secretary-Treasurer’s police salary and fringe
benefits, as those terms have been applied in Article 11 of this Agreement.
The Secretary-Treasurer shall continue to accrue sick leave and vacation
hours at the rates called for by this collective bargaining agreement. The City
shall bill the Association for half the salary of the Secretary-Treasurer. At the
conclusion of the Secretary-Treasurer’s term of office, the City shall bill the

50
Association for 50% of the dollar value of the difference between the
Secretary-Treasurer’s then-current vacation accrual and the Secretary-
Treasurer’s vacation accrual as of the time the Secretary-Treasurer assumed
office.

57.2.16 The City and the Association, by mutual written agreement, may
terminate the use of the Association to schedule the special duty work at any
time. The City, on sixty (60) days written notice to the Association, may
terminate the use of the Association to schedule the special duty work
because of the Association’s failure to adequately perform its responsibilities
under this section. Should the City elect to terminate the use of the
Association to schedule the special duty work, the Association may challenge
such decision by submitting a grievance directly to the arbitration step of the
grievance procedure in this Agreement.

ARTICLE 58
FIREARMS AND PROTECTIVE VESTS

Firearms.

58.1.1 The City agrees to furnish all newly-hired officers with a duty
firearm upon their date of hire.

58.1.2 Current officers who have purchased their own Glock duty
firearms from the City and who qualified with the weapon as a primary duty
weapon up through the Winter 1994 qualification shall continue to carry their
personally-owned weapons. The Bureau shall be responsible for the
maintenance and repair of the personally-owned weapons and for the
replacement of the weapons if they are lost or stolen. If an officer who carries
their personally-owned weapon changes duty assignment to a position where
the carrying of a different model weapon is more suitable to the assignment,
the Bureau shall furnish the officer with the different model weapon.
Disputes as to which model weapon is suitable to an assignment shall be
resolved by the Safety Committee. If the safety committee is unable to decide
the matter, the final decision will be left to the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee.

58.1.3. When an officer whose duty firearm has been purchased by the
City retires, the officer shall be allowed the option of purchasing the firearm
from the City at the price originally paid for the firearm by the City.

58.1.4 Modification of weapons allowable under Bureau rules (e.g., the
addition of night sights or the installation of different magazines) shall be
performed by the Bureau; the officer requesting the modification shall be
responsible for paying the cost of hardware used in the modification.

58.1.5 Officers shall have an opportunity to purchase additional
Sl
59.1

weapons from the City at the City’s costs pursuant to the terms set forth in
the Bureau’s rules.

Vests.
58.2.1 The City shall furnish protective vests to each officer.

58.2.2 The vests provided by the City must meet or exceed the
recommended standards set by the Safety Committee. However, the final
decision will be left to the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee. However,
the vest provided by the bureau must meet or exceed the ballistic threat level
of bureau-issued sidearm ammunition for day-to-day use by patrol officers.

58.2.3 Vests shall be replaced by the City in accordance with the
manufacturer’s recommended replacement schedule or when the vest fails, is
damaged, or is rendered non-usable. If an officer desires to upgrade a vest
before the vest is due to be replaced, the officer shall be responsible for
paying the entire cost of the upgraded vest.

58.2.4 If an officer chooses to purchase the officer’s own vest, and if the
City approves of the vest for use on duty, the City shall issue the officer a chit
or purchase order in the amount the City pays for the vest it most commonly
issues to its officers. If the additional cost of the vest is due to the vest not
fitting the officer, the City shall pay the entire cost of the vest. Disputes as to
whether an issued vest fits shall be resolved by a recommendation from the
Safety Committee. However, the final decision will be left to the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee.

58.2.5 Upon separation from employment, officers shall return to the
City vests the City has provided. If the City requests that an officer return a
vest provided under section 58.2.4, above, the City shall reimburse the officer
for any additional cost of the vest paid by the officer in excess of the chit or
purchase order issued by the City.

ARTICLE 59
PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS

Performance evaluations are not a disciplinary tool and shall not serve as the

basis for discipline, discharge, demotion, or involuntary transfer.

59.2

Performance evaluations shall not be used in any fashion to impact an

officer’s contractual pay increases, including without limitation premiums, step
increases, raises, and cost-of-living adjustments. However, for the limited purpose
of promotions, the City may use annual performance evaluations as a basis to
promote where all other promotional criteria are basically equal.

59.3

All performance evaluations shall be in writing. Criteria for performance

52
evaluations shall be clearly defined. Performance evaluations shall not include
references to acts of alleged misconduct that were investigated and not sustained, or
sustained and reversed on appeal.

59.4 All performance evaluations shall be conducted by the officer’s immediate
supervisor.

59.5. The City shall notify the officer in writing before placing a performance
evaluation in the officer’s personnel and supervisor’s file, including without
limitation the officer’s 201, 201 Field, and Bureau of Human Resources files.

59.6 Before a performance evaluation is placed in an officer’s personnel file or a
supervisor’s file, the officer shall have the right to provide a written response to the
performance evaluation within fifteen (15) days of the officer’s receipt of the
performance evaluation. The officer’s written response shall be placed with the
performance evaluation in the officer’s personnel file or supervisor’s file.

59.7. While performance evaluations are not grievable, it is understood that the
union representative may consult with the rating officer concerning a challenged
non-probationary evaluation report.

ARTICLE 60
SAFETY COMMITTEE

60.1 A sworn safety committee consisting of a total of nine represented and non-
represented employees shall confer on City time with a view to maintaining safe
equipment and safe working conditions. There shall be five represented employees:
four appointed by and representing the Portland Police Association and one
appointed by and representing the Portland Police Commanding Officers’
Association.

60.2 Ifthe committee meets on the time off of Association appointees, the shifts
and/or days off of the Association appointees shall be adjusted to allow the
appointees to attend the meeting on on-duty time.

60.3. The committee shall have co-chairs; one each selected by represented and
non-represented employees. Among the members of the sworn safety committee, at
least one member each from the City, the Association and the PPCOA shall also
serve as liaisons to the Police Bureau’s standing safety committee. The parties shall
ensure that one member each of the sworn safety committee shall have the
following assignments: (1) North Precinct; (2) Central Precinct; (3 East Precinct;
(4) Traffic Division; and (5) Investigations Branch.

60.4 The committee shall meet monthly.

53
ARTICLE 61

PORTLAND POLICE OFFICERS’ BILL OF RIGHTS
PREAMBLE

61.1 All officers within the bargaining unit shall be entitled to the protection of
what shall hereafter be termed as the “Portland Police Officers’ Bill of Rights”. The
wide ranging powers and duties given to the Bureau and its members on and off
duty involve them in all manner of contacts and relationships with the public. Of
these contacts come many questions concerning the action of members. These
questions often require investigation by superior officers and/or the Internal Affairs
Division. In an effort to insure that these investigations are conducted in a manner
which is conducive to good order and discipline, the following guidelines are
promulgated:

61.2. Except as otherwise provided, the procedures contained in this section apply
only to non-criminal investigations which may reasonably result in the discipline of
the officer.

61.2.1 Interview Notice. Prior to being interviewed regarding an IAD
or EEO investigation for any reason which could lead to disciplinary action,
an officer shall be:

61.2.1.1 Informed of the nature of the investigation and whether the
officer is a witness or a suspect, if and when known; informed of other
information necessary to reasonably apprise the officer of the nature of
the allegations of the complaint. Such information shall be provided in
a reasonable period of time following its receipt by the City.

61.2.1.2  Afforded an opportunity and facilities to contact and
consult privately with an attorney of the officer’s choosing and/or a
representative of the Association, provided this does not delay the
investigation.

61.2.2 Interview Safeguards.

61.2.2.1 Any interview of an officer shall be when the officer is on
duty unless the seriousness of the investigation dictates otherwise.

61.2.2.2 Interviews shall take place at a Portland Police Station
facility, or elsewhere if mutually agreed, unless the emergency of the
situation necessitates otherwise.

61.2.2.3 The officer may have an Association representative present
to witness the interview provided the representative does not participate
in the interview. However, the interview may not be unduly delayed
awaiting an unavailable Association representative when other
Association representatives are available.

54
61.2.2.4 The officer being interviewed shall be informed of the
name, rank, and command of the officer in charge of the investigation,
the interviewing officer, and all other persons present during the
interview.

61.2.2.5 Interviews shall be done under circumstances devoid of
intimidation or coercion and shall not otherwise violate the officer’s
Constitutional Rights. The officer shall not be subjected to abusive
language. No promise of reward shall be made as an inducement to
answer questions.

61.2.2.6 Interviews shall not be overly long. The officer shall be
entitled to such reasonable intermissions as the officer shall request for
personal necessities, telephone calls, and rest periods, with one ten (10)
minute intermission every hour, if the officer requests.

61.2.2.7 All interviews shall be limited in scope to activities,
circumstances, events, conduct or acts which pertain to the subject
investigation.

61.2.2.8 The complete interview of the officer, noting all recess
periods, shall be recorded and the officer upon request will be provided
a copy of the recording, or the officer may also record the interview at
the officer’s own expense. If the interviewed officer is subsequently
charged and any part of any recording of the interview is transcribed by
the Bureau, the officer shall be given a complimentary copy thereof.

61.2.2.9 Interviews and investigations shall be concluded with no
unreasonable delay.

61.2.3. When the Investigation Results in Charges Being Filed.

61.2.3.1 The officer, upon request, will be furnished with a copy of
all materials developed in the investigation which will contain all
material facts of the matter. Such materials will be provided no later
than seven (7) days prior to the officer’s mitigation hearing, and shall
include any transcripts the City has prepared of recorded interviews.
The obligation to disclose information to the officer under this section
shall not apply to information required to be maintained as confidential
under federal or state law.

61.2.3.2 The officer will be furnished with the names of all
witnesses and complainants who will appear against the officer and/or
whose statements will be used against the officer.

61.2.4 When Disciplinary Action Results.

61.2.4.1 When the investigation results in a determination of a
sustained complaint and disciplinary action, only the findings and the

55
disciplinary order may be placed in the officer’s Personnel and “201”
files.

61.2.4.2 No dismissal, demotion or other punitive measure shall be
taken against an officer unless the officer is notified of the action and
the reason(s) therefor prior to the effective date of such action.

61.3 Personal Information. No officer shall be required for purposes of
assignment or other personnel action to disclose any item of the officer’s property
income, assets, source of income, or personal or domestic expenditures (including
those of any member of the officer’s family), unless such information is obtained
under proper legal procedures, or tends to indicate a conflict of interests with
respect to the performance of the officer’s official duties. The City shall notify an
officer when it receives a request from the media or a subpoena or request in
criminal or civil proceedings for any materials in the officer’s personnel or [AD
files.

61.4 Political Activity. Except when on duty or when acting in the officer’s
official capacity, no officer shall be prohibited from engaging in political activity.

61.5 Lie Detector Tests. No officer shall be required to take any lie detector or
similar tests as a condition of continued employment.

61.6 Personnel File. All officers shall have access to their Bureau personnel file,
precinct file, and any summary report of an IAD investigation in which they were a
suspect. The officer may submit rebuttal material as desired. However, the officer
may not have access to the background investigation report.

61.7 Deadly Force Incidents. An officer involved in the use of deadly force shall
have the right to counsel and Association representation as set out in the Police
Bureau Manual of Rules and Procedures.

61.8 Criminal Investigations. If the Bureau questions an officer during a
criminal investigation of one of its officers, it shall advise the member of the
criminal nature of the investigation and whether the member is a suspect or a
witness before interviewing the member. The preceding sentence shall not apply to
covert or undercover investigations. If the member is a witness, the member shall
be informed of and afforded the right to Association representation during any
interview. Investigations of the use of deadly force by members shall be conducted
pursuant to G.O. 1010.10.

61.9. Police Review Board (PRB). The following shall apply to the Police
Review Board:

61.9.1 Officers who choose to attend a PRB meeting shall be afforded
the following:

61.9.1.1 The right to be in attendance during non-Executive Session

56
proceedings of the PRB, and upon the officer’s request, the right to be
represented by the Association during non-Executive Session
proceedings of the PRB.

61.9.1.2. The right to make a presentation to the PRB. This right shall
include the right to make a personal statement and submit documentary
and other information, but shall not include the right to call witnesses or
ask questions of other individuals making presentations to the PRB.

61.9.1.3 The Association shall be allowed to have a representative
present during any portion of PRB Executive Session in which non-
Board member “presenter” representatives of Training Division,
Internal Affairs Division, or Detective Division are allowed to attend.

61.9.2 If the Association challenges discipline though the grievance
procedure under this agreement, the arbitrator will be presented with the
following joint statement in the event either party seeks to introduce into
evidence the recommendations of the PRB: “The Police Review Board is an
advisory body formed by the City for purposes of making recommendations
to the Chief of Police. The proceedings of the Board are not adversarial in
nature, do not involve an evidentiary hearing, and the PPA and involved
officers do not have the right to call or cross-examine witnesses.”

61.10 Drug Testing. Drug testing shall be conducted pursuant to Bureau Policy.
Random testing thereunder shall not be conducted prior to July 1, 2011. Nothing in
this agreement shall be considered a waiver of the constitutional rights of PPA
members with respect to drug testing, nor shall this agreement be a bar to a
constitutional challenge by the PPA or any of its members to random drug testing.
The parties agree that their PECBA obligations are met concerning bargaining
random drug testing.

ARTICLE 62
INDEPENDENT POLICE REVIEW (IPR)

62.1 Except as provided in this article, the provisions of Article 61 of the parties’
collective bargaining agreement shall apply to investigations conducted or
reviewed by the IPR. However, given that IPR does not have authority or
responsibility relating to the imposition of discipline, the following clarifications
are made:

  

62.1.1 Relating to Article 61.2.3, if an investigation conducted or
reviewed by IPR results in proposed discipline, all requests for information
by the officer for IPR materials containing material facts of the matter must
be made through the Personnel Division of the Portland Police Bureau.

62.1.2 Article 61.2.4 does not apply except that, consistent with Article
61.2.4.1, should the Bureau impose discipline based on an investigation

57
conducted or reviewed by IPR, only the findings and disciplinary order
issued by the Bureau may be placed in an officer’s Personnel or “201” file.

62.1.3 The parties recognize that IPR has no authority or responsibility
relating to Articles 59, 61.6, 61.7, and 61.8.

62.2 An officer who is dissatisfied with an investigation of alleged officer
misconduct relating to a citizen-initiated complaint may request a review in
accordance with IPR/CRC Protocols.

62.3. When an investigation is conducted by IPR, an officer shall have access to
any summary report of an IPR investigation in which they were a suspect. The
officer may submit rebuttal material as desired. When an investigation is reviewed
by IPR, an officer shall have access to the IPR Final Report in accordance with the
IPR/CRC Protocols. The officer may submit rebuttal material as desired.

 

62.4 Should a PPA member against whom a citizen complaint has been sustained
and discipline imposed decide to utilize the IPR review process provided for under
PCC Section 3.21, then Step 2 of the grievance process described in Article 22 of
the collective bargaining agreement shall be held in abeyance until the IPR review
process is complete. In no event will the grievance process be held in abeyance for
more than six months from the date that the grievance was filed.

62.5 Article 15, Policies and Procedures and Other Orders, of the collective
bargaining agreement will apply to rules proposed and issued by the IPR pursuant
to PCC 3.21.070(1).

62.6 Nothing in this agreement shall be considered a waiver of the rights of the
PPA or a PPA member to challenge the ability of IPR and/or the CRC to subpoena
an officer.

ARTICLE 63
COACH PAY

63.1 Officers designated as a coach serve at the discretion of the Bureau. Officers
will receive a 10% premium pay for any pay period in which they are designated
and serve as a certified coach with an assigned trainee for all or part of the pay
period.

63.1.1 The following divisions will have certified coaches: Operations;
Detectives; and Forensics.

63.2. Substitute coaches will receive an amount equal to one-tenth (.1) of one hour
of their base pay rate for each hour, or portion thereof, that they are coaching a
trainee.

63.2.1 Any officer is eligible to be a substitute coach.
58
63.3. If a coach works operational overtime with a trainee, the coach shall receive
coach’s pay for the overtime hours worked. For purposes of this Article,
“operational overtime” shall not include court overtime.

63.4 Coach’s pay will be paid during all paid leave.

63.5 Coach’s pay will be paid to a coach if assigned trainee is on vacation or sick
leave.

63.6 Coach’s pay will be paid if a coach is assigned to teach a class.

63.7. All new officers who are in entry phase through phase 5 will be considered
trainees,

63.8 Two certified coaches may be assigned to one trainee, due to overlapping.

 

63.9. Officers in the Training Division, satellite instructors, and/or coaches receive
coach’s pay for teaching at DPSST, if they are working patrol tactics ina 1-on-1
setting. In such cases, the officer will be paid as a substitute coach.

63.10 Academy instructors will receive coach’s pay when teaching at the basic
and/or advanced academy.

63.11 Coach’s pay will be “stacked” or “pyramided” on other premiums for straight
time and overtime. However, the coach’s pay premium will not be “stacked” or
“pyramided” on other premiums when the coach works an overtime shift without a
trainee; in such a case, the officer will receive all other premiums for the overtime
shift, but not the coach’s pay premium.

ARTICLE 64
SAVINGS CLAUSE

64.1 Should any section or portion thereof of this Contract be held unlawful and
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction or upon mutual agreement of
the parties, such decision shall apply only to the specific section or portion thereof,
directly specified in the decisions; upon the issuance of such a decision, the parties
agree immediately to negotiate a substitute, if possible, for the invalidated section
or portion thereof.

ARTICLE 65
RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION INCENTIVES

65.1 Recruitment Incentives. The following provisions recognize that certain
incentives related to salary, relocation expenses, and vacation leave benefits may
assist the City in the recruitment and appointment of qualified candidates for Police

59
Officer positions.

65.1.1 Based upon a bona fide recruitment need, the Bureau may
appoint a currently certified law enforcement officer to Police Officer up to
the step immediately below top step Police Officer if approved by the
Director of the Bureau of Human Resources. Initial appointment to top step
Police Officer may be made only with the approval by ordinance of the City
Council.

65.1.2. Reasonable expenses associated with relocating permanently
appointed Police Officers may be approved. The payment of such expenses
is subject to the conditions provided for in the Personnel Rules.

65.1.3. Upon completion of probation, a new Police Officer may be
credited for prior professional service by placement at the appropriate step of
the vacation accrual table contained in Article 24 of this Agreement, as
determined by the Chief, when authorized by the Commissioner-in-Charge.
Once placed on the schedule noted above, future service with the City shall
count normally towards additional vacation accrual rates.

65.1.4 When authorized by the Commissioner-in-Charge, a new Police
Officer may receive a one-time crediting of 40 hours of vacation after
completion of the probationary period.

  

65.1.5 Effective upon ratification, the City will implement the following
hiring incentive program package:

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘Amount Upon
Amount at | Amount at End | Completion of 3 Years
Swear-In of Probation of Service
New Officer| $1,000 $1,000 $3,000
Finder Fee = $1,000 S
Lateral Officer | __ $2,000 $2,000 $6,000
Finder Fee| $1,000 $1,000 =

 

 

 

 

 

65.1.5.1 The hiring incentives for new or lateral officers as set forth
in the above table are payable separately upon the new or lateral
officer’s completion of each of the following events: swear-in, end of
probation, and three years of service with the City.

 

65.1.5.2 The “finder fee” as set forth in the above table is payable
separately to a currently employed officer who recruits a new officer
upon the new officer’s end of probation. The “finder fees” as set forth
in the above table are payable separately to a currently employed
officer who recruits a lateral officer upon the lateral officer’s swear-in
and end of probation.

65.1.5.3 The hiring incentive program set forth in this Article 65.1.5
expires on June 30, 2020.

60
65.2. Voluntary Employee Beneficiary Association (VEBA). The City shall
allow officers to participate in a Plan(s) which is defined to include a Voluntary
Employee Beneficiary Association (VEBA), a Section 457 plan or any other form
of non-qualified deferred compensation program.

65.2.1 The PPA has established a retirement medical trust (the PPA
VEBA Trust) for the purpose of providing for the payment of life, sick,
accident or other benefits to its members.

65.2.2 The PPA VEBA Trust has received tax-exempt status from the
Internal Revenue Service under Section 501(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue
code.

65.2.3 For every officer who is a member under the Fire & Police
Disability & Retirement (FPD&R) system under Chapter 5 of the City
Charter, the City shall, upon that officer’s retirement from the City,
contribute to the PPA VEBA Trust to the credit of the officer and on a pre-tax
basis, an amount equal in value to 100% of the payments that would
otherwise be paid to the member for unused sick leave under Article 26 of the
parties’ collective bargaining agreement.

65.2.4 The City shall withhold two percent (2%) of Top Step Officer
wage from each individual PPA member’s gross wages per pay period. This
amount shall be contributed on the member’s behalf to the PPA VEBA Trust
each pay period or monthly, the interval to be determined by the City. The
withholding shall be made on a pre-tax basis.

65.2.5 Ifat any time during the operation of the Plan or Plans it is
determined that (1) deposits may not be made on a pre-tax basis or (2) that
plan earnings are not tax-exempt or (3) payments from the Plan or Plans are
not tax exempt or if participation in the Plan or Plans or operation of the Plan
or Plans is in violation of any federal or state law or regulation, then in that
event the parties agree to negotiate a substitute provision in order to carry out
the original intention of the Agreement.

65.3 Longevity Pay.

65.3.1 Upon the completion of their fifteenth year of service with the
Bureau, officers shall receive longevity pay of 3.0%. Upon the completion of
their twentieth year of service with the Bureau, officers shall receive
longevity pay of an additional 2.0%, for total longevity pay of 5.0%. Upon
the completion of their twenty-fifth year of service with the Bureau, officers
shall receive longevity pay of an additional 2.0% for total longevity pay of
7.0%.

65.3.2. Longevity pay shall not be included in determining the officer’s
regular rate of pay for purposes of calculating overtime owed under the

6l
65.4

provisions of this Agreement including but not limited to the overtime
provisions under Article 43.

65.3.3. Longevity pay shall be calculated on the basis of the officer’s
regular hourly rate, not including premium pay.

65.3.4 For the limited purposes of this section of the Agreement only,
the City shall be allowed to establish the Section 207(k) exemption under the
FLSA.

65.3.5 The Association agrees to defend and indemnify the City from
any and all claims that the City failed to include longevity pay in the regular
rate of pay in violation of the FLSA.

65.3.6 For purposes of this section, time worked for another law
enforcement agency by an officer who has transferred to City employment
under ORS 236.605 to 236.640 (Transfer of Public Employees) shall be
considered to be time worked with the Bureau.

65.3.7 For purposes of this section, time spent on LOS resulting from a
nonservice-connected disability where the leave commenced after the date of
execution of this agreement shall not be considered to be time worked with
the Bureau.

Retire-Rehire Program.

65.4.1 Effective upon ratification, the City will implement a retire-rehire
program in which an employee may, upon permission by the Chief of
Police, retire from the Police Bureau as a sworn employee and then be
rehired by the Police Bureau as a sworn employee. An employee
participating in the retire-rehire program may, on one occasion, elect to
participate in Option A or Option B, as set forth below.

65.4.2 Elements Common To Both Options A & B.

65.4.2.1 A participating employee will be classified as a full-time,
limited duration retire-rehire Bureau employee. The position is eligible
for social security.

65.4.2.2 An employee must apply to the retire-rehire program. The
Chief of Police retains discretion to rehire an employee into the
program.

65.4.2.3 An employee who retires on or after ratification may apply
to participate in the program. The employee must provide the Chief of
Police with 30 days’ written notice of the employee’s intent to
participate in the program. After providing the requisite notification,
the employee may elect to take 30 days of leave immediately prior to

62
retirement as unpaid time or as paid time using accrued vacation,
holiday, and compensatory time.

65.4.2.4 A participating employee must return to duty the day after
retirement; there can be no break in service. There will be no break in
service for the purposes of Health and Welfare coverage under Article
48 or for the purposes of other benefits under this Agreement.

65.4.2.4.1 However, employees who retired between April 1,
2016 and ratification may elect to return to work under this
program no later than December 31, 2016. In such case, the City
will conduct a gap background check comprised of a LEDS,
NCIC, and DMV records review, and will obtain from the
participating employee an affidavit affirming that the employee
has not used any illegal drugs or controlled substances (including
marijuana) between April 1, 2016 and the date of acceptance in
the retire-rehire program. Upon rehire into the program, the
participating employee will be immediately eligible for Health
and Welfare benefits under Article 48.

65.4.2.5 A participating employee is not subject to a probationary
period upon rehire.

65.4.2.6 A participating employee may resign from City
employment with 14-days’ advance written notice to the Bureau.

65.4.2.7 A participating employee may be disciplined for just cause
as set forth elsewhere in this Agreement.

65.4.2.8 A participating employee is subject to all rights and
benefits under this Agreement, except where specifically modified by
this Article 65.4.

65.4.2.9 A participating employee is subject to all City rules and
Bureau directives.

65.4.2.10 Upon retirement from City employment, the participating
employee may begin drawing their pension consistent with applicable
pension rules and regulations. Upon rehire, the participating employee
will be eligible for a pension under the Oregon Public Service
Retirement plan (OPSRP).

65.4.2.10.1 The City agrees to maintain its membership in
OPSRP. The City shall continue to “pick up,” assume and pay a
six percent (6%) average employee contribution to OPSRP for
the employee members participating in OPSRP. Such “pick up”
or payment of employee member contributions to the OPSRP
system shall continue for the duration of the employee’s

63
participation in the retire-rehire program.

65.4.2.10.2 The full amount of required employee contributions
“picked-up” or paid by the City on behalf of participating
employees pursuant to this Section 65.4 shall be considered as
“salary” within the meaning of ORS 238A.005(17) for the
purposes of computing an employee member’s “final average
salary” within the meaning of ORS 238A.130, but shall not be
considered as “salary” for the purposes of determining the
amount of employee contributions required to be contributed
pursuant to ORS 238A.330. Such “picked-up” or paid employee
contributions shall be credited to employee accounts pursuant to
ORS 238A.335, and shall be considered to be employee
contributions for the purposes of ORS 238A.330.

65.4.2.11 Participating employees may maintain their deferred
compensation accounts with the City upon retirement and rehire into
the program.

65.4.2.12 Upon rehire, participating employees will be covered
under Oregon’s Workers’ Compensation laws, not under FPDR, and
will be eligible for supplemental workers’ compensation benefits under
City Human Resources Administrative Rule 6.13.

65.4.2.13 Participating employees will continue to be subject to
the Substance Abuse Policy, including random drug testing.

65.4.2.14 A participating employee will receive the sick leave
payout under Articles 26.5 and 65.2.3 upon the employee’s retirement
immediately prior to rehire into the program. Upon separation from the
retire-rehire program, a participating employee will not be eligible for a
sick leave pay out under Articles 26.5 and 65.2.3.

65.4.2.15 A participating employee will receive payout for their
accrued vacation, holiday compensation, and overtime compensation
both upon the employee’s retirement immediately prior to rehire into
the program and upon the employee’s separation from the retire-rehire
program.

65.4.2.16 A participating employee will accrue vacation only at
the “5 to 9 years” of service rate under Article 24. All other leave,
including sick leave, will accrue according to the provisions of this
Agreement.

65.4.2.17 A participating employee’s seniority date will be the
date of their rehire into the program.

65.4.2.18 An participating employee's anniversary date will be
64
the date of their original (pre-retirement) hire date.
65.4.2.19 Participating employees are not eligible for promotion.

65.4.2.20 A participating employee will receive longevity pay
under Article 65.3 equal to their longevity rate upon retirement and
rehire into the program. Such longevity rate will remain fixed during
the term of the employee’s participation in the program.

65.4.3 Option A.

65.4.3.1 Upon rehire into the program, the participating employee
will hold the rank of Police Officer and will be eligible for assignment
only to patrol, SCT, or NRT.

65.4.3.2 The participating employee will be rehired at top step
Police Officer wages. However, if the employee was not receiving top
step Police Officer pay upon retirement, the employee will be rehired at
the same Police Officer pay rate the employee was receiving upon
retirement, and will thereafter be eligible for step increases based on
the employce’s anniversary date as defined in Article 65.4.2.18.

65.4.3.3 The participating employee will receive step increases and cost
of living wage adjustments consistent with the other provisions of this
Agreement.

65.4.3.4 The duration of the employee’s participation in the program
will be not less than six (6) years, with the Chief of Police retaining the
option to extend the employee’s participation in the program for no
more than an additional two (2) years.

65.4.4 Option B.

65.4.4.1 Upon rehire into the program, the participating employee
will hold the same rank as the employee held upon retirement. The
participating employee will be eligible for all regular and specialty
assignments, except for Articles 35.1 and 35.2 hazard pay assignments.

65.4.4.2 The participating employee will be rehired at the top step of
the classification that the employee held upon retirement. However, if
the employee was not receiving top step pay within their classification
upon retirement, the employee will be rehired at the same pay rate the
employee was receiving upon retirement, and will thereafter be eligible
for step increases based on the employee’s anniversary date as defined
in Article 65.4.2.18,

65.4.4.3 The participating employee will receive step increases and cost
of living wage adjustments consistent with the other provisions of this

65
Agreement.

65.4.4.4 The duration of the employee’s participation in the
program will be no more than two (2) years.

ARTICLE 66
OVERPAYMENT

66.1 In the event that an employee receives wages or benefits from the City to
which the employee is not entitled, regardless of whether the employee knew or
should have known of the overpayment, the City shall notify the employee in
writing of the overpayment which will include information supporting that an
overpayment exists and the amount of wages and/or benefits to be repaid. For
purposes of recovering overpayments by payroll deduction, the following shall

apply:

66.2. The City may, at its discretion, use the payroll deduction process to correct
any overpayment made within a maximum period of two (2) years before the
notification.

66.3. Where this process is utilized, the City and the employee, and the Association
if requested by the employee, shall meet and attempt to reach mutual agreement on
a repayment schedule within thirty (30) calendar days following written
notification.

66.4 If there is no mutual agreement at the end of the thirty (30) calendar day
period, the City shall implement the repayment schedule stated in 66.5 below.

66.5. If the overpayment amount to be repaid is more than five percent (5%) of the
employee’s regular monthly base salary, the overpayment shall be recovered in
monthly amounts not exceeding five percent (5%) of the employee’s regular
monthly base salary. If an overpayment is less than five percent (5%) of the
employee’s regular monthly base salary, the overpayment shall be recovered ina
lump sum deduction from the employee’s paycheck. If an employee leaves City
service before the City fully recovers the overpayment, the remaining amount may
be deducted from the employee’s final check.

66.6 An employee who disagrees with the City’s determination that an
overpayment has been made to the employee may grieve the determination through
the grievance procedure. In the event a grievance is filed, recoupment deductions
will be held in abeyance pending resolution of the grievance.

66.7. This article does not waive the City’s right to pursue its legal rights to recoup
an overpayment where the employee is no longer in pay status, but does agree that
it will attempt to use the procedures outlined in this article before pursuing those
rights.

66
ARTICLE 67
CANINE HANDLER

67.1 Portland Police Bureau Dog Handlers who have a police canine kenneled at
their residence, shall be paid one hour pay at the time-and-one-half (1/4) rate per day
for each regular day off they perform “kennel time” for their dog. “Kennel time”
includes but is not limited to exercising the dog, grooming the dog, and cleaning up
the dog run and similar duties.

67.2. Ona regular work day, Portland Police Bureau Dog Handlers shall be paid
one-half (/) hour at the time-and-one-half rate per day for performing “kennel
time” duties over and above the regular shift, if the Dog Handler cannot perform the
“kennel time” during the regular shift.

67.3. Portland Police Bureau Dog Handlers shall be paid one-half (14) hour at the
time-and-one-half rate per day they perform “kennel time” duties while on vacation.
The vacation compensation will apply to full or partial shifts of vacation leave.

67.4 Portland Police Bureau Dog Handlers shall receive one-half (¥) hour per day
compensation if they perform “kennel time” duties while on in the following pay
status:

a) Jury Duty if the Dog Handler cannot perform the kennel time during the
regular shift.

b) Holidays.

c) Compensatory time off.

d) Parental Leave.

e) Sick leave, unless the Dog Handler is physically incapable of performing
kennel time duties.

f) Injury (LOS) leave, unless the Dog Handler is physically incapable of
performing kennel time duties.

67.5. Portland Police Bureau Dog Handlers shall not receive any additional
compensation if they perform "kennel time" duties while in the following pay
status:

a) Military leave, if away from home overnight.

b) Sick leave, if the Dog Handler is physically incapable of performing
kennel time duties.

c) Injury (LOS) leave, if the Dog Handler is physically incapable of
performing kennel time duties.

67
ARTICLE 68
TERMINATION AND DURATION

68.1 This Contract shall be effective upon ratification, and shall remain in full
force and effect until the 30th day of June 2020.

68.2. Negotiations for a successor Agreement shall begin not later than January 15,
2020. This Contract shall remain in full force and effect during the period of
negotiations.

  
  

For the CyfSF Portland: For the Portland Police Association

 

“Mayor Ted Whepler Daryl Tumer, President

bet del)

‘Chief Michael Marshman

mak a
MMOL Sf
Mark Amberg or ‘gf kein =

68
SCHEDULE A
SALARY RATES

. Upon ratification, the “Entry Rate” step for the Police Officer will be
removed and the “After 6 Mo.” step will become the new entry rate step as,
set forth in Schedule B. Police Officers at the old “Entry Rate” step in
Schedule A will be moved to the new “Entry Rate” step in Schedule A.

. Effective January 1, 2017, an additional three percent (3.0%) top pay step
will be added to the salary schedules for all classifications in Schedule B.
Police Officers with more than six years of service, and Detectives,
Criminalists, and Sergeants with more than five years of service, will be
immediately advanced to the new pay step. Thereafter, advancement to the
new step will occur on the date a Police Officer has more than six years of
service, and a Detective, Criminalist, or Sergeant has more than five years
of service. For example, a Police Officer with more than six years of
service as of January 1, 2017 will be moved to the new top Police Officer
step on January 1, 2017, and a Police Officer with a classification seniority
date of February 10, 2011, will be advanced to the new step on February
10, 2017.

. Effective July 1, 2017, Schedule “B” wage rates will be revised as
follows:

Salary rates for classifications in Schedule “B” for the period July 1, 2016 to
June 30, 2017 are to be increased by one hundred percent (100%) of the
annual increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and
Clerical Workers (CPI-W) (as measured by the annual change in the index
for between 2nd Half 2015 and 2nd Half 2016) for the Portland-Salem, OR-
WA, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor.
However, in no event shall the salary increase attributable to the CPI be less
than one percent (1.0%) or greater than five percent (5.0%).

. Effective January 1, 2018, an additional three percent (3.0%) top pay step
will be added to the salary schedules for all classifications in Schedule
“B”, Police Officers with more than seven years of service, and
Detectives, Criminalists, and Sergeants with more than six years of
service, will be immediately advanced to the new pay step. Thereafter,
advancement to the new step will occur on the date a Police Officer has
more than seven years of service, and a Detective, Criminalist, or Sergeant
has more than six years of service. For example, a Police Officer with
more than seven years of service as of January 1, 2018 will be moved to
the new top Police Officer step on January 1, 2018, and a Police Officer
with a classification seniority date of February 10, 2011, will be advanced
to the new step on February 10, 2018.

. Effective July 1, 2018, Schedule “B” wage rates will be revised as
follows:

69
Salary rates for classifications in Schedule “B” for the period July 1, 2017 to
June 30, 2018 are to be increased by one hundred percent (100%) of the
annual increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and
Clerical Workers (CPI-W) (as measured by the annual change in the index
for between 2nd Half 2016 and 2nd Half 2017) for the Portland-Salem, OR-
WA, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor.
However, in no event shall the salary increase attributable to the CPI be less
than one percent (1.0%) or greater than five percent (5.0%).

. Effective January 1, 2019, an additional three percent (3.0%) top pay step
will be added to the salary schedules for all classifications in Schedule
“B”. Police Officers with more than eight years of service, and Detectives,
Criminalists, and Sergeants with more than seven years of service, will be
immediately advanced to the new pay step. Thereafter, advancement to the
new step will occur on the date a Police Officer has more than eight years
of service, and a Detective, Criminalist, or Sergeant has more than seven
years of service. For example, a Police Officer with more than eight years
of service as of January 1, 2019 will be moved to the new top Police
Officer step on January 1, 2019, and a Police Officer with a classification
seniority date of February 10, 20111, will be advanced to the new step on
February 10, 2019.

. Effective July 1, 2019, Schedule “B” wage rates will be revised as follows:

Salary rates for classifications in Schedule “B” for the period July 1, 2018
to June 30, 2019 are to be increased by one hundred percent (100%) of the
annual increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and
Clerical Workers (CPI-W) (as measured by the annual change in the index
for between 2nd Half 2017 and 2nd Half 2018) for the Portland-Salem,
OR-WA, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of
Labor. However, in no event shall the salary increase attributable to the
CPI be less than one percent (1.0%) or greater than five percent (5.0%).

In the event that City revenue sources should be decreased by the passage or
impact of a tax limitation measure, legislatively mandated change, cut back in
Federal and/or State revenue sharing, or any other conditions causing a
worsening of the City’s financial position, the City Council and the signatory
labor organizations agree that they will meet and discuss the economic
impact and, by mutual agreement, will put forth a good faith effort to arrive
at alternatives to a reduction in the work force.

In the event that a current city employee is appointed to the Police Officer
classification, the officer’s pay rate shall be the step within the pay range
which represents at least a 3% increase over the officer’s regular rate in the
officer’s former classification, provided that in no event shall the new rate of
pay exceed the maximum rate for Police Officer.

70
A Police Officer promoted to Sergeant, Detective, or Criminalist will be
placed at the step on the Sergeant, Detective, or Criminalist pay scale that is
at least one and three-quarters percent (1.75%) higher than the Police
Officer’s pay step upon promotion.

71
SCHEDULE A
SALARY RATES

Rates as of July 1, 2016

JOB TITLE Entry After6 After1 After2 After3 After4 After 5

Rate Mos. Yr. Yr. Yr. Yr. Yr.
Police $23.96 $29.25 $31.05 $32.90 $34.94 $36.92 $39.25
Officer*
Police $39.94 $41.13 $42.34 $43.66 $45.14
Sergeant ***
Criminalist $39.94 $41.13 $42.34 $43.66 $45.14
Detective $39.94 $41.13 $42.34 $43.66 $45.14

* Hazard pay 6% added to base. See Articles 35.1 and 35.2.

** — Assignment as supervisory sergeants to Investigations or Forensics Division:
3% above highest Sergeant or Criminalist rate. See Article 37.

SCHEDULE B
SALARY RATES

Rates as of January 1, 2017

JOB TITLE Entry After After After After After After
Rate 1Yr. 2yYr. 3 Yr. 4yYr. SyYr. 6 Yr.

Police Officer* $29.25 $31.05 $32.90 $34.94 $36.92 $39.25 $40.43
Police $39.94 S41.13 $42.34 $43.66 $45.14 $46.49
Sergeant ***

Criminalist $39.94 $41.13 $42.34 $43.66 $45.14 $46.49
Detective $39.94 S41.13 $42.34 $43.66 $45.14 $46.49

* Hazard pay 6% added to base. See Articles 35.1 and 35.2.

** — Assignment as supervisory sergeants to Investigations or Forensics Division:
3% above highest Sergeant or Criminalist rate. See Article 37.

72
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
CONCERNING DETECTIVES AND SERGEANTS

The parties to this agreement are the City of Portland (City) and the Portland Police
Association (PPA).

It is the intent of this Agreement: (1) to eliminate the “Memorandum of Agreement
Concerning Detective and Sergeants” dated March 11, 1996; (2) to split the
combined classification of Sergeant into the classifications of Sergeant and
Detective; (3) to define the seniority rights of members impacted by this MOA;
and (4) to clarify the impact of the split with respect to duties and assignment.

It is not the intent of this Agreement to facilitate or provide any basis for the
reclassification of investigative positions nor is it the intent of this Agreement to
facilitate or provide any basis for the removal of sergeants from the Portland
Police Association’s collective bargaining unit. Nothing in this Agreement is
intended to waive any rights the City or the PPA has under law, current practice,
or applicable collective bargaining agreement.

Re-Establishment of Detective Rank.

Effective November 19, 2001, the duties of Sergeant will be separated. The
duties of the rank of investigative Sergeant prior to the effective date of this
agreement will be performed by those persons holding the rank of Detective. The
duties of the rank of supervisory Sergeant prior to the effective date of this
agreement will be performed by those persons holding the rank of Sergeant.

Seniority of Affected Members

Should there be a need to allocate benefits under the contract such as days off,
vacation selection, shift selection or other benefits on the basis of seniority, after
the implementation of this Memorandum of Agreement, the effective date for
purposes of seniority will be as follows:

Sergeants who held the rank of Sergeant on April 30, 1996, will have a seniority
date which reflects their date of entry into the sergeant classification.

Sergeants who held the rank of Detective on April 30, 1996 will have a seniority
date of May 1, 1996.

Detectives who held the rank of Detective on April 30, 1996, will have a
seniority date which reflects their date of entry into the detective classification.

Detectives who held the rank of Sergeant on April 30, 1996, will have a seniority
date of their entry into the classification of Detective, but in no case shall the
seniority date precede May 1, 1996.

Those individuals promoted into the classification of Sergeant after May 1, 1996
shall retain the seniority date of their promotion.

2B
The Scope of the PPA’s Bargaining Unit

The classifications of Sergeant and Detective shall continue to be included in the
PPA’s collective bargaining unit. Effective upon the ratification of this
Agreement, the parties shall file with the Oregon Employment Relations Board a
consent agreement stipulating that the PPA’s collective bargaining unit shall
consists of Police Officers, Sergeants, Detectives, and Criminalists.

74
One-Time Declaration for Members on the “Combined List”

As a result of the 1996 MOA, a list was created that combined sergeants and
detectives into one classification of sergeants, with investigatory and non-
investigatory duties. In an effort to balance the loss of eligibility for non-
investigative assignments with the Bureau’s exclusive management right to hire,
transfer and promote, the following one-time, limited process will occur.

Individuals on the combined list have 30 days from the effective date of this
agreement to make a onetime declaration for the desired classification (Sergeant
or Detective). Once the declaration is made, the individual will be placed on a
temporary list for the purpose of participating in a screening process. The
screening process, which may include a panel, will be developed by the Personnel
Division and will be used to assess the individual’s knowledge, skills, abilities and
suitability to perform the duties of the classification. Individuals making the one-
time declaration will participate in the screening process.

Individuals with the knowledge, skills, abilities, and suitability to perform in the
requested classification will be placed on an unranked list for the requested
classification. The Bureau will select individuals on the unranked lists for the
purpose of filling vacant Sergeant and Detective positions. An individual on the list
who is offered a position shall have the opportunity to accept or reject the offer; a
rejection of an offer will result in the elimination of the individual’s name from the
unranked list. The Bureau will continue to select individuals on the respective
unranked lists until they are exhausted.

No portion of the one-time declaration, the screening process, the unranked lists or
the selection decisions generated by this section will be subject to the grievance
process.

Retention of Ability to Make Transfer Requests

Individuals holding the rank of Sergeant on November 19, 2001 will maintain
the ability to request transfer between the classifications of Sergeant and Detective
until they separate from the Sergeant or Detective classifications, whatever the
reason for separation (i.e. promote, retire, resign). Acting upon a request for
transfer is at the discretion of the City. The City agrees it will not involuntarily
transfer an individual holding the rank of Sergeant on November 19, 2001 to
either Sergeant or Detective Classifications.

Filling Sergeants and Detective Positions

Except for probationary assignments, assignments for sergeants shall continue to
be posted and shall be filled through the posting process. Except for probationary
assignments, assignments for detectives shall be posted and shall be filled through
the posting process.

Sergeants on Disability Status

Individuals on disability (LOS) status as of the effective date of this agreement
75
who are subsequently released to return to duty shall be assigned to the
classification associated with the duties the individual performed just prior to LOS
status, provided the person is qualified and subject to the terms and conditions
of this Agreement. An individual will return to the Sergeant classification if the
individual held a supervisory sergeant assignment just prior to LOS; an individual
will return to the Detective classification if the individual held an investigative
assignment just prior to LOS.

 

  

Sergeants on LOS as of the effective date of this agreement will be afforded the
opportunity to make the one-time declaration, to participate in the screening
process and be placed on the unranked list, as described above, during the same
time frame as Sergeants who are not on LOS.

Eligibility for Lieutenant Promotional Exam

Detectives, Sergeants, and Criminalists shall be eligible to sign up for promotional
examinations to the rank of Lieutenant.

Applicability to Sergeants Transferring from Portland Public Schools

With the exception of the section entitled “seniority of Affected Members,” the
terms of this agreement apply to sergeants who transfer from Portland Public
Schools effective November 1, 2001. Seniority for such sergeants will be
determined in accordance with ORS 236.605-640, as amended by Senate Bill 415.

76
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
CONCERNING WORKPLACE VIOLENCE POLICY

This Agreement has been reached between the City of Portland (City) and the
Portland Police Association (PPA). The parties are desirous of resolving all
collective bargaining issues arising out of the adoption and/or modification of
Sections 4.01.030 (F) and 4.01.030 (G)(14) of the Portland City Code.

In consideration of the mutual promises of the parties, the parties agree as
follows:

This Agreement satisfies all collective bargaining obligations of the parties with
respect to the adoption and/or modification of Sections 4.01.030(F) and 4.01.030
(G)(14) of the Portland City Code.

The adoption and/or modification of Section 4.01.030 (F) of Portland City Code
does not supersede the just cause provisions of Articles 20 and 21 of the PPA’s
collective bargaining agreement with the City, and the rights and obligations of the
parties under Articles 20 and 21.

The parties acknowledge that they have entered into this Agreement voluntarily,
with full knowledge of their rights and obligations.

Entered into this 13th day of March, 2000.

For City OF PORTLAND: FOR THE PPA:
David Shaff, Greg Pluchos, President
Employce Relations Manager Portland Police Association

City of Portland

77
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT

The parties agree for purposes of calculating the regular rate for FLSA overtime
only, the work period for all officers shall be 28 days, as allowed under Section
207(k) of the FLSA.

‘The parties further agree that the above does not affect the calculation of overtime
owed under specific provisions of the collective bargaining. For purposes of
calculating overtime owed under the Labor Agreement the following premiums will
continue to be included in that calculation: hazard pay (motorcycle, DVD, SERT,
EDU), supervisory sergeant (Article 37), and coach pay.

Entered into this 29th day of March, 2000.

For City OF PORTLAND: FOR THE PPA:
David Shaff, Greg Pluchos, President
Employee Relations Manager Portland Police Association

City of Portland

78
Advance Notice of Shift Change:
Age Discrimination.
Aid To Other Unions
Prohibition against......
Arbitration
Final and binding ..
Payment of arbitrator's fee
Selection of arbitrators.
Time for arbitrator's decisior
Association
Bulletin boards..
Copies of General Order:
Discrimination against
Exclusive bargaining representative
Executive Board
List of officers
Negotiating team statu:
President's statu:
Representating during interal affairs interviews
Representative:
Responsibility
Right to engage in concerted action.
Secretary-Treasurer's statu:
Special conferences
Transfer of representatives
Automatic Renewal of Contract.
Bill of Rights.
Applicability .
Bulletin Boards
Bureau of Human Resources
Callbacks.
Checkoff
Dues..
Civil Service Appeal
Civil Service Appeals
Civilianization..
Clothing Allowance
Coach Pay
Compensatory Time Off
Accrual ....
Cash out...
Use during parental leave
Concerted Activities...
Contract
Automatic renewal of
Copies of...
During negotiations
Negotiations.

 

 

 

 

 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

79
Court Appearance
72-hour notice...
Morning and afternoon appearances,
Overtime...
Retired officer:
While on sick leave.
Witness fees..

Criminal Investigations
Legal fees

Day Off Trades

Days Off
Changes in.
Notice of change in.

Deadly Force Incidents
Legal fees
Procedures for inv
Right to counsel

Death Leave...

decline overtime

Deferred Compensation

Demotion
Notification

Disability Discrimination.

Discharge...

Discipline and Discharge
Copies of investigatory material
Definition...
Fitness for duty examination
Just cause...
Method of administering
Probationary employees

Discrimination
Age
Association activitie:
Disability
Marital status
Prohibition against
Racial

 

 
 
  
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  

in

cote mion

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

BRRRRRERR

 

Doctor’s Certificate
Sick leave use ...
Domestic Partners
Family leave usage .
Drug and Vice Division
Hazardous duty pay
Dues
Checkoff....

 

 

  
 

 

80
 

Fair share ...
Hold harmless agreement .
Duration of Contrac
Early Warning System
Education Reimbursement Program .
Approved courses
Eligibility.
Educational Leav
Emergencies
Provision of meals ..
Equipment
Allowance..
Furnished by City
Evaluations...
Existing Standard:
Extra Employment.
Fair Share...
Family Leave
Impact on vacation accrual
Use of sick leave.
Firearms .
Modification of...
Purchase upon retirement .
FLSA Overtime
Memorandum of Agreement.
Four-Ten Plan...
Funeral Expenses
Funeral Leave
General Order
Copies to Association
Grievance Procedur
Arbitration .....
Purpose of.
Step I
Step II.
Hazardous Duty Pay
Drug and Vice Division
Motorcycle duty
Health and Welfare
Health Legislation, Federal
Higher Classification
Work in...
Holiday
Assignment...
On scheduled day off.
Holidays.
During leave .
Eligibility.

   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 

 

 

 

 

81
Observed.
Selection .
Seniority trade.
Immediate Family
Definition of .
Insurance
Deferred compensation...
Denial of benefits.
Dental
Liability
Life
Vision
Insurance, Health
Eligibility for
Officers killed in line of duty.
Officers with occupational injuri
Part-time officers
Retirees...
Internal Affairs Investigations
Advance notice of interview
Association representation
Copies of investigatory material:
Interview safeguards
List of witnesses and complainants
Recording of interviews
Right to attorney ...
Sustained complaint:
Job Sharing
Layoff ..
Procedures
Recall from
Leave of Absence
Court appearances
Educational leave.
Military leave
Other...
Return from leave
Standards ...
Vacation accrual during...
Legal Fees
Deadly force incidents
Levels of Service .
Lie Detector Tests
List of Officers.
Maintenance of Standards
Management Rights ....
Marital Status
Discrimination ..

 
 

 

 

  
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

82
Meals.
Provision of ..
Medications
Use of...
Mileage Rate.
Military Leave
Moonlighting
Motorcycle Duty
Hazardous duty pay
Motorcycle Use and Care.
Negotiating Team
Status
Officer
Definition of .
Oral Reprimand....
Overtime
Callbacks
Definition of .
Multiple assignments
Offered by seniority
Pyramiding
Rate...
Shift overtime
Telephone calls at home
Training...
Transport of prisoners.
Parental Leave.
Impact on vacation accrual
Paydays...
Performance Evaluations ..
PERS Employees
Sick leave conversion ....
Worker's compensation claim.
Personal Information
Disclosure of.
Personnel File
Plainclothes Allowance.
Political Activit;
Polygraph Examinations
Position Announcements
Preamble .....
Pregnancy Leavi
Impact on vacation accrual ...
President
Assignment to Association
Probationary Period
Productivity...
Promotions.

 

 

 

119
See Extra Employment

 

 

 

0
2

 

 

1
See Verbal Reprimand

 

 

 

 

 
 
  
  
  
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
  
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

HNoOW

 

83
Probationary period
Signups...
Protective Vests
Racial Discrimination ...
Ranks
Salary differentials between.
Recall From Layoff.
Reclassification
Recognition...
Recruitment Incentive:
Credit for prior professional service
Credit of 40 hours of vacation
Longevity pay
Relocation expense.
VEBA
Release Time.
Religious Discrimination .
Reporting Pay ..
Reprimands....
Retiree
Court appearance .
Health insurance
Health insurance and Medicar
PERS sick leave conversion
Sick leave cashout ..
Vacation accrual prior to retirement
Retraining ..
Rules and Procedures
Copies of...
Safety Committee ...
Salaries
Bi-weekly compensation .
Differential between ranks.
Work in higher classificatio:
Savings Clause.
Secondary Employment
Secretary-Treasurer..
Seniority
Calculation of
Day off selectio:
Holiday assignment
Holiday selection ..
Involuntary transfer between assignments
Layoff.
Shift overtime
Shift selection
Vacation selection.
Voluntary transfer between assignments...

84

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 

 

  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
   

Changes in.
Shift and day off trade
Shift Trades....
Sick Leave ..
Accrual
Conversion by PERS employees
Conversion on retirement or death
Court appearance .
Doctor’s certificate .
Family illness or injury.

 
 
    
 
  
 
 

Special Conferences...
Special Duty for Second Employers
Split Shifts.
Strikes.
Subcontracting .
Suspension .
Sworn Personnel
Definition of .
Termination of Contract.
Transfers
Association representatives...
Seniority for vacation purpose:
Seniority upon reassignment.
Tuition Reimbursement
Vacation...
Accrual prior to retirement
Accrual rates ..
Court appearance .
Loss of vacation time.
Maximum accrual...
Payment upon termination or death .
Selection process .
Seniority .
Years of service
Verbal Reprimand
Vests ..
Voluntary Employee Beneficiary Association.
Witness Fees ..
Work In Higher Class
Workplace Violence
Memorandum of Agreement...
Written Reprimand..

 

 

 

 

 

iv

PUSS KRANBARCADAASH EY

  
 
   
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

a

   
    

ification

 

 

85
86
