AGREEMENT

BETWEEN
THE CITY OF ST. PETERSBURG
AND
SUN COAST
POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION
FOR
POLICE OFFICERS AND TECHNICIANS
a
a (A
ae
aS ae
a ° ae

St. Petersburg
wwwsstpete.org

 

OCTOBER 1, 2016 THROUGH SEPTEMBER 30, 2019
CITY OF ST. PETERSBURG AND PBA
OFFICERS & TECHNICIANS

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE
Agreemen
Preamble.

 
 
 
 

1 Recognition...
2 Employee Rights.
3 Management Rights
4 Prohibition of Strikes.
5 Non-Discriminatio
6
7
8

 

 

 

 

Checkoff

PBA Representation.

PBA Business........
9 Grievance Procedur
10 Arbitration...
11 Illness Leave
12 Bereavement Leav
13 Military Leave......
14 On-Duty Injury Benefits.
15 Temporary Restricted (Light) Duty
16 Annual Leave..
17 Holidays

 

  
 
 
 
 

 

ANAAKDESKRAINEASSiINEwWHEEE

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  

Section 1 General Wage Increase.
2 Progression in the Pay Plan
3 Shift Differential...
4 Acting Assignment:
5 Extra Duty Pay
6 Credit for Previous LE Experience
7 Clothing Allowance
8 K-9 Allowance
9 Uniform Maintenance Allowance
10 Compensation for Off-Duty Permit Assignments
11 Compensation for Tropicana Field Assignments.
12 Compensation for Working City Co-Sponsored Event:
10 Police Officer Recruitment Bonus.
Appendix '"'A" Pay Plan...
19 Work Week & Overtime
20 Seniority & Reduction-in-Force .
21 Legal Benefit...
22 Safety & Health..
23 General Provision:
Section 1 Reimbursement for Lost or Damaged Personal Property ..
2 Group Insurance
3 Retirement Awards
4 Court Duty After Retirement

 

 

 

 

 
  
   
  

2
44
48

0

1

3

3

4

5

5

in

 
24
25

27
28
29
30
31

5 Per Diem... -

6 Assigned Vehicles -

7 Law Enforcement Personnel DNA Elimination Sample Database...56
Tuition Reimbursement..
Drug Free Workplace..
Pension Benefits ...
Promotional Process
Maintenance of Condition:
Savings Clause....
Entire Agreement.
Duration
Signature Page

 

 

 

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
AGREEMENT

In accordance with the State of Florida Public Employees Collective Bargaining Statute,
this Agreement is entered into by the City of St. Petersburg, a municipality in the State of Florida,
hereinafter called the "Employer" or "City" and the Sun Coast Police Benevolent Association,
Incorporated, hereinafter referred to as the "PBA."

PREAMBLE

The purpose of this Agreement is to promote and maintain harmonious and cooperative
relationships between the Employer and employees, both individually and collectively, and the
PBA, and to provide an orderly and peaceful means for resolving differences which arise
concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement.

The parties recognize that the best interest of the community will be served by assuring
the public, at all times, of orderly and uninterrupted operations and functions of the municipal
government, and by providing in the most efficient manner, public service to the citizens of the
community.

SPECIAL NOTE:

The personal pronouns he, his, and him used in this Agreement are to be interpreted to include
both sexes. They are used merely for convenience purposes and are not to be considered as any
adverse reflection on either sex.

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION

Section 1. The City of St. Petersburg hereby recognizes the Sun Coast Police Benevolent
Association as the exclusive bargaining agent for the purpose of good faith collective bargaining
with respect to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment for all employees in
the bargaining unit.

Section 2. The bargaining unit for which this recognition is accorded is as defined in the
certification granted by the Public Employees Relations Commission on June 27, 1975, Certificate
No. 87, comprised of all full-time employees (and excluding temporary employees) within the
City of St. Petersburg Police Department employed in the classifications of:

Police Officer
Forensic Services Technician
Latent Print Examiner

 
  

 

All other employees in other ranks, positions, and classifications are excluded from this bargaining
unit, unless the parties mutually agree to add a classification or classifications to the unit. If the
parties are not able to agree, the matter shall be referred to the Public Employees Relations
Commission (PERC) by either party through the unit clarification process.

 
Section 3. The Sun Coast Police Benevolent Association hereby recognizes the Mayor or his
representative as the public employer's representative for the purpose of good faith collective
bargaining.

Section 4. For the purpose of this Agreement, the terms "member," "bargaining unit
employees," and "employees" shall be synonymous.

ARTICLE 2
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS
Section 1. Bill of Rights

Employees, including Forensic Services Technicians and Latent Print Examiners, are
entitled to any and all benefits and rights as described in Florida Statutes Sections 112.532 through
112.534, "Law Enforcement Officers' and Correctional Officers’ Bill of Rights," and any and all
benefits and rights that may be added to said Statutes during the term of this Agreement. Any
allegations of a violation of these benefits or rights shall be subject to the remedies provided by
Florida Statutes Sections 112.532 through 112.534.

Employees are also entitled to any and all benefits and rights as described in General Order
II-10, Processing Complaints Against Personnel, Section IV, Receipt of Complaints (revised July,
2010). Should changes be made to the Florida Statutes or court decisions be made interpreting the
Statutes, the Department may change the General Order to be in conformance. The Union will be
notified if this section is modified.

Section 2. Department Personnel Records

Each employee covered by this Agreement shall have the right to inspect and make copies
of his Department Personnel Record or any record directly related to said employee, provided the
records are not confidential. (Note: An employee's own medical records are not confidential to
him and may be viewed by him and copied upon request.) There shall be a copying charge per file
of fifteen cents ($.15) per page. No more than one (1) personnel record will be reviewed at any
one time.

Section 3. Refutation

The City agrees that an employee shall have the right to include in his official or department
personnel record a written and signed refutation (including signed witness statements) of any
material the employee considers to be detrimental.

Section 4. Residency

Residency requirements for employees covered by this Agreement shall be within a sixty
(60) mile radius or two (2) hours driving time of Police Headquarters.

Section 5. Miscellaneous
A. Polygraph examinations shall be administered in accordance with applicable law.

-2-
B.

Section 1.

It will be an employee's right to record his own Internal Affairs investigation
interview if he wishes.

ARTICLE 3
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

The PBA recognizes the prerogative of the City to operate and manage its affairs

in all respects in accordance with its responsibilities. The powers and authority which the City has
not officially abridged, delegated, or modified by this Agreement, are retained by the City.

Except for management rights specifically compromised by the provisions of this
Agreement, management officials of the City retain their rights in accordance with the provisions
of the Personnel Management System, and the law of this municipality and state. These rights
include, but are not limited to, the following:

A.

B.

To determine the organization of City government.
To determine the purpose of each of its constituent agencies.

To exercise control and discretion over the organization and efficiency of
operations of the City.

To set standards for services to be offered to the public.
To manage and direct the employees of the City.

To hire, examine, classify, promote, train, transfer, assign, schedule, and retain
employees in positions with the City.

To suspend, demote, discharge, or take other disciplinary action against employees
for just cause.

To increase, reduce, change, modify, or alter the composition and size of the work
force, including the right to relieve employees from duties because of lack of work,
funds, or other legitimate reasons.

To determine the location, methods, means, and personnel by which operations are
to be conducted, including the right to contract and subcontract existing and future
work. The City agrees to meet and confer with PBA representatives at least thirty
(30) days prior to assigning civilians to do work currently being performed by
Police Officers filling positions authorized by the Budget Department for that rank.

To determine the number of employees to be employed by the City.

To establish, change, or modify the number, types, and grades of positions or
employees assigned to an organization, unit, department, or project.

 
L. To establish, change, or modify duties, tasks, responsibilities, or requirements
within job descriptions in the interest of efficiency, economy, technological change,
or operating requirements.

M. To establish, implement, and maintain an effective Internal Security Procedure.
N. To add, change, modify, or delete any rule, regulation, or policy.
Section 2. The City Council has the sole authority to determine the purpose and mission of the

City Council and the amount of the budget to be adopted by the City Council.

Section 3. If it is determined that civil emergency conditions exist, including, but not limited
to riots, civil disorders, hurricane conditions, or similar catastrophes, the provisions of this
Agreement may be suspended during the time of the declared emergency, provided that wage rates
and monetary fringe benefits shall not be suspended.

ARTICLE 4
PROHIBITION OF STRIKES
Section 1. Strike Definition

"Strike" means the concerted failure to report for duty, the concerted absence of employees
from their positions, the concerted stoppage of work, the concerted submission of resignations, the
concerted abstinence in whole or in part of any group of employees from the full and faithful
performance of their duties of employment with the City of St. Petersburg, the Employer, for the
purpose of inducing, influencing, condoning, or coercing a change in the terms and conditions of
employment or the rights, privileges, or obligations of their employment. "Strike" also means
participating in a deliberate and concerted course of conduct which adversely affects the services
of the Employer, including the concerted failure to report for work after the expiration of a
collective bargaining agreement and picketing in furtherance of a work stoppage.

Section 2. Strikes Prohibited

Employees covered by this Agreement, the PBA, its officers, agents, and representatives,
agree that Florida Statutes Section 447.505 prohibits them individually or collectively as public
employees or the PBA from participation in a strike against the City of St. Petersburg, the
Employer, by instigating or supporting in any manner, a strike. It is further agreed that employees
covered by this Agreement will not support strike actions that may be initiated by other unions by
refusing to cross strike lines or picket lines that may be established by such unions. Any violation
of this section shall subject the violator(s) to the penalties as provided by law and the rules and
regulations of the Employer.

 

Section 3. Affirmation

Employees covered by this Agreement and the PBA, its officers, agents, and
representatives agree that they will not engage in any "strike" activities against the City of St.
Petersburg, the Employer.
Section 4. Penalties

Any employee covered by this Agreement who participates in, is a party thereto, or
promotes any of the above actions as outlined in Sections | and 2 of this Article, or other similar
form of interference with the operations or functions of the Employer shall be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including discharge. Employees shall not be entitled to any benefits
or wages whatsoever while they are engaged in any strike activities, or other interruptions of work.

 

Any employee discharged in accordance with this Article or applicable provisions of
Florida Statutes Chapter 447 shall, if appointed, reappointed, employed, or re-employed by the
City, serve a six (6)-month probationary period following the reappointment or re-employment,
and the compensation may in no event exceed that received immediately prior to the time of the
violation, and the compensation may not be increased for one (1) year.

ARTICLE 5
NON-DISCRIMINATION

Section 1. The Employer and the PBA agree that the provisions of this Agreement shall be
applied equally to all employees in the bargaining unit without regard to race, color, national
origin, religion, gender, marital status, age, disability, sexual orientation, PBA membership, or
legitimate PBA activity. The parties agree, however, a grievance based upon allegations of a
violation of federal or state employment laws, such as the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Family
and Medical Leave Act, Title VII, 42 U.S.C. §1983, Florida Statutes Chapter 760, the Americans
With Disabilities Act, and the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, cannot be filed
under the grievance procedure contained within this contract. Rather, the employee or Union,
whichever is applicable, shall be directed to the process established by the Mayor for the
investigation of allegations of illegal discrimination, sexual harassment, or other forms of
inappropriate behavior. In addition to the Mayor's internal process, procedures established by the
Police Department are available, and/or the employee or Union may seek assistance from the U.S.
Department of Labor, the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, or other appropriate
state or federal agency.

Section 2. The PBA, as the certified bargaining agent of the employees covered by this
Agreement, hereby pledges that it will accept members to its organization without regard to race,
color, national origin, religion, gender, marital status, age, disability, or sexual orientation
ARTICLE 6
CHECKOFF
Section 1. Employees participating in the current dues, dental, health insurance, AFLAC,

and/or uniform assessment payroll deduction program, may continue to do so as long as the PBA
remains the certified bargaining agent for employees in this bargaining unit.

 

Section 2. Employees covered by this Agreement may authorize, on the prescribed form at the
end of this Article, the deduction of PBA dues, the approved PBA dental or health insurance plan,
and AFLAC premiums if applicable. These forms may be duplicated by the employees or Union

-5-
for this purpose. Any Union uniform assessments will be certified in writing to the Employer by
the PBA thirty (30) days prior to implementation date.

Section 3. Payroll dues, AFLAC, and/or dental or health insurance authorizations are
revocable at the employee's request upon thirty (30) days written notice to the Employer and the
PBA. When an employee stops payroll dues deduction, dental or health insurance, uniform
assessments, and any other Union payroll deductions shall also be stopped.

Section 4. The Employer is expressly prohibited from any involvement in the collection of
fines, penalties, or special assessments and shall not honor any requests of this nature.

Section 5. The PBA agrees to pay the Employer a reasonable fee for the service of dues,
dental, health insurance, AFLAC, and/or uniform assessments deductions. The fee for total
deductions, dues, dental, health insurance, AFLAC, and/or uniform assessments shall be twenty-
five dollars ($25.00) per month. The deduction for services for the fiscal year, excluding the fee
for changes referenced in Section 9 of this Article, shall be deducted from the October payment of
dues, dental, health insurance, AFLAC, or uniform assessments to the PBA.

 

Section 6. PBA dues, dental, health insurance, AFLAC, and/or uniform assessments shall be
deducted each applicable pay period and the funds deducted shall be remitted to the PBA account
by automatic deposit (wire transfer) the first workday after deduction unless an emergency
(machine breakdown, etc.) prevents the meeting of this time frame. Should the PBA's account
number change, the City must have at least fifteen (15) calendar days notice in order to be able to
provide automatic deposit within the time frame specified.

Section 7. In any pay period in which there is insufficient pay to cover all other duly
authorized deductions, dues, dental, health insurance, AFLAC, and/or uniform assessments will
not be deducted from an employee's pay.

Section 8. The Treasurer of the PBA shall submit a written request stating in dollars and cents
the new amount of PBA dues, dental, health insurance, AFLAC, and/or uniform assessments to be
deducted from the wages of members who have authorized or been assessed such deductions. This
request shall be submitted in advance of the effective date of any changes.

Section 9. The PBA agrees to pay the Employer a reasonable fee for any change in
membership dues structure, dental, health insurance, AFLAC, and/or uniform assessment structure
at the rate of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). A check to cover this fee shall accompany any letter of
change notice.

  

Section 10. The PBA will indemnify, and hold the City harmless against any and all claims,
demands, suits, or other forms of liability that shall arise out of, or by, payroll deduction of Union
dues, dental, health insurance, and/or uniform assessments. The PBA agrees that in case of error,
proper adjustment, if any, will be made by the PBA with the affected employees.
NOTICE TO EMPLOYER AND PBA
AUTHORIZATION FOR DEDUCTION OF UNION DUES

Thereby authorize my Employer to deduct from my salary each pay period my PBA Dues
as certified to the Employer by the PBA.

Thereby authorize my Employer to deduct from my salary each pay period payments as
indicated below and as certified to the Employer by the PBA.

 

Dues $ AFLAC $
O Dental Insurance $. Other $
(Please Specify)
Increase/Decrease Bi-weekly Deduction from $ to$

I understand these authorizations are voluntary, and I may revoke them at any time by giving my
Employer and the Union thirty (30) days notice.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Date Signed

Position (Print) Last Name, First, M.I.
Dept./Div./Activity Payroll #

Union Official Date
NOTICE TO EMPLOYER AND PBA
INSTRUCTIONS TO STOP PAYROLL DEDUCTION OF PBA DUES

I hereby instruct my Employer and advise the Union to stop deducting Union dues
from my salary. It is understood that my deductions for other programs that I may have selected
will also stop.

Thereby instruct my Employer and advise the Union to stop deducting payments for
the following programs:
Dental Insurance
AFLAC

Other (Please Specify)

 

Decrease my total deduction from $ to$

This form is executed willfully, and it is understood it will take thirty (30) days to execute the
stop deduction.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Date Signed

Position (Print) Last Name, First, M.I.
Dept./Div./Activity Payroll #

Union Official Date
Section 1.

ARTICLE 7
PBA REPRESENTATION

PBA Representation During Collective Bargaining Negotiations

 

A.

Section 2.

Neither party in negotiations shall have any control over the selection of the
negotiating or bargaining representatives of the other party. The PBA will furnish
the Labor Relations Office with a written list of the PBA's bargaining team at the
first bargaining meeting, and substitution changes thereto, if necessary.

The Employer shall recognize PBA representatives for the purpose of collective
bargaining as authorized by the President of the PBA as reflected on the submission
listed per Section 1(A) of this Article.

The Department will make every effort to release recognized PBA representatives,
who are Police Department employees, to participate in collective bargaining
negotiation sessions as representatives of the PBA.

PBA collective bargaining team members will be authorized to use PBA Business
time as outlined in Article 8. In addition, employees participating in the collective
bargaining process at the request of the Union may also be authorized by the Union
to use PBA Business time. This includes preparation for bargaining, negotiations
sessions, Special Master hearings, and other related meetings.

 

A.

PBA Representation During the Term of the Contract

The names of all PBA representatives shall be given in writing to the Labor
Relations Office as well as any change in such list prior to the effective date of their
assuming duties of representation.

The Employer shall recognize five (5) PBA representatives, or one (1)
representative for each one hundred (100) members, as authorized by the President
of the PBA or his designee for the conduct of Labor-Management relations between
the Employer or Police Department and the PBA for this bargaining unit as
reflected on the submission listed per Section 2(A) of this Article.

Recognized PBA representatives, who are employees of the St. Petersburg Police
Department, will be permitted to discuss PBA business with employees during their
duty hours provided that such discussions shall in no way interrupt, delay, or
otherwise interfere with effective and proper service to the community. The PBA
agrees that this privilege shall not be abused.

 
 

Recognized PBA representatives, who are employees of the St. Petersburg Police
Department, shall be allowed to communicate official PBA Business to employees
prior to being checked on duty and after the employees have been checked off duty
at the end of their work shifts. City work hours shall not be used by employees or
PBA representatives for conducting Union meetings or the promotion of Union
affairs, with the one exception noted in Section 2(C) of this Article.

-9-
E. Recognized PBA representatives, who are not employees of the St. Petersburg
Police Department, will be granted access to Department work areas during
working hours to carry out the functions which come within the scope of their
responsibilities on matters relating to this Agreement.

F. Employees shall have the right to PBA representation if the employee desires to
meet and consult with any supervisory or managerial official to discuss matters that
may involve employee discipline, via the appropriate chain of command.

G. Copies of special orders, general orders, or training bulletins affecting employees
covered by this Agreement shall be provided to the PBA when issued.

H. Solicitation of any and all kinds by the PBA not previously approved by the Police
Chief or his designee including solicitation of membership and the collection of
PBA monies, shall not be engaged in during working hours.

ARTICLE 8
PBA BUSINESS

Section 1. PBA representatives who are employees of the St. Petersburg Police Department
and recognized by the Employer as such may be granted time off, up to a maximum of five (5)
employees in any one instance, by Department management to conduct business in connection
with the PBA and to attend city, county, or state public hearings or meetings; Civic Association
meetings; or fund raising activities for registered (IRS) charitable organizations. Employees and
representatives performing any of the activities provided for elsewhere in this Agreement that
provides time off without loss of pay will be compensated in accordance with the provisions of
this Article. Attendance at any PBA business activities outside of an employee's regular scheduled
working hours shall not be deemed as time worked and will not be covered by PBA Business leave
hours.

  

Section 2. Time off from duty will be without loss of straight time pay in accordance with the
following provisions:

A. A written request for the use of PBA Business time shall be submitted through the
chain of command to the appropriate Assistant Police Chief at least seventy-two
(72) hours in advance of the time off, or verbal permission may be obtained from
the Watch Commander in the case of unforeseen emergencies and the request
submitted to the Assistant Chief the next business day.

B. Requests shall be submitted using the PBA Business Time Leave Request Form
providing the time and date requested to be absent from duty and briefly describing
the purpose for the leave. A copy of the form is contained at the end of this Article.

Cc. Sufficient manpower is available on his regular shift to properly staff the

Department/unit during the absence of the employee or PBA representatives as
determined by the appropriate Assistant Chief.

-10-
 

D. Written approval by the appropriate istant Chief in advance of the use of PBA
Business time, except in emergencies as provided in Section 2(A) of this Article.

E. The Assistant Chief or Watch Commander shall, prior to approval, take into
account staffing problems, emergency situations, overtime obligations, and other
leave for PBA Business which conflicts with vacation time schedules.

Section 3. The Department retains the right to restrict time off for PBA Business when an
emergency condition exists and such time off from work assignment would create a danger to
public safety.

Section 4. The Department will allow four hundred and fifty (450) hours of paid time per fiscal
year to be donated to the PBA Business time account. Use of these hours and all hours donated
by members of the bargaining unit as described in Section 5 of this Article shall be used exclusively
by PBA representatives and employees for the purposes described in Section | of this Article.

Section 5. Employees covered by this Agreement may donate a minimum of two (2) hours of
their annual leave (vacation) or holiday time toward a PBA Business time account. Donations to
the St. Petersburg PBA Business time account can be processed anytime during the term of this
Agreement using the form included at the end of this Article, which must be submitted to the
Department fiscal office. Donated hours must be credited and available in the account prior to any
request for use. In no case will a negative balance be permitted.

Section 6. Charges against the PBA Business time account, as provided in this Article, shall
only be made when approved by the President of the PBA, or his designee, prior to the employee
or PBA representatives utilizing requested PBA Business time.

Section 7. For the purposes of this Article, annual leave time schedules have priority over
requests for the use of the PBA Business time.

Section 8. Unused time in the PBA Business time account will be carried into the next fiscal
year.

Section 9. City Council Agenda

The PBA President shall be provided with advance copies of the printed City Council
agenda, and City Council subcommittee meeting agendas when available in advance, at no cost to
the PBA. In addition, if the PBA is interested in particular back-up material, the Clerk's office will
provide a copy at no cost and in a timely manner.

Section 10. Bulletin Boards

The presently existing bulletin boards authorized for PBA use may be used for posting
official PBA business notices. Authorized bulletin boards shall number a minimum of four (4),
but shall not exceed six (6) and shall be the same size as the existing boards. All notices posted
shall be signed by the president of the PBA, or the Executive Director, who shall be personally
accountable for the contents. Duplicate copies of all notices posted shall be submitted to the Police
Chief for his file prior to posting. All costs incidental to preparing and posting of PBA materials

-ll-
shall be borne by the PBA. The PBA is responsible for posting and removing material on its
bulletin boards and for maintaining such bulletin boards in an orderly condition.

Section 11. | City-PBA Consultation

The City and PBA mutually agree that either party may request a consultation meeting,
with said request being made in writing. Times, dates, and places for the meeting shall be arranged
by mutual consent. The party requesting the consultation shall advise the other party of the topic
or topics for discussion. Consultation meetings shall not be used for negotiation purposes, but
shall provide for a free flow of information and ideas of possible future changes of working
conditions. Meetings may also be used for either party to advance its views on interpretation of
matters covered by this Agreement where a conflict in interpretation may exist. Each party shall
be responsible for those people attending the meetings. PBA representatives who are also Police
Department employees shall be limited to no more than four (4) persons at any one meeting. There
will be no limitations for attendance placed on PBA representatives who are not Police Department
employees. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the PBA from utilizing the grievance
procedure as set forth in Article 9 of this Agreement as final resolution to conflicts involving the
interpretation or application of this Agreement.

 

  

Section 12. Other Administrative or Legal Procedures and Hearings

 

On occasion, employees covered by this bargaining unit are subpoenaed to attend a
deposition or court hearing with said subpoena being issued at the request of the PBA or PBA
attorney. The City agrees it will provide up to four (4) of these employees with pay for hours
which coincide with their normally scheduled hours of work, resulting in a no loss of pay situation.
It is agreed that employees shall not receive pay from the City for attendance outside of the
employees’ normally scheduled work hours. If more than four (4) employees are subpoenaed at
the request of the PBA, then the four (4) employees so designated by the PBA shall be covered by
this provision. All other employees shall either use annual leave or be placed in a leave without
pay status for any work hours spent at such proceedings. Arrangements to attend must be made
so as not to disrupt service to the community.

This provision does not apply to other absences from work for other purposes addressed
elsewhere in this Agreement.

Section 13. Contract Modification

Provisions of this contract may be clarified, amended, or modified upon the written consent
of the duly authorized representatives of the City and the PBA. No ratification by the legislative
body or represented employees shall be required on said clarification, amendment, or modification.

Section 14. Printing the Agreement

The Employer agrees to make available ten (10) copies of this Agreement to the PBA
within forty-five (45) days after final ratification by City Council and signature by the parties of
the ratification page of the contract. An electronic copy of the Agreement shall be made available
on the City's Intranet.

-12-
DONATION TO PBA BUSINESS TIME ACCOUNT

 

L hereby authorize the

 

CITY OF ST. PETERSBURG to deduct hours (minimum of two) from my

account checked below:

() HOLIDAY (_) ANNUAL LEAVE

The time deducted above is to be transferred to the PBA Business time account for use in

accordance with Article 8 of this Agreement.

 

SIGNATURE

 

PAYROLL# DEPT. DIVISION-ACTIVITY

-13-
PBA BUSINESS TIME LEAVE REQUEST

I, » payroll # ,» a PBA member, request to be absent from duty
on the date and time listed below for the purpose of PBA Business. I understand this request is to
be made at least 72 hours in advance of the time off, except in an emergency situation.

Date of requested absence: Time: from a.m./p.m. to a.m./p.m.

Check type of Union Business being attended and provide explanation below:

 

Pay | Explanation

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Type of PBA Business Code
CL Representative at [A interview 08
Representative at grievance, arbitration, Chain of 08

Command Board or Camnlaint Review Board
Representative at employee-initiated meetings with 08

management

| 11 Grievant 08

[1 Witness (in to 4 emnlovees) OR1
C1 Consultations O81
0 Preparations for Bargaining 080
(Negotiation Sessions 08
o_Imnasse and Snecial Master Hearings 00.
1 Onsite Department approved information sessions

(Gnclude readoff. contract ratification. etc.) 08
0 Solicitation previously or not previously approved 080

 

O City, County, or State public meetings, civic
association meetings, fund raising

[|_PBA Meetings O80

1 Other not listed above

080

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

080 - Union Business, non-sweat hours 081 - Union Business, sweat hours
Signatures:
Employee/PBA Representative: Date:
PBA President or designee: Date:
Watch Commander: Date:

(If less than 72 hours notice)

Chain of Command: Date:
Date:
Date:

cc: Police Fiscal Services, Labor Relations, PBA

-14-
Section 1.

A.

ARTICLE 9
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
General

The purpose of this Article is to establish a procedure for the fair, expeditious, and
orderly adjustment of grievances and is to be used only for the settlement of
disputes between Employer and employee, or group of employees, involving the
interpretation or application of this Agreement. A classified employee shall have
the option of utilizing the City Grievance and Appeal Procedure as written in the
Rules and Regulations of the Personnel Management System, or the grievance
procedure established under this Article, but such employee cannot use both.

An employee who has a grievance which is outside the purview of this Agreement
shall utilize the City Grievance and Appeal Procedure, if applicable.

An employee covered by this Agreement, except those in an initial probationary
period, shall have the right to be represented, or refrain from exercising the right to
be represented in the determination of grievances arising under the terms and
conditions of employment covered by this Agreement. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to prevent any classified employee from presenting a grievance
without representation, and having such grievances adjusted without the
intervention of the PBA, provided the adjustment is consistent with the terms of the
Agreement currently in effect. However, the PBA may at its own discretion choose
not to represent an employee pursuing a grievance who is not paying dues to the
PBA or whose grievance in the opinion of the PBA is without merit.

 

The PBA shall not be held responsible for and shall be held harmless from any
liability which may arise out of any adjustment or lack thereof, for any grievance
or arbitration which was processed without the employee being specifically
represented by a recognized PBA representative.

A grievance may be submitted by the PBA, as the exclusive representative of
employees covered by this Agreement, as a class grievance, which is defined as a
grievance which is non-disciplinary and affects more than one employee regarding
the same subject. The PBA President or Executive Director shall sign the class
grievance on behalf of the members of the bargaining unit. A PBA class grievance
shall be initially submitted at Step 2 (Labor Relations Office) within twenty (20)
calendar days from the date of occurrence or awareness of the occurrence.

The Employer may submit a grievance which will be filed with the PBA President
or Executive Director at Step 2 within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of
occurrence or awareness of the occurrence.

Grievances arising from the interpretation of contract provisions shall be submitted
at Step 2 within twenty (20) calendar days after the occurrence of the matter from
which the grievance arose. If any grievance, whether class, disciplinary, or contract
interpretation, is not submitted within the time limits as prescribed for every step,

 

-15-
it shall be considered untimely and deemed void. A grievance not appealed to the
next step within the time limits established by this grievance procedure shall be
considered settled on the basis of the last answer provided by management. A
grievance not answered within the time limits prescribed for the appropriate
management representative at each step shall entitle the employee to advance the
grievance to the next step. The time limits prescribed herein may be extended if
agreed by both management and the Union.

Disciplinary grievances that resulted from a Bureau Investigation shall be
submitted at Step 1 within twenty (20) calendar days of the decision.

Disciplinary grievances that resulted from a Command Review Board shall be
submitted at Step 2 within twenty (20) calendar days of the decision. If discipline
from the Command Review Board followed allegations initiated by an individual
or individuals outside of the Police Department, the aggrieved employee may also
request a Complaint Review Board, before filing a Step 2 grievance, within twenty
(20) calendar days of the Command Review Board's decision. After the decision
is rendered by the Complaint Review Board, the aggrieved employee may submit
the Step 2 grievance within twenty (20) calendar days of the Board's decision.

The filing requirements and deadlines in Steps | and 2 for written grievances and
answers shall not preclude the aggrieved employee, the PBA if applicable, and
appropriate management representatives from verbally discussing and resolving the
grievance. Discussions up through Step 2 shall not cause the aggrieved employee
and the PBA representative to suffer any loss of pay and shall normally be held
during regular working hours. It is agreed that grievance resolution activities
performed outside of the employees' normal work schedules shall not be counted
as time worked.

 

In advancing grievances in Steps 1 and 2, the employee and/or the PBA
representative, if applicable, may call a reasonable number of witnesses to offer
testimony from direct knowledge only. Witnesses who are employees shall suffer
no loss of pay or benefits while serving as witnesses at Step 1 and Step 2 hearings,
and shall be excused to testify during working hours provided such absence from
their place of work in no way interrupts, delays, or otherwise interferes with proper
and effective service to the community. Time spent during off-duty hours attending
or testifying on behalf of a grievant through Step 2 of this process shall not be
counted as time worked consistent with Article 8, Section 12 of this Agreement.

The City agrees it will provide up to four (4) employees covered by this bargaining
unit who are subpoenaed by the grievant and/or the PBA to appear at an arbitration
with pay for hours which coincide with their normally scheduled hours of work,
resulting in a no loss of pay situation. Employees shall not receive pay for
attendance that falls outside of their normally scheduled work hours. If more than
four (4) employees are subpoenaed, then the four (4) employees so designated by
the grievant or PBA, whichever is applicable, shall be covered by this provision.
All other employees shall either use annual leave or be placed in a leave without
pay status for any work hours spent at such proceedings. Arrangements to attend
must be made so as not to disrupt service to the community. Employees

-16-
Section 2.

Step 1

subpoenaed by the City to testify on behalf of the City will be placed on duty for
attendance that falls outside of their normally scheduled work hours.

The PBA representative shall be allowed reasonable time off without loss of pay
during the representative’s regular shift hours for investigating, presenting, and
appealing grievances up to and including Step 2 of this procedure. The
representative shall not receive pay for attendance that falls outside of his normally
scheduled work hours. The performance of this function by the PBA representative
shall in no way interrupt the normal functioning of the Department.

The PBA agrees to guard against the use of excessive time for such activities which
are authorized by this Agreement. The PBA representative will provide advance
notice to supervision to allow planning arrangements to enable the representative
time for investigative activity. When a PBA representative desires to contact an
employee who has a complaint, the representative shall first obtain verbal
permission from the employee’s supervisor. If permission must be denied at that
particular time, the PBA representative will be informed of the reason for the denial
and when he can reasonably expect to contact the aggrieved employee. In the event
permission is denied, the time periods in Sections C, D, and E of this Article will
be extended accordingly. The PBA representative will notify the supervisor upon
returning to work.

Employees will follow all written and verbal directives, even if such directives are
allegedly in conflict with the provisions of this Agreement. Compliance with such
directives will not in any way prejudice the employee's right to file a grievance
within the time limits contained herein nor shall compliance affect the ultimate
resolution of the grievance. No employee or group of employees may refuse to
follow directions pending the outcome of a grievance.

Grievance Procedure

The aggrieved employee may, with or without PBA representation, submit a written
grievance on the prescribed form to the Office of the Police Chief within twenty (20)
calendar days after the occurrence of the matter from which the grievance arose. The
grievance will be considered submitted when it is signed as received by the
Department/City if delivered in person or when it is date/time stamped from a
facsimile or e-mail to the Police Chief or designee. It is understood that in all
discipline cases, "occurrence" is the date that Police Fiscal Services forwards the fully
signed Employee Notice to the employee.

 

The written grievance at this step, and at all steps thereafter, shall contain the
following information:

1. A statement of the grievance including date of occurrence, details, and facts
upon which the grievance is based.

2. The article and section, if appropriate, of the Agreement alleged to have
been violated.

-17-
Step 2

3. The action, remedy, or solution requested by the employee.

4. Signature of aggrieved employee and/or the PBA representative, if
applicable. If the employee is represented by the PBA, no employee
signature is necessary for disciplinary grievances.

5. Date submitted.

Grievances submitted which do not contain the above information shall be considered
void and shall be returned to the employee or the PBA if it is representing the
employee. The employee/grievant or the PBA shall have five (5) additional calendar
days to fully complete and resubmit the grievance.

Within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the grievance, the Police Chief or his
designee shall meet with the grievant and/or the PBA representative, if applicable, to
discuss and seek a solution to the grievance. Within seven (7) calendar days after the
meeting, the Police Chief or designee shall give a response in writing to the grievant
and the PBA representative as the case may be.

The written response at this step and all steps thereafter shall contain the following
information:

1. An affirmation or denial of the facts upon which the grievance is based.
2. An analysis of the alleged violation of the Agreement.

3. The remedy or solution, if any, to be made.

4. Signature of the appropriate management representative.

If the grievance is not resolved at Step 1, the aggrieved employee and/or PBA
representative, if applicable, may submit a written appeal to the Labor Relations
Office within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the Police Chief or designee's
written response. If Step 2 is the appropriate level to file the original grievance, the
aggrieved employee may, with or without PBA representation, submit a written
grievance on the prescribed form to the Labor Relations Office within twenty (20)
calendar days after the occurrence of the matter from which the grievance arose. The
Labor Relations Manager or designee, if deemed appropriate, shall meet with the
aggrieved employee, Department management, and PBA representative, if
applicable, within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the written appeal to discuss
and seek a resolution of the grievance. Within fifteen (15) calendar days after this
meeting, the Labor Relations Manager or designee shall give a written
recommendation to the Police Chief or designee and to the aggrieved employee
and/or PBA representative, if applicable. The Police Chief will then have fifteen (15)
days to make any changes to the disciplinary action following the recommendation
by the Labor Relations Manager or designee. In the event the PBA representative;
the employee, if not represented by the PBA; and the Labor Relations Manager or
designee mutually agree to waive Step 2, the PBA or aggrieved employee may
proceed directly to arbitration as described in Article 10 of this Agreement.

-18-
PBA GRIEVANCE
City of St. Petersburg
Grievance No..
Please attach any statements or information to support your grievance. Type or print neatly.
NAME (Employee filing) Work phone
Class/Rank Shift Division

Date of Occurrence of Grievance

 

Article & Section of Agreement alleged to have been violated
Please check appropriate box: STEP 1_ Police Chief STEP 2 Labor Relations

Class Grievance

 

 

DESCRIBE ALL THE FACTS CONCERNING THE GRIEVANCE (date, time, place, persons involved,

etc.)

 

 

REQUESTED REMEDY:

EMPLOYEE/UNION DEPARTMENT/CITY

Signature (Employee filing grievance) Time/Date Grievance Received By (Signature)
PBA Representative Signature Time/Date Time/Date of Receipt

 

 

As provided by the PBA contract, I wish to appeal my grievance to Step 2.

 

 

Signature (Employee filing grievance) Time/Date Grievance Received By (Signature)
PBA Representative Signature Time/Date Time/Date of Receipt
DISTRIBUTION: Original - Labor Relations Copies - Department, Employee, Union
10/98

-19-
PBA GRIEVANCE
City of St. Petersburg

Grievance No..

RESPONSE

This form is to be used by the Police Chief/Designee and Labor Relations to respond to Step | and Step 2 PBA
Grievances.
TO: FROM:

EMPLOYEE/GRIEVANT OR PBA REPRESENTATIVE POLICE CHIEF /
DESIGNEE OR LABOR RELATIONS

Date Grievance Filed: Date of Hearing:

The following is in response to the above-referenced grievance. (Attach additional sheets if necessary.)

 

HEARING OFFICER'S SIGNATURE DATE
(Police Chief/Designee or Labor Relations)

 

DATE RESPONSE WAS GIVEN TO EMPLOYEE

DISTRIBUTION: Original - Labor Relations | Copies - Department, Employee, Union

-20-
Section 1.

A.

Section 2.

A.

ARTICLE 10

ARBITRATION

Arbitration Appeal

If an employee grievance is not resolved at Step 2, the aggrieved employee or the
PBA may, within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the Step 2 response,
submit a request for arbitration to the Labor Relations Office.

In non-disciplinary grievances, either the PBA or the Employer may request to take
the issue or grievance directly to arbitration by submitting the request for arbitration
to the Labor Relations Office.

If the parties fail to mutually agree upon an arbitrator within five (5) calendar days
after the date of receipt of the arbitration request, a list of seven (7) qualified
neutrals shall be requested and paid for by the moving party from the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS). Within fifteen (15) calendar days
after receipt of the list, the parties shall meet and alternately strike names on the
list, and the remaining name shall be the arbitrator. A coin shall be tossed to
determine who shall strike first. Each party has the right to reject one list. The
party rejecting the list shall be responsible for paying for and obtaining the next list
and the above described procedures will be followed for selection from the list. If
the selected arbitrator is not available for a hearing within ninety (90) days of the
date the arbitrator was selected, another list may be requested by the Labor
Relations Office, which will pay the fee for that particular list.

If the grievant is not represented by the Union, the list of arbitrators shall be
requested from the American Arbitration Association with the moving party paying
whatever fees may be charged. Once a list has been obtained, the procedures
detailed above shall be used for selecting an arbitrator.

The hearing on the grievance shall be informal and the rules of evidence shall not
apply; however, to assure an orderly hearing, the rules of judicial procedure should
be followed as closely as possible.

General Provisions

The arbitrator shall not have the power to add to, subtract from, modify, or alter the
terms of this Agreement in arriving at a decision of the issue or issues presented,
and shall confine his decision solely to the interpretation or application of the
Agreement. The arbitrator shall not have authority to determine any other issues
not submitted to him.

The decision of the arbitrator made within the scope of his authority as outlined in

Section 2(A) of this Article, shall be final and binding upon the aggrieved employee
or the PBA and the Employer but neither party waives its rights under state law.

-21-
Section 1.

A.

The arbitrator's fee and expenses shall be borne by the losing party. In the event
that the arbitrator makes any change in the award, meaning the arbitrator does not
fully uphold the position of either party, the arbitrator's fee and expenses shall be
borne equally by the parties to the arbitration.

In the event a scheduled hearing is rescheduled or canceled and fees are due to the
arbitrator, the party rescheduling or canceling the hearing is responsible to pay the
costs. If both parties mutually make the decision to reschedule or cancel the
hearing, the fees due to the arbitrator shall be split equally by the parties.

The expenses in connection with attendance of participants and witnesses for either
side shall be paid by the party producing such participants and witnesses, except as
otherwise specified in Article 9, Section 1(F) of this Agreement.

The arbitrator shall be requested to render his decision as quickly as possible, but
in any event, no later than sixty (60) calendar days after the hearing or after receipt
of the post-hearing briefs. When post-hearing briefs are to be submitted and one of
the parties orders a transcript of the hearing prior to preparing its brief, that party
shall notify the other party and the arbitrator as to when it has received the
transcript. Both parties shall have twenty (20) calendar days following notification
of receipt of the transcript to prepare and mail their briefs to the arbitrator, unless
both parties agree to some other deadline.

 

For grievances that include a monetary claim against the Employer, the arbitrator
shall not award the accrual of back pay and/or benefits that are more than thirty one
(31) calendar days prior to the date the employee filed the written grievance.

Upon receipt of the arbitrator's award, corrective action, if any, will be implemented
as soon as possible, but in any event no later than fifteen (15) calendar days after
receipt of the arbitrator's award.

 

Either party to this Agreement desiring transcripts of the arbitration hearings shall
be responsible for the cost of such transcripts, if available.

ARTICLE 11

ILLNESS LEAVE
Accrual Rate
Employees covered by this Agreement shall accrue four (4) hours of illness leave
for each eighty (80) regularly scheduled work hours on active pay status with a
maximum accrual of 1,500 hours.
Employees with personal leave balances remaining from the 2008 excess illness
leave conversion shall continue to have their personal leave hours scheduled and
authorized in accordance with the provisions for annual leave.

Personal leave hours shall not be considered work time.

-22-
D. Personal leave hours shall not be donated or transferred to other employees or as
donations to Union Pool Time.

E. Unused personal leave hours shall not be paid out upon separation from
employment.
Section 2. Use

Illness leave shall be charged by the actual hours and tenths of hours used. An employee
shall not be entitled to apply any illness hours in excess of the amount of such leave accumulated
to his credit.

Section 3. Purpose

 

The purpose of the illness leave program is to provide employees with base salary during
temporary periods of illness or injury in which they are medically incapacitated and unable to
perform their job assignments.

Section 4. Approvals

Upon receiving proper notification from an employee requesting permission to be absent
from work for medical reasons, the Police Chief or his designee shall evaluate the available
information and determine to his satisfaction that the employee is actually too ill or injured to be
expected to work. Based upon the circumstances of the case and prior to receiving the employee's
physician's report, tentative approval may be granted to the employee to be absent for medical
reasons pending further investigation including, but not limited to, personal observation of the
employee by a supervisor, or a medical evaluation by a doctor designated and compensated by the
City. The Police Chief or his designee may send home an employee who is too ill or injured to
work or would cause an unhealthy working condition if he came in contact with other employees.

Section 5. Notification

A. An employee medically incapacitated to the extent that he is unable to work shall
personally notify his supervisor or other approved department representative at
such time before the scheduled reporting time as designated by the Department,
giving the reason for the requested illness leave and the expected duration of the
absence. Occasionally, circumstances may prevent an employee from personally
notifying the Department of an absence, in which case notification may be made by
another person. If an employee is not able to notify, and can substantiate this to the
satisfaction of Department management, illness leave may be authorized by the
Police Chief or his designee.

B. Employees shall follow proper notification and absence request procedures for each
day the employee is unable to work, unless prior approval specifically waiving this
requirement is granted by the Police Chief or his designee. Failure to properly
report absences may cause an employee to be charged with leave of absence without
permission and may result in disciplinary action.

Cc. Certain requests for illness leave may qualify and be covered by the Family and
Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA). If the illness leave is covered by this Act, it

-23-
Section 6.

A.

Section 7.

A.

will be applied to the twelve (12) weeks per year of leave which must be granted to
eligible employees by the City. The year is defined by the City as a "rolling" twelve
(12)-month period which is the twelve (12) months preceding the current FMLA
event. It is understood that FMLA leave runs concurrently with time off due to on-
duty injuries or illnesses covered by workers' compensation.

Physician's Report

In order to utilize the illness benefit under this Article for bona-fide illnesses or
injuries which require an employee's absence from work, the Police Chief or his
designee may use discretion as to when a completed illness/injury report signed by
an attending physician is necessary (see form at end of this Article). However, a
completed report shall be required in each case where an employee is absent for
more than three (3) consecutive days or for repeat/chronic revisits to the doctor for
follow-up illnesses or injuries.

 

The illness/injury report form shall be presented to Department management for
verification. The form will not be accepted by Department management unless it
has been properly completed in full, including the employee's return to duty date,
the attending physician's signature, and the physician's diagnosis covering the dates
of treatment and recuperative period required.

Illness Recuperation

An employee granted illness leave shall assist in promoting his recuperation by
remaining at either his residence, a hospital, or another location approved in writing
in advance by the attending physician. The written approval shall be presented to
the Police Chief or his designee for verification prior to the employee recuperating
at the alternate site. An employee authorized to be absent from work for medical
reasons shall not engage in any recreational or work activities except upon
receiving prior written approval from his physician. The written approval shall be
presented to the Police Chief or his designee for verification. The City reserves the
right to obtain at its own expense the opinion of another physician of its own
choosing concerning what constitutes an appropriate location for recuperation or
appropriate recreational activities for an employee too ill or injured to work. Abuse
of illness leave privileges shall constitute grounds for disciplinary action.

Other places of recuperation in addition to the above require the following:

1. Pre-authorization by a medical doctor must be in writing with specifics,

2. Pre-authorization must be on file with the immediate supervisor and is to
include the employee's address and phone number, if applicable, where the
employee may be reached.

Employees recuperating from a medical condition in which there was no

involvement with doctors or hospitals may request, through the chain of command,
another place of recuperation. Approval will be required in advance and the

-24-
employee's address and phone number where the employee may be reached are to
be a part of the request.

D. If, and whenever, illness leave may appear to be abused or frequently used,
Department management may require the employee claiming/requesting such leave
to furnish an illness/injury report to support the necessity for such absence.
Consistent with Section 7(A) of this Article, abuse of illness leave privileges shall
constitute grounds for disciplinary action.

Section 8. Department management shall use discretion in determining whether or not a visit
is required to verify the reason for an employee's medical absence and a report made of the reasons
for absence from duty.

Section 9. Should an employee be absent for reported medical reasons and fail to comply with
the provisions of this Article, such employee's timesheet shall be coded as leave without pay, and
the employee may be disciplined.

Section 10. Pay Off Provision

During the term of this Agreement, upon separation of employment for reasons of either
normal or disability retirement, or the death of an employee who would otherwise be eligible for
normal retirement, employees or their estates shall be entitled to receive a payment for unused

illness leave hours credited to their account based on the following formula:

Twenty-five percent (25%) of the accrued hours up to a maximum of three hundred seventy-
five (375) hours.

This payment shall be determined on the employee's base straight time hourly rate at the time of
retirement, or death, if applicable.

Section 11. | Miscellaneous Provisions

A. An employee making a departmental transfer will retain any illness leave hours and
personal leave hours to his credit.

B. Employees may not use illness leave for illnesses or injuries sustained while
engaged in outside employment.

Cc. Those employees who suffer injuries or illnesses which preclude them from being

able to work light duty shall also be covered by the one or two-year time frame for
recovery purposes, depending upon which is applicable, as detailed in Article 15.

-25-
CITY OF ST. PETERSBURG
ILLNESS/INJURY REPORT

PATIENT:

 

(Printed Name of Employee)

Department/Division

 

Supervisor

 

PHYSICIAN'S STATEMENT

T examined the above-named patient on

 

Nature of injury or illness

 

 

 

CHECK ONE:
Patient may return to work immediately.
Patient may work a light duty assignment.
Patient unable to work due to this injury/illness from date) through

(date)

For the following reasons:

 

 

 

Date patient can return to work

 

Restriction or comments

 

 

Was this condition reported to you as job related?

Date:

 

Attending Physician's Signature

 

Address

26
ARTICLE 12
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

Section 1. Employees covered by this Agreement may be granted, upon approval of the Police
Chief or his designee, time off with pay, if applicable, at the employee's base straight time rate,
not to exceed forty (40) work hours, to attend the funeral and/or memorial service (hereinafter
service) and/or attend to the affairs or handle related activities in the event of a death in the
employee's immediate family. All days taken for bereavement leave must be taken within thirty
(30) consecutive calendar days surrounding the date of the service or date of death if no service is
held. If the service is to be held outside the state of Florida, the employee may be granted time off
with pay from his regularly scheduled work hours up to eighty (80) work hours to attend the
service. Should the employee not attend the out-of-state service but need time to make service
arrangements or handle related activities, up to forty (40) hours of paid time off may be granted.
Such leave shall be granted by the Police Chief or his designee except in such cases as he
determines that such leave is not possible because of operational requirements.

Section 2. For the purpose of this Article, the employee's immediate family shall be defined
as the employee's father, mother, legal guardian(s), spouse, son, daughter, brother, sister, father-
in-law, mother-in-law, grandparents, great-grandparents, stepparents, step-children, grand-
children, or spouse's grandparents.

Section 3. Should an employee require additional time other than provided in Section 1 of this
Article, he may request the additional time from the Police Chief or his designee. Any additional
time used shall be charged to annual leave or the holiday storage account if the employee has hours
accrued that can be charged. Use of annual leave or holiday time for this purpose shall not result
in the cancellation of annual leave already scheduled by the employee; if necessary, the portion of
the approved and previously scheduled annual leave for which the employee does not have
sufficient time accrued may be taken as leave without pay.

Should an employee request annual leave to attend the service for an individual who is a
member of the employee's immediate household but is not listed in Section 2 of this Article, the
employee's supervisor shall, operational considerations permitting, grant the request.

Section 4. The employee shall, at the discretion of the Police Chief or his designee, provide
the Department with proof of death in his immediate family as defined in Section 2 of this Article
before compensation is approved.
Section 5. An employee must be on active pay status to be eligible for this benefit.
ARTICLE 13
MILITARY LEAVE
Military Leave for employees covered by this Agreement shall be governed by Florida

Statutes, Chapters 115 and 250, as well as the administrative procedures included in the City’s
Rules and Regulations of the Personnel Management System.

27
ARTICLE 14

ON-DUTY INJURY BENEFITS
(Workers' Compensation Supplement)

This Article is intended to supplement the wage benefit provisions of the Workers' Compensation
Law of the State of Florida.

A.

The Employer agrees to compensate employees covered by this Agreement for on-
duty injuries sustained by an employee while acting within the scope of his
employment and not as a result of the employee's failure to comply with published
safety rules and regulations. On-duty injury benefits consisting of on-duty injury
pay, annual leave accrual, and illness leave accrual shall be provided to an
employee who is unable to work in any capacity as a result of an on-duty injury.

An injury shall be determined to have been incurred while on duty only if such
injury is a compensable injury under the Florida Workers' Compensation Law. The
Employer's physician, in accordance with the Workers' Compensation Law, shall
determine the length of time an employee is designated as "no duty" or Total
Temporary Disability (TTD) resulting in absence from work due to the on-duty
injury.

The amount of on-duty injury pay shall be the amount of the employee's base salary
up to the time that Workers' Compensation wage benefits begin. When Workers'
Compensation wage benefits begin, the on-duty injury pay shall be the difference
between the Workers' Compensation wage benefits and the employee's current base
take home pay.

Base take home pay is defined as base salary after it has been reduced by normal
federal withholding taxes (income tax and Social Security, if applicable). Base
salary is the employee's straight time hourly rate times his base bi-weekly work
hours (eighty (80) for employees covered by this Agreement).

The entitlement for on-duty injury benefits shall commence with the employee's
first scheduled work shift following the date of injury, which is the date on the
City’s Report of an Injury to an Employee form completed by the employee and
the employee’s supervisor, and shall continue for fifty-two (52) calendar weeks.
In the event the no duty or TTD status extends beyond twenty-one (21) calendar
days, the amount of on-duty injury pay paid by the Employer for the first seven (7)
days shall be adjusted to equal the employee's base salary, less the Workers'
Compensation wage benefits payments.

The initial period of on-duty injury pay shall be a maximum of twelve (12) calendar

weeks. Payments made by the Employer during this period shall not be charged
against accumulated illness leave or annual leave.

28
F. In the event that the no duty or TTD status extends beyond twelve (12) calendar
weeks, the employee shall immediately notify the Police Chief, who may request
an extension from the Risk Manager in Human Resources. If an extension of on-
duty injury benefits beyond twelve (12) calendar weeks is granted, the benefits shall
be retroactive to the date the extension was requested. Until such time as the
extension is approved, or if the extension is not approved, the employee shall be
allowed to utilize accumulated illness leave or annual leave to make up the
difference between Workers' Compensation payments and current base salary.

In the event an extension of on-duty injury benefits is granted, illness leave or
annual leave used in the interim will be returned to the employee's illness leave or
annual leave account. On-duty injury benefits may not be provided beyond one (1)
year from the date of injury as established by Workers' Compensation unless
extenuating circumstances so indicate; in such cases, benefits shall be provided
only with the approval of the Mayor or his designee.

G. While an employee is on no duty or TTD status and is receiving on-duty injury pay,
illness and annual leave accruals shall continue for a maximum of fifty-two (52)
calendar weeks from the employee's first scheduled work shift following the date
of injury as recorded on the Report of an Injury to an Employee form.

H. An employee granted on-duty injury benefits shall be required to comply with the
illness leave provisions of this Agreement as they pertain to recuperation,
substantiation of medical conditions, and the performance of light duty as
applicable.

ARTICLE 15

TEMPORARY RESTRICTED (LIGHT) DUTY

 

Section 1. Employees may suffer injuries or illnesses which temporarily prevent them from
performing the full range of the essential functions of their assigned positions. However, they may
be able to work a restricted duty assignment. All employee requests for light duty must be
accompanied by a physician's statement describing the specific restrictions being placed on the
employee's activities. This physician's statement must also state that light duty work is appropriate
given the employee's condition. The Department may ign such duties as the health and
condition of the involved employee(s) permit. Employees injured on duty are also eligible to
receive Workers' Compensation and on-duty injury benefits in accordance with state law and
provisions contained elsewhere in this Agreement.

 

 

Section 2. Employees who are temporarily unable to perform full duty may request light duty
assignments through their Chain of Command. Light duty assignments will be made through the
Office of the Police Chief and may be mandated by management if light duty work is available.
First preference for light duty assignments shall be given to employees who have been injured on
the job. If light duty work is not available as determined by the Police Chief or his designee, the
employee shall not be permitted to work but may utilize whatever benefit, if any, is appropriate
(e.g., accrued annual leave, accrued illness leave, Workers' Compensation leave, etc.). If light
duty work is available and the employee chooses as permitted by the Family Medical Leave Act

29

  
not to work light duty in the case of an on-duty injury, he will not receive Workers' Compensation
pay or on-duty injury benefits but may use the appropriate accrued leave or leave without pay if
he has no accrued leave.

Section 3. The opportunity to work light duty, if available, shall be afforded to a Police Officer
who has suffered an on-duty injury, and to a Forensic Services Technician or Latent Print Examiner
who suffers an on-duty injury as the result of one of the following: 1) exposure to hazardous
substances, such as HBV and HIV-contaminated materials or chemicals which are known
carcinogens; or 2) physical harm from an encounter with criminal subjects and which results in
potentially serious medical treatment and extensive recovery. Light duty assignments are intended
for temporary periods when the employee is unable to perform the essential functions of his
position and shall cease to be available when he is informed that he has reached maximum medical
improvement (MMI) or until a period of two (2) years has expired, whichever occurs first. The
two (2)-year time period begins on the date when the physician places the employee on
restricted/modified or no duty/Total Temporary Disability (TTD) status because he cannot perform
the essential functions of the job and may only be extended by the Human Resources Director for
an employee who has suffered a catastrophic injury as defined by Workers' Compensation Law.
This time frame includes time off, time on light duty, and periods when the employee works
intermittently. An on-duty injury is an injury compensable under the Florida Workers'
Compensation Law. Employees who are working in a light duty capacity as a result of an on-duty
injury shall be relieved of duty when scheduled for authorized Workers’ Compensation
appointments for continuing treatment, therapy sessions, and/or return visits to the authorized
treating physician for evaluations. Absences of less than one (1) full shift for Workers'
Compensation follow up treatment shall be considered as regular work time and a no loss of pay
for pay code purposes. Absences in excess of one (1) full shift shall be covered and paid in
accordance with Workers' Compensation provisions. It is understood that FMLA leave runs
concurrently with time off due to on-duty injuries or illnesses covered by Workers' Compensation.

Section 4. Should an Officer or a civilian as indicated in Section 3 of this Article, who has
suffered an on-duty injury, reach MMI prior to the expiration of the two (2)-year time limit and
such designation continues to restrict the individual's ability to fully perform the essential functions
of his job, the employee may apply for a disability pension. Such employee may also seek a
civilian position which would be compatible with their limitations within the Department or the
City.

Section 5. Should an Officer or a civilian as indicated in Section 3 of this Article, who has
suffered an on-duty injury, reach the two (2)-year time limit prior to reaching MMI, he may also
seek other employment which is compatible with his limitations within the Department or the City.

Section 6. Injured Officers under Sections 4 and 5 of this Article who apply for employment
in a civilian position within the Department or the City for which they meet the minimum
qualifications shall automatically be certified and be placed on the eligibility list for that
classification and be considered with others who have qualified for consideration for the position.
In the event an Officer does not qualify for a disability pension and accepts and begins work in a
civilian position, he shall be vested under the vesting schedule provisions of the pension plan for
sworn Officers of which he was a member and be enrolled in the Employee Retirement System or
the management defined contribution plan, if eligible.

30
Section 7. An injured employee under Sections 4 and 5 of this Article who does not qualify
for a pension and who is not able to obtain a different position, may be vested in accordance with
the normal vesting schedule contained in the pension plan of which he is a member, and shall be
separated from employment with the City. Applicable Workers' Compensation benefits will
continue to be provided in accordance with state law.

Section 8. The opportunity to work light duty, if available and if so indicated by the health
care provider, shall be afforded to an Officer who suffers an illness or has been injured off-duty
who is unable to perform the essential functions of the job of Police Officer and to a Latent Print
Examiner or Forensic Services Technician who suffers an illness or has been injured off duty or
has suffered an on-duty injury which is not a result of one of the conditions described in Section 3
of this Article. Such light duty assignments may continue until the employee is informed by the
treating physician that he has reached MMI or until a one (1)-year period of time has expired,
whichever occurs first. This time frame includes time off, time on light duty, and periods where
the employee works intermittently. The one (1)-year time period begins on the date of injury or
commencement of the illness.

Section 9. An Officer under Section 8 of this Article may apply for a disability pension and/or
seek a civilian position within the Department or the City. An Officer who does not qualify for a
disability pension and/or is not able to obtain a civilian position shall be separated from City
employment and may vest in accordance with the normal vesting schedule, if eligible, in the
pension plan of which he is a member. A Latent Print Examiner or Forensic Services Technician
may apply for a disability pension and/or seek a different civilian position compatible with his
limitations. A Latent Print Examiner or Forensic Services Technician who does not qualify for a
disability pension and/or is not able to obtain a civilian position shall be separated from City
employment and may vest in accordance with the normal vesting schedule, if eligible, in the
pension plan of which he is a member.

Section 10. It shall be the responsibility of the employee to pursue his options, i.e., seek a
disability pension or other employment, with the Human Resources Department or the Pension
Office.

Section 11. It shall be the responsibility of the Department to request that the Human Resources
Department place the employee in the Alternate Employment Program (AEP) whenever an
employee reaches MMI or within ninety (90) days of the expiration of the applicable one (1) or
two (2)-year time frame, whichever comes first.

Section 12. _ Both parties agree that the provisions and time frames specified in this Article do
not constitute a guarantee of employment. Employees may still be terminated in accordance with
the provisions of the Rules and Regulations of the Personnel management System, the Police
Department General Orders, and under the provisions of this Agreement, which include just cause,
lack of work, or other such reasons.

ARTICLE 16
ANNUAL LEAVE

Section 1. Purpose of Annual Leave
31
The purpose of the annual leave is to provide employees with the opportunity to be absent
from work with management approval due to valid reasons without loss of pay or benefits.

Section 2. Annual Leave Accrual Rate

Accrual of paid annual leave shall be earned on the basis of regularly schedule work hours
on active pay status as reflected in the following schedule:

 

Annual Hourly

Accrual Upon
Years of Completion of
Service 2080 Work Hours
Employment through 5 years 120 hours
Beginning 6th year of employment 128 hours
Beginning 7th year of employment 136 hours
Beginning 8th year of employment 144 hours
Beginning 9th year of employment 152 hours
Beginning 10th year of employment 160 hours
Beginning 12th year of employment 168 hours
Beginning 13th year of employment 176 hours
Beginning 14th year of employment 184 hours
Beginning 18th year of employment 192 hours
Beginning 20th year of employment 200 hours

Section 3. Annual Leave Used for Illness Recuperation

Provisions governing the use of annual leave for illness/injury reasons may be found in the
applicable sections of Article 11 of this Agreement.

Section 4. General Provisions

A.

Paid annual leave may not be taken during the initial six (6) months of
employment or re-employment except for illness. In addition, employees
may not request paid annual leave for hours not earned and accrued, and all
annual leave time taken shall be in increments of not less than one-tenth of
an hour.

The maximum number of annual leave hours which may be accrued shall
be twice the employee's annual rate of accrual, except that employees with
twenty (20) or more years of service shall be allowed to accrue a total of
416 hours.

Requests for annual leave shall be made in advance of use. In emergency
cases, the Police Chief or his designee may waive this requirement. Certain
requests for annual leave may qualify and be covered by the Family and
Medical Leave Act (FMLA). If such leave is covered by this Act, it will be
applied towards the twelve (12) weeks per year of leave which must be
granted to eligible employees by the City. The year is defined as a "rolling"

32

 
Section 6.

twelve (12)-month period which is the twelve (12) months preceding the
current FMLA event. When an employee uses annual leave for illnesses or
injuries after exhausting his illness leave balance, the employee's annual
leave account shall not be reduced below forty (40) hours unless requested
otherwise by the employee.

Annual leave requests for vacation periods will be selected by the
Department, Division, or Units considering the manpower needs to achieve
their mission. Every effort will be made to meet the desires of the
employees and priority will be given in scheduling individual annual leave
requests for vacation purposes based on seniority date in classification.
Once an annual leave request has been authorized in writing by the
employee's supervisor and the employee can verify that nonrefundable
money has been expended after said authorization was given, the leave shall
not be canceled by the Department except in cases of civil emergency as
defined in Article 3 of this Agreement.

The nature of an employee's job and the operational requirements of a
Division/Department may cause the Police Chief or his designee to limit the
scheduling of annual leave during certain periods of the year. Based on
operational requirements and when practical and in the best interests of the
City, the Department may require the use of annual leave in amounts of
forty (40) or more hours. When a written request for annual leave (40 hours
or more) is denied, the employee will be notified in writing.

Pay Off of Account

Upon separation from City employment, an employee with at least six (6) months of full-
time service from his last date of hire shall be entitled to compensation for all unused but earned
hours in his account at his base straight time hourly rate, effective on his date of separation.

Section 1.

ARTICLE 17

HOLIDAYS

The following Holidays shall be observed:

New Year's Day

Martin Luther King, Jr. Day
Presidents' Day

Memorial Day
Independence Day

Labor Day

Veterans' Day

Thanksgiving Day

Day following Thanksgiving
Christmas Day

33

January 1

Third Monday in January
Third Monday in February
Last Monday in May

July 4

First Monday in September
November 11

Fourth Thursday in November
Fourth Friday in November
December 25
Section 2. Whenever possible, employees will be granted time off on holidays. When an
employee who is scheduled to work is able to take the holiday off, he will receive holiday pay for
the hours he would normally work. Thus, an employee normally scheduled to work five (5) eight
(8)-hour days per week will receive eight (8) hours of holiday pay. An employee who normally
works four (4) ten (10)-hour days would receive ten (10) hours of holiday pay. Employees who
work a variable hour-per-day schedule shall receive eight (8) hours of pay for the holiday if they
were scheduled to work that day and were able to take the day off.

Section 3. An employee, regardless of his work schedule, who is required to work on a holiday
or whose normal day off occurs on any such holiday shall be paid an additional eight (8) hours at
his straight time hourly rate of pay.

Section 4. Employees who work five (5) eight (8)-hour shifts per week may elect to store their
holiday hours. Employees who work four (4) ten (10)-hour shifts per week may also elect to store
their ten (10) hours of holiday time worked. However, the maximum number of holiday hours in
any fiscal year that employees may designate and assign as stored hours shall not exceed eighty
(80) hours during that fiscal year. For example, if an employee stores forty (40) hours, but
subsequently uses twenty (20) of those stored hours prior to storing any additional hours, he
remains eligible to only store up to an additional forty (40) hours in that same fiscal year to equal
the maximum of eighty (80) hours permitted. This provision therefore requires employees who
work a shift of four (4) ten (10)-hour days per week to take off some or all of the holidays that fall
on their normally-scheduled work days during the fiscal year in order to receive the benefit of all
ten (10) City-recognized holidays.

Stored holiday time not used or paid out during the fiscal year shall be paid in the last pay
period of the fiscal year or prior to an employee being promoted to any higher classification. These
hours shall be paid at the employee's straight time hourly rate of pay.

Section 5. In accordance with Article 19, Section 3 of this Agreement, holiday hours shall be
counted as work time for the purpose of weekly overtime computation when an employee either
uses holiday time on the day of the holiday, or when the employee uses stored holiday hours to
take time off at a later date. The use of stored holiday time may be granted at the discretion of
Department management.

Section 6. An employee must be on active pay status for his entire scheduled hours of duty or
work his normal schedule of hours, either on his regularly scheduled working day immediately
prior to a holiday or his regularly scheduled working day immediately following a holiday, in order
to qualify for holiday pay. Employees on Workers' Compensation will also qualify for holiday

pay.

Section 7. Employees who are scheduled and required by their supervisor to work on the day
observed as a holiday must work that day to be eligible to earn the holiday. An employee who is
scheduled to work on the day observed as a holiday and reports sick will receive holiday pay for
that day. Section 6 of this Article will not apply to employees scheduled and required to work on
the day observed as the holiday.

34
Section 8. Employees on annual leave, military leave, jury duty, illness leave, bereavement
leave, and all other absences from duty, and on active pay status on the calendar day the holiday
is observed, must use the holiday on the same calendar day that it is earned.

Section 9. When a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be designated a
substitute holiday and observed as the official holiday for that year. When a holiday falls on a
Sunday, the following Monday shall be designated a substitute holiday and observed as the official
holiday.

Section 10. | The Police Chief will determine which operations will be closed in observance of
the holiday.

Section 11. Employees covered by this Agreement will be scheduled by appropriate
supervision to work or take a holiday off, if the holiday falls on their normal work day, to provide
orderly and efficient police service to the community and Department. After being scheduled to
work on a holiday which is his normal work day, an employee may request and be approved to
take the holiday off, provided such absence from duty will in no way interfere with the mission of
his particular function, operation, unit, section, or division. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to limit the Department to close down certain functions, operations, activities, and/or
units on the day observed as the holiday.

Section 12. | Employees may donate banked holiday time to co-workers at the Police Chief's
discretion.
ARTICLE 18

PAY

Section 1. General Wage Increase

Effective the first payroll period start date of fiscal years 2017-19, pay shall be as shown
in Appendix "A" of this Article. For purposes of this Article, all references to "Technicians"
include all employees in the classifications of Forensic Services Technician and Latent Print
Examiner, except as otherwise indicated.

The pay plan reflects a four percent (4%) general wage increase for fiscal years 2017-2019.

Section 2. Progression in the Pay Plan

Progression of employees from their current step to the next higher step in the appropriate
labor grade for their classifications shall be automatic and will become effective at the beginning
of the pay period in which the employee's anniversary date of classification falls contingent upon
the employee receiving a satisfactory performance evaluation, which is defined as a rating
containing no more than two (2) unacceptable scores. See Pay Plan in Appendix A of this article.

However, progression to the final step (Master Patrol Officer) shall not be automatic. In
order to progress to step 13, employees must qualify each fiscal year by meeting the following
criteria: 1) have at least twenty (20) years of service in the City's Police Department; 2) have no
record of a disciplinary suspension on file within the previous three (3) years, except that those

35
who are in the Master Patrol Officer step as of September 2, 2015, through the end of this contract
will be subject to a requirement that they have no record of a disciplinary suspension on file within
the previous two (2) years; 3) have no more than a total of two (2) unacceptable ratings in any
categories in the previous two (2) performance evaluations combined; 4) have no more than four
(4) weeks of unscheduled leave beyond the twelve (12) weeks of FMLA leave during the previous
twelve (12) months; and 5) agree to perform additional duties as assigned. Prior to progression to
Step 13, employees shall agree in writing to the terms above. It is understood that any violations
of the terms above shall result in either ineligibility for progression to Step 13 or immediate
demotion back to Step 12 for those who have previously progressed.

 
  

Section 3. Shift Differential
A. Shift Differential for Employees Assigned to Designated Shifts

Employees working other than the normal shift schedule on a regularly assigned
shift/relief starting between 1:00 p.m. and 3:59 a.m. shall be paid a bonus called
"shift differential". Day shift (2nd relief) employees who are scheduled to work
beyond their regularly scheduled working hours shall not receive shift differential.
For the purpose of establishing the applicable shift/relief: 1) a designated shift that
normally starts between 1:00 p.m. and 8:59 p.m. shall be designated Third Relief;
and 2) a shift that starts between 9:00 p.m. and 3:59 a.m. shall be designated First
Relief. Amounts shall be:

First Relief, $1.50 per hour
Third Relief, $1.25 per hour

B. Shift Differential for Officers Working Flexible Schedules

Many Officers are working flexible hours and are not as such assigned to a
particular shift. Given their schedules, these Officers will receive a shift differential
according to the following:

Start time: 1:00 p.m. or later but on or before 8:59 p.m., $1.25 per hour
Start time: 9:00 p.m. or later but on or before 3:59 a.m., $1.50 per hour

Shift differential for each day an Officer works shall be based upon when the
Officer's shift begins, as shown above. If the Officer works two (2) full consecutive
shifts, the Officer shall be paid the appropriate shift differential for each of the two
(2) shifts, if applicable.

An Officer may occasionally work a split shift which is defined as a shift with a
break of at least two (2) hours between the first portion of the shift worked and the
second portion of the shift. An Officer who works a split shift will be eligible for
shift differential if the second portion of the split shift starts at or after 1:00 p.m.
when the hours worked after that starting time total at least six (6) hours or more.
The rate of shift differential shall be the same as that paid to Officers assigned to a
shift which has a starting time of 1:00 p.m., 6:00 p.m., or 11:00 p.m., as indicated

 

36
above, with the shift differential for the second portion of the shift based upon when
the second portion of the shift begins.

Cc. Shift Differential Eligibility

Employees meeting the criteria in Section 3(A) and 3(B) of this Article shall be
eligible for shift differential for all eligible hours worked. However, any hours
worked by an Officer in accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 8 of this
Article will not be eligible for shift differential for those hours.

Section 4. Acting Assignments

A Police Officer who is selected and assigned to serve as an Acting Sergeant or Lieutenant
(“Acting Assignment”) for a minimum of four (4) consecutive hours shall be compensated at the
same base hourly rate of pay the officer would receive if actually promoted. Such Acting
Assignments may last for up to six (6) months, after which the employee in the acting assignment
would be returned to a non-acting Officer assignment. Any Police Officer who receives a
promotion within thirty (30) days following a qualifying Acting Assignment (an Acting
Assignment of at least ninety (90) consecutive days) shall have the rate of pay_adjusted to receive
credit for the time spent acting in that classification to which he/she is promoted.

Section 5. Extra Duty Pay

A. Field Training Officer Assignments

Any Police Officer who is assigned to the Field Training Unit as an FTO shall
receive, in addition to the Officer’s base rate of pay, Extra Duty Pay for Field
Training Officer (FTO pay) in the amount equivalent to five percent (5%) of the
Officer’s base rate of pay during the term of this Agreement. This extra-duty pay
will be paid bi-weekly to qualified Officers during their periods of assignment to
the Field Training Unit.

Any Police Officer temporarily assigned to the Field Training Unit (Temporary
FTOs) will receive, in addition to the Officer’s base rate of pay, this FTO pay in
the amount equivalent to five percent (5%) of the Officer’s base rate of pay only
during pay periods in which Probationary Officers (POs) are actively assigned to
the Officer.

Officer’s assigned to the Field Training Unit who are temporarily assigned to other
units/duties, or otherwise not actively engaged in supervising or training POs (or
FTOs) for two (2) consecutive pay periods or longer, will not receive extra duty
pay for the FTO assignment until the Officer resumes such supervisor or training
duties.

B. Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) Assignment

37
Any Officer who is assigned to the extra duties of a SWAT member shall receive,
in addition to the Officer’s base rate of pay, extra duty pay for the SWAT
assignment in the flat amount of thirty-eight dollars and eighty-five cents ($38.85)
bi-weekly during the term of this Agreement. This extra-duty pay will be paid to
qualified Officers during their period of assignment. The Police Chief or his
designee shall have sole authority in decisions regarding the selection and
placement of Officers into FTO and SWAT assignments, and the removal of
Officers from FTO and SWAT assignments.

The Police Chief shall have sole authority and discretion to extend the extra duty
pay to other unique units within the Department when training of other Officers in
a manner similar to Field Training is determined to be feasible and beneficial to
Department operations.

C. Field Training Technician (FTT) Assignments

Forensic service employees who are assigned to be Field Training Technicians
(FTT) shall receive, in addition to their base rate of pay, extra duty pay for Field
Training Technician (FTT pay) assignments in the flat amount of forty-eight dollars
and thirty- five cents ($48.35) bi-weekly during the term of this Agreement. This
extra duty pay will be paid to such employees during their period of assignment.

The Police Chief or his designee shall have sole authority in decisions regarding
the selection and placement of Officers into FTT assignments, and the removal of
Officers from FTT assignments.

Dz It is understood that the Extra Duty Pay becomes part of the employee's base rate
of pay for purposes of computing overtime, in accordance with the Fair Labor
Standards Act.
Section 6. Credit for Previous Law Enforcement Experience

 

The Police Chief or his designee shall have the discretion to place a newly hired certified
Law Enforcement Officer at a level of the Police Officer Pay Plan (Appendix "A") above the Entry
Step but no higher than Step 5. An Officer's placement into a step above the entry level will be
determined based upon an assessment made by the Police Chief, or his designee, of the newly
hired Officer's education, training, and experience.

  

Seniority and all other benefits shall begin at the Entry Step for all Officers hired under
this provision.
Section 7. Clothing Allowance

A. The Employer agrees for the term of this Agreement, to continue to make available
a clothing allowance for designated Officers and Latent Print Examiners.

B. The amount of the clothing allowance shall be three hundred seventy-five dollars
($375.00) for each half of the fiscal year covered by this contract.

38
Section 8.

Designated employees shall receive (pro rata) the clothing allowance twice a year,
during October and April.

A newly designated/assigned employee may receive a clothing allowance up to six
(6) months in advance (one half (2) of the annual allowance). For example, a newly
designated employee can be paid up to the full semi-annual payment amount
applicable as of the date he is designated/assigned.

If a newly designated/assigned Officer receives a clothing allowance in advance
and then leaves the duty and becomes no longer eligible prior to completing six (6)
months, the Officer shall pay back the advance clothing allowance received. The
payback shall be on a weekly pro rata basis, i.e., the payback shall be reduced by
1/52 of the annual maximum for each full week of service in the designated duty.

K-9 Allowance

K-9 Officers perform work related to the care of department dogs outside of their normally
scheduled hours. The City recognizes that this time is compensable under the current provisions
of the Fair Labor Standards Act and will be paid in accordance with the following:

A.

K-9 Officers will be paid for the care of department dogs done after their normally
scheduled work hours at the federally established minimum wage plus two dollars
($2.00) per hour.

The parties to this Agreement concur that an average of five (5) hours per week is
spent on such duties. K-9 Officers will not work beyond the five (5) hours
established unless exigent circumstances indicate a need and only upon the
approval of a supervisor. The parties further agree that it is the prerogative of the
Department whether time spent in excess of the above is necessary.

Whenever a K-9 Officer is eligible for overtime pay, the premium pay shall be
based on the "Weighted average" of the employee's two rates of pay (the one for
law enforcement and the one for canine care) as required by the current provisions
of the Fair Labor Standards Act.

K-9 Officers will be charged with the appropriate leave whenever they work less
than the regularly scheduled forty (40) hours per week for law enforcement duties.
For example, an Officer who takes off one (1) shift for annual leave purposes will
be paid straight time for thirty-two (32) hours worked, eight (8) hours for annual
leave and five (5) hours at straight time pay for canine care and maintenance duties.
The five (5) hours for canine care will not be counted towards the regularly
scheduled forty (40) hours per week.

K-9 Officers will continue to receive seventy-five ($75.00) dollars per month as

reimbursement for miscellaneous expenses associated with the care and
maintenance of the dog.

39
Section 9. Uniform Maintenance Allowance for Forensic Services Technicians

 

A. All Forensic Services Technicians covered by this Agreement who are on the
payroll during the last payday in September shall be eligible to receive a uniform
maintenance allowance for the purpose of maintaining Technician uniforms and
related clothing worn during working hours.

Technicians hired during the fiscal year will receive a weekly-based prorated
amount depending on the number of weeks served during the covered period
(number of weeks times 1/52 of annual amount).

Technicians who retire, resign, or are laid off during the fiscal year, will receive a
weekly-based prorated amount at the time of separation. Those terminated for
cause shall not receive the weekly-based prorated amount at the time of separation.
(Example: A Technician who worked twenty-six (26) weeks of the fiscal year
would receive fifty percent (50%) of the annual allowance payment if he retired,
resigned, or was laid off).

B. This payment shall be made to eligible Technicians by the City on the last payday
during September for each applicable year of the contract.

Cc. The amount of the uniform maintenance allowance payment for eligible
Technicians shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) per year.

D. The Police Department agrees to continue to furnish uniforms for Technicians.

Section 10. | Compensation for Off-Duty Permit Assignments

 

All authorized and approved permit assignment work performed by off-duty Officers shall
be paid at one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the officer’s normal base hourly rate
for all permit assignment hours worked.

 

Section 11. | Compensation for Tropicana Field Assignments

The parties agree that a separate rate has been agreed upon for traffic control and inside
security assignments for events taking place at Tropicana Field. All off-duty Officers
working an event at Tropicana Field shall be paid one hundred twenty-five percent (125%)
of their normal base hourly rate of pay regardless of the specific assignment, and regardless
if the employee has worked a forty (40) hour work week at the time of the off-duty
assignment.

 

Section 12. | Compensation for Working City Co-Sponsored Events

 

Off-duty officers required to work City sponsored and co-sponsored events will be paid for
all hours worked at one and one-half (1 ’2) times the employee’s base hourly rate.
Employees assigned to these events shall be guaranteed a minimum of three (3) hours for
each assignment.

40
Section 13. Police Officer Recruitment Bonus

The City agrees to extend a Police Officer Recruitment Bonus to employees in the PBA
Police Officers and Technicians Unit, subject to eligibility and administrative criteria
established by the City. The purpose of the bonus is to provide an incentive to City
employees to assist the Police Department with recruiting new officers. Accordingly,
eligible employees will receive eight (8) hours of personal leave for each new person they
refer who successfully enters the City of St. Petersburg Police Academy. Those eligible
employees would receive eight (8) additional hours of personal leave once the recruited
employee becomes classified as a police officer. The parties understand that this benefit is
based on the current needs of the Police Department, and that the City can unilaterally
remove this benefit at any time.

 

41
FYI7

FY18

FY18

FY19

1
$50,510.72
$24.28

$52,531.15
$25.26

$54,632.39
$26.27

2
$52,479.23
$25.23

$54,578.40
$26.24

$56,761.54
$27.29

LATENT PRINT EXAMINER PAY PLAN

OFFICER PAY
PLAN
Steps E

Annual — $48,607.10

Hourly $23.37
13 (Master)
$78,004.99

$37.50
Annual — $50,551.39

Hourly $24.30
13 (Master)
$81,125.19

$39.00
Annual = $52,573.44

Hourly $25.28
13 (Master)
$84,370.20

$40.56

Steps E

Annual $49,321

Hourly $23.71
13 (Master)

$76,664

$36.86

Annual $51,294

Hourly $24.66
13 (Master)

$79,730

$38.33

Annual $53,346

Hourly $25.65
13 (Master)

$82,920

$39.87

1
$51,030
$24.53

$53,071
$25.51

$55,194
$26.54

2
$52,804
$25.39

$54,916
$26.40

$57,112
$27.46

3
$54,534.27
$26.22

$56,715.64
$27.27

$58,984.27
$28.36

$54,599
$26.25

$56,783
$27.30

$59,054
$28.39

APPENDIX "A" TO ARTICLE 18 (PAY)
FISCAL YEARS 2017-19 PAY PLAN

4
$56,654.21
$27.24

$58,920.38
$28.33

$61,277.19
$29.46

4
$56,481
$27.15

$58,740
$28.24

$61,090
$29.37

42

5
$58,860.67
$28.30

$61,215.10
$29.43

$63,663.70
$30.61

$58,428
$28.09

$60,765
$29.21

$63,196
$30.38

6
$61,153.66
$29.40

$63,599.81
$30.58

$66,143.80
$31.80

6
$60,461
$29.07

$62,880
$30.23

$65,395
$31.44

7
$63,533.18
$30.54

$66,074.51
$31.77

$68,717.49
$33.04

$62,516
$30.06

$65,017
$31.26

$67,618
$32.51

8
$66,020.86
$31.74

$68,661.70
$33.01

$71,408.17
$34.33

8
$64,701
$31.11

$67,289
$32.35

$69,981
$33.64

9
$68,595.07
$32.98

$71,338.87
$34.30

$74,192.43
$35.67

$66,908
$32.17

$69,584
$33.45

$72,637
$34.79

10
$71,277.44
$34.27

$74,128.54
$35.64

$77,093.68
$37.06

10
$69,222
$33.28

$71,991
$34.61

$74,871
$36.00

11
$74,046.34
$35.60

$77,008.19
$37.02

$80,088.52
$38.50

11
$71,602
$34.42

$74,466
$35.80

$77,445
$37.23

12
$76,469.12
$36.76

$59,527.88
$38.23

$82,709.00
$39.76

12
$74,068
$35.61

$77,031
$37.03

$80,112
$38.52
FORENSIC SERVICES TECHNICIAN PAY PLAN

Steps
Annual
Hourly

Annual
Hourly

Annual
Hourly

Note:

E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
$46,011.26 $47,612.03 $49,320.96 $51,029.89 $52,825.34 $54,685.70 $56,567.68 $58,557.82 $60,612.86 $62,732.80 $64,939.26
$22.12 $22.89 $23.71 $24.53 $25.40 $26.29 $27.20 $28.15 $29.14 $30.16 $31.22

13 (Master)
$71,969.66
$34.60

$47,851.71 $49,516.51 $51,293.80 $53,071.08 — $54,938.36 $56,873.12 $58,830.39 $60,900.14 $63,037.38 $65,242.11 $67,536.83
$23.01 $23.81 $24.66 $25.51 $26.41 $27.34 $28.28 $29.28 $30.31 $31.37 $32.47

13 (Master)
$74,848.45
$35.98

$49,765.78 $51,497.17 $53,345.55 $55,193.93 $57,135.89 $59,148.05 $61,183.60 $63,336.14 $65,558.87 $67,851.80 $70,238.31
$23.93 $24.76 $25.65 $26.54 $27.47 $28.44 $29.42 $30.45 $31.52 $32.62 $33.77

13 (Master)
$77,842.39
$37.42

Annual salaries are for reference only and are based on 2,080 regularly scheduled hours. Because pay hours may vary, the annual salaries are not to be
construed as guaranteed income for the year

4B

11
$67,210.62
$32.31

$69,899.05
$33.61

$72,695.01
$34.95

12
$69,546.88
$33.44

$72,328.76
$34.77

$75,221.91
$36.16
ARTICLE 19
WORK WEEK AND OVERTIME

Section 1. The normal work week will consist of forty (40) hours. Department management
will establish the work week and hours of work best suited to meet the needs of the Department
and provide superior service to the community. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as
a guarantee or limitation of the number of hours to be worked per week.

Section 2. Employees covered by this Agreement who are required to be on call for their entire
shifts of work, shall be entitled to a paid meal break. Employees not required to be on call for their
entire shifts shall have an unpaid lunch break scheduled by management.

Section 3.

A. With the exception of the Off-Duty Permit and Tropicana Field Assignments
outlined in Article 18, authorized and approved work performed in excess of forty
(40) hours in any one (1) work week shall be considered as overtime and shall be
paid at the overtime rate of one and one-half (1/2) times the employee's regular
hourly rate of pay as defined by the Fair Labor Standards Act. For purposes of
overtime computation, holiday time (whether used in the week of the holiday or
used from the employee's "banked" holiday hours) shall be counted as time worked.

B. Known and scheduled overtime will be assigned with as much advance notice as
possible.
Section 4. For purposes of overtime computation, annual leave, illness leave, personal leave,

bereavement leave, jury duty, military leave, PBA Business time coded as non-sweat time for pay
purposes, and other absences from duty shall not be considered as time worked.

Section 5. Employees shall be required to work overtime when requested unless excused by
supervision. In the event any employee is required to work overtime, he will not be required to
use annual leave nor be placed in a "leave without pay" status during the basic work week in order
to compensate or offset the overtime hours worked or to be worked.

Section 6. When an employee is required to work overtime in excess of four (4) hours before
or after his regular shift hours, his immediate supervisor will schedule a paid meal period during
the overtime assignment unless the employee's overtime work assignment requires the constant
attention or availability of the employee or the employee does not desire a meal period.

Section 7. Special Events

Whenever an employee is scheduled to be off and his regularly scheduled day(s) off is/are
canceled and the employee is assigned to work a special event (e.g., St. Anthony's Triathlon, MLK
Parade, Fourth of July) all hours worked shall be paid at the overtime rate. Once an annual leave
request (including use of stored holiday hours) has been authorized in writing by an employee's
supervisor and the employee can verify that non-refundable money has been expended after said
authorization was given, the leave shall not be canceled by the Department except in cases of civil

44

  
emergency as defined in Article 3 of this Agreement. This provision shall also apply in cases when
an employee has made non-refundable arrangements connected with consecutive scheduled days
off which do not require the use of accrued annual leave or use of holiday hours.

Section 8.

Call Bac

Call back pay is provided to compensate employees ordered to return to work on an
unexpected basis after completing a regularly assigned shift of work or a regularly assigned week
of work. Call back work is work to be performed which is of an emergency or unexpected nature
and should not be associated or confused with the monthly department shift/work schedule or
anticipated additional work requirements.

Any employee who is off duty and contacted after leaving the premises, and ordered to
return to work shall be eligible for call back pay in accordance with the provisions of the following

paragraphs:

A.

Any employee who is on duty and is instructed to continue to work past his normal
shift-ending time shall be ineligible for call back pay, but may be eligible for
compensation at the overtime rate of pay. Anyone who completes a shift and is
required to return to work in less than eight (8) hours from the time he checks off
duty shall be eligible for a one (1)-hour inconvenience bonus.

Any employee required to continue working after his regular scheduled shift shall
be ineligible for call back pay but may be eligible for compensation at the overtime
rate of pay.

Any employee required to return to work three (3) hours or less prior to his regularly
scheduled starting time shall be paid for the actual time worked plus a one (1)-hour
inconvenience bonus.

 

If an employee is called back to work and the call back is canceled prior to the
employee arriving at work or before the employee actually performs any work, he
shall not be eligible for call back pay but shall receive the one (1)-hour
inconvenience bonus.

Any employee eligible for call back pay shall be paid for the actual hours worked,
plus a one (1)-hour bonus for the call back inconvenience. A minimum guarantee
of four (4) hours pay which will include the one (1)-hour inconvenience bonus shall
be paid. The maximum any employee may receive the call back inconvenience pay
is twice in a twenty-four (24) hour period. If the employee is called back to work
more than two (2) times in a twenty-four (24) hour period, he shall be paid at his
applicable rate from the time of notice to the time the employee returns home. If
the employee goes to a destination other than his home after completion of the
assignment, he shall be paid only until he is released from duty. All hours worked
on a call back shall be counted toward computing the weekly overtime.

45
F. An employee who is called back and works for a complete shift immediately prior
to his next scheduled shift may request and be granted relief from duty without
losing the one (1)-hour inconvenience bonus for the call back assignment.

Section 9. Standby Time

In order to provide coverage for services during off-duty hours, it may be necessary to
assign and schedule certain employees to standby duty. A standby duty assignment is made by
the Police Chief or his designee who requires an employee to be available for work due to an
urgent situation on his off-duty time, which may include nights, weekends, or holidays.

Employees assigned to a standby duty by Department management are guaranteed standby
pay of two (2) hours at their regular straight time rate for each eight (8)-hour increment of standby
time assigned and scheduled. Standby assignments shall be made by management in eight (8)-
hour increments.

Employees while on standby duty when called to work will, in addition to the standby pay
of two (2) hours for each eight (8) hours assigned, be paid for the actual time worked with a
minimum guarantee of one (1) hour of pay for each call to work. For pay purposes actual time
worked starts at the time of notice and ends when the employee returns home. If the employee
goes to a destination other than his home after completion of the assignment, he shall be paid only
until he is released from duty.

In the event any employee who is on standby duty fails to respond to a call to work, he will
forfeit the standby pay and may be subject to possible disciplinary measures.

Standby time shall not count as hours worked for the purpose of computing overtime pay.

Section 10. | Employees on active status covered by this Agreement shall be considered on duty
while responding to an emergency and/or performing police functions during their off-duty time.

Section 11. | Off-Duty Court Attendance

A. Court attendance is an integral part of police work, and the parties agree that Police
Officers required to attend court in the performance of their duties should be fairly
compensated.

B. An employee required to attend court or a court related hearing, such as a

deposition, for purposes directly related to the performance of his duties as a Police
Officer during scheduled off-duty hours shall be compensated two (2) hours of pay
for all appearances commencing during the two hour period, provided that the start
of the two (2)-hour period is more than sixty (60) minutes prior to his regularly
scheduled check-on time or more than sixty (60) minutes after his regularly
scheduled check-off time.

1. Multiple appearances commencing during the two (2)-hour period shall be
paid on the basis of a single two (2)-hour guarantee.

46
2. The employee will be compensated from the time the first appearance
begins until two (2) hours later or when released by proper judicial authority
if the release extends past the two (2)-hour period.

3. An employee required to attend any court appearance starting within the
two (2)-hour period and extending beyond this period shall be paid for the
two (2) hours plus all time spent beyond the two (2) hours until released.

An employee required to attend court or a judicial hearing after he has been released
from a guaranteed two (2) hours shall be guaranteed a minimum of one (1) hour of
pay. The same rules shall apply as covered in Section 11(B) of this Article.

An employee attending court or a judicial hearing sixty (60) minutes or less prior
to his regularly scheduled check-on time will be placed on on-duty status.
Likewise, an employee attending court or a judicial hearing within sixty (60)
minutes after his regular scheduled check-off time shall remain on-duty until
released by the proper judicial authority or released from duty.

All hours mentioned in paragraphs Section 11 (B), (C), and (D) of this Article shall
be counted toward computing the weekly overtime.

Off-Duty Court Standby

In the event that an employee is required to be on off-duty court standby, he shall
be paid two (2) hours base straight time pay for each day of off-duty court standby.
It shall be the responsibility of the employee to check with the Department's Court
n Officer or the State Attorney's receptionist for status changes for those
ses scheduled at the Pinellas County Criminal Justice Complex; unless notified
otherwise by the Court Liaison Officer, the employee shall be released from
standby at 4:00 p.m. Current practice for status determination and release from off-
duty court standby shall continue for cases scheduled for other courts, (e.g., Traffic
Court, Federal Court).

 
  

In order to be eligible for court standby payment, the employee must check in as
per Department policy, leaving the phone number where he may be reached. Off-
duty court standby hours paid shall not count as hours worked for the purpose of
computing overtime pay.

An employee who is called to appear in court receives standby pay and pay for the
time spent in court, with a minimum guarantee of one (1) hour for court time. Time
spent in court begins from the time of the first appearance until one (1) hour later
or whenever released by proper judicial authority if the release extends past the one
(1)-hour period.

Employees covered by this Agreement who are assigned to the second (2nd) relief
(day shift), shall be ineligible for off-duty standby pay unless it is on their regularly
scheduled day off or they have been placed on off-duty court standby for evening
court hearings.

 

47
G. For provisions covering Court Duty After Retirement, refer to Article 23, Section

 

4.
ARTICLE 20
SENIORITY AND REDUCTIO (-FORCE
Section 1. City seniority is understood to mean an employee's most recent date of employment

or re-employment. Seniority will continue to accrue during all types of leave except for leaves of
absence without pay and suspensions without pay in excess of thirty (30) calendar days, which
shall cause this date to be adjusted for an equivalent amount of time. A leave of absence without
pay or suspension in excess of thirty (30) calendar days shall not cause an employee to lose the
City seniority he accrued prior to the leave. Leaves of absence without pay for periods of thirty
(30) calendar days or less shall not cause the City seniority date to be adjusted.

City seniority shall be used for purposes of computing annual leave accruals, service
awards, and other matters based on length of service.

Section 2. Classification seniority shall be understood to mean length of time in classification.
After successful completion of the probationary period, length of time in classification reverts to
date of entry, transfer, or promotion to present classification. Seniority will continue to accrue
during all types of leave except for leaves of absence without pay in excess of thirty (30) calendar
days or suspensions, which shall cause this date to be adjusted for an equivalent amount of time.
A leave of absence without pay or suspension in excess of thirty (30) calendar days shall not cause
an employee to lose the classification seniority accrued prior to the leave. Leaves of absence
without pay or suspensions for periods of thirty (30) calendar days or less shall not cause the
classification seniority date to be adjusted.

 

 

Classification seniority shall be used for purposes of layoffs, performance reviews, and
selection of the yearly vacation award as per the Department's procedures for selection of
vacations.

In the event an employee is demoted back from a higher rank to the rank of Police Officer,
his classification seniority date will reflect both time previously spent as a Police Officer as well
as any time spent in higher classifications.

Section 3. Employees having a minimum of five (5) years of City seniority shall suffer no loss
of either City or classification seniority if on a leave of absence without pay due to the employee's
illness for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months. It is understood however, that seniority will
not continue to accrue while employees are on a leave of absence without pay for reasons other
than illness.

 

Section 4. All new employees shall be placed on probation for one (1) year in the classification
following graduation from the Police Academy or for one (1) year in the classification from the
date of employment if the new employee has previously fulfilled the requirements of the State of
Florida Police Standards Board. All new employees on probationary status shall be eligible for
membership in the PBA although not eligible to grieve disciplinary action. Non-sworn employees
will serve a six (6)-month probationary period.

48
The Police Chief has the authority to extend the initial probationary period for three (3)
additional months. Cumulative absences of thirty (30) calendar days or more, work time spent on
light duty status, and any suspensions from scheduled work shall be added to a probationary period.

Section 5. Employees shall lose their seniority as a result of the following:
A. Resignation
B Retirement
Cc. Termination for just cause
D

Layoff exceeding eighteen (18) months

m

The employee's failure to report to the Employment Office his intent to return to
work within seventeen (17) calendar days from the date the City mailed a certified
recall notice to the employee's last known address. This time period may be
extended another seven (7) calendar days upon proof that the employee was not at
his residence or was incapacitated during the seventeen (17) calendar day period
and could neither receive nor respond to the notice.

F. Failure to return from Military Leave within the time limits prescribed by law.
Section 6. Layoff

Department management will notify the PBA in advance of any pending reduction in force.
Probationary employees do not have recall rights and will be laid-off first. They shall, however,
be placed on the eligibility list in order of their dates of employment. Classified employees will be
laid off in the inverse order of their lengths of time in their classification. In the event that two (2)
or more classified employees affected have the exact same amount of service in the classification,
the employee with the lowest identification number will be deemed to be the senior employee,
unless one is eligible to receive veterans’ preference in accordance with applicable state or federal
laws.

Section 7. Recall

Classified employees in layoff status will retain recall rights for eighteen (18) months and
shall have preference to work over all applicants on eligible lists for this period. Recall will be
made by certified mail to the last known address in the Employer's records. If the employee fails
to notify the Employment Office of his acceptance of recall within seventeen (17) calendar days
from the date the City mailed the certified notice, the employee will forfeit all recall rights. This
time period may be extended another seven (7) calendar days upon proof that the employee was
not at his residence or was incapacitated during the seventeen (17) calendar day period and could
neither receive or respond to the notice.

Recall will be offered to laid off employees provided they are able to perform the essential
functions of the job and provided they still meet all of the City and State requirements to be a Law
Enforcement Officer, Fingerprint, or Identification Technician. A laid-off employee, when offered

49
recall, who is temporarily unable to accept due to medical reasons as certified by an attending
physician, may request a leave of absence not to exceed thirty (30) days unless the provisions of
the Family and Medical Leave Act entitle him to more.

Recall from layoff shall be in the order of classification seniority.
An employee recalled and returned to the active payroll within eighteen (18) months from

his effective date of layoff shall retain the cl. ication seniority earned prior to the layoff,
although he will not receive credit for the time spent on layoff.

 

Section 8. The Employer shall prepare a seniority list for this bargaining unit and will provide
a copy to the PBA during the month of February each year of the contract. This list shall be
deemed correct unless an objection is raised by the PBA or by a bargaining unit employee within
thirty (30) calendar days after receipt. The seniority list shall provide the employee's name,
identification number, classification, employment date, and classification date.

ARTICLE 21
LEGAL BENEFIT

Section 1. The Employer shall, upon the request of an employee covered by this Agreement
and after notice of the suit against the employee has been given to the Legal Department within
five (5) days after service upon the employee, undertake the defense of that employee against any
civil damage suit where the employee was acting within the scope of his employment and the
employee did not act in bad faith, with malicious purpose, in a manner exhibiting wanton and
willful disregard of human rights, safety, and property.

Section 2. The Employer shall, upon the request of an employee covered by this Agreement
and after notice of the suit against the employee has been given to the City Legal Department
within five (5) days after service upon the employee, undertake the defense of that employee
against any civil damage suit where the employee was acting within the scope of his employment
even if the complaint alleges that the employee acted in bad faith, or with malicious purpose, or in
a manner exhibiting wanton and willful disregard of human rights, safety, and property. However,
in those cases where the City Attorney has reason to believe that there exists a substantial factual
basis for the complaint's allegations of bad faith, malicious purpose, or wanton and willful
disregard, the Employer shall not be required to undertake the defense of the employee, as set forth
in Florida Statutes Section 111.07.

Section 3. In a civil damage suit where a defense is provided by the Employer, the Employer
will indemnify that employee against any judgments, except for punitive damage judgments,
levied in that suit against the employee as a result of his actions while acting within the scope of
his employment up to the recovery limits specified in Florida Statutes Section 768.28(5) as
amended.

Section 4. The City recognizes that the Union provides a legal benefit wherein the Union
provides an attorney for the defense of dues-paying member employees in civil damage suits. If
the employee wishes to substitute this attorney or any other attorney of his own choosing at his
own expense for the City's attorney, he may do so without affecting his rights to indemnification

50
under Section 3 of this Article provided he has the permission of the City Attorney and provided
any settlement or claim negotiated by the employee's private counsel has been authorized by the
City Attorney. Nothing within this section shall be interpreted to imply that the Union shall
provide the legal defense benefit coverage to those employees covered by this Agreement who are
not dues paying members.

Section 5. The employee agrees to cooperate fully with the Legal Department if the Legal
Department undertakes the defense of said employee. If the employee has been scheduled to meet
with the Legal Department, the employee must attend that meeting as scheduled. If the Legal
Department has determined that the employee's attendance at a hearing or deposition is necessary
and has asked or instructed said employee to attend, the attendance at the hearing or deposition
will be without loss of pay or benefits.

Section 6. In all suits in which the Legal Department has undertaken the defense of an
employee wherein the employee is named as an individual defendant and wherein the employee
may be personally liable, the employee shall be advised of all motions, hearings, and settlement
offers unless the employee requests otherwise in writing.

ARTICLE 22
SAFETY AND HEALTH

Section 1. Department management will make every reasonable effort to provide and maintain
safe working conditions. To this end, the PBA will cooperate and encourage the employees to
work in a safe manner. Also, Department management will receive and consider written
recommendations with respect to unsafe conditions or other safety ideas from any employee or the
PBA. Within thirty (30) days of receipt, Department management shall give a written reply to the
employee or the PBA, as the case may be, regarding the disposition of its recommendation.

Section 2. Department management will provide proper and necessary safety equipment and
devices for employees engaged in work where such special equipment and devices are necessary.
Such equipment and devices, where provided, must be used. Employees who fail to utilize
provided equipment or devices will be subject to discipline.

Section 3. In the event an employee leaves the employ of the Department, he shall return all
uniforms and safety equipment to the Department.

Section 4. Employees purchasing industrial safety lenses with safety frames, safety shoes, or
safety lenses for combat eyeglass frames (used when an Officer needing prescription lenses wears
a chemical gas mask) will be reimbursed upon presentation of proof of purchase and a
memorandum from the Police Chief indicating that the item was required in the performance of
his duties to maintain proper safety standards. Such lenses and shoes must meet ANSI/OSHA
and/or ASTM standards.

51
Section 5. Reimbursements

A. Employees will be reimbursed for the cost of industrial safety lenses with or without
frames up to one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) no more frequently than once
every two (2) years.

B. Employees will be reimbursed for the cost of safety shoes up to one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) no more frequently than once every year.

Cc. Employees will be reimbursed for the cost of prescription safety lenses for combat
eyeglass frames up to seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for single vision and standard
bifocal lenses and up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) for "no line" bifocal lenses.
The lenses need to be made of polycarbonate of a thickness required for safety
lenses in order to qualify for reimbursement and a statement from the provider to
that effect must be provided by the employee. This reimbursement will be made
no more frequently than once every two (2) years.

D. For the purposes of this section, a year is defined as the Employer's fiscal year.

E. Employees will be reimbursed for the cost of protective body armor (bullet resistant
vests) up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750). Reimbursement will be made in
accordance with policies and procedures established by the Department.

Section 6. It shall be the responsibility of the individual employee to check all equipment
which has been issued to him to assure it is in safe operating condition prior to use or operation.
If an assigned vehicle is damaged and the damage has not been reported, the employee shall submit
a written report to supervision.

If the supervisor believes that the vehicle or item of equipment is in such an unsafe
condition as to be a hazard to the operator or the public, the Fleet Management Department shall
be notified for appropriate disposition. The Fleet Management Department shall be the final
authority as to inspection and repairs needed to release a vehicle or item of equipment back into
service.

Section 7. AIDS Prevention

A. Surgical gloves and plastic disposable resuscitation masks shall be made available
for each employee's use. Such equipment shall be replaced immediately after use.
B. A member who has been exposed to blood or other body fluids of an individual

during his duty hours shall be immediately afforded a reasonable period of time to
wash and cleanse himself after such exposure.

Section 8. The City agrees to provide Forensic Services Technicians and Latent Print
Examiners with chest x-ray examinations from a medical facility on an annual basis at no cost to
the employees. The x-ray will only be given to employees who consent to the test. The
Department will schedule the x-rays, which will generally be given in May unless the Department
deems otherwise. Said x-rays will be provided on a no loss of pay basis to an employee. Should
a conflict arise due to an employee's work assignments, the Department will reschedule the x-ray.

52
Section 9. Latent Print Examiners and Forensic Services Technicians will be provided with
medical examinations annually in accordance with the Department's policies and procedures
(currently, General Order I-23).

Section 10. | Employee Wellness Incentive

During each fiscal year, employees will have the opportunity to earn personal leave time
for maintaining physical fitness and wellness standards developed by the department based on
standards developed by the Cooper Institute. This program is voluntary. Any employee who scores
within the fiftieth (50th) percentile or above, based on standards developed by the Cooper Institute,
on the department’s annual physical assessment and attends at least one (1) live or two (2) online
wellness seminars in a fiscal year (sponsored by the City, the City’s Health and Wellness Center
or the City’s health insurance provider) will receive personal leave hours according to the schedule
below:

 

Assessment Score —

 

50-60 percentile— 8 (eight) personal leave hours

61-70 percentile — 12 (twelve) personal leave hours

71 — 80 percentile — 16 (sixteen) personal leave hours
81- 90 percentile — 20 (twenty) personal leave hours
91+ percentile — 24 (twenty-four) personal leave hours

Employees shall schedule the use of personal leave in accordance with other personal leave
provisions defined within this agreement.

ARTICLE 23
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. Reimbursement for Lost or Damaged Personal Property

 

An employee may be reimbursed for loss or damage to personal property in the
performance of his duty subject to the following restrictions:

A. The maximum reimbursement for items of personal necessity such as eye glasses
and hearing aids shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), except that eyeglasses
requiring bifocal or trifocal lenses shall be reimbursed up to a maximum of two
hundred dollars ($200.00).

   
 

B. The maximum reimbursement for all other personal property shall be one hundred
twenty-five dollars ($125.00).

Cc. Requests for reimbursement for the loss of, or damage to, personal property must
be made within the shift in which the loss or damage occurs, or within the shift
when the loss or damage is discovered if it is within seven (7) calendar days of the
actual loss or damage. If mitigating circumstances such as an injury prevent the

53
Section 2.

A.

employee from reporting the loss or damage the employee has an additional seven
(7) calendar days to make the request for reimbursement.

To aid in establishing the amount to be reimbursed, the employee will be required
to provide to the Department the receipt for the replacement article.

Reimbursement for lost or damaged personal property must be approved by the
Police Chief or his designee. The Police Chief may approve reimbursement beyond
the limits established by this section if he feels that such action is warranted by
extraordinary circumstances.

Employees may be reimbursed the purchase price up to a maximum of fifteen-
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for an AR-15 Rifle that is personally owned by the
employee, if the rifle is stolen, damaged or lost while the employee is utilizing it or
carrying it in relation to their employment with the City. Reimbursement shall be
at the sole discretion of the Police Chief based upon the circumstances reported and
documented that resulted in the loss.

Employees shall be permitted to obtain pay advances for the purchase of AR-15
rifles. Employees shall be required to complete a Salary Advance Agreement prior
to receipt of the advance pay.

Group Insurance

The City agrees to provide employees covered by this Agreement the opportunity
to participate in a City group health insurance program, subject to the eligibility
criteria established by the provider(s) selected by the City.

The City reserves the right to self-administer group health insurance claims if and
when deemed appropriate.

The City further reserves the right to change carriers if and when deemed
appropriate and to determine the plans offered. The parties agree that the City may,
at its option, reopen Section 2 of this Article in order to bargain in good faith over
the impact of proposed changes to group health insurance coverage. Should the
City choose to exercise the option to reopen Section 2, the City will notify the
Union as soon as possible.

 

The City agrees to pay seventy-five percent (75%) of individual coverage for
employee participation in the City group health insurance programs. If the
employee elects any form of dependent coverage, the City will pay seventy-five
percent (75%) of the total premium for the employee and dependents.

Those individuals participating in City coverage who are covered by this
Agreement, but who subsequently retire shall be offered the option at the time of
retirement of selecting coverage with a lifetime maximum benefit of $100,000 or a
higher lifetime maximum benefit offered to current employees. The City will pay
seventy-five (75%) of the cost of the coverage with a lifetime maximum benefit of

54
$100,000 or the same dollar amount towards coverage with the higher lifetime
maximum benefit subject to the maximum City contribution noted in Section 2(E)
of this Article. The rates paid by both the City and the employee shall be adjusted
whenever increases become effective as the City is notified by the provider.
Employees hired on or after January 1, 2009, shall be offered the option at the time
of retirement of selecting coverage with a lifetime maximum benefit of $100,000
or any higher lifetime maximum benefit offered to current employees, but will be
responsible for paying the entire cost of the coverage with no City contribution
toward the premium cost.

E. Effective January 1, 2010, for active employees hired prior to January 1, 2009, the
maximum cost for which the City will be responsible for any retiree health
insurance plan coverage will be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the City's cost
(seventy-five percent (75%) of the cost of the coverage with a lifetime maximum
benefit of $100,000) that was in effect on January 1, 2010, for the type of coverage
elected by the retiree (single, dual, or family coverage). The City's monthly
premium costs in effect on January 1, 2010, for single, dual and family coverages
respectively were $198.48, $400.91, and $555.72.

F. The City shall provide, at no cost to the employee, life insurance in an amount equal
to his annual base pay rounded to the nearest thousand dollars. Employees also
have the option of purchasing additional life insurance through the City Benefits
Division of Human Resources.

It is agreed by the parties that the rates paid by the employee for supplemental term life insurance
will be established by the City's provider and may be changed in the event the provider implements
arate change.

Section 3. Retirement Awards

As an expression of appreciation and recognition for service as a Law Enforcement Officer
of the St. Petersburg Police Department and the City, the City will provide each Officer at the time
of normal or service-connected disability retirement with the appropriate plaque, badges, and
firearm at no expense to the employee except the firearm may be withheld when the Officer has
been relieved of his firearm by the Police Chief prior to retirement and the Officer's right to carry
his firearm had not been restored prior to retirement.

Section 4. Court Duty After Retirement

An employee who has a pending case at the time of his retirement and as a result has a
court appearance after his retirement date shall be compensated the same as if he was still
employed by the City in accordance with Article 19 of this Agreement unless the retiree is working
for an employer who is already paying him for this time. Verification of attendance and time shall
be made by the same procedure utilized for employees whose names do not appear on the list
maintained by the Court Liaison Officer (i.e. by write in).

55
Section 5. Per Diem

Employees who travel as a result of their employment with the City and who are eligible
for reimbursement of expenses may be reimbursed for meals and other authorized expenses in an
amount not to exceed the amount determined by the Budget and/or Finance Departments to be
reasonable for the area to which the employee travels.

Section 6. Assigned Vehicles

Take-home vehicle assignments shall be made in accordance with the Department General
Orders and include consideration of the availability of vehicles, seniority, and positional
assignments. The parties agree that this is not a waiver of either parties’ bargaining rights related
to take-home vehicles.

The Police Chief reserves the right to establish the availability of vehicles, positional
assignments, the process by which vehicle assignments will be made, to monitor the program to
ensure compliance with the policies governing the use of the Department vehicles, and to provide
at least sixty (60) days’ notice to the Union if the City proposes to suspend or terminate an
assignment or the program. This notice requirement excludes when an individual loses vehicle
privileges as a result of discipline or otherwise becomes ineligible per the General Orders. The
parties agree to the Employee Contribution and Mileage Boundaries in St. Petersburg Police
Department General Order II-6 to be effective October 1, 2016. The employer agrees that any
future changes to the Employee Contribution and Mileage Boundaries will not be arbitrarily made,
and will be noticed to the Union as prescribed above in this Section.

Section 7. Law Enforcement Personnel DNA Elimination Sample Database

 

The purpose of this Section is to document the agreement between the parties as it relates to the
Law Enforcement Personnel DNA Elimination Sample Database. The information below will
explain the rationale and process of collecting DNA from the Bargaining Unit members who
choose to participate and to ensure that the entire DNA database remains confidential at all times
from any third party not directly involved in the collection process, as well as to assure continued
anonymity of the DNA sample collected thereafter.

A local database of Law Enforcement Elimination Profiles (LEEP) will be maintained at the
Pinellas County Forensic Lab (PCFL) or Pinellas County Medical Examiner’s Office only,
specifically and solely for the purpose of eliminating extraneous DNA profiles from forensic
samples collected in the course of a criminal investigation.

Collection of samples and maintenance of profiles is necessary due to the increasing sensitivity of
DNA analytical techniques. It is imperative we ensure that any profiles developed from forensic
samples do not correspond to personnel working at the scene.

Samples will be maintained anonymously. Each profile will be assigned a code (assigned
randomly) and will NOT be linked to a specific individual. After the profile is entered into the
search database, the PCFL will be unable to determine the specific source. Database development
process:

56
The only process to be utilized to collect DNA shall be a buccal swab collected from
each employee. The swab will be placed in a pre-labeled envelope with the elimination
database (LEEP) number on it. No other identifying information will be included on
the inner envelope to maintain anonymity.

The inner envelope (containing the buccal swabs) will be placed in an outer envelope.
The employee name, badge/ ID number, and date of collection will be noted on this
envelope. The elimination database number will not be referenced on this envelope.

The buccal swab will be analyzed. Once a full clean profile is obtained, the outer
envelope will be separated from case and no further associations to the buccal will be
possible. In the event that the profile is incomplete or otherwise unusable, the sample
will be discarded, the LEEP number discontinued, and a new swab will be requested
from the employee.

After severing the profile from the employee information (inner from outer envelope)
the profile will be uploaded into the local elimination database.

A roster of names and badge/ID numbers (without the associated LEEP identifier) will
be maintained to ensure that all designated employees are represented in the database.

During the entire collection process, and after, samples obtained, LEEP numbers
issued, or any other documentation pertaining to the DNA collection process and
database shall remain strictly confidential and not be available to third parties, public
records requests or any other requests.

Once the profile has been uploaded into the elimination database it will be impossible for the
laboratory to determine the source. In the event that a law enforcement officer is involved (as a
victim or suspect) in a criminal investigation requiring elimination or suspect samples, a case
related elimination/suspect sample will be required in accordance with state and federal law.

Law Enforcement Elimination Profiles will be maintained locally and only searched against
forensic samples submitted to this laboratory in Pinellas County, Florida. They will not be
uploaded to or searched against any state or federal databases.

Directions for Collection:

1.

Either don a fresh pair of gloves or thoroughly wash hands prior to opening
collection kit. (If a collector is other than the employee, gloves are required.)

Remove the swabs from the envelopes and swab sleeve.

Use BOTH swabs to thoroughly swab the inner cheeks of the mouth. Be careful to
ensure that the swabs are not exposed to any other sources of DNA (direct or

57
indirect contact with other personnel). If there are any contamination concerns,
discard the kit and use a new kit.

4. Return the swabs to the swab sleeve inserting the swab tip portion into the sleeve
first.
5. Place the swab sleeve in the smaller manila envelope. This envelope is pre-labeled

with the randomize LEEP number. Do NOT add any additional identifying
information to the inner envelope.

6. Place the envelope into the larger “outer” envelope completing the following
information:
a. Full Name (print)
b. Payroll ID number
c. Date Collected
d. Signature of supervisor/witness ensuring that the sample was collected
as directed.
e. DONOT record the LEEP number on this envelope.

7. Envelopes can be dropped off at the laboratory during working hours or placed in
an evidence locker at SPPD at any time for transport to PCFL. No other paperwork
is needed. DO NOT submit LEEP samples with DNA Case Submission forms.

ARTICLE 24
TUITION REIMBURSEMENT

The City agrees that it will continue to provide a tuition reimbursement program in which
employees represented by this bargaining unit may participate. Policies concerning eligibility for
reimbursement, procedures for pre-approval, payment processing, and so forth will continue to be
established by the Training Division of the Human Resources Department and published in the
Training Catalog which is distributed annually during the months of September or October.

The parties agree that the City shall reimburse eligible employees for seventy-five (75%)
of their tuition costs up to the cap of one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per fiscal year at the
completion of classes at eligible institutions of higher learning (e.g., St. Petersburg College and
the University of South Florida).

ARTICLE 25
DRUG FREE WORKPLACE
Section 1. The City of St. Petersburg and the Union agree that maintaining the confidence of

the citizens in their Law Enforcement Officers is of utmost importance. One vehicle for
demonstrating the integrity of these employees is through a random drug testing program. Further,

58

 
a random drug testing program reinforces the City's policy that its employees shall not use illegal
drugs, or abuse alcohol or those drugs taken by prescription.

Section 2. A designated number of employees shall be selected each month by a computer
program which generates a list of randomly selected Officers and Forensic Technicians. The list
shall be communicated to Internal Affairs, which will have the responsibility of contacting those
employees on the list and escorting them to the medical facility named by the City to serve as the
sample collection site. All tests will be conducted on duty.

Section 3. When the employee arrives at the medical facility, he will provide a urine, breath,
and/or blood test sample for testing; a sample adequate for split sample testing will be taken.
Refusal to provide a urine, breath, and/or blood test sample will be considered insubordination,
and will result in termination. Chain of custody will be followed and the sample will be sent to a
NIDA certified laboratory for testing. If the initial screening test indicates the presence of an
illegal drug, a confirmation test will be performed using the gas chromatography/mass
spectrometry (GCMS) method.

The drug test results will be forwarded to Internal Affairs. If the initial screen test was
positive but the confirmation test was negative, the second result will prevail. If the confirmation
test is positive, the employee will be given the option of a split sample test, whereby an
independent laboratory conducts a drug test using the same sample originally collected from the
employee. The cost of the split sample test shall be borne by the employee challenging the initial
result. A positive confirmation test for illegal drugs will result in termination.

Section 4. Employees covered by this Agreement shall not be tested any more than three (3)
times in any one (1) calendar year. For example, if an employee's name appeared on a list of ten
(10) names, and this was the fourth time the employee had been selected, the employee would not
be tested and only nine (9) tests would be conducted that month.

Section 5. In order to demonstrate to a greater degree the drug-free status of certain employees
and to enable the most effective prosecution of law violators possible, the City and Union agree
that a separate random drug testing program which provides for a greater likelihood of selection
for testing is appropriate for employees assigned to the Vice and Narcotics Unit. The identities of
employees assigned to this unit will be maintained and updated only by Police Department
personnel for confidentiality reasons. A list randomly generated by computer will be created each
month from the employee identification numbers of employees assigned to the
Department/division account number for the Vice and Narcotics Unit. The procedures described
in the above sections will apply for the purpose of drug testing Vice and Narcotics Unit employees.
A drug test will also be conducted whenever an employee enters the unit or transfers from the unit.
The City and Union agree that assignment to, or removal from, the Vice and Narcotics Unit is a
management right as provided in Article 3 of this Agreement, regardless of drug test results.

ARTICLE 26
PENSION BENEFITS

Section 1. Retirement benefits for sworn employees covered by this Agreement shall be
provided in accordance with the 1984 Supplemental Police Officers’ Retirement System.

59
It is agreed that the 1984 Supplemental Police Officers' Retirement System, as specified
by City Ordinance 708-F, as amended, and set forth in Chapter 22, Article IV, Division 6 of the
City Code (Pension Plan), will remain in effect for the duration of this Agreement.

Section 2. Effective October 1, 2015, there is hereby created a defined contribution plan that
shall operate as a component of the Retirement System and exist in conjunction with the defined
benefit plan that meets minimum benefits and minimum standards within the meaning of Chapter
185, Florida Statutes. The defined contribution plan component shall receive deposits, if any, for
the purpose of providing benefits to eligible police officers. The retirement benefits of the defined
contribution plan component, if any, shall be provided through individual member accounts in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code and related regulations
and are limited solely to the contributions, if any, made into each member’s account and the actual
accumulated earnings, net of expenses, earned on the member’s account. The funding and structure
of this defined contribution plan component may be modified only by the mutual consent of the
parties or by operation of Section 185.35(1), Florida Statutes. The provisions of this component
governing earnings rates, distribution rules, and administration shall be negotiated between the
parties at the time Chapter 185 premium tax revenues are assigned to this component.

The defined contribution plan component shall be funded in accordance with section
185.35(1), Florida Statutes, provided that any deviation therefrom shall be based upon reaching
mutual consent on an alternative means of utilizing premium tax revenues, as provided for in
section 185.35(1)(g), Florida Statutes. Mutual consent shall be defined as ratification by the parties
in accordance with the Florida Division of Retirement’s regulations and administrative guidance.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the parties mutually consent to the allocation of premium
tax revenues received pursuant to Chapter 185, Florida Statutes, including additional premium tax
revenues, to fund the inclusion of overtime pay in the definition of “earnable compensation” in
section 22-275 of the Retirement System until the maximum established by section 185.02(6),
Florida Statutes (currently three hundred 300 hours) is reached. Until a new agreement is reached
by the parties, the maximum number of hours of overtime to be included shall be one hundred
twenty (120) hours per member per year.

Overtime hours means those hours defined and paid by the City as overtime hours, but not
including payments for extra duty or a special detail for work performed on behalf of a second
party employer during off-duty hours.

Employees will have pension contributions deducted for any overtime hours included in
the calculation of pension benefits.

Section 3. The parties to this Agreement have agreed in the past to enhance certain benefits
related to the 1984 Supplemental Police Officers' Retirement System through the collective
bargaining process. Both parties acknowledge that benefit enhancements were agreed to on the
basis of a mutual expectation that the City would continue to qualify for State premium tax funding
pursuant to Florida Statutes Chapter 185, without further increasing benefits beyond those
referenced above, except on an incremental basis, and then only to the extent additional premium
tax funding becomes available to fully fund those incremental benefits. Therefore, if the City is
advised by the appropriate state agency, or an administrative or judicial court that the City's plans

60
for sworn Officers are not in compliance with Ch. 185, and changes to any of those plans would
have to be implemented in order for the City to qualify for the continued receipt of State premium
tax funds, the parties agree to begin bargaining changes to maintain compliance with Ch. 185.
However, consistent with Section 1 above, any plan changes that result from bargaining shall not
be implemented during the term of this Agreement. Additionally, the City agrees to advise the
PBA at such time as such notice is received from the appropriate State agency or court.

Section 4. The parties agree to reopen Article 26 no later than March 1, 2017 solely for the
purpose of discussing possible pension plan changes for Forensic Technicians and Latent Print
Examiners in fiscal years 2018 and/or 2019. The parties agree that funds received through Florida
Statutes Chapter 185 cannot be used to fund pension plans for Forensic Technicians and Latent
Print Examiners.

ARTICLE 27
PROMOTIONAL PROCESS

Section 1. Examinations given for the position of Police Sergeant shall be coordinated by the
Human Resources and Police Departments.

Section 2. A job analysis will be conducted by constructing and administering questionnaires to
incumbents to assess the importance of the knowledge, skills and abilities to be measured in the
Promotional Process.

Section 3. Officers with sixty (60) semester credits from a regionally or nationally accredited
college or university and three (3) years of non-probationary sworn service with the St.
Petersburg Police Department, as of the date of the promotional Written Examination, are
eligible to enter the Police Sergeant portion of the Promotional Process. Credit may be granted
for up to two (2) years of full-time non-probationary sworn law enforcement service with another
law enforcement agency in the United States or its territories.

Section 4. At least ninety (90) days prior to the scheduled Written Examination date, the City
shall post notice of the examinations via the Job Announcements. The announcements shall
include the date and time of the Written Examinations and the sources from which the
examinations are drawn. The City shall make available reference materials for use by eligible
employees preparing for the examinations.

Section 5. Step 1 for both the Sergeant and Lieutenant processes will be a closed-book, multiple-
choice Written Examination. The Sergeant and Lieutenant examinations will be developed by
representatives from the Human Resources and Police Departments, and an outside consultant
may be included. During administration of the Written Examinations, candidates may write
challenges to questions which they think are inappropriate, inaccurate or ambiguous. This
information may be used in conjunction with statistical item analysis information to modify the
scoring of individual questions as necessary or to eliminate invalid questions from the
examinations. The final decision regarding the suitability of the questions shall be made by the
Chief of Police or designee. Sergeant and Lieutenant candidates who receive a passing score on
the Written Examination will proceed to Step 2 in the Promotional Process.

61
Section 6. Step 2 will be a Review of Education and Service for which up to fifteen (15) points
will be awarded. Each candidate will submit supporting documentation to the designated
Promotional Process coordinator by the date established following notification of a passing score
on the Written Examination. (For graded criteria, see the “Review of Education and Service”
form in this Article.)

Section 7. The relative weights assigned to the foregoing components will be eighty-five percent
(85%) for the Written Examination and fifteen percent (15%) for the Review of Education and
Service. These two (2) scores will be combined for a final score that will be used to rank order
the candidates and produce the Police Sergeant and Police Lieutenant eligibility lists.

Section 8. Step 3 will be the identification of candidates to continue in the process. Candidates
will be identified from the eligibility lists, based on the number of available promotional
positions and in accordance with the Rule of Five, which is described in the City of St.
Petersburg Rules and Regulations of the Personnel Management System, Section 2-6.

Section 9. Step 4 will be an Oral Interview and Assessment administered by the Chief of Police
with each of the candidates selected in Step 3. Information to be reviewed will include each
candidate’s performance evaluations, discipline history, community service, and position on the
eligibility list. The Chief's decision to promote will be based on all information gathered through
the aforementioned four-step process.

Section 10. Police Department representatives will be appointed by the Chief of Police to
develop and administer the components of the Promotional Process in conjunction with Human
Resources staff and, if included, an outside consultant. Any individual who is related to a
potential candidate through family and/or significant other personal connections (including, but
not limited to, roommate, significant other and domestic partner) will not participate in any level
of the process (including examination development, scoring, Review of Education and Service,
Oral Interview and Assessment).

Section 11. Police Sergeant eligibility lists shall remain in effect for two (2) years. The lists shall
not be extended beyond two (2) years from the date they are posted unless the City and the PBA

mutually agree to extend the time limit of the lists, and said lists shall be utilized for promotions

in accordance with the procedures contained in the City's Rules and Regulations of the Personnel
Management System.

62
 

Candidate name and rank: Payroll number:

 

 

 

 

Date Issued:
Date Due:

St. Petersburg Police Department
Promotional Process

REVIEW OF EDUCATION AND SERVICE

To be completed by candidate. Candidate must attach complete documentation to support reported
points.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HIGHEST EARNED COLLEGE DEGREE Check if not applicable:
. . . Candidate: Do not
Accredited College or Degree Candidate Points | write in this column
University (maximum 5)
Verifier Initials/Date
Associate = | point Bachelor = 3 points Master = 4 points Doctorate = 5 points

Candidate must provide copy of official final transcript. See General Order II-27 for accreditation
requirements.

SWORN SERVICE WITH SPPD

 

. . . Candidate: Do not

Number of Years Points per Year Candidate Points write in this column
(maximum 20) (maximum 6)

Verifier Initials/Date

 

x 0.3 =

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Candidate may claim sworn service with SPPD only, up to 20 years as of the date this scoring sheet is
issued. Partial years up to two decimal places may be counted toward the total.

Candidate must provide documentation showing candidate name and applicable service dates.

 

SWORN SERVICE IN SPPD SPECIALIZED

 

ASSIGNMENTS (current rank only) Check if not applicable:
. . Candidate: Do not
Unit Name Service Dates oo write in this column

Verifier Initials/Date

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

63
Candidate may claim 2 points for at least one year of sworn service in SPPD specialized assignments (per
General Order II-32, any assignments other than to patrol squads) in current rank only, as of the date
this scoring sheet is issued.

Candidate must provide documentation showing candidate name, units and applicable service dates.

 

 

 

 

 

Candidate name and rank: Payroll number:
MILITARY SERVICE Check if not applicable:
. Years of Years of Candidate: Do not
Highest i E i write in this column
Branch Rank Full-Time | Part-Time | Candidate Points | Witeim this column

Service Service Verifier Initials/Date

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Candidate Points for Military Service (maximum

2)

Full time: 1-5 years = 1 point 6-10 years = 1.5 points More than 10 years or officer rank = 2 points
Part time: 1-5 years = 0.5 points 6-10 years = 0.75 points More than 10 years or officer rank = 1 point

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Candidate must provide copies of DD-214 or equivalent forms showing military status and dates of
service.

 

: Do not
this column

  

Verifier Initials/Date

 

Total Candidate Points (maximum 15)

 

 

 

 

 

CANDIDATE AFFIRMATION

Thereby affirm that the information I have presented in this summary is true and correct and any false or
inaccurate information that is discovered will automatically disqualify me from the Promotional Process
and may be grounds for disciplinary action against me.

  

 

Candidate Signature: Date:

 

 

 

 

Completed form received by.

Date received

2/5/16

64
ARTICLE 28
MAINTENANCE OF CONDITIONS

Section 1. No employee shall be unfavorably affected by the signing of this Agreement as to
wages, hours, or other conditions of employment except as may be established by the terms of this
Agreement. Any written rule, regulation, policy, or procedure in conflict with this Agreement
shall be resolved by modification of such rule, regulation, policy, or procedure to be compatible
with this Agreement. A consultation meeting, as provided in Article 8, Section 11, shall be deemed
appropriate to resolve conflicts arising under this section.

Section 2. Employees covered by this Agreement are also entitled to the benefits and rights of
the Rules and Regulations of the Personnel Management System of the City. If any conflicts occur
between this Agreement and the City's Rules and Regulations of the Personnel Management
System, the Agreement shall take precedence. The Agreement shall be the governing factor in all
cases even though the benefits or rights may be greater or lesser than provided for in the City's
Rules and Regulations of the Personnel Management System.

ARTICLE 29
SAVINGS CLAUSE

Section 1. If any Article or Section of this Agreement should be found invalid, unlawful, or
not enforceable, by reason of any existing or subsequently enacted legislation or by judicial
authority, all other Articles and Sections of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect for
the duration of this Agreement.

Section 2. In the event of invalidation of any Article or Section, both the Employer and the
PBA agree to meet within thirty (30) days of such determination for the purpose of negotiating a
replacement for such Article or Section.

ARTICLE 30
ENTIRE AGREEMENT

The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which resulted in this Agreement,
each had the right and opportunity to make proposals with respect to subjects or matters not
removed by law from the area of collective bargaining. The basic and entire Agreement between
the parties in the determination of wages, hours, and terms and conditions of employment, arrived
at by the parties after the exercise of such right and opportunity, are set forth in this Agreement.

The Employer and the PBA for the duration of this Agreement, each voluntarily and
unqualifiedly waives the right, and agrees that the other shall not be obligated to bargain
collectively with respect to any subject or matter referred to or covered in this Agreement or with
respect to any subject or matter not specifically referred to or covered in this Agreement, even
though such subject matter may not have been within the knowledge or contemplation of either or
both parties at the time that they negotiated this Agreement, unless otherwise provided for herein.

65
ARTICLE 31
DURATION

Section 1. This Agreement shall take effect the first payroll period start date after ratification
by both parties to this Agreement, and shall continue in full force and effect until its expiration
date of September 30, 2019.

Section 2. Should either party desire to terminate, change, or modify this Agreement as the
expiration draws near, it shall notify the other party by the month of March 2019. In the event
such notice is given, negotiations for a follow-on Agreement shall begin no later than May 15,
2019. Consistent with Article 8, Section 13 of this Agreement, provisions herein may be modified
during the term of the Agreement by written consent of the duly authorized representatives of the
City and the PBA.

66
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have

eqused thik Agreement to be signed by their

duly autharized Representatives on this 2°1" Gay of September, 2014

FOR THE CITY

 

Manager
Pap — _oasf20
Michael Koyatsev 4 &
Assistant Chief, Administrative Services
Bureau
aPC be at

Michael McDonald
Assistant Director, Administrative Services
Bureau

ee -_T
Timothy Broce!

Major, Office of Professional Standards

¢

Charles Alexander Jr,
Labor Relations Officer

Teer ee dite
Richurd Frantz,

Labor Relations Officer

 
  

&

FOR THE PBA

Michael Krohn
Executlve Director

val

Geotge
President

Legard Co
‘Officer,

LEE Lae AE

nathan Ven Houten
Officer

     

William Vickers
‘Officer
