MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN
THE CITY OF EAST PALO ALTO
AND
EAST PALO ALTO POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

PREAMBLE

Having met and conferred in good faith pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 3500-3510, the
City of East Palo Alto (hereinafter referred to as “CITY”) and the Police Officers Association (hereinafter
referred to as “ASSOCIATION”) have agreed upon this memorandum of understanding (“MOU”).

It is the general purpose of this MOU to promote the mutual interest of the City and its employees and to
establish rates of pay, and certain other terms and conditions of employment.

ARTICLE 1: RECOGNITION
1.1 Union Recognition

1.1.1 Pursuant to the provisions of the City Employer-Employee Relations Resolution #48-83 and
applicable State law, the City of East Palo Alto hereby recognizes the Police Officers Association
as the certified majority representative of the employees in each of the classifications listed
below:

¢ Police Officer
e Police Sergeant

1.1.2 The term “employee” or “employees” as used herein shall refer only to individuals employed by
the City (excluding temporary and/or contracted) as well as such classes of employees as may be
added hereafter through the provisions of the City Employer-Employee Relations Resolution or
applicable State law.

1.1.3 The Association agrees to provide the City with a list of Association Officers and representatives
who are authorized to meet and confer in good faith or to represent other employees. The
Association shall also provide the City with a list of all authorized paid representatives. These
lists shall be kept current by the Association.

1.2 Employer Recognition

The City Manager or his/her designee is the representative of the City in employer-employee relations, pursuant
to the Employer-Employee Resolution # 48-83 adopted November 21, 1983.
ARTICLE 2: NON-DISCRIMINATOIN

The provisions of this MOU shall be applied equally to all employees covered hereby. Neither the City nor the
Association shall unlawfully discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race,
creed, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or religious or political opinion or affiliation or
legitimate Association activity. In addition, to the extent prohibited by applicable state and federal law, there
shall be no discrimination against any disabled person solely because of such disability unless that disability
prevents the person(s) from performing the essential functions and duties of the classification.

ARTICLE 3: RIGHTS OF PARTIES

3.1

3.2

Management Rights

3.1.1

The City retains, among other management rights, the exclusive right to determine methods,
means, and personnel by which City government operations are to be conducted, as well as to
exercise complete control and discretion over its organization, operations, and technology of
performing its work; to determine the mission, function and necessity of all or part of each of its
constituent departments, boards, and commissions and take all necessary actions to carry out their
mission, functions and necessity, or any part thereof, as well as set standards of service to the
public.

The City also retains the sole right to administer the Human Resources System, to classify or
reclassify positions, add or delete positions or classes to or from the authorized strength and
Compensation Rate Schedule; to establish standards for employment, promotions, and transfer of
employees; to direct its employees, establish rules and regulations, take disciplinary action for
proper cause; to establish work schedules and work assignments, contract out work, transfer work
out of the unit, and to relieve its employees from duty for lack of work or other legitimate
reasons. The City retains the right to be the sole judge, subject to its Personnel Rules and
Regulations, of the qualification and competence of its officers and employees.

The City reserves the right to take whatever action may be necessary in an emergency situation.
This section is not intended to restrict consultation with employees or employee representatives

about the practical consequences that decisions on these matters may have on wages, hours and
other terms and conditions of employment.

Employee Rights

3.2.1

3.2.2

Employees of the City shall have the right to form, join, and participate in the activities of
employee organizations of their own choosing for the purpose of representation on all matters of
employee relations. Employees shall also have the right to represent themselves individually in
their employment relations with the City. No employee shall be interfered with, intimidated,
restrained, coerced, unduly influenced or discriminated against because of his/her exercise of
these rights.

Management employees shall not represent non-management employees on matters within the
scope of representation. Confidential employees shall not represent non-confidential employees
on matters within the scope of representation. This provision does not otherwise limit the right of
confidential employees to be members of and to hold office in employee organizations of their
choice.
3.3 Association Rights

City employees who are Official Representatives or Unit Representatives of the Association shall
be given reasonable time off with pay to attend meet-and-confer sessions with Management
Representatives, or to be present when unit member grievances are being considered. The use of
official time for this purpose shall be reasonable and shall not interfere with the performance of
City services as determined by the City Personnel Officer. Whenever possible, such employee
representatives shall make a request for excused absence to the Police Chief or his or her
designated representative at least two (2) calendar days prior to the scheduled meeting. Except
by mutual agreement, the number of employees excused for such purposes shall not exceed two

Q).
ARTICLE 4: ASSOCIATION SECURITY

4.1 The City will deduct membership dues and insurance premiums from employees in the above-mentioned
classifications when such deductions have been authorized in writing by the individual employee on a form
acceptable to the Finance Director and shall transmit such membership dues deductions to the Association.

4.2 An Employee who is a member of the Association’s bargaining team and who attends the regularly scheduled
bargaining sessions between the City and the Association shall receive release time conditioned on the following:

4.2.1 Release Time: Means the release from regularly scheduled duty to attend with pay bargaining
sessions between the City and the Association’s bargaining team during on-duty-time. Release
time is time worked.

4.2.2. Hours Eligible for Release Time: Means only those hours scheduled and actually spent in
bargaining sessions between the City and the Association on days the Association member is
scheduled to work. Hours spent in negotiations in excess of the number the employee was
scheduled to work that day, or hours spent in negotiations on a non-duty day, shall not be counted
for pay purposes or as hours worked.

4.2.3 Each POA bargaining team member shall notify his/her supervisors of the scheduled time, date
and place of the bargaining session between the City and the Association as soon as a session is
scheduled and shall re-notify the supervisor at least 72 hours in advance of the bargaining
session.

4.3 Scheduled on-duty personnel will be expected to report for duty prior to a scheduled negotiation session
unless the start of the shift is the same as the scheduled start of the negotiation session. On-duty personnel shall
report for duty after the end of a bargaining session unless the bargaining session exceeds the scheduled duty
day. The bargaining session ends when either the City or Association indicates the meeting is over.

4.4 The City shall provide an aggregate of up to ten (10) days off without pay for Association officers to attend
seminars or conduct Association business. Such leave without pay must be scheduled and approved in advance
by the Police Chief or his/her designated representative. The department retains the right to deny a leave or
cancel a leave when such leave will result in an uncovered work assignment or cause overtime. The City shall
establish a release time bank for the Association’s elected officers. Bargaining unit members may contribute
vacation or Compensatory Time Off (CTO) in full-day increments to the release time bank. This leave will be
converted to release time on an hour-for-hour basis. The Association shall designate elected officers who may
use the time in the release time bank. Release time shall continue to be at the discretion of the supervisor and
shall not be permitted if its use would incur overtime.
ARTICLE 5: BULLETIN BOARDS

5.1 The City shall provide designated bulletin board space on existing bulletin boards for the Association, the
size and location to be determined jointly by departmental management and the Association. All materials to be
posted must be non-defamatory in nature, must be approved, dated, and signed by an Association official and
shall be for the benefit of the membership. Appropriate postings include, but are not limited to the following
subjects:

1. Association recreational, social and related news bulletins;

2. Scheduled meetings;

3. Information concerning Association elections or the results thereof; and

4. Reports of official business of the Association, including reports of committees or the Board of Directors.
5.2 Materials posted on the bulletin board shall be removed consistent with Departmental Policy.

5.3 In cases where the Association shares space with employees of another bargaining group, in whole or part,
the space described above will become the bulletin board space for employees represented by each bargaining
group. In the event that there is insufficient bulletin board space for both unions, the parties shall meet to discuss
appropriate allocation of space.

ARTICLE 6: REOPENER ON HEALTH AND WELFARE

At the request of either party, this MOU will reopen on the subject of health and welfare benefits. Within
fourteen (14) days of the request by either party, the parties shall meet and confer over medical premium rates,
potential plan design changes, employee and employer premium contributions, and potential new medical
insurance providers, and the change of the Plan Year to the calendar year. Any changes to health and welfare
benefits during the term of the MOU must be by mutual agreement.

ARTICLE 7: MEDICAL AND DENTAL COVERAGE
71 Medical Coverage
7.1.1 Employee Coverage:

The City agrees to provide a medical insurance plan or plans (if more than one is available) for its
employees covered by this bargaining unit. The City shall contribute the full cost of the
employee-only level for the medical plan selected by each employee. The contributions are
based on regular full-time employment; part-time employees shall receive a prorated contribution
based on their percentage of full-time equivalent. Employees may select coverage from among
the available options.

7.1.2. Dependent Coverage:

A. Employees may insure their eligible dependents (including registered domestic partners)
under the medical plans provided by the City, in accordance with the rules and regulations
applicable to obtaining said dependent coverage.

B. The City shall pay eighty percent (80%) of the premium of the selected medical plan for
those employees electing to have dependent medical coverage under the City’s existing
medical plans. The employee shall be responsible for the remaining twenty percent (20%) of

4
the premium, payable through bi-weekly payroll deductions.
7.2 Dental Coverage
7.2.1 Employee Coverage:

A. The City agrees to provide a dental insurance plan or plans (if more than one is available) for
its employees covered by this bargaining unit. The City shall contribute the full cost of the
employee-only level for the dental plan selected by the employee. The contributions are
based on regular full-time employment; part-time employees shall receive a prorated
contribution based on their percentage of full-time equivalent.

B. Maximum Delta Dental payout per calendar year shall be $2,000.

C. Co-payment for Crown and Cast Restoration, and Prosthodontic benefits shall be 80/20; with
the twenty percent (20%) share the responsibility of the employee.

7.2.2. Dependent Coverage:

A. Employee may insure their eligible dependents (including registered domestic partners as
defined by State law) under the dental plan(s) in accordance with the rules and regulations
applicable to obtaining said dependent coverage.

ARTICLE 8: MEDICAL & DENTAL INSURANCE COVERAGE DURING LEAVES OF ABSENCE

Employees who are placed on paid leave of absence resulting from a medical condition including injury, illness,
pregnancy or childbirth shall receive the City contribution toward medical and dental plan coverage for a leave
period up to twelve (12) months. Premium amounts exceeding the City contribution and for dependents shall be
the responsibility of the employee during the leave period. If an employee has paid leave accruals in excess of
twelve (12) months, the City will continue to make its contribution toward health coverage while paid leave is
being used and until such time as the paid leave is exhausted.

ARTICLE 9: WAGES & RETIREMENT
9.1 Wages
There shall be no change in the published wage schedule during Fiscal Year 2013-14.

Effective the first full pay period following July 1, 2014, wages for all bargaining unit members shall be
increased by 2.5% as set forth in Exhibit [A].

9.2 Step Increases

9.2.1 Employees initially appointed to the first step of the salary range of their classification shall be
entitled to a merit increase to the next higher step in the pay range upon successful completion of
six (6) months of actual initial or promotional probationary service, so long as they receive a
satisfactory performance evaluation. The date of such increase shall be called the evaluation
date.

9.2.2 Employees may be appointed to any step in the salary schedule for their classification as
recommended by the Chief of Police and approved by the City Manager. Employees appointed to
the second step and above are eligible to receive a merit increase after successful completion of
twelve (12) months of actual service, so long as they receive a satisfactory performance
evaluation.

9.2.3. Each twelve (12) months of actual service after the evaluation date, each employee receiving a
satisfactory performance evaluation shall receive a merit increase to the next higher step until the
top step of the pay range for the job class has been reached. An employee shall not receive a
merit increase beyond the maximum steps established for the job classification.

9.2.4 For purposes of this section, an employee who has not received any performance evaluation
during the sixty (60) days following the evaluation date shall be deemed to have received a
satisfactory performance evaluation effective the evaluation date. Nothing in this section shall
limit the employer’s ability to take disciplinary or other action for performance issues which
occur during a time period when no performance evaluation was completed.

9.3 Effect of Promotion, Demotion or Transfer on Salaries
9.3.1 Pay Following Promotion

An employee promoted to a higher-paid classification shall be assigned to the first step in the
new pay range or at the step which equals no less than a five percent (5%) increase over his/her
current base pay rate, whichever is more, provided the maximum pay step for the new range is
not exceeded.

9.3.2. Pay Following Demotion

An employee involuntarily demoted to a lower-paid classification shall be assigned to a step in
the new pay range recommended by the Chief of Police and approved by the City Manager. An
employee voluntarily demoted shall be paid at the step of the new pay range closest to the
employee's base pay in the higher-paid classification, but not exceeding the maximum step in the
range.

9.3.3 Pay Following Transfer

An employee transferred to a position within the same classification or to another classification
with the same pay range shall retain the same rate of base pay and the same evaluation date. A
merit increase shall not be applicable at the successful completion of any probation or evaluation
period required as a result of a transfer.

9.4 Working Out of Classification

An employee who is officially designated by management to perform all, or substantially all, of the duties of a
vacant position or of an absent employee in a higher paid classification, shall be paid at the step of the higher pay
range or at the first step which is not less than five percent (5%) more than his/her current base rate after a full
workweek (or a minimum of thirty-six (36) regularly-scheduled hours) served in the higher paid classification.
Once an employee has worked in the acting assignment for a full workweek (or a minimum of thirty-six (36)
regularly-scheduled hours), he or she shall be entitled to acting pay for the entire length of the assignment.

Example 1. An officer is assigned to fill in behind a vacationing Sergeant for two full workdays. He or she is
not entitled to acting pay for those workdays.

Example 2. An officer is assigned to fill in behind a vacationing Sergeant for a full workweek (36 hours). He or
she is entitled to receive acting pay for the full term of the assignment.
9.5 Shift Changes

The Chief of Police shall post shift changes fourteen (14) days in advance of such change, subject only to exigent
circumstances as determined by the Chief of Police or his/her authorized designee. Said exigent circumstances
shall be explained to affected personnel in writing and/or posted where such notices are customarily located in
the department.

9.6 Retirement
Tier 1

Employees who do not meet the definition of “new employees”, as defined by the Public Employees’ Retirement
System (PERS) shall be subject to the 3% @ 55 retirement formula. Tier 1 employees will continue to pay the
employee contribution of 9%.

Tier 2

For new employees, as defined by the Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS), hired on or after January
1, 2013, retirement benefits shall be those established by the Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS) for
Local Safety Members, with a 2.7% at age 57 retirement formula based upon an average of the three (3) highest
years of compensation. Employees will pay the full employee contribution (50% of the Normal Cost of the
benefit).

ARTICLE 10: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
10.1 Grievance Defined

A grievance is defined as an allegation by an employee, group of employees, or the Association that the
Employer has failed to provide a condition of employment as required by Memorandum of Understanding,
written departmental rules, or written City Rules and Regulations, provided that the enjoyment of such right is
not made subject to the discretion of the Police Chief or the City by terms of Memorandum of Understanding or
law and, provided further, that the condition of employment which is the subject matter within the scope of
representation as defined in California Government Code Section 3504.

10.2 Grievance Procedure
Step 1. Informal Discussion.

An employee shall discuss the act in dispute with his/her immediate supervisor no later than seven
(7) calendar days after the event giving rise to the dispute, or no later than seven (7) calendar days
after the employee knew or reasonably should have known of the event giving rise to the grievance.
The Supervisor shall give the employee an oral reply within fifteen (15) calendar days after the
discussion. If the employee is not satisfied with the response, he/she may proceed to Step 2.

Step 2. Division Head.

Any dispute not resolved at Step 1 may be submitted to the Division Head in writing, citing the
specific provision of this Agreement in dispute and setting the desired solution within fifteen (15)
calendar days after the Supervisor's response. A copy shall be provided to the Immediate
Supervisor and the Personnel Officer. Within fifteen (15) calendar days thereafter, a meeting
shall be scheduled with the employee by the Division Head, who shall attempt to resolve the
matter. The Division Head shall give the employee a written reply within fifteen (15) calendar
days after such meeting and shall file a copy with the Personnel Officer. If the employee is not
satisfied with the response, he/she may proceed to Step 3. Employees who are supervised
directly by the Chief of Police shall by-pass Step 2 and proceed directly to Step 3.

Step 3. Chief of Police.

Any dispute not resolved at Step 2 may be submitted in writing to the Chief of Police within
fifteen (15) calendar days of the division head's response, with a copy to the Immediate
Supervisor and the Personnel Officer. Within fifteen (15) calendar days thereafter, a meeting
shall be scheduled with the employee by the Chief of Police, who shall attempt to resolve the
matter. The Chief of Police shall give the employee a written reply within fifteen (15) calendar
days after the meeting and file a copy with the Personnel Officer. If the employee is not satisfied
with the response, he/she may proceed to Step 4.

Step 4. Final Level of Review.

If the POA is not satisfied with the Chief of Police’s response, it may appeal the dispute to
advisory arbitration in writing within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of the Step 3
response. Within ten (10) calendar days of the appeal, the parties shall meet to select an
arbitrator. If the parties are unable to reach mutual agreement on an arbitrator, the parties shall
jointly request a list of seven (7) labor arbitrators from the California State Mediation Service and
shall alternately strike names until only one name remains. If the City and the Association
cannot agree within five (5) calendar days after receipt of such list on one of seven (7)
persons to act as the arbitrator, they shall alternately strike names from the list until one name
remains and that person shall then become the arbitrator. The party making the first strike
shall be determined by a flip of a coin.

Costs for the arbitration (including the cost of the list, arbitrator fees, and any court reporter) shall
be shared equally by the parties. The parties shall each pay for their own representative. The
decision of the arbitrator shall be advisory to the City Manager. The City Manager or designee
shall have ten (10) calendar days after the service of the decision to notify the Union of his
decision either to adopt or revoke the decision of the arbitrator. If the City Manager or designee
takes no action within the ten (10) calendar day period, the City Manager shall be deemed to have
adopted the decision. A decision adopted by the City Manager or designee will be final and
binding upon the parties. A decision revoked by the City Manager or designee shall be deemed to
have no effect and the Step 3 reply shall be final and binding upon the parties.

ARTICLE 11: LEAVES
11.1 Sick Leave
11.1.1 Intent

Sick leave shall be allowed and used only in case of actual personal sickness or disability,
medical or dental treatment, family illness and injury, and as an income supplement to Workers'
Compensation payments. Sick leave shall not be considered as a right which an employee may
use at his/her discretion, but shall be allowed only in case of necessity as described herein.
Employees shall not be entitled to sick leave for sickness or injury during leave of absence
without pay. This section is intended to be interpreted in a manner consistent with the provisions
of the Family Medical Leave Act and the California Family Rights Act.
11.1.2 Accrual

Full-time, regular and probationary employees shall accrue sick leave at the rate of three and
seven-tenths (3.7) hours per bi-weekly pay period of actual service. Part-time, regular employees
who customarily work at least twenty (20) hours per week shall receive a pro-rated sick leave
accrual based on actual hours worked each bi-weekly pay period.

11.1.3 Compensation for Accumulated Sick Leave

There shall be no buy out or compensation for unused accrued sick leave, except that once each
calendar year in the month of November an employee may give notice that he/she intends to
convert sick leave to vacation leave or to be paid out in cash up to 40 hours. To be eligible to
take advantage of this policy, an employee shall have a minimum of seven (7) years continuous
service with the City in a permanent position. Employees who have not met the seven year
continuous service requirement may accumulate and carry over the full amount of unused
accrued sick leave from calendar year to calendar year. There shall be no upper limit on the
accumulation of sick leave.

11.1.4 Use of Sick Leave

A. Off-duty employees who become sick or injured and unable to report to work must notify the
Department no later than one (1) hour prior to their next scheduled shift.

B. Employees shall report their sick leave status to their on-duty supervisor, or in his/her
absence, to the Watch Commander. The Supervisor receiving the notification shall complete
an "Absentee Report" form and insure that form is forwarded to the appropriate Commander
or Supervisor.

C. Employees who become sick while on duty, not related to their work, and are unable to
continue working, shall notify their immediate supervisor prior to going home. The
supervisor shall notify the Division Commander and complete an Absentee Report.

D. Employees who have been on sick leave for seven (7) consecutive calendar days are required
to present written verification of inability to work signed by a treating physician or other
health care provider to their immediate supervisor upon returning to work. The written
verification must also include a release for the employee to return to work, together with any
restrictions. That Supervisor shall attach the medical verification to the completed Absentee
Report form and forward both to the Administrative Division. The City reserves the right to
determine whether it can reasonably accommodate the employee’s work restrictions.

E. Employees may use sick leave for the illness or injury of a member of the employee's
immediate household.

11.2. Bereavement Leave
11.2.1 Bereavement Leave

Employees shall be entitled up to three (3) calendar days of paid leave for an occurrence of death
or serious illness or accident determined to possibly lead to death in the immediate family; five
11.3

11.4

11.5

11.2.2.

(5) calendar days if out of state. Additional days may be approved by the City Manager and
charged to the employee's available unused leave. This leave shall not be accumulated and is in
addition to sick leave and vacation benefits except where additional time off is taken as provided
above. Request for funeral/emergency leave must be in writing, state the relationship of the
family member, and be approved in advance by the Chief of Police and City Manager. In special
emergencies, an employee may request formal approval after the fact; if approved, leave records
shall be adjusted accordingly. Death following a serious illness shall generally be regarded as
one (1) occurrence; however, the Chief shall be responsible for recommending otherwise when,
in his/her judgment, the nature or severity of the illness and/or lapse of time warrants.

Immediate Family
Immediate family shall mean the following: related by blood, marriage or adoption: spouse,

child, parent, sister, brother, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, grandparent, grandchild, and cousin.
Immediate Family shall also include registered domestic partners.

Disability Leave

11.3.1

Sworn Police Unit personnel who are unable to work due to an injury or illness arising out of and
in the cause of his/her duties which is declared to be compensable under the State of California
Workers' Compensation Law, shall be granted industrial disability leave and temporary disability
benefits in accordance with Section 4850 of the California Labor Code.

Military Leave

11.4.1

11.4.2

Military leave shall be granted by the City in accordance with the provisions of State and Federal
Laws and there may be a deduction for any military compensation that the employee receives for
service during the period that he is receiving full pay from the City, to the extent permitted by
law. All employees taking military leave shall give the City an opportunity, within the limits of
military regulations, to determine when such military leave shall be taken.

An employee returning from military leave may be required to pass a medical examination to be
paid by the City, and shall be required to submit proof of actual service before returning to work.

Leave of Absence

11.5.1

11.5.2

11.5.3

When determined to be in the best interests of the employee and the City, the City Manager may
approve a leave of absence without pay for a regular or probationary employee for a period up to
six (6) months. Such leave is a privilege, not a right, and must be requested in writing by the
employee, stating the reason and requested dates, and must be recommended by the Chief of
Police. The request shall include the address and the phone number where the employee may be
contacted during the leave, if approved.

Leave for one (1) calendar week or less may be granted by the Chief of Police upon his/her
determination that such leave is justified.

Employee benefits shall not be continued during leave in excess of one (1) calendar week unless
any insurance contract provisions permit and the employee agrees in writing to pay the total
monthly cost or a portion thereof, as appropriate, by a method satisfactory to the Finance
Director. Benefits not paid as agreed shall terminate. Employees on leave of absence without pay
in excess of one (1) calendar week shall not accrue leave nor service credit, but shall retain
unused accruals as of the date leave began. Employees on leave in excess of thirty (30) calendar
days shall return City property as set forth in Section 3.13.06 of the Personnel Policies and

10
Procedures.

11.5.4 An employee returning to the same classification from which he/she took leave shall be paid at
the current rate in the same step and range of the class in which employed.

11.5.5 An employee on leave shall confirm in advance of the leave expiration date his/her intention to
return. An employee who fails to report promptly at the expiration of his/her leave without
sufficient cause shall be subject to disciplinary action and possible termination of his/her right to
continued employment. A leave of absence may be revoked by the City Manager upon a
determination that the reason for leave was not stated and did not serve the City’s best interests.

ARTICLE 12: VACATION
12.1 Vacation Accumulation

An employee with less than ten (10) years of consecutive City service shall not accumulate more than two-
hundred and eighty-eight (288) hours of vacation. An employee with more than ten (10) years of consecutive
City service shall not accumulate more than three-hundred and twenty (320) hours of vacation. Once the accrual
cap is reached, an employee will not accrue any additional vacation until he or she reduces the accumulated
hours below the accrual cap, either through usage or cash out. An employee shall receive reasonable notice of
the amount of accumulated vacation leave in advance of each anniversary date.

The Chief of Police shall give employees reasonable advance notice if vacation leave will conflict with the
department needs and shall advise the City Manager if vacation denial is the reason for employee's deferral
request. Requests for deferring vacation use must be presented to the City Manager prior to the start of the
vacation unless the vacation is cancelled by the Department, in which case the deferral request must be presented
to the City Manager within thirty (30) calendar days after the vacation was originally scheduled to start. In
granting deferred vacation, the City Manager may specify a time within which such excess vacation leave must
be used.

12.2 Crediting Vacation

Full-time employees, excluding seasonal and temporary, shall be credited with vacation as follows:

Minimum Continuous Service Amount of Vacation Earned Annually
0-4.99 years: 80 hours (3.08 hrs bi-weekly)
5-9.99 years: 120 hours (4.62 hrs bi-weekly)
10-14.99 years: 160 hours (6.15 hrs bi-weekly)
15-plus years: 200 hours (7.69 hrs bi-weekly)

12.3 Use of Vacation

The time at which an employee may use vacation leave and the amount to be taken at any one time shall be
determined by the Chief or designee with particular regard for the needs of the City and, insofar as possible,
considering the wishes of the employee. Except in unusual circumstances, use of vacation leave shall be
scheduled and approved in advance of the first day of absence. Approval of use of vacation leave shall be ina
form and manner prescribed by the Personnel Officer. Said approval of vacation leave shall not be unreasonably
withheld.

In addition, the Chief or designee may require any unit member to use up to two weeks of vacation for
operational reasons, including the good of the Department. Unlike other paid leaves, mandatory vacation under
this paragraph shall be deemed hours worked for overtime purposes.

11
12.4 Vacation Cash out

Members of the bargaining unit may cash out vacation during the month of December each year. To qualify for
vacation cash out, an employee must have more than eighty (80) hours of accrued vacation. Bargaining unit
members may cash out up to a maximum of forty (40) hours of vacation, so long as the member maintains a

balance of at least eighty (80) hours.

12.5 Work During Vacation

Employees shall not work for the City or be called back during vacation leave except in an emergency as
determined by the Chief of Police and approved by the City Manager. An employee required to work shall not
be charged for leave and shall be compensated as if working on his/her regular schedule.

ARTICLE 13: HOLIDAYS

13.1 The City recognizes the following twelve (12) holidays (note: holidays are recognized on the identified

dates, even if they fall on a weekend):

Holiday

New Year’s Day
Martin Luther King Birthday
Lincoln’s Birthday
Washington’s Birthday
Cesar Chavez Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day

Veteran’s Day
Thanksgiving Day

Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas Day

Date Recognized

January 1st

3rd Monday in January
February 12th

3rd Monday in February
last Monday in March
last Monday in May

July 4th

1st Monday in September
November 11th

4th Thursday in November
4th Friday in November
December 25th

13.2 Each bargaining unit employee in paid status the day before and the day after a recognized holiday will
receive eight (8) hours of Holiday Leave for that holiday. Holiday Leave will be credited in the pay period in

which the holiday falls.

Example: Christmas Day falls on a Saturday. For purposes of this MOU, the holiday is recognized on that day,
even though City Hall may be closed on the preceding Friday. Each bargaining unit member will be credited
eight (8) hours of Holiday Leave during the pay period in which Christmas Day falls.

13.3 Holiday Leave is paid time off and may be scheduled in the same manner as an employee schedules
vacation. Any bargaining unit member who is not required to work on a designated holiday may use Holiday
Leave, Vacation, CTO, or other discretionary leave to cover the holiday.

Example: An officer assigned to CID is not required to work on Thanksgiving Day. The Officer has a bank of
twenty (20) hours of Holiday Leave. The Officer may use ten (10) hours of Holiday Leave or other discretionary

leave to cover that absence.

13.4 Employees may cash out up to twenty-four (24) hours of Holiday Leave during the first pay period of
December and the first pay period of June, for a total of forty-eight (48) hours each fiscal year. Elections must

12
be made in the month preceding the cash out (i.e., during the month of November or May).

Example: On November 13:, Officer A files an election to cash out twenty four (24) hours of Holiday Leave.
That leave will be paid on the paycheck for the first pay period in December. Officer A may elect to cash out up
to an additional twenty-four (24) hours of Holiday Leave in June (with the election filed in May).

13.5 Employees may accrue a maximum of ninety-six (96) hours of holiday leave. Once employees have
reached the maximum, they will no longer accrue Holiday Leave.

13.6 Holiday leave will be cashed out (at the employee’s salary rate before promotion) upon promotion.

13.7 Employees required to work on a holiday which is not their regularly scheduled workday will be paid
overtime consistent with Section 15.2 of this MOU.

ARTICLE 14: LEAVE DONATION

14.1 Employees shall be eligible to participate as donors and recipients in the leave donation program, which
provides a mechanism for assisting employees who have exhausted paid leave due to a catastrophic illness or
injury. This program allows a regular City employee represented by the Association to donate, on an hour-for-
hour basis, accrued vacation, or Compensatory Time Off hours to a specific, eligible employee who has
exhausted his/her own available leave balances. Catastrophic illness or injury is defined as the employee’s own
adverse medical condition which requires the employee to be absent from work for more than twenty (20)
consecutive work days, or similarly debilitating illness or injury of the employee’s immediate family member
who has a catastrophic illness or injury (as verified by a physician’s statement).

14.2 To receive leave donations, an employee:
14.2.1 Must have been employed in a regular position for a minimum of one year; and

14.2.2 Must be absent from work due to his/her own catastrophic illness or injury for more than twenty
(20) consecutive days (as verified by a physician’s statement); or be absent from work in order to
attend his/her immediate family member who has a catastrophic illness or injury (as verified by a
physician’s statement); and

14.2.3. Must have exhausted all earned leave balances, including sick leave (if related to the employee’s
own illness), vacation, overtime and CTO accruals. However, the Personnel Officer may approve
the solicitation/acceptance of leave donations prior to all balances being exhausted, when the
physician’s statement and leave balance indicate the probable exhaustion of balances within two
pay periods.

14.3. Donations:

Are voluntary;

Are made from accrued vacation and/or CTO balances;

May not be made through donation of sick leave;

Must be for a minimum of eight (8) hours, in whole hour increments;

Are irrevocable, and

Are taxable on the part of the recipient, in accordance with IRS regulations, and are subject to
withholding as required by law.

PuRWNPr

14.4 Donations shall be processed in the order received. However, a donor’s leave shall not be reduced until the
recipient actually uses the leave. Unused donations shall remain with the donor.

13
14.5 An employee may not donate more than eighty (80) hours to any other individual employee.

14.6 The total donations received into his/her vacation balance by an employee shall normally not exceed 1040
hours; however, donations in excess of 1040 hours may be considered and approved by the Personnel Officer.

14.7 Upon approval of a request for donations, the Personnel Officer (or his/her designee) shall, at the
employee’s request, post a notice of the eligible employee’s need for donations on departmental bulletin boards
accessible to employees; confidential medical information shall not be included in the notice.

14.8 Nothing in this section shall be construed to modify the employment relationship between the City and the
receiving employee, or to restrict the City’s management rights. Neither shall this section modify existing City
tules, policies or agreements regarding unpaid leave of absence or family leave.

ARTICLE 15: OVERTIME

15.1 The City shall determine those classifications eligible for overtime compensation. Regular full-time
employees in those classifications represented by the Association when properly authorized in advance by the
Department Head or his/her designated representative shall receive overtime compensation in accordance with
the following provisions.

Employees working in exempt positions (either as a regular assignment or when working out of class) shall not
qualify for overtime.

15.2 Except as provided below, overtime for eligible employees shall be defined as follows:

15.2.1 For employees assigned to a 12/84 work schedule, work in excess of eighty-four (84) hours in a
fourteen (14) day work period, exclusive of stand-by and call-back pay.

15.2.2. For all other employees represented by the Association, that time worked in excess of forty (40)
hours in a seven day work period, exclusive of stand-by and call back pay, provided, however,
such law enforcement personnel in attendance at the P.O.S.T or F.B.I academies shall accrue
overtime for hours worked in excess of 240 hours in a 28-day cycle. Such cycle shall be
established by the City.

15.2.3 For the purpose of computing overtime, all regularly scheduled work hours, including paid leave
time, shall be considered time worked.

15.3 Overtime is compensable at the rate of time and one-half the regular hourly rate, computed in accordance
with FLSA. Hours worked shall accrue in increments of one tenth (1/10) of an hour (6 minutes), subject to a
minimum of two-tenths (2/10) of an hour (12 minutes).

15.4 Overtime shall be placed in a compensatory time off (CTO) account or paid in the pay period in which
earned at the discretion of the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative. The maximum allowable
balance in the CTO account shall be 120 hours. Employees will not be permitted to accrue additional CTO over
the 120 hour cap. In the event that an employee accrues more than 120 hours, any hours in excess of 120 will be
paid out no later than the next full pay period.

CTO will be cashed out (at the employee’s salary rate before promotion) upon promotion.

15.5 When an employee wishes to take compensatory time off and requests time off at least ninety-six hours
prior to the time such hours would be taken off, the Chief of Police will make every effort to comply with the
employee’s request. Approval of this request is subject to a determination by the Chief of Police of whether or
not it would unduly disrupt the operations of the department. Compensatory time off shall be used before any

14
leaves-of-absence-without pay and granted pursuant to the City Policies and Procedures.

15.6 An employee may request cash payment of all hours in the compensatory overtime account during any pay
period. Requests for payment of CTO will be made on a form provided by the City.

15.7 Computation of probationary periods, retirement benefits, sick leave, vacation time, merit increase periods,
or other similarly computed periods of benefits shall be based only on regularly scheduled hours of work, and
shall not include overtime hours worked.

15.8 When an employee is off duty, not on standby, and called back to work, said employee shall be given credit
for at least four (4) hours of work time.

15.9 Sworn employees subpoenaed to court as an Officer of the City during off-duty hours shall be compensated
for such court time at the rate of time and one-half (1-1/2) the employee's regular rate of pay. For said court
time, employees shall be paid a minimum of four (4) hours at the premium rate specified above. Court time in
excess of four (4) hours shall be compensated at the premium rate specified above on the basis of hours actually
spent at the court. The employee must be off-duty to qualify for court time pay and shall submit an Overtime
Request Form.

15.10 Effective December 13, 2013, the City will contribute the equivalent of $1,000 to the CTO bank of each
bargaining unit member who has been continuously employed by the City as a Police Officer or Police Sergeant
from August 1, 2013 through December 1, 2013. Employees who separate from employment with the City
between December 1, 2013 and December 13, 2013 shall not qualify for this benefit.

ARTICLE 16: VEHICLE DAMAGE REIMBURSEMENT
16.1 City shall provide either:
16.1.1. A secured parking space for officers’ privately owned vehicles; or

16.1.2 If the City has not yet provided a secure parking area and an officer’s privately owned vehicle is
vandalized outside a secured parking area while the officer is on-duty, City agrees to pay a
maximum of $250 per incident, up to a maximum of $1,000 per year per officer toward the cost
of any deductible owed to the officer’s insurance company. Said payment will be made to the
officer upon submittal of proof of insurance and of deductible owed. An Officer who discovers
that his/her car has been vandalized shall report such damage within one (1) hour after discovery
to their immediate supervisor. An Incident or Malicious Mischief Report shall be prepared, along
with a picture of the damage, by a person other than the employee, within 24 hours after
discovery and submitted along with the claim for reimbursement.

ARTICLE 17: PROBATION
17.1 Probationary Period

Unit members covered by this agreement shall have a probationary period of eighteen (18) months of actual
service. The probationary period for promotional positions within the Department shall be twelve (12) months.
Upon request of the Chief of Police, the Personnel Officer or designee may extend the probationary period of a
unit member by a period not to exceed three (3) months. The Personnel Officer or designee shall notify the
Police Chief at least one-and-one-half (1-1/2) months prior to the completion of an employee’s probationary
period. The Police Chief shall submit to the Personnel Officer an Employee Performance Report (EPR) within
thirty (30) calendar days prior to the due date, indicating any concern over the employee’s performance which
would support the extension of a probationary period.

15
17.2 Rejection of Probationary Employee

During the probationary period, an employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or recourse
to the grievance procedure under this MOU or Section 3.15 of the Personnel Rules. Notification of rejection
from probation shall be in writing to the employee. Upon notification of rejection from probation, the employee
may request a meeting with the Personnel Officer to review the reasons for rejection. An employee rejected
during a promotional or transfer probationary period shall be reinstated to a vacant position, if available, in a
class from which he/she was promoted or transferred, unless rejected on the basis of charges leading to
discharge. If no vacancy exists, the employee may exercise displacement procedures set forth in Section 3.13 of
the Personnel Rules.

ARTICLE 18: TUITION REIMBURSEMENT
18.1 The City shall establish a Tuition Reimbursement Program for Police Unit members.

18.2 Subject to the availability of funding, the City will reimburse expenses for tuition, books, and curriculum
fees incurred by an employee within the representation unit, to a maximum of Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00)
per fiscal year, for classes completed in accredited institutions of learning or approved specialized training
groups leading to an academic degree or improved job-related skill. The rate of reimbursement shall be one
hundred percent (100%) for completion of job-related courses and fifty percent (50%) for the completion of
courses leading to an academic degree. Programs must be approved in advance by the Chief of Police to qualify
for reimbursement.

ARTICLE 19: SPECIAL ASSIGNMENTS

19.1 Special Assignments shall be at the discretion of the Chief and shall be for no more than four (4) years. The
parties agree that elimination of or a change in assignments is a regular part of the assignment process and shall
not be deemed disciplinary in nature.

19.2 Effective upon Adoption of the Agreement, an additional five percent (5%) pay allowance shall be awarded
for all special assignments, including:

1. Motorcycles

2. Detective (Officers and Sergeant)

3. School Resources Officer

4. Field Training Officer (normally four, including sergeant, but subject to change per the Chief).
19.3 The parties may establish additional special assignments by mutual agreement.
19.4 Bargaining Unit members shall receive special assignment allowance pay for the entire period that they are

in an assignment. However, when a Bargaining Unit member is assigned to a higher classification, but is not
performing the duties of the acting assignment, he/she will not receive special assignment allowance pay.

For example, if a Police Officer is assigned to the higher classification of Detective, and subsequently is assigned
an acting assignment as the Patrol Sergeant, he/she stops working as a Detective. The officer no longer earns a
Detective pay differential when serving in an acting capacity as a Sergeant. However, if that same officer is
assigned to work as a Detective Sergeant, he or she will continue to earn the differential.

19.5 Canine Pay

19. 5.1 Effective upon adoption of the Agreement, each employee who is assigned to the duty of feeding,
caring for and supervising police dogs, which duty is performed by the employee at his/her home

16
and during hours when he/she is otherwise not on duty with the Police Department, shall be paid
$138 during each biweekly period of such assignment.

Effective July 1, 2014, this amount shall be increased to $142 per biweekly pay period.

19.5.2 Such additional compensation shall not be paid for any two (2) biweekly periods when such
additional duty is not performed by the employee, whether for the reason that the dog assigned to
such employee is boarded at a kennel at City expense or otherwise.

19.5.3 The additional compensation provided for in Section 1 is granted in recognition of the personal
investment, duties and responsibilities of the K-9 assignment including the time spent by the unit
employee while off duty in the care and maintenance of the assigned canine, which is estimated
to be 4.6 hours per week. The additional compensation is based on the expected additional work
required for the care of the dog, given the work historically required for such care. This extra
compensation is not to be considered premium pay. The City shall pay costs associated with the
"Initial Basic Training of Handler and K-9" when an officer is assigned to canine duty.

19.5.4 The City shall either supply or reimburse the officer for the cost of food and medical care
(including prescription medication) for the canine.

ARTICLE 20: UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

20.1 Allowance

Employees of the Police Department in the classifications of Police Officer and Police Sergeant, who have been
so employed for one (1) year or more with the City of East Palo Alto, and are required to wear a uniform, shall
be provided an annual uniform allowance of one-thousand, two hundred dollars ($1200.00). The uniform

allowance will be paid monthly, on the last full pay period of each month.

For the first year of service, the Police Department shall issue purchase orders for the purchase of two pants,
three shirts, one belt, one pair of shoes, one nameplate, and one set of raingear, consisting of a jacket and pants.

20.2 Safety Equipment

The City shall furnish, at its own expense, all safety equipment required by the City and State Law. Soft body
armor, riot helmets and protective gas masks, shall be made available in the manner prescribed in the
Department's Operations Manual. Such furnished safety equipment and any and all replacements furnished by
the City at any time shall remain the property of and under the control of the City. City shall also furnish
ammunition for weapons authorized to be carried on duty by the Chief of Police; supply includes ammunition
needed for qualification and on duty use only.

20.3 Plain Clothes Officers

Employees in classifications of Police Officer and Police Sergeant who, in the course of their work, do not wear
a uniform, shall be paid an annual clothes allowance of nine hundred dollars ($900.00). The clothing allowance
will be paid monthly, on the last full pay period of each month.

20.4 Safety Equipment Standards

City will work with the Association to develop a replacement schedule for safety equipment and vehicles.

17
ARTICLE 21: PREMIUM PAY
21.1 Premium Pay
City agrees to provide qualified employees the following premium payments:

21.1.1 Bi-lingual Pay: On recommendation of the Chief of Police and approval of the City Manager,
payment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month will be paid to eligible personnel who are
required to use their bilingual skills in the performance of their duties with members of the public
in a language other than English. Selection of the language shall be by the City, and all personnel
receiving the differential must be certified as proficient by the City.

21.1.2 Intermediate/Advanced POST Certificates:

Police Unit members shall receive a salary adjustment equal to five percent (5%) of hourly base
pay for possession of an Intermediate POST Certificate, and shall receive a salary adjustment
equal to two and one-half percent (2.5%) of hourly base pay for possession of an Advanced
POST Certificate. If a member holds both Intermediate and Advanced POST Certificates he/she
will receive a salary adjustment equal to seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of hourly base pay.

Those employees who possess Intermediate and Advanced Certificates as of July 1 of any year
shall be eligible for the salary adjustment. Employees who obtain their Intermediate or Advanced
Certificates after July 1 of any year shall receive the salary adjustment effective July 1 of the
following year. It is the responsibility of the employee to notify appropriate personnel in the
Police Department, and provide a copy of same to Support Services Manager, upon the award of
the Intermediate or Advanced Certificate.

21.1.3 Longevity Pay:

Police Unit members with ten (10) years continuous service with the City shall receive a one-
time lump sum payment of $1,000 in compensation. Such pay shall be awarded to all eligible
Police Unit members who achieve 10 years continuous service during the fiscal year. Such
compensation shall be paid during the month of December for those employees who achieve 10
years of service from July through December of any year, and paid during the month of June for
those employees who achieve 10 years of service from January through June of any year

ARTICLE 22: OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT
Employees may engage in other employment or enterprise provided:
1. Such employment does not interfere with required duties or conflict with the City interests; and
2. Such employment is approved in advance in writing by the Chief of Police, reviewed by the City
Manager, and a copy filed with the Human Resources Department.
Approval may be denied or revoked for non-compliance with the above provisions.
ARTICLE 23: AUTOMATIC PAYROLL DEPOSIT
23.1 All employees covered by this Agreement shall participate in the City’s automatic payroll deposit program

by completing a payroll authorization form and submitting the form, along with a voided check or savings
deposit slip to the Finance Department. It shall be the employee’s choice as to which bank he/she designates as

18
the institution receiving the payroll funds.

23.2 When the authorization form is properly executed and filed with the Finance Department, the City shall
automatically deposit in the employee’s designated bank account the net amount of pay each designated
biweekly payday.

ARTICLE 24: INTERNAL AFFAIRS

24.1 City and Association agree that all Internal Affairs (IA) Investigations shall be completed within the
following timelines, with understanding that the timeline begins from the date a complaint or allegation is
assigned an IA number by appropriate staff in the Police Department:

1. 180 days except for cases involving criminal allegations;.
2. One (1) year limit: Cases involving criminal allegations.

24.2 The City shall assign an IA number to a complaint or allegation within seven (7) days of the incident giving
rise to the complaint or within (7) days from the time the City should have known of the incident giving rise to
the complaint. In the event that an [A number is not assigned within the appropriate seven (7) day period, an IA
number shall be deemed to have been assigned on the seventh day for purposes of this Article.

24.3 The foregoing time frames may be extended consistent with the Public Safety Officer Bill of Rights or may
be waived by an employee in writing.

24.4 A finding of “exonerated”, “not sustained”, “unfounded”, or a letter of intent to discipline (Skelly) shall
constitute completion of the investigation.

ARTICLE 25: LAYOFF AND REEMPLOYMENT
25.1 Definition of Layoff

Layoff is defined as the separation of employees from the active work force due to lack of work or funds,
organizational or duty changes, or the abolition of positions by the Council. The City Manager shall designate
the number and dispositions for layoff as approved by the Council. The decision to layoff shall not be subject to
the grievance procedure contained in this Agreement.

25.2 Order of Layoff

Layoff shall be based on seniority in class, which shall be defined as the employee's total continuous time of
permanent and probationary employment in the class in which employed. Total continuous time shall include
military leave in accordance with State Law. In the event two (2) employees have identical seniority, the
employee who had the highest ranking on the employment list for the position currently held shall have
precedence. In the absence of a list, the drawing of lots shall decide which employee is senior. No probationary
or permanent employee shall be laid off while any temporary employee occupies a position in the same class.
The Human Resources Department shall provide seniority lists before layoff notices are prepared.

25.3. Notice to Employees

Permanent and probationary employees shall receive written notice (to be hand-delivered by the department
management whenever possible) stating the reason for layoff a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days prior to the
date of expected layoff. Similar notice shall be provided to the affected recognized employee organization
representing the classes. With such notice, the employee shall be informed of the procedure to be followed and
the rights to which he/she is entitled. The Department shall make every effort to allow employees who are to be

19
laid off reasonable time to seek other employment. Pay for such time off shall be provided to full-time
permanent and probationary employees only.

25.4 Displacement Rights

A full-time permanent or probationary employee who is laid off from his/her classification shall be entitled to
displace another employee with less seniority in an equal or lower paying classification within the representation
unit for which he/she meets the minimum qualifications and in which he/she has held prior permanent status. To
successfully displace another employee, an employee must be fully qualified, trained, and capable of performing
all work in the new classification. Permanent part-time employees may displace only other permanent part-time
employees. When minimum qualifications have increased, the Personnel Officer may temporarily waive the
increased requirements if previous successful performance is documented, and provided the requirements are met
within a reasonable time.

25.5 Reemployment

Permanent and probationary employees who are laid off, demoted, or who have exercised employment rights set
forth in this Rule in lieu of layoff shall have their names placed on reemployment lists for the classification from
which laid off and any classifications previously held in order of total continuous time served in probationary
and permanent status in the City Service.

ARTICLE 26: NO STRIKE

The Union agrees that during the term of this Memorandum of Understanding, neither it nor the employees it
represents will engage in, encourage, sanction, and/or support, any: (1) strikes; (2) slowdowns; (3) mass
resignations; (4) mass absenteeism; and/or (5) picketing, which would involve the suspension of, or interference
with, normal work of the Department or other City departments.

ARTICLE 27: SHIFT & VACATION DRAWS AND SPECIAL ASSIGNMENTS

The POA shall meet with the Chief of Police or designee to establish General Orders covering the subjects of
Shift Draw, Vacation Draw, and selection processes for Special Assignments. If the Chief and the POA are
unable to reach agreement over a General Order covering any of these subjects, within ninety (90) days of the
opening the POA may reopen negotiations on that subject.

ARTICLE 28: SUPERSEDENCE

The inclusion of language in this Memorandum of Understanding concerning matters formerly governed by City
Rules, Regulations, Resolutions and Ordinances shall not be deemed to be a preemption of the entire subject
matter. Accordingly, City Rules, Regulations, Resolutions and Ordinances not in conflict with specific
provisions of this Agreement shall not be construed to be superseded by this Agreement and shall continue in full
force and effect.

ARTICLE 29: SEPARABILITY

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Agreement to the contrary, in the event that any article, or
subsections thereof of this Agreement shall be disclosed invalid by any court of competent jurisdictions, or by an
applicable State or Federal Law or regulation, or shall a decision by any court of competent jurisdiction or any
applicable State or Federal Law or regulation diminish the benefits provided by this Agreement, or impose
additional obligations on the City, the parties shall meet and confer or negotiate on the Article or Subsections
thereof affected. All other provisions of this Agreement shall continue in full force and effect.

20
ARTICLE 30: FULL UNDERSTANDING MODIFICATION AND WAIVER

It is intended that this Agreement sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties regarding the matters
set forth herein, and any other prior or existing understanding or agreements by the parties, whether formal or
informal, regarding any such matters are hereby superseded or terminated in their entirety.

Except as specifically provided herein, it is agreed and understood that each party hereto voluntarily and
unqualifiedly waives its right, and agrees that the other shall not be required, although they may mutually agree
otherwise, to negotiate with respect to any subject or matter covered herein during the term of this Agreement.
Nothing herein shall be viewed as restricting or otherwise limiting the employee's rights under the Meyers-
Milias-Brown Act (Government Code Section 3500 et seq.).

Any agreement, alteration, understanding, variation, waiver, or modification of any of the terms or provisions
contained herein shall not be binding upon the parties hereto unless made and executed in writing by all parties

hereto, and if required, approved and implemented by the City Council.

The waiver of any breach, term or condition of this Agreement by either party shall not constitute a precedent in
the future enforcement of all of its terms and provisions.

ARTICLE 31: TERM
July 1, 2013 to June 30, 2015.

POA Representative(s) and the Chief of Police shall continue to work together to reduce overtime and other costs
during the term of this agreement.

21
For the Union:

.

Z ark O’Connell

Jet

C62

ndrea Dion

Stephen Kalb

Geta = s -

Clint Simmont

For the City:

Magdafjonzalez

oS oO

Charles Sakai

22
Exhibit A

POA-Represented Positions -- Salaries Calculated with 2.5% Increase

Police Officer -Academy Graduate/ Basic

Hourly 34,6311
Bi-Weekly 2,770.49
Monthly 6,002.72
Annual 72,032.62

Police Officer-intermediate

Hourly 36.3626
Bi-Weekly 2,909.01
Monthly 6,302.85
Annual 75,634.25

Police Officer-Advanced

Hourly 37.2284
Bi-Weekly 2,978.27
Monthly 6,452.92
Annual 77,435.07

Police Sergeant - Basic

Hourly 41.4486
Bi-Weekly 3,315.89
Monthly 7,184.43
Annual 86,213.12

Police Sergeant - Intermediate

Hourly 43.5210
Bi-Weekly 3,481.68
Monthly 7,543.65
Annual 90,523.78

Police Sergeant - Advanced

Hourly 44,5573
Bi-Weekly 3,564.58
Monthly 7,723.26

Annual 92,679.10

36.3626
2,909.01
6,302.85

75,634.25

38.1808
3,054.46
6,618.00

79,415.97

39.0898
3,127.19
6,775.57

81,306.82

43.5210
3,481.68
7,543.65

90,523.78

45.6971
3,655.77
7,920.83

95,049.97

46.7851
3,742.81
8,109.42

38.1808
3,054.46
6,618.00

79,415.97

40.0898
3,207.18
6,948.90

83,386.77

41.0443
3,283.54
7,114.35

85,372.16

45.6971
3,655.77
7,920.83

95,049.97

47.9820
3,838.56
8,316.87

40.0898
3,207.18
6,948.90

83,386.77

42.0943
3,367.54
7,296.34

87,556.10

43.0965
3,447.72
7,470.06

89,640.77

47.9820
3,838.56
8,316.87

99,802.46

50.3811
4,030.48
8,732.72

99,802.46 104,792.59

49.1244
3,929.95
8,514.89

51.5806
4,126.45
8,940.64

97,313.06 102,178.71 107,287.65

42.0943
3,367.54
7,296.34

87,556.10

44.1990
3,535.92
7,661.16

91,933.91

45.2514
3,620.11
7,843.57

94,122.81

50.3811
4,030.48
8,732.72

104,792.59

52.9001
4,232.01
9,169.35

110,032.22

54.1596
4,332.77
9,387.67

112,652.03
