MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY OF PHOENIX
AND

PHOENIX LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSOCIATION

2016 — 2019

142936--1

AMENDED 9/21/2016
PREAMBLE.......c:cscssscsessseseeseenee eteo yeneaeseataannecsesesenenenneesaeee sotneeseasaeseneneeereraeeee seseenaessaeeacne 4

ARTICLE 1: RIGHTS........ccccssesseseesseses ses eeaeeaseesaeseseeseesseaeaesesaenenas seneteneenearenaeaes

SECTION 1-1; PURPOSE/GENDER ...
SECTION 1-2: CITY AND DEPARTMENT RIGHTS.
SECTION 1-3: RIGHTS OF ASSOCIATION.
SECTION 1-4: RIGEITS OF UNIT MEMBERS
SECTION 1-5: PROHIBITION OF STRIKE AND LOCKOU

ARTICLE 2: GRIEVANCE/ARBITRATIONILABOR MANAGEMENT.........ss:sesseseesseeees

SECTION 2-1: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
SECTION 2-2: LABOR-MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE...

ARTICLE 3: COMPENSATION/WAGES ............ sieeeaseasaesentaneesseseaeeeeees seaenaseesnesnneneaneee 24

SECTION 3-1: WAGES
: PRODUCTIVITY ENHANCEMENT PAY
; CAREER ENHANCEMENT PAY
TRAINING PAY ......

 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 

 

 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 

  
 
 
 

SECTION 3-2: OVERTIM!
SECTION 3-2A: COURT TIMI
SECTION 3-2B: CALL-OUt Pay.
SECTION 3-3: OUT-OF-RANK PAY ....
SECTION 3-4: SICK LEAVE CONVERSION AT Ri
SECTION 3-4A; SICK LEAVE PAYOUT......
SECTION 3-5: NIGHT SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL/ WEEKEND SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL.
SECTION 3-6: STAND-BY PAY ...
SECTION 3-6A: COURT TIME STANDBY PA
SECTION 3-7: OFF-DUTY EMPLOYMENT,
SECTION 3-8: JURY DUTY...
SECTION 3-9: DEFERRED COMPENSATION AND

 

INED CONTRIBUTION PLANS.
ARTICLE 4: HOURS OF WORK/WORKING CONDITIONS.

SECTION 4-1: WORK SCHEDULES .
SECTION 4-2: SENIORITY .....

ARTICLE 5: BENEFITS .......ccccssssseeteersersees

SECTION 5-1; HEALTH INSURANCE...
SECTION 5-1A: RETIREE HEALTH INSURANCE
SECTION 5-2; DENTAL INSURANCE
SECTION 5-3; LIFE INSURANCE...
SECTION 5-4: LONG-TERM DISABILITY INSURANCE
SECTION 5-5: HOLIDAYS AND VACATION LEAV.
SECTION 5-5 A: OUT-OF-STATE VACATION RECALL
SECTION 5-6: UNIFORM, CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE
SECTION 5-7: REIMBURSEMENT FOR EDUCATION EXPENSE!
SECTION 5-8: LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
SECTION 5-9; WORKERS’ COMPENSATION .....

ARTICLE 6: MISCELLANEOUS ..........csssccsesssssseeseesssnseesseeseeeseesnterseesetsnenseeansearennieenne Dd

SECTION 6-1: SAVING CLAUSE ..
SECTION 6-2: COPIES OF MEMORANDUM.
SECTION 6-3: AID TO CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS OF MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDIN'
SECTION 6-4: CHANGES IN DEPARTMENT OPERATIONS ORDERS PURSUANT TO THIS MEMORANDUM
SECTION 6-5: PHYSICAL FITNESS .
SECTION 6-6: TERM AND EFFECT OF MEMORANDUM...

   
 
  
 

   
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 

 

   

 

    
 
  
 

 
ATTACHMENT A uu. cceseecsetstsescerscsssastacnesessassersesaesseeessrassensseansnceuseaesensnanaeseaeseneesanenseae 55

 

ATTACHMENT B..
ATTACHMENT C ou..cceccscesstsesssseeteccessecseeeeseesseeesaesesessssassensaeseseeeessaeseeseessestiaseneeenarasege 57
ATTACHMENT D .........cccceseteereesseteeesstacneeessaetereesaessaeenssracsensasiesenensnaeeensnesseaeensersenaaeaaege 58
Preamble

WHEREAS the parties, through their designated representatives, met and conferred in
good faith pursuant to Chapter 2, Article XVII (Employer-Employee Relations), Phoenix
City Code in order to reach agreement concerning wages, hours, and working
conditions of employees in the Police Officers Unit, and

WHEREAS the parties hereby acknowledge that the provisions of this
Memorandum are not intended to abrogate the authority and responsibility of City
government provided for under the statutes of the State of Arizona or the Charter
or ordinances of the City of Phoenix except as expressly and lawfully limited
herein,

NOW THEREFORE, it is agreed that this Memorandum of Understanding
(hereinafter “Memorandum”) shall be submitted to the City Council of the City of
Phoenix for its consideration.

ARTICLE 1: Rights

Section 1-1: Purpose/Gender

Wherever any words used herein in the masculine, feminine or neutral, they shall be
construed as though they were also used in another gender in all cases where they
would so apply.

Section 1-2: City and Department Rights

A. The Association recognizes that the City and the Chief of Police retain, whether
exercised or nat, solely and exclusively, all express and inherent rights and
authority pursuant to law with respect to determining the level of and the manner
in which the City’s law enforcement activities are conducted, managed, and
administered, and the Association recognizes the exclusive right of the Chief of
Police to establish and maintain departmental rules and procedures for the
administration of the Police Department during the term of this Memorandum
provided that such rules and procedures do not violate any of the specific
express provisions of this Memorandum.

B. The City and Chief of Police have the exclusive right and authority to schedule
work and/or overtime work as required in the manner most advantageous to the
City.

Cc. It is understood by the parties that every incidental duty connected with
operations enumerated in job descriptions is not always specifically described;
nevertheless, it is intended that all such duties shall be performed by the
employee.

The Chief of Police and City Manager reserve the right to discipline or discharge
employees for just cause, pursuant to the Civil Service laws. The City reserves
the right to lay off personnel of the Department.

The City and the Chief of Police shall determine assignments and establish
methods and processes by which assignments are performed.

The City and Chief of Police shall have the right to transfer employees within the
Police Department in a manner most advantageous to the City.

Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Memorandum, the City and the
Chief of Police retain unqualifiedly all rights and authority to which by law they
are entitled.

The City shail have the authority without prior meeting and conferring to effect
reorganizations of the Police Department.

The Association recognizes that the City has statutory and Charter rights and
obligations in contracting for matters relating to municipal operations.

The Association pledges cooperation to the increasing of departmental efficiency
and effectiveness. Any and all rights concerning the management, organization,
and direction of the Police Department and the police force, including those set
forth in this Memorandum, shall be exclusively the right of the City and the Chief
of Police unless otherwise provided by the express terms of this Memorandum
as permitted by law.

The inherent and express rights of the City and the Chief of Police, including
those herein specifically referred to, which are not expressly modified or
restricted by a specific provision of this Memorandum, are not in any way,
directly or indirectly, subject to the Grievance Procedure herein.

Section 1-3: Rights of Association

A.

The Association, as the authorized representative, has the exclusive right
to serve as the meet and confer representative of all employees in the
Police Officers Unit as described in Attachment A.

Under no circumstance shall the department create or request unit
members to sign or agree to individual employment contracts without
mutual agreement with the Association. Unit members will still be required
to sign for receipt of materials.
Union Release:

The Phoenix community benefits from harmonious and cooperative
relationships between the City and its employees. The City and the
Association have negotiated six full-time release positions, and release
hours, as an efficient and readily available point of contact for addressing
labor-management concerns. Examples of work performed by the release
positions in support of the City include ensuring representation for unit
employees during administrative investigations and grievance/disciplinary
appeal meetings with management; participating in collaborative labor-
management initiatives that benefit the City and the unit members; serving
on Police Department task forces and committees; facilitating effective
communication between City and Department management and unit
employees; assisting unit members in understanding and following work
rules; and administering the provisions of the Memorandum of
Understanding. The cost to the City for these release positions, including
all benefits, has been charged as part of the total compensation contained
in this agreement in lieu of wages and benefits.

1. Full-Time Release Positions:

a. The six (6) full time release positions shall be sworn, full time, paid
police officers of the Phoenix Police Department, who will at all times
remain qualified to perform such duties as are normally expected
and required of a municipal police officer in the City of Phoenix,
Arizona. These six (6) full time release positions will receive their
regular salary including fringe benefits, and the employer shall make
all employer contributions to the Public Safety Personnel Retirement
System required by law so as to maintain their full eligibility under
the Public Safety Personnel Retirement System.

b. The six (6) full time release positions shall participate in all
appropriate training requirements necessary to maintain
membership in the department, including all training mandated by
the Arizona Peace Officers Standards and Training Board (AZ POST).

c. The six (6) full time release positions agree to be bound by the City’s
and the Police Department's rules, regulations, and operations
orders, including but not limited to proper notification when utilizing
sick or vacation leave. The full time release employees may be
subject to disciplinary action for violations of any such rules,
regulations, general or operations orders.

2. Association Representatives:

The Association may designate up to forty-two (42) (as of July 1, 2012)
representatives and shall notify the Chief of Police and Labor Relations
Administrator in writing of such designations as they occur. There shall
be no obligation on the City to change or adjust normal departmental
scheduling or assignments of personnel as a result of such
designations.

a. Up to two PLEA representatives may, when the Association is
designated by the unit member as his representative, attend mutually
scheduled grievance meetings, Use of Force Boards, Disciplinary
Review Boards, IRP Meetings, and hearings with department
representatives and hearings scheduled and conducted by the Civil
Service Board without loss of pay or benefits. Up to two PLEA
representatives may attend hearings with the department
representative if more than one department representative is in
attendance. Paid release time used for any other purposes, such as
gathering information, interviewing the grievant/appellant or
witnesses, or preparing a presentation shall be charged against the
bank of release hours as described in Section 1-3 D. PLEA
representatives are required to obtain the permission of their non-
unit supervisor to absent themselves from their duties to attend
scheduled meetings and provide representation.

b. When new work units, precinct(s)/bureau(s) are created, the
Association may designate up to one (1) additional representative
per bureau and up to three (3) additional representatives per
precinct. The increased number will be consistent with current
practice and will be based solely on the addition of new work unit(s).
Any deviation from the above will be discussed at a Labor-
Management meeting.

3. Bank of Release Hours:

A bank of 1,859 hours of paid Association release time shali be created
per M.O.U. year for use by the Association to engage in legitimate
Association business. The cost to the City for these release hours,
including fringe, has been charged as part of the total compensation
contained in this agreement in lieu of wages and benefits. Examples of
how these hours are used by the Association include:

a. For Executive Board members to attend meetings of the Executive
Board, meetings of the general membership, and for preparation for
negotiations pursuant to Chapter 2, Article XVil (Employer-Employee
Relations), Phoenix City Code.

b. For unit members to attend seminars, meetings, training classes and
conferences so that representatives better understand issues such
as City policies and practices, conflict resolution, labor-management
partnerships, and methods of effective representation.

c. For Association representatives to communicate with members,
investigate grievances or prepare for hearings. A PLEA
representative wishing to enter a work area for the purpose of
investigating a formal grievance must first gain the permission of the
work area supervisor. This permission will not be unreasonably
withheld, giving proper consideration to essential work of the
department and the occupational safety of the PLEA representative.
When requesting a meeting with the work unit/site supervisor, the
PLEA representative will inform the supervisor of the purpose of the
meeting. PLEA representatives will attempt to schedule an
appointment in advance whenever possible. One additional PLEA
representative may be allowed to attend such meetings for training
purposes.

Approval for use of paid release time hereunder shall be subject to
Departmental operational and scheduling factors. When using such
paid time, Association representatives and members of the
Executive Board shall give at least twenty-four (24) hours written
notice in advance.

In recognition of the mutual benefit to both the City and the
Association, a unit member using Association release time as
defined by Articles in this MOU to conduct Association business
shall be accorded all insurance-related benefits. Approval of claims
made for benefits will be determined on a case by case basis.

Any hours used in excess of the bank must be approved by the
Police Chief, the Labor Relations Administrator, and the PLEA
president. The number of hours used in excess of the bank at the
end of the contract term will be deducted from the bank at the start
of the first year of the following contract. Unused hours will be
carried over into the first year of the next contract to a maximum
total bank of 2,789.

The president may appoint a legislative representative for the Association
if the legislative representative is registered with the Secretary of State as a
lobbyist and if the legislative representative has agreed to work with and
assist the city’s legislative lobbyist. The legislative representative shall
receive 500 hours of release time per MOU year.

A member of the Executive Board of the Association, or a designated PLEA
representative, will, with the approval of the Chief of Police or his designee,
subject to twenty-four (24) hours written notice in advance, be authorized
to engage in Association related activities during City work hours on a non-
paid basis. Approval for such authorization for more than two (2) Executive
Officers or Board members of the Association or designated shift
representatives is subject to forty-eight (48) hours written notice in
advance. Approval for use of unpaid time hereunder shall be subject to
Department operational and scheduling factors and administration control
as to usage of such time, but shall not be arbitrarily withheld. There shall
be no use of official paid time for Association related activities under this
paragraph.

Upon the Association’s filing of a Third Party Data Sharing Agreement with
the Labor Relations Division, during the term of this Memorandum, the City
shall furnish to the Association bimonthly at no cost a listing of all unit
members, indicating name, mailing address, phone number and
assignment.

The City shall deduct monthly from the pay warrants of Association
members the regular periodic Association membership dues and/or special
assessments in accordance with Chapter 2, Article XVII (Employer-
Employee Relations), Phoenix City Code and pursuant to the City’s existing
dues deduction authorization form duly completed and signed by the
Association member, and transmit such deductions to the Association ona
monthly basis; except, however, that such deduction shall be made only
when an Association member’s earnings for a pay period are sufficient
after other legally required deductions are made. The City shall, at the
request of the Association, make changes in the amount of the deduction
hereunder during the term of this Memorandum at cost for implementing
such change. The City shall not make dues deductions for unit members
on behalf of any other employee organization as defined in Chapter 2,
Article XVII (Employer-Employee Relations), Phoenix City Code during the
term of this Memorandum. The City assumes no liability on account of any
action taken pursuant to this paragraph.

The Association is authorized to use mutually agreed upon non-work areas
in City facilities for pick-up by or distribution to unit members of official
Association literature that is not political in nature, abusive of any person
or organization, or disruptive of the department's operations, it being
understood and agreed, however, that such activity shall not be done
during the on-duty time of any unit member. The Association may, using its
own resources, use the mailboxes at work locations to communicate with
unit members. The association may use Inter-departmental mail to
communicate with unit members on two occasions over a three month pilot
program.

The City shall continue to provide existing bulletin boards for the exclusive
use by the Association for communicating with its members. Bulletin
boards shall be limited to one (1) per bureau/precinct. New or replaced
bulletin boards shall be provided by the Association and shall not exceed
4' x 3' (width by height) in size, and shall be placed in a location established
by the bureau/precinct commander that is readily accessible to unit
members.

For a unit member whose regular shift is other than Shift 1, there will be
flexibility in changing his normal work hours for the purposes of attending
official Labor-Management meetings called by or with the concurrence of
City management or the Police Chief or his designee.

The Association and the Department will jointly present a two (2) hour
career survival class to newly sworn police officers. Immediately following,
the Association will be allowed one (1) hour to talk to and possibly sign
newly sworn police officers into the Association and to explain the rights
and benefits under the MOU. This time will be allotted during the post-
academy training time of said officers at the offices of the Association. The
content of such information shall not be political in nature, abusive of any
person or the Department or disruptive of the Department’s operation.

It is understood by the parties that the benefits granted by this Article shall
not be interpreted or applied as requiring the employer to count as time
worked, any hours or fractions of hours spent outside the unit member's.
work shift in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article. The employer shall
count as time worked any hours or fractions of hours spent within the unit
member’s regular work shift in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article.

Any unit representative attending any IRP, DRB, UFB, DAC, or any other
review board will be allowed to adjust their work schedule by an equal
amount of time spent in the meeting. The adjustment will require the
approval of the representative’s supervisor with operational consideration.
Approval will not be unreasonably withheld.

In the interest of encouraging continuing education for unit members, the
department will mail to the Association president the AZ POST calendar
and all other job related seminar notices it receives.

The Association will have two (2) PLEA positions, designated in writing, on
continuous paid stand-by for the mutual benefit of both the City and the
Association to respond to critica! incidents as needed. No member will be
placed on stand-by if the member is not available for call-out. If call-out
occurs, overtime will be paid in accordance with Article 3, Section 3.2.

Upon written request from the Association, the City will provide specific
information pertinent to a written grievance, arbitration case, or Civil

Service appeal. The City will also provide pertinent collective bargaining
information. This material will be supplied to the Association at no cost.

To improve communication and relationships between labor and
management, the Association will be allowed an opportunity to attend one
mutually agreed upon briefing quarterly with each squad to discuss
Association business and issues of mutual concern to labor and
management.

The City values and benefits from the participation of Union leaders on
citywide task forces and committees, Police Department task forces and

10
committees, Labor -Management work groups, and a variety of Health and
Safety committees. These activities take time away from expected tasks
such as representation and communicating with the membership and may
occur outside the regular work day of the Union officials. The full-time
release positions agree to participate in these important committees and
task forces. In recognition of this commitment, the City agrees to provide a
nine hundred sixty (960) hour bank of compensation for use by the full-time
release positions each MOU year. (This is a reduction from the 2010 — 2012
MOU).

Section 1-4: Rights of Unit Members

A.

A unit member has the right to have the Association serve as his meet and
confer representative as set forth in Chapter 2, Article XVII (Employer-Employee
Relations), Phoenix City Code.

A unit member has the right to be represented by the Association in dealings with
the City concerning grievances and matters pertaining to his individual
employment rights and obligations.

1.

{f a unit member requests, representation will be allowed when the member is
the subject of an administrative investigation by Professional Standards
Bureau, any Police Department supervisor, or other City employee who is
conducting an investigatory interview or interrogation. The City will notify the
Association who will obtain the most readily available unit Association
representative, who must be a bargaining unit member. The unit
representative will make every reasonable attempt to arrive within one hour
from the time a phone is made available to the unit member. Management will
make a concerted attempt to release the association representative giving the
consideration of the departments’ and the associations’ scheduling concerns.
The unit Association representative may make a request for a caucus prior
to, during, or after the interview to bring to the investigator's attention
issues which may be violations of the MOU as set forth in this Memorandum
or questions outside the scope of the N.O.|. Prior to the conclusion of the
meeting, the member, or representative on behalf of the employee, will
have the opportunity to make a closing statement.

The Union representative may assist and consult with the employee,
attempt to clarify the facts or questions asked, and suggest other
employees or witnesses who may have knowledge of the underlying
issues. The Union representative may not turn the meeting into an
adversarial proceeding, unduly disrupt the interview, interfere with the
objective of the examination, or compromise the integrity of the
interview. The Union representative may not interrupt the employee’s
response to a question or prevent the employee from responding to a
question. The Union representative also may not behave in a violent,

ll
verbally abusive, insulting, or demeaning manner toward the
interviewer.

During the interview, the interviewer may insist that he is only interested
in hearing the employee’s own account of the matter under
investigation at that time. The interviewer may not prohibit the Union
representative from engaging in meaningful representation, including
assisting and consulting with the employee.

. The interview/interrogation session shall be a reasonable period of time,
taking into consideration the gravity and complexity of the misconduct being
investigated.

. Prior to conducting an administrative interview, the City/Department will
consider the necessity of interviewing a Unit Member who is impaired by
alcohol or drugs. If the City/Department deems an immediate administrative
interview is not necessary, it will/may be scheduled at a later time.

. At the time of the scheduled interview by Professional Standards Bureau, a
Police Department Supervisor, or other City Employee, the investigator will
make available for review to the unit member and/or his representative any
material that is being used as the basis for an allegation of misconduct.
Material includes any video, audio, photographs, or documents at the time
the internal investigation is initiated, and which is specifically related to
the conduct of the unit member under investigation, Material does not
include audio recorded interviews of witnesses, or investigative leads
captured during the investigative process. All materials will be made
available to the unit member and/or his representative in the draft
investigation prior to the investigative review process (IRP). During the
course of the administrative investigation the investigator will not knowingly
misrepresent any fact or material issue to the unit member.

. A unit member under investigation, and the association, will be notified in
writing every three (3) months as to the current status of the investigation.
This will include a brief description of the number of known witnesses still to
be interviewed and other investigative processes remaining to be completed,
as well as an estimated date of completion.

. If a Professional Standards Bureau (PSB) investigation has not been
completed within 180 days, the unit member may request that the PLEA
grievance chair meet with the PSB Division Commander to discuss the status
of the investigation.

. Department information regarding citizen complaint information/procedures
will contain a statement forewarning the complainant that any false report in
an attempt to unjustly defame police personnel or place their employment in
jeopardy can result in criminal charges and or civil liability.

12
8. Establish a sub-committee with PSB, PLEA, and management to
address technological improvements to improve efficiency with the
transfer of finalized investigations.

A unit member has the right to present his own grievance, in person or by legal
counsel.

Unit members are entitled to representation if a "Not Met" PMG is appealed and
is at the Executive Level (Assistant Chief or Chief) or when management has
more than one representative at the meeting to discuss the appeal of the PMG.

1. A unit member covered hereunder shall, on his request and by appointment,
be permitted to examine his departmental or divisional personnel file, in the
presence of an appropriate supervisory official of the Department. The unit
member may be accompanied by another person of his choosing. When a
city directed work fitness/job performance medical evaluation process is
completed, the employee may request his/her medical information from the
city doctor. The city agrees to give the city doctor a release to give the
information to the requesting employee.

2. No unit member shall have any adverse comments entered into his
departmental or divisional personnel file without the member being informed
by a supervisor. If the unit member requests, he may receive a copy of the
adverse comment.

3. A unit member may, at his discretion, attach rebuttal statements to any
material contained in his departmental or divisional personnel file which may
be adverse in nature.

a. Material purged, or meeting all criteria for purging, from a unit member's
division and department files and moved to a section marked “Inactive” in
the Central HR Department personnel file in accordance with the below
procedures or allegations about a unit member which are unfounded,
exonerated or unresolved will not be used in future performance ratings,
or disciplinary actions, DRB, UFB, CSB, IRP, Grievance, or any other
review board.

b. Documents maintained by the department containing adverse comments
about a unit member, regardless of the storage medium, will not be used
in future disciplinary actions (meaning submitting as evidence at DRB,
UFB, CSB, or any other disciplinary review board) if the unit member has
not been previously made aware of the existence of the
performance/conduct concerns.

5. Performance evaluations will be purged from a unit member's Human
Resources Department file after no longer than ten (10) years.

13
6. At his request, a unit member may have material of an adverse nature which
is over three (3) years old removed from all the division and department files
and moved to a section marked “Inactive” in the Central HR Department
personne! file when there have been no incidents or problems of a similar
nature within the three (3) year period immediately preceding the request
(except Discipline Notices and Industrial Injury or Illness information).
Performance Evaluations will be purged after three (3) years. At the annual
employee evaluation, the unit member and his supervisor will review and
purge the unit member's division file. A unit member may make an
appointment with fiscal to purge their department file. In the event that
documentation that is eligible for purging from division and department files is
not purged, it will not be considered in future disciplinary matters. Separation
Notices over five (5) years old will not be considered in any process.

7. A Supervisory Counseling is a verbal warning and if used in any disciplinary
or personnel action or documented rating, the counseling must first be
documented in the supervisor's notes and shall be initialed or signed by the
unit member within two (2) weeks of being advised that the discipline has
been issued. The effective date of the discipline for all grievance and appeal
purposes will start from the date that the unit member signs the supervisor's
notes.

8. Once a unit member has been disciplined, no further disciplinary action
maybe imposed for the same specific allegation during the same incident of
misconduct. If a unit member has received a coaching for the same incident,
it may be considered as a mitigating factor in the final determination of
discipline. A unit member may be subjected to additional discipline if further
investigation reveals additional allegations arising from the same incident.

9. At his request, a unit member may have documents related to disciplinary
actions which are over ten (10) years old removed from his division and
department personnel files and moved to a section marked “Inactive” in the
Central HR Department personnel file when there have been no incidents or
problems of a similar nature within the ten year period immediately preceding
the request. The term disciplinary actions is defined as follows:

a. Any discipline given a unit member that resulted in a suspension of eighty
(80) hours or less and,

b. For an infraction which did not result in a criminal charge or actions which
did not include violent or assaultive behavior directed at another person
or,

c, Any infraction that is no longer considered to be a disciplinary matter
under current contemporary department standards in effect at the time of
the unit member's file purge request.

10. “On duty” training will be approved at the Division Chief level.

14
A unit member and his Association Representative shall have the right to appear
before the departmental Disciplinary Review Board when disciplinary matters are
brought before the Board involving the unit member.

1. The purpose of such appearance is to give the unit member an opportunity to
respond to the assertions made against him. If the discipline is appealed to
the CSB, no reference to the DRB discussions or deliberations shall be made
by either the city or the association representative at the CSB hearing.

2. The Department shall notify the unit member ten (10) calendar days prior to
such opportunity to respond to the Board. The notification shall contain the
date, time, violation(s) and basis of each violation that has been sustained. In
addition, the unit member, if he chooses, may meet with his immediate
supervisor along with his second level supervisor or the unit member's
Bureau/Precinct Commander for the purpose of discussing the basis of each
violation to be reviewed by the DRB. If the immediate supervisor conducted
the investigation, the unit member, if he chooses, may meet with the next
supervisor in his chain of command. Such request shall be made in writing to
the unit member’s immediate supervisor. Also, the unit member, if he
chooses, may be accompanied by an Association representative at either
meeting.

a. At the IRP meeting, the unit member shall be afforded a reasonable
opportunity to review the written investigation. Realizing that in some
cases there may be information that would be detrimental to the
department's ability to conduct misconduct investigations, that information
may be deleted. However, ail other information will be available for review.

3. The unit member under investigation may request a copy of the DRB
information at no cost. The DRB information will be made available to the unit
member or his representative at the same time the unit member is served
with the DRB notice. Any written or electronic material to be presented by the
employee or his representative to the DRB shall also be given to the
department in a reasonable time. The information will be supplied on a read-
only computer disc if possible; if not, it will be supplied in written form. In
addition, the department will supply any audio/video tapes and computer
graphics which have been produced.

4. The unit member may, at his discretion, appear before the Board with an
Association representative of his choosing and may state his reasons why the
proposed action is unjustified. The unit member and his representative may
passively observe all presentations made to the board and all responses
made to questions by board members. The unit member and non-board
members will be excluded from the room during board deliberations.

5. The unit member may submit relevant written matter in support of his position.
6. If the unit member requests, representation will be allowed, consistent with
Article 1, Section 1-4(B)(1) of this Memorandum, during Use Of Force
Board (UFB) hearings. A unit Association representative will be allowed to
observe all presentations made to the Board and all responses to questions
by Board members.

a. At least ten (10) days prior to the convening of the UFB the unit member
will be provided at no cost with a copy of all documentation concerning his
involvement in the matter under investigation that is made available to the
UFB Board members. Establish a sub-committee with PSB, PLEA, and
management to address technological improvements to improve
efficiency with the transfer of UFB documentation.

7. \fthe department intends to conduct a Loudermill process, a unit member will
be provided a written notice at least 5 working days prior to the scheduled
hearing along with copies of all supporting documentation. This is to ensure
the member will have a meaningful opportunity to prepare for the hearing.
Although subject matter experts are not permitted to attend the Loudermill, a
member may provide written documentation from subject matter experts at
the Loudermill. At Loudermill Hearings, the Chief may consider written
information submitted which may include written statements provided
by the Unit Member's expert witness.

8. In recognition of the mutual benefit to both the city and the unit member,
suspensions MAY BE served under the following time limits, at the unit
member's option. Unit members may serve suspensions of more than 40
hours on an alternating weekly schedule. Unit members will also be allowed
to exchange up to 40 hours of vacation or comp time in exchange for serving
a suspension. The city retains the option to deviate from this provision for
suspensions involving sexual harassment, violence in the work place,
felonies, and drugs/alcohol.

A unit member under investigation by Professional Standards Bureau or a Police
Department supervisor for a disciplinary matter that may lead to a written
reprimand, suspension, demotion, or discharge, and who is interviewed or
interrogated, or requested to produce any documentation, shall be given a written
Notice Of Investigation (Form 80-58DB) informing him of the specific nature of
the investigation, his status in the investigation, and all known allegations of
misconduct involved in the interview of the unit member. In addition, the unit
member and/or the Police Department supervisor/Professional Standard Bureau
representative may mechanically record such interview/interrogation. Should any
mechanical recordings take place, the department reserves the right to transcribe
any such interview/interrogation for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of the
interview/interrogation and, if requested, the unit member shall sign the
transcription if it is accurate. In the event that the investigator intends to segment
the interview or the interrogation, the NOI will inform the member of the specific
nature and all known allegations pertaining to the portion or portions of the
investigation being covered by the segmented Notice of Investigation.

16
1. Acopy of the signed and dated Notice of Investigation will be given to the unit
member prior to the beginning of the interview. The unit member shall have
the right to retain the NOI for his use throughout the entire course of the
interview.

2. The unit member will be provided a copy of all the
interview/interrogation in digital media format.

3. If any unit member is told not to speak to anyone regarding an investigation,
this admonition does not apply to speaking with an attorney functioning within
the attorney-client relationship. In addition, if an accused unit member is told
not to speak to anyone regarding an investigation, this admonition does not
apply to speaking with an Association representative, who may discuss the
matter only with the grievance chairman/Association president or his
designated representative. Once the investigation is completed, any unit
member may speak with an Association representative regarding the incident.
When the investigation is completed, the accused unit member will be notified
in writing of the findings. A unit member under internal or administrative
investigation may be reassigned (may include reassignment to his home),
untit the completion of the investigation.

4. If during the course of the above mentioned investigation, information is
learned concerning additional misconduct on the part of the unit member
being interviewed, an NOI will be issued to the unit member prior to the unit
member being questioned about the additional misconduct information.

5. Investigations alleging serious misconduct and/or issues of veracity will be
investigated by Professional Standards Bureau (PSB).

6. Notification regarding the general nature of a Professional Standards Bureau
(PSB) interview at the time of scheduling will be left at the discretion of the
PSB Commander.

7. \fany additional NOI's are served during the course of a misconduct interview
where a PLEA representative is not present (has not been requested), a
break in the interview of up to one (1) hour will be granted (if requested) for
the employee to obtain a PLEA representative.

8. The unit member or the unit member’s representative may make a
request to the Chief, or his designee, in unusual circumstances such as
a unit member’s extended duty or hospitalization, to delay the PSB
interview for up to 24 hours after a critical incident.

It is understood by the parties that the benefits granted by this Article, shall not
be interpreted or applied as requiring the employer to count as time worked, any
hours or fractions of hours spent outside the unit member's work shift in pursuit
of benefits provided by this Article. The employer shall count as time worked any
hours or fractions of hours spent within the unit member's regular work shift in
pursuit of benefits provided by this Article.

A unit member attending any IRP, DRB, UFB, DAC, Grievance meeting, or any
other review board while off duty shall be allowed to adjust their work schedule
by an equal amount of time spent in the meeting. The adjustment will require the
approval of the unit member's supervisor, with operational considerations,
approval will not be unreasonably withheld.

After a separation notice has been signed by the appropriate authorities, and if
the unit member is given the opportunity to resign, the unit member will have
three (3) hours to consult with an Association representative.

A unit member who receives a written reprimand will be provided a copy of the
official documentation, if any, supporting the written reprimand at the time the
unit member receives the reprimand.

If the Driving Analysis Committee sends a case to the DRB for review, the unit
member will receive a copy of the facts supporting the DAC position upon
request. Prior to the DAC review, unless the unit member declines, an IRP will be
completed with the unit member's commander. Establish a sub-committee
with PSB, PLEA, and management to address technological improvements
to improve efficiency with the transfer of case documents.

A unit member identified only as a witness will be given the opportunity to consult
with the PLEA President or Representation Chairman to discuss their rights and
obligations prior to the interview or interrogation.

A unit member seeking an "at request” transfer will only have discipline of a
written reprimand of a relevant nature, suspension, or demotion taken into
consideration in the determination of the transfer. For transfers only, discipline
greater than three (3) years from the date of the NOI will not be considered.

If a polygraph examination is required of a unit member, an Association
representative may monitor the interview and examination from the monitoring
room. Monitoring will include both visual and audio. A unit member will be
allowed an association representative during the post exam interviews. The PSB
Investigator will also have the right to be present.

If an employee is not given his/her PMG by the annual review date, the employee
may request his or her merit increase in writing by sending a memorandum
directly to the Human Resources Officer in the Fiscal Management Bureau. If the
PMG is an overall “met,” the request will be processed within twenty-one (21)
calendar days of submittal and will be retroactive to the PMG annual review date.

Unit members will not be excluded from applying and/or competing in a transfer

process based solely on a pending investigation. However, the transfer process
will not be delayed pending the conclusion of the related investigation. !f a unit

18
member is passed over for transfer based on the pending investigation, he/she
may be eligible for the next available opening depending upon the outcome of
the investigation.

An association member, or the association at the request of the member, may
request the opportunity to discuss a good-of-the-department transfer decision
with the member's Division Commander. The Division Commander will make
him/herself available, but the transfer action will not be delayed based on this
provision. This provision does not apply to transfers made to adjust staffing
levels, reduce staff in a specific area or other similar operational need.

A unit member or their representative may request the opportunity to
discuss and review a transfer that is the subject of a grievance with the
Chief or their designee. The Chief or their designee shall make themselves
available to discuss, but the transfer action will not be delayed based on
this provision. The transfer action could be delayed or reversed at the
discretion of the Chief or their designee. (This paragraph does not apply to
at-request transfers or transfers based on a selection process).

Section 1-5: Prohibition of Strike and Lockouts

A.

The Association and the unit members covered by this Memorandum recognize
and agree that rendering of police services to the community cannot under any
circumstances or conditions be withheld, interrupted, or discontinued, and to do
so would endanger the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of
Phoenix.

The Association pledges to maintain unimpaired municipal services as directed
by the City. Neither the Association, nor any unit member, for any reason, will
authorize, institute, aid, condone or engage in a slowdown, work stoppage,
strike, or any other interference with the work and statutory functions and
obligations of the City or the Department. During the term of this Memorandum
neither the City nor its agents for any reason shall authorize, institute, aid or
promote any lockout of unit members covered by this Memorandum.

Should any unit member during the term of this Memorandum, and until such
time that it is expressly and legally rescinded, breach the obligations of Section
1-5B, the City Manager or his designee shall immediately notify the Association
that a prohibited action is in progress.

The Association shall forthwith, through its executive officers and other
authorized representatives, disavow said strike or other prohibited action, and
shall notify in writing all Association members and representatives of their
obligation and responsibility for maintaining compliance with this Article, including
their responsibility to remain at work during any interruption which may be
caused or initiated by others. Copies of such notification shall be delivered to the
office of the City Manager. In addition, the Association shall order all unit

19
members violating this Article to immediately return to work and cease the strike
or other prohibited activity. Such order shall be delivered both orally and in
writing to all unit members violating this Article with copies of the written order to
be delivered to the office of the City Manager.

Penalties or sanctions the City may assess against a unit member who violates
this Section shall include, but not be limited to:

1. Discipline up to and including discharge.

2. Loss of all compensation and benefits, including seniority, during the period of
such prohibited activity.

Should the Association during the term of this Memorandum and until such time
that it is expressly and legally rescinded, breach its obligations under this
Section, it is agreed that all penalties set forth in Chapter 2, Article XVII
(Employer-Employee Relations), Phoenix City Code, shall be imposed on the
Association, in addition to any other legal and administrative remedies available
to the City that in its discretion it may elect to pursue.

Nothing contained herein shall preclude the City from obtaining judicial restraint

or from seeking damages from the Association, in the event of a violation of this
Section.

ARTICLE 2: Grievance/Arbitration/Labor Management

Section 2-1: Grievance Procedure

A.

Informa! Resolution

1. As a matter of good labor-management relations the parties encourage a unit
member who believes that he has a bona fide grievance to discuss and
attempt to resolve it with his immediate non-unit supervisor as designated by
the Chief or his designee.

2. If the above informal discussion is held and does not resolve the grievance,
the unit member may file a formal grievance in accordance with the following
procedure.

Definition of Grievance
1. A grievance is a written allegation by a unit member, submitted as herein
specified, claiming violation(s) of the specific express terms of this

Memorandum for which there is no Civil Service or other specific method of
review provided by State or City law.

20
Cc.

Procedure

1.

Step |

The unit member shall reduce his grievance to writing by signing and
completing all parts of the grievance form provided by the City and submit it to
his immediate non-unit supervisor within fourteen (14) calendar days of the
initial commencement of the occurrence being grieved. The supervisor shall
further consider and discuss the grievance with the grievant and the grievant's
representative, if any, as he deems appropriate, and shall, within fourteen
(14) calendar days of having received the written grievance, submit his
response thereto in writing to the grievant. The parties by written agreement
may move the grievance to Step Il of the grievance procedure.

. Step Il

If the written response of the immediate non-unit supervisor does not result in
a resolution of the grievance, the grievant may appeal the grievance by
signing and completing the City form and presenting it to his Division or
Bureau Commander within fourteen (14) calendar days of the grievant's
receipt of the supervisor's response. The Division or Bureau Commander may
investigate the grievance and may set a meeting with the grievant, the
grievant's designated representative, if any, and such other personnel as he
deems appropriate to consider the grievance. Within fourteen (14) calendar
days of receipt of the grievance, the second level of review shall submit his
response to the grievance to the grievant and the grievant's representative, if
any.

Step Ill

a. If the response of the second level of review does not result in resolution
of the grievance, the grievant may appeal the grievance by signing and
completing the City form and presenting it to the Police Chief within
fourteen (14) calendar days of the grievant's receipt of the Step Il
response.

b. The Chief or designee shall conduct a hearing within fourteen (14)
calendar days of receipt of the grievance regarding the grievance at which
the grievant shall be afforded the opportunity to fully present his position
and to be represented. Within fourteen (14) days of the hearing, the Police
Chief or his designee shall submit his response to the grievant and the
grievant's representative, if any.

Step 3.5
After the Department Head's decision, but prior to review by the Grievance

Committee, the parties involved may mutually agree to submit the grievance
to the Labor Relations Administrator. The grievance, as originally written and

21
the attached response from the Department Head, must be submitted to the
Labor Relations Administrator within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of
the Department Head’s answer. The Labor Relations Administrator shall,
within fourteen (14) calendar days of the receipt of the grievance, meet with
the Department Head or his designee and the unit member and his
representative in an attempt to resolve the grievance. The Labor Relations
Administrator shall then submit written recommendations for resolution to the
unit member and Department Head within fourteen (14) calendar days of the
meeting. If Step 3.5 is used, the Labor Relations Administrator shall not be a
member of the Step IV Grievance Committee.

5. Step IV

a.

If the response of the Police Chief does not result in resolution of the
grievance, the grievant may, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the
Step Ill response, appeal the grievance by signing and completing the City
form and presenting it to the Grievance Committee. The Grievance
Committee shall be composed of:

Chairman - A member of the City Manager's Office designated by the City
Manager.

Secretary - A designee of the Labor Relations Administrator.

Member - A different City department head on a rotating schedule.
Member - PLEA President or his designee.

The Grievance Committee shall schedule a hearing regarding the
grievance at which the grievant shall be afforded the opportunity to fully
present his position and to be represented.

If the grievant so elects in writing within the above time limit, in lieu of such
hearing the grievance may be reviewed by an arbitrator. The parties, or
their designated representatives, shall agree on an arbitrator, and if they
are unable to agree on an arbitrator within a reasonable time, either party
may request the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to submit to
them a list of seven (7) arbitrators who have had experience in the public
sector. The parties shall, within seven (7) calendar days of the receipt of
said list, select the arbitrator by alternately striking names from said list
until one name remains. Such person shall then become the arbitrator.
The arbitrator so selected shall hold a hearing as expeditiously as possible
at a time and place convenient to the parties, and shall be bound by the
following:

i. The arbitrator shall be bound by the language of this Memorandum

and departmental rules and regulations consistent therewith in
considering any issue properly before him.

22
ii. The arbitrator shall expressly confine himself to the precise issues
submitted to him and shall have no authority to consider any other
issue not so submitted to him.

ii, The arbitrator shall be bound by applicable State and City law.

iv. The Grievance Committee or the arbitrator shall submit findings and
advisory recommendations to the grievant and to the City Manager.
The cost of the arbitrator and any other mutually incurred costs shall
be borne equally by the parties.

v. The City Manager shall, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the
receipt of the written findings and recommendations, make the final
determination of the grievance and submit it in writing to the grievant
and his designated representative.

Time Limits

Failure of City Management representatives to comply with time limits specified
in Paragraph C shall entitle the grievant to appeal to the next level of review; and
failure of the grievant to comply with said time limits shall constitute
abandonment of the grievance; except however, that the parties may extend time
limits by mutual written agreement in advance.

The Association may, in its own name, file a grievance that alleges violation by
the City of the rights accorded to the Association by the specific terms of Article
1-3 of this Memorandum. The Association shall file such grievance at Step Ill of
the Procedure. All other grievances must be filed and signed by a unit member,
subject to the provisions of this Article.

Employer grievances, should they occur as a result of official Association
activities or actions, including the failure to act as required under the terms of this
Memorandum, will be presented directly to the Association president or any
officer of the Association within ten (10) days of the occurrence prompting the
grievance. The president or his designee shall in each case provide a written
answer within five (5) days from receipt of the grievance. Unresolved employer
grievances may be submitted to arbitration pursuant to Step IV herein provided
the City shall pay for the costs of the arbitrator for grievances initiated by the City.

It is understood by the parties that the benefits granted by this Section shall not
be interpreted or applied as requiring the employer to count as time worked, any
hours or fractions of hours spent outside the unit member's work shift in pursuit
of benefits provided by this Article. The employer shall count as time worked any
hours or fractions of hours spent within the unit member's regular work shift in
pursuit of benefits provided by this Section.

23
Section 2-2: Labor-Management Committee

A.

There shall be a Labor-Management Committee consisting of up to six (6)
representatives of the Association and up to six (6) representatives of the
Department and City. The purpose of the Committee is to facilitate improved
Labor-Management relationships by providing an informal forum for the free
exchange of views and discussions of mutual concerns and problems as
distinguished from meeting and conferring.

The Committee shall meet at least quarterly at mutually scheduled times.

The City’s Labor Relations Administrator or his designee shall be the Chairman.
The members shall, in advance of a meeting, provide the meeting’s Chairman
with proposed agenda items, and the Chairman shall provide the members with
the meeting agenda in advance of the meeting.

Representatives of the Association on the Committee who are unit members
shali not lose pay or benefits for meetings mutually scheduled during their duty
time up to a maximum of three (3) hours per unit member per meeting.

It is understood by the parties that the benefits granted by this Section shall not
be interpreted or applied as requiring the employer to count as time worked, any
hours or fractions of hours spent outside the unit member's work shift in pursuit
of benefits provided by this Section. The employer shall count as time worked
any hours or fractions of hours spent within the unit member's regular work shift
in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article.

The Committee will work cooperatively to review and update the shooting/critical
incident protocol by August 1, 2012.

Any signed/dated written Labor/Management agreements will be binding on the
parties.

ARTICLE 3: Compensation/Wages

Section 3-1: Wages

A.

In year one of this agreement, the economic value of concessions to be
restored will equal 1.9%. The first year of the agreement will include
restoration (e.g. elimination) of 36 hours of unpaid holidays per year (Art 5,
Sec 5-5); restoration of the vacation buyback concession (Art 5, Sec 5-5);
restoration of $650 per member uniform allowance (Art 5, Sec 5-6); and, a
0.04% DCP increase (Art 3, Sec 3-9).

24
In year two of the agreement, the economic value of concessions to be
restored will equal 1.0%. The second year of the agreement will include a
0.98% DCP increase (Art 3, Sec 3-9) and restoration of PEHP plan payments
($6 per pay period per member) (Art 5, Sec 5-1A).

In year three of the agreement, the economic value of concessions to be
restored will equal 1.3%. The third year of the agreement will include a
1.44% DCP increase (Art 3, Sec 3-9).

if the City projects a General Fund surplus for Fiscal Year 2018-2019 in the
five-year forecast that is presented to City Council in February 2018, the
parties will Meet and Confer in February 2018.

Unit members assigned to the Air Support Unit, and who have achieved and
maintained the qualification level of Pilot in Command, shall be placed at step
one of Police Officer*Pilot, Job Code 62211, in the pay schedule outlined in
Attachment D.

Unit members assigned to the Air Support Unit, and who have achieved and
maintained the qualification level of Rescue Qualified Pilot or PC12 Qualified
Pilot, shall be placed at step one for Police Officer*Rescue Pilot, Job Code
62212, in the pay schedule outlined in Attachment D.

Unit members assigned to the Air Support Unit, and who have achieved and
maintained the qualification level of Unit Certified Flight Instructor, shal! be
placed at step one of Police Officer*Flight Instr, Job Code 62213, in the pay
schedule outlined in Attachment D.

A unit member assigned to the Air Support Unit, and who has achieved and
maintained the qualification level of Chief Pilot, shall be placed at step one of
Police Officer*Chief Pilot, Job Code 62214, in the pay schedule outlined in
Attachment D.

Unit members assigned to one of the four described Air Support
assignments may only qualify for and receive pay for one pay step at a time.
Example: A unit member qualified as a Unit Certified Flight Instructor and
receiving pay at pay step one of Job Code 62213 shall not receive the premium
pay for any other pay step the unit member may also qualify for.

It is understood that for implementation purposes, the practice of rounding of
fractional cents shall be done in accordance with accepted mathematical and
accounting principles.

When a conflict arises between the Pay Schedule attached hereto as

Appendices and the Pay Ordinance due to mathematical, typographical, or
printing error, the Pay Ordinance shall be the controlling authority.

25
I. It is the intent of the parties to permanently move the effective date of any wage
increase to the start of the first pay period in July.

Section 3-1A: Productivity Enhancement Pay

In recognition of dedicated public service and overall performance, the City agrees to
implement the following Productivity Enhancement Pay formula for unit members:

A. Pay Benefit:

1. On December 19, 2016, June 5, 2017, December 18, 2017, June 4, 2018,
December 17, 2018, and June 3, 2019, a unit member who has completed
at least seven (7) years of continuous full-time service and who meets the
additional qualifications specified in this Article shall receive eighty ($80)
dollars, pro-rated and included each pay period in the qualifying unit
member's regular pay check, for each full year of continuous full-time service
in excess of six (6) years, up to a semi-annual! maximum of one thousand
forty dollars ($1,040), annual maximum of two thousand eighty dollars
($2,080) at twenty (20) years.

2. On December 19, 2016, June 5, 2017, December 18, 2017, June 4, 2018,
December 17, 2018, and June 3, 2019, a unit member at twenty (20) years
and one day of continuous full-time service shall receive one hundred and
twenty-five dollars ($125), pro-rated and included each pay period in the
qualifying unit member's regular pay check, for each full year of continuous
service in excess of six (6) years, up to a semi-annual maximum of two
thousand dollars ($2,000), annua! maximum of four thousand dollars ($4,000)
at twenty-two (22) years or more.

B. Qualifications:

1. A unit member must have completed at least one (1) year of continuous full-
time service at the top step in his classification. Employees in step 8 as of
July 8, 2002 will receive Productivity Enhancement Pay when they reach one
year at step 8 and maintain their Productivity Enhancement Pay eligibility
when they move to step 9. Employees in step 7 or below as of July 8, 2002
will be required to complete one year at step 9 to be eligible for Productivity
Enhancement Pay.

2. Effective July 1, 1999, a unit member must have completed seven (7) years
of continuous full-time service. A unit member who has continuous, full time
City service in another classification(s) may apply that time to the seven (7)
year requirement.

3. A unit member must have achieved the overall performance rating of meets

standards or better on his latest scheduled performance evaluation on file in
the Human Resources Department.

26
Cc.

4. A unit member who receives a less than meets standards rating may appeal
that rating by memo through his chain of command to the Police Chief. A unit
member's eligibility shall be reinstated once the unit member receives a
scheduled or unscheduled performance rating that meets standards.

5. A unit member must be on full-time active status. A unit member on industrial
leave shall qualify for this payment for only the first year of the industrial
leave. However, the entire period of industrial leave shall qualify as
continuous service when the unit member returns to active employment.

Terms of Payment:

1. The City will make adjustments to an employee's Productivity Enhancement
payment within thirty (30) days of the qualifying date.

Section 3-1B: Career Enhancement Pay

Effective July 14, 2008, Career Enhancement Pay (CEP) will be paid to qualified unit
members at the levels fixed below:

1. CEP Level 1 pay shall be $1,903.20 per year ($73.20 per pay period).
2. CEP Level 2 pay shall be $3,806.40 per year ($146.40 per pay period).
3. CEP Level 3 pay shall be $5,709.60 per year ($219.60 per pay period).

4. CEP Level 4 pay shall be $7,612.80 per year ($292.80 per pay period).

Section 3-1C: Training Pay

A.

Field Training Officers (FTOs) and other unit members whom the department
selects to conduct department-approved officer field training; will receive an
additional five percent (5%) of their regular rate of pay for every day they are
assigned to an officially authorized field training position.

Any unit member assigned to train an O.I.T. in traffic/DUI enforcement will
receive 5% training pay for every day the unit member actually trains.

Unit members assigned to the Canine Unit, who have achieved and maintain the
qualifications for the position of Canine Unit Trainer, will receive an additional five
percent (5%) of their regular rate of pay for every day they are assigned to an
officially authorized Canine Unit Trainer Position. The following is a list of
requirements to receive payment as a Canine Unit Trainer:

27
1. The unit member must be, or be designated by the Department to become,
certified by an outside association to train police service dogs. The
certifications include patrol, narcotics detection and/or explosive detection.

2. Training being provided must include basic level training for canines and
handlers assigned to the unit. This section is not meant to include a canine
handler training only his or her assigned canine; it is meant for those who
provide basic and in service training to other canine teams in the unit.

3. An officially authorized Canine Unit Trainer Position must include
responsibility for proper written evaluation of each canine and handler being
trained.

Section 3-1D: Compensation for Interpreting and Translation by Sworn Police
Officers
A. Purpose
4. This regulation is written to provide guidelines for adjusting the compensation
of sworn police officers who are authorized and required by a sworn police
supervisor to utilize a language other than English, including sign language,
to conduct an official Police Department function or activity.
2. This compensation shall be for police-related functions or activities in which
the unit member is called upon to interpret in addition to their normal assigned
duties.

B. Payment Authorization

Compensation provided for by this regulation shall be given only when approved
by a sworn police supervisor prior to the actual interpretation or translation.

Cc. Performance Activities Approved for Special Compensation

1. Verbal interpretation, in excess of seven (7) consecutive minutes per
occurrence, while conducting any assigned formal police function or activity.

2. Written translation, in excess of seven (7) consecutive minutes per
occurrence, while conducting any assigned formal police function or activity.

3. Signing interpretation and translation, in excess of seven (7) consecutive

minutes per occurrence, while conducting any assigned formal police function
or activity.

28
Compensation

A unit member who meets linguistic skills qualifications, as determined by a
management review panel, or in the case of sign language determined by
presenting certification recognized by the Arizona Commission for the Deaf and
Hard of Hearing (ACDHH), shall be paid a premium of $10.00 per hour calculated
to the nearest 1/4 hour, in addition to his base hourly rate, for each hour he is
engaged in assigned and authorized interpretation, translation, or signing
activities.

Consistent with Section 5-7, 3 of this Memorandum and A.R. 2.51, employees
are eligible to use the seminar and professional membership portion of their
reimbursement benefit for the ACDHH certification.

Supervisory Authorization

Authorization must be provided by a sworn police supervisor in each case.
Written notification which includes a listing of the specific time periods for which
the premium payment is sought along with signatures of the unit member and the
appropriate supervisor should be forwarded to the Police Department's Fiscal
Management Bureau before the end of the pay period in which the additional
duty occurred.

Section 3-2: Overtime

A.

Overtime is defined as time assigned and worked beyond the regularly
scheduled forty (40) hour work week or eight (8) hour work shift, or ten (10) hour
work shift if a four (4) day work week is implemented. Duly authorized paid leave
shall be considered as time worked for purposes of the regularly scheduled work
week. This provision shall not apply to unpaid leave.

Overtime shall be worked and shall be allowed if assigned by the Chief of Police
or his designees.

Overtime work will be compensated in either cash or compensation time at one
and one-haif (1-1/2) times the regular rate of pay after the first seven (7) minutes
assigned and worked beyond the end of the unit member's regularly scheduled
shift, calculated to the nearest 1/4 hour.

A unit member may, subject to approval of his non-unit supervisor based on
considerations of departmental scheduling and operations factors, request to use
overtime as compensatory time subject to the limitation of two hundred fifty (250)
hours on the accumulation of compensatory time. Use of compensatory time
shall be subject to advance approval of the non-unit supervisor. For purposes of
accumulating compensatory time, the department will provide overtime request
slios which will include a check box indicating payment or compensatory time.
The unit member shall check either box to reflect his wishes. If a unit member

29
submits overtime requests that are in excess of two hundred fifty (250) hours, he
will be paid the difference. Effective July 13, 2009, a unit member may hold or
request to be paid for up to two hundred (200) hours of comp time.

Unit members may contribute accrued compensatory time to other employees in
accordance with City policy governing contributions of leave for serious illness of
an employee or their immediate family member.

A unit member may be paid for accumulated compensatory time by submitting a
memorandum to the Fiscal Bureau requesting payment for any portion of the
compensatory time. This may be done at any time upon the unit member's
request, and such payment will be made in the pay period following receipt of the
memorandum by the Fiscal Bureau.

At the direction of the immediate non-unit supervisor in each case, a unit member
shall be entitled to overtime in accordance with Article 3, Section 3-2 hereof,
while he is being evaluated by the authorized and designated City physician for
return to work at times he is not scheduled to be on duty nor is on paid leave or
disability benefit status, based on actual check-in and check-out time recorded by
Health Center staff. This time shall not qualify for the guaranteed minimum
overtime provision contained in Section 3-2B, but shall be compensated at a
minimum of one (1) hour at time and one-half (1-1/2). No unit member shall be
compensated for other than the supervisor directed evaluation(s) by the City
physician for return to work.

After four (4) consecutive hours of overtime, a unit member shall be entitled to a
paid mea! break of one-half (1/2) hour, but in no event shall a unit member be
entitled to more than one such meal break for every eight (8) consecutive hours
of overtime.

For a unit member participating in the 4/10 schedule, this provision shall mean
that before a unit member is entitled to a second one-half (1/2) hour paid meal
break, he shall have worked on an overtime basis for a minimum of four (4) hours
beyond the end of his regularly scheduled ten (10) hour work shift.

If work demands preclude a unit member from taking a meal period, the unit
member will be paid an additional thirty (30) minutes at the straight time rate.
This benefit shall apply only if the interruption occurs during the first thirty (30)
minutes of the meal period.

When a unit member is off duty and is contacted by telephone by his supervisor
because of the unit member's official duties, for purposes other than call-out, or a
supervisor approves of the making or receiving of the call, the unit member will
be paid a minimum of fifteen (15) minutes at time and one-half his regular rate of
pay when any combination of calls equals seven (7) minutes or more. If the call
extends past this minimum, the overtime will be calculated to the nearest one-
quarter (1/4) hour. He will not receive overtime for additional duty-related calls
received during this compensation period.

30
A unit member on industrial leave and assigned to his home will be considered to
have the same duty hours and N-days, up to a seven (7) calendar day period, as
the squad he was on when the injury/illness occurred. After the seven (7) days,
he may be reassigned to new duty hours and/or N-days.

A unit member who scheduled a leave day thirty (30) calendar days in advance
through his immediate non-unit supervisor in accordance with departmental
policy and who subsequently is placed on court stand-by, or is required to appear
in court will, by his choice, receive overtime pay in accordance with this Section
and Section 3-2A and/or Section 3-2B, in addition to the leave day.

A unit member who scheduled a leave day but failed to do so within thirty (30)
calendar days in advance, and who is placed on stand-by or called to court, will
receive overtime pay in accordance with this Article and Section 3-2A. However,
the number of leave hours taken will be reduced by the number of overtime hours
paid. Court stand-by hours do not apply to this provision.

Section 3-2A: Court Time Overtime

A.

When court time constitutes overtime, a unit member shall be entitled to overtime
compensation/minimum call-out pay consistent with Section 3-2B of this
Memorandum.

1. Court time overtime shall be continuous time compensated consistent with
Section 3-2, subsection C.

2. Effective July 1,1998, no cost parking will be provided for unit members who
are called to testify or appear at any City of Phoenix Municipal Court facility
for any official police department business, whether on or off-duty.

For purposes of this Article the term Court shall be defined as including Federal
District Court; Superior Court, State of Arizona; City Court, City of Phoenix, State
of Arizona; Municipal Courts in Maricopa County; Justice Court; Federal, State,
County Grand Juries; Motor Vehicle Department hearings, and Prosecutorial and
Defense interviews. It is understood that this Article shall not apply to
administrative hearings including but not limited to arbitration hearings pursuant
to the MOU, Civil Service Board hearings, PERB hearings, and hearings
pursuant to the A.R. 2.61 grievance procedure.

After a unit member verifies his need to appear in court to testify concerning the
performance of his official duties at a time other than his regularly scheduled tour
of duty, and he is notified less than twelve (12) hours in advance of the
scheduled appearance time that he need not appear, the unit member will
receive two (2) hours of pay at one and one-half (1-1/2) times his base hourly
rate of pay.

31
Section 3-2B: Call-Out Pay

A.

A unit member called back because of his own negligence, whether in the proper
care and use of City equipment, or for his failure to complete official reports prior
to securing for the day, shall be paid for such call- back consistent with Section
3-2, subsection C, provided, however, the unit member shall not be eligible for
the three (3) hour guaranteed minimum pursuant to this Article. If a claim of
negligence is disputed, it may become subject to the grievance procedure herein.

Anytime that a unit member is called back after leaving City facilities at a time
other than his regularly assigned shift, the unit member will receive a minimum of
three (3) hours pay at time and one-half the unit member's base pay calculated
to the nearest quarter (1/4) hour, except that a unit member shall not be eligible
for additional compensation during that three hour period.

Compensation to a unit member who is called out at times other than his
regularly scheduled shift will begin at the time the unit member is notified. The
compensation will continue up to thirty (30) minutes beyond the completion of the
duties for which the unit member was called out, or until the member returns to
his residence, whichever is first. Where applicable, the travel time shall be paid
only if the total work and allowed travel time exceed the minimum call out
guarantee. Travel time shall not apply when a unit member is working overtime
planned in advance.

A unit member beginning an overtime period within three (3) hours or less prior to
the regularly scheduled duty reporting time, will be compensated from the time
the overtime period begins to the time he is scheduled to report for duty except
that a unit member shall not be eligible for additional compensation during that
period.

Holdover time, i.e., being held over on shift (no break in duty exceeding fifteen
(15) minutes) will be compensated for actual time spent in accordance with
Section 3-2, subsection C.

Section 3-3: Out-of-Rank Pay

A.

A unit member who is temporarily required to serve in a regular authorized
position in a supervisory classification, (e.g., sergeant), shall be compensated at
the higher rate of pay in accordance with the following:

To be eligible for the additional compensation, the unit member must first
accumulate ten (10) regular working shifts of assignment in the higher rank within
any twelve (12) month period; satisfactory performance during a previous
appointment to the higher rank will be credited to the qualifying period. The days
of out-of-rank assignment need not necessarily be consecutive. Once this
qualification is satisfied, no additional re-qualification will be required. All shifts

32
worked beyond the tenth (10th) shift in the supervisory classification will be
subject to the higher rate of pay.

C. Temporary assignments out-of-rank shall be recorded only in full shift units. A
unit member working out-of-rank for less than one (1) full shift will not be credited
with working out-of-rank service time.

D. To qualify for out-of-rank pay, a unit member must be assuming substantially the
full range of duties and responsibilities of the higher level position. Out-of-rank
pay is not authorized, for example, if the organization of a work unit is such that
each unit member carries on his normal duties during the temporary absence of
a supervisor, without a need for the direction which the supervisor would provide
ona longer term basis.

E. Time worked in a higher rank shall not earn credits toward the completion of
probationary requirements in the higher rank.

F. A unit member who has qualified under these provisions shall be compensated at
the minimum rate established for the higher rank for all shifts worked beyond the
10th shift served in the higher rank. In the event of overlapping salary ranges, a
one-step differential shall be paid for out-of-rank assignments. The higher rate of
pay shall be used in computing overtime when authorized overtime is served in
out-of-rank work assignments; the overtime rate shall be the rate established by
the overtime regulations that apply to the higher rank.

Section 3-4: Sick Leave Conversion at Retirement

Effective at the beginning of the first pay period in July, 1992, the following benefits shall
apply:

A. Definitions:

4. Qualifying hours - the minimum number of accrued and unused sick leave
credits existing on the last day of service prior to retirement, which are
necessary before a unit member can participate in the benefit program.

2. Base number of hours or base hours - the number of hours of accrued and
unused sick leave credits which are uncompensated under this Article and
above which the City will compensate the unit member.

3. Base hourly wage - the base hourly rate of pay being paid at the time of

retirement to the retiring unit member who qualifies for participation in this
benefit program.

33
Benefit and Eligibility:

1.

A unit member who has accumulated a minimum of nine hundred (900) hours
or more of accrued and unused sick leave at the time of a duty-related
retirement shall be eligible for payment of an amount of compensation equal
to thirty-five percent (35%) of his base hourly wage for all hours in excess of
four hundred and fifty (450) hours; or

. A unit member who has accumulated a minimum of one thousand two

hundred eighty six (1286) qualifying hours or more of accrued and unused
sick leave at the time of a duty related retirement shall be eligible for payment
of an amount of compensation equal to sixty percent (60%) of his base hourly
for all hours in excess of three hundred eighty six (886) hours.

Commencing July 1, 1998, a unit member who has accumulated a minimum
of one thousand seven hundred and fourteen (1714) hours or more of
accrued and unused sick leave at the time of a duty related retirement shall
be eligible for payment of an amount of compensation equal to sixty percent
(60%) of his base hourly wage for all hours.

A unit member who has accrued 1,286 hours or more of unused sick leave
may elect to have one hundred fifty (150) hours of sick leave paid out at the
member's hourly rate in one lump sum. A unit member may only elect to
exercise this benefit three (3) times in their career, and not more than one (1)
time in a fiscal year. Eligible employees may elect to buy back their
hours between July 1 and the last pay period in January each fiscal
year.

The payments described in numbers 1 through 4 above are not considered
Final Average Salary for purposes of pension calculations.

Administration:

1.

At the time of retirement, the City’s Employee Benefits Division, or such other
individual or agency as the City may designate, shall determine the unit
member’s eligibility and the amount of unused sick leave to be compensated.

The unit member shall verify in writing the computations of the Employee
Benefits Division.

In the event a unit member's eligibility for participation or the amount of

compensation is disputed, then the dispute shall be submitted to the City
Auditor for binding resolution.

34
Section 3-4A: Sick Leave Payout

All accumulated sick leave hours on the city's official file at the time of the member's
death will be paid. Payment will be based upon the member's base hourly rate at the
time of death.

Section 3-5: Night Shift Differential\Weekend Shift Differential

A.

A unit member shall receive sixty cents ($.60) per hour in addition to his base
hourly rate of pay when working a night shift or any portions of a night shift which
ends at or after 10:00 PM.

A unit member shall receive night shift pay differential only for hours scheduled
and worked, and not while on paid leave time.

A unit member who is called out and works between the hours of 10:00 PM and
6:00 AM will be paid night shift differential for ali hours worked at the rate
specified in this Article. If a unit member was called out while on a stand-by
status, he will not receive night shift differential.

A unit member shall receive twenty-five cents ($.25) per hour in addition to his
base hourly rate of pay and any other shift differential or any other premium pay
he may be receiving for working a weekend shift. A designated weekend shift is
defined as any shift that starts on or after 2:00 PM on Friday, and continuing
through any shift that starts on or before, but not after 11:59 PM on Sunday.

4. A unit member shall receive weekend shift pay differential only for hours
scheduled and worked, and not while on paid leave.

2. A unit member who is called out and works between 2:00 PM on Friday and
11:59 PM on Sunday will be paid weekend shift differential for all hours
worked at the rate specified in this Article. If a unit member was called out
while on stand-by status, he will not receive weekend shift differential.

Section 3-6: Stand-By Pay

A.

When a unit member is required and assigned to be available for immediate
emergency call-out at times that he is not otherwise on duty and the unit member
complies with departmental regulations incident thereto, he shall be
compensated as follows: $60.00 on the unit member's non-work day and $40.00
on a work day.

When management determines it is necessary to provide call-out service, stand-
by assignments will be maintained in, but not be limited to, the following details:
Traffic Investigators Unit (TIU), Bomb, Canine, DRE, MAC Van, SAU, Sex
Crimes, Homicide Detail, Assaults Unit, Special Projects Unit, Critical Incident

35
Stress Debriefing (C.1.S.D.) Team, Documents Crimes Unit (DCU), and the
Family Investigation Bureau (F.1.B.).

Section 3-6A: Court Time Standby Pay

A.

When a unit member receives a subpoena or other notice requiring him to stand-
by to appear in court to testify concerning the performance of his official duties at
a time other than his regularly scheduled tour of duty, and he was not notified
twelve (12) hours or more in advance of the court appearance that he need not
stand-by, he shall be entitled to a minimum of two (2) hours of pay at one and
one-half (1-1/2) times his base hourly rate of pay for court dockets scheduled
before 1200 hours, and an additional minimum of two (2) hours of pay at one and
one-half (1-1/2) times his base hourly rate of pay for court dockets scheduled
after 1200 hours, for each day the subject court proceeding is in session and the
Unit member is subject to call, providing the provisions of subsection B hereof
are satisfied. If a unit member is required to remain on stand-by after 1200 hours,
the unit member shall receive an additional one (1) hour of pay at one and one-
half (1-1/2) times his base hourly rate of pay.

If call-out occurs before the expiration of stand-by pay, then stand-by status shall
continue until the occurrence of either (a) the expiration of stand-by pay; or (b)
arrival at the duty location. Call-out pay and stand-by pay shall not be permitted
to overlap resulting in the compounding of compensation.

If a unit member fails to exercise his responsibility to contact the appropriate
representative of the court or a party sixteen (16) hours or less before the time
indicated on the subpoena to determine the continued need for him to stand-by,
he is not eligible for any stand-by pay.

For the purpose of this Memorandum, subpoena refers to a subpoena duly
issued by a court or the Arizona Motor Vehicle Department.

For purposes of this Article the term Court shall be defined as including Federal
District Court; Superior Court, State of Arizona; City Court, City of Phoenix, State
of Arizona; Municipal Courts in Maricopa County; Justice Court; Federal, State,
County Grand Juries; Motor Vehicle Department hearings; and Prosecutorial and
Defense interviews. It is understood that this Article shall not apply to
administrative hearings including but not limited to arbitration hearings pursuant
to the MOU, Civil Service Board hearings, PERB hearings, and hearings
pursuant to the A.R. 2.61 grievance procedure.

36
Section 3-7: Off-Duty Employment

A.

The Department agrees to maintain a list of unit members who are interested in
off-duty work for use in making job referrals, provided the unit member has
received prior approval to engage in off-duty employment from the immediate
non-unit supervisor.

Off-duty employment shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the
Phoenix Police Department. Should the Department contemplate any changes in
these rules and regulations during the term of this Memorandum, it shall meet
and consult with the Association on such changes in the Labor-Management
Committee prior to implementation.

The Police Chief agrees to eliminate the limitation of the number of off-duty work
hours permitted. However, the Department reserves the right to take appropriate
action in the event that a unit member's performance is adversely affected.

A unit member who works off duty in a police function for a City-sponsored event
or project, and is paid through City payroll, will be compensated at time and one-
half his regular rate of pay for all time worked.

Section 3-8: Jury Duty

When a unit member is called upon to serve as a juror in any court action, he will be
allowed leave from his duties without loss of pay for the time required for his service.

Section 3-9: Deferred Compensation and Defined Contribution Plans

A.

Prior to the start of this agreement, the City was contributing 0.1% of each
unit member’s monthly gross wages to the City’s 401(a) Defined
Contribution Plan (DCP). The City will increase the DCP percentage as
follows: 0.04% in 2016-17 (for a total of 0.14%); 0.98% in 2017-18 (for a total
of 1.12%); and 1.44% in 2018-19 (for a total of 2.56%).

At the employee’s separation, for either retirement or exiting the Deferred
Retirement Options Program, the employee's sick leave payout amounts will be
automatically contributed into the City’s 401(a) plan. Any excess amount over the
Internal Revenue Code 401(a) plan contribution maximum limits will be
automatically contributed into the City's 457(b) plan. Any portion of the excess
amount that cannot be contributed to the 457(b) plan because of Internal
Revenue Code 457(b) plan contribution maximum limits will be paid as taxable
income. The 401(a) Plan document as approved by the Deferred Compensation
Board will be the governing document.

Discuss alternatives to the Union’s participation in the City’s Deferred
Compensation Plans.

37
After the City receives official Internal Revenue Service approval and a private
letter ruling regarding the City’s 401(a) plan, the parties agree to schedule a
meeting to discuss a possible change in the distribution of the current benefit
between the 457(b) and 401(a) plans. Any agreement will be conditional on
Deferred Compensation Board approval.

Section 3-10: Non-Direct Payment of Compensation or Benefits

Various sections of this Memorandum contain a form of compensation, wages, or
benefits that have been negotiated in good faith and may or may not provide a direct
payment of wages or other benefit to each member. Those forms of compensation,
wages, or benefits that do not provide a direct payment to each unit member have been
negotiated in place of a direct payment and costed as part of the overall economic
package. Examples include: life insurance, long term disability insurance, leave
payouts, etc.

ARTICLE 4: Hours of Work/Working Conditions

Section 4-1: Work Schedules

A.

The regular duty hours for a unit member shall be five (5) consecutive shifts of
eight (8) hours in a seven (7) calendar day work week. These five (5)
consecutive shifts will be preceded and followed by two (2) “N” days. If, by
reason of transfer, a unit member's “N” days are changed, the provisions of this
section pertaining to “N” days shall not apply. The eight (8) duty hours per shift
shall be consecutive and may include any “briefing time” and shall include a meal
period of thirty (30) minutes. When work demands permit, with a supervisor's
approval, a unit member may combine this thirty (30) minute meal period with
one of his fifteen (15) minute rest periods described under Subsection D of this
Article to achieve a forty-five (45) minute meal period. This shall also apply to a
unit member working a 4/10 schedule. At times, the department may have
operational needs which necessitate a change in current work schedules. The
department shall give a unit member a minimum seven (7) day advance written
notice when his “N” days or hours will be changed. !f this seven (7) day written
Notice is not given, and there is no operational need for nat providing the notice,
the “N” days or hours change will be rescheduled to allow for a seven (7) day
notice period.

\f a ten (10) hour, four (4) day work week is implemented; the regular duty hours
for an affected unit member shall be four (4) consecutive shifts of ten (10) hours
in a seven (7) calendar day work week. These four (4) consecutive shifts will be
preceded and followed by three (3) “N” days. If, by reason of transfer, a unit
member’s “N” days are changed, the provisions of this Subsection pertaining to
“N” days shall not apply. The ten (10) duty hours per shift shall be consecutive

38
and may include any “briefing time” and shall include a meal period of thirty (30)
minutes. At times, the department may have operational needs which necessitate
a change in current work schedules. The department shall give a unit member a
minimum seven (7) day advance written notice when his “N” days or hours will be
changed. If this seven (7) day written notice is not given, and there is no
operational need for not providing the notice, the “N” days or hours change will
be rescheduled to allow for a seven (7) day notice period.

All unit four members assigned to patrol squads with beat responsibility only will
work the work schedule defined in subsection B of this section (4/10's) through
June 30, 2019.

If the regular duty schedule for a unit member has any of their normal “N” days
changed, the unit member is entitled to premium pay for each “N” that was
changed.

"Premium Pay" is defined as follows:

« An additional rate of pay for each changed N-day.
¢ Fora unit member assigned to a 5/8’s schedule:
¢ One “N” day change: 4 hours at their regular rate of pay.
e Two “N” days changed: 20 hours at their regular rate of pay.
« Fora unit member assigned to a 4/10’s schedule:
e« One “N” day change: 5 hours at their regular rate of pay.
* Two “N” days changed: 10 hours at their regular rate of pay.
e Three “N” days changed: 20 hours at their regular rate of pay.

A unit member, who requests a change in work schedules, will not receive
premium pay since the request is not a department directed change.

This section does not apply to the 30 hour or more block of annual module
training.

A unit member is not eligible to receive both premium pay and overtime for the
same hours.

When used in the context of this Article, “Operational Needs” will be defined as:
Service demands or other required actions performed to accomplish the mission
of the department. These actions may be routine (anticipated) or emergency
(unanticipated). For routine operational actions, a seven-day written notice will be
given to change schedules. For emergency operational actions, unit members
will be provided with as much advance notice and information as the situation will
allow.

In addition to all duties as assigned by the Chief of Police or his designees, work

hours shall continue to include two (2) fifteen (15) minute rest periods as work
demands allow.

39
There shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) hours off between shifts, thirteen (13)
hours for a unit member working a 4/10 schedule. If this is not possible, the unit
member shall receive overtime compensation at his regular rate of pay for each
full hour worked within the described fifteen (15) hour period, thirteen (13) hour
period for a unit member working a 4/10 schedule. A unit member assigned to
the DEB, OCB, GIB, CRB, NRB or SRB may sign individual statements waiving
the provisions of this section. Signed waivers shall continue in effect per fiscal
year.

A unit member will be permitted to take the meal period at a location within the
squad/team area, or if no suitable eating location is available, then with the
approval of the designated non-unit supervisor, at a location outside the
squad/team area. A meal period may be taken at a private residence, with
supervisory approval, provided such residence is within the unit member's beat
area.

A unit member may return to his work station ten (10) minutes before his
scheduled end of shift if work demands permit for the purpose of completing
required paperwork, notifying oncoming unit members of any beat conditions,
and to notify his supervisor of any unusual occurrences he encountered during
his shift.

A unit member assigned to the Canine Detail shall be allowed four (4) hours of
paid time per work week to care for his police dog at his residence. The City will
determine when and how the hours will be scheduled.

A unit member may waive the provision of section A and B of this section to
facilitate an alternative work schedule upon written agreement of both the
Association and the Department.

Section 4-2: Seniority

A

The City shall provide the Association with a list of unit members showing each
unit member's City employment date and class employment date.

Seniority shall be by length of service within a class. If seniority within the class is
not determinative, then length of service with the City shall prevail.

Seniority shall be used as a factor consistent with established Civil Service

procedures in choice of work assignments, vacation schedules and in the
determination of layoffs.

40
ARTICLE 5: Benefits

Section 5-1: Health Insurance

A.

The City and Association agree to maintain the current 80/20 split for health
insurance monthly contribution for the single and family coverage. If there is a
rate increase or decrease, the city will pay 80% of the new monthly contribution
and the employee will pay 20%.

If there is a substantive change in the City’s Health Insurance Plan design, the
Labor Relations Administrator will discuss such change with the Association.

In the event of the death of a unit member while on duty or while performing a
police function as determined by the City, the City will continue to pay the full
monthly health insurance premium for the spouse and all eligible dependents.
Should the surviving spouse remarry, the benefits of this provision shall be
discontinued.

In the event of the death of a unit member while commuting to or from his work
location, for a period of two hours each way, the City will continue to pay the full
monthly health insurance premium for the spouse and all eligible dependents.
This policy will be consistent with the terms of the 1997 agreement between the
City of Phoenix and CIGNA Group Insurance, for the payment of a
supplementary commutation life insurance policy for each unit member. The
Association will pay the cost of this benefit, if any, the first year of each new
Memorandum period.

In the event Congress or the State of Arizona passes legislation which considers
the amount the City contributes to health or dental insurance as imputed income,
then the City will consider such contributions as income to the employee.

During the next twelve (12) months, the City will participate in Labor-
Management meetings to discuss alternatives to the Union’s participation in the
Health Care Plans currently provided by the City.

Section 5-1A: Retiree Health Insurance

A.

Upon retirement of a unit member, or bargaining unit member who retired on
August 1, 1992 or later, the City’s contribution to health care premiums will be
calculated without regard to age.

In no event will the combination of this contribution and the amount paid by the

PSPRS (Public Safety Personnel Retirement System) exceed the monthly
premium for the chosen health insurance benefit.

41
The City of Phoenix agrees to participate in the Post Employee Health Plan
(PEHP) for unit members in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
Plan's Participation Agreement, a copy of which is attached to this agreement.
The Employer agrees to contribute to the Plan on behalf of unit members:

Effective July 1, 2017, the Employer shall contribute for each unit member the
amount of $6.00 (six) dollars per pay period. If any contribution is an amount
other than an equal dollar amount per unit member, that contribution shall be
deposited in the unit member's Health Insurance Premium Reimbursement sub-
account, otherwise the Employer's equal dollar amount contribution per unit
member shall be deposited into the unit member's Universal Health Care
Reimbursement sub-account pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Plan.

Section 5-2: Dental Insurance

A.

Commencing August 1, 1994, the City shall pay the full premium costs for single
coverage and seventy-five percent (75%) of the premium costs for family
coverage for a City dental plan.

The plan shall consist of 80% payment of reasonable and customary charges
covered for preventive and diagnostic services, basic services, and major
services. The plan shall also include an orthodontia benefit providing for 80%
payment of reasonable and customary charges up to a maximum lifetime benefit
of $4,000 per person. This plan is subject to the deductibles and limitations
contained in the contract between the dental insurance carrier and the City of
Phoenix. Enroliment in prior City of Phoenix dental plans counts toward major
services time limit exclusions.

Effective August 1, 2002 and August 1, 2003, if there is a rate increase or
decrease, the City will pay 100% of the new monthly contribution for single
coverage. If there is a rate increase or decrease, the City will pay 75% of the new
monthly contribution, and the employee will pay 25% for family coverage.

Section 5-3: Life Insurance

A.

The City will continue the existing off-the-job and on-the-job life and
dismemberment insurance coverage, and will continue the face value of the
policy at fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000). The City will continue the current
policy for death in the line of duty at one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00).

Effective August 1, 2001, the City will increase the thirty-five thousand dollar

($35,000.00) line of duty life and dismemberment insurance coverage to each
unit member to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).

42
Additionally, the City will provide to each unit member a $200,000 death benefit
covering the unit member's commute to and from his city work location. This
policy will be consistent with the policy negotiated in 1997 with CIGNA Group
Insurance and will cover the unit member's commute for up to two hours before
his shift begins and two hours after his shift concludes. The Association will only
pay the cost of this benefit the first year of the MOU.

Section 5-4: Long-Term Disability Insurance

A.

The City will offer a long-term disability benefit for all full-time, regular unit
members pursuant to A.R. 2.323 as may be amended (providing that such
amendments shall not be in conflict with the MOU). Employees who have been
continuously employed and working on a full-time basis for twelve consecutive
months are eligible for long-term disability coverage. After an established ninety
(90) calendar day qualifying period, the plan will provide up to sixty-six and two-
thirds percent (66-2/3%) of the employee's basic monthly salary at the time
disability occurs and continue up to age seventy-five (75) for employees who
have been employed full-time for 36 months and one day. Employees who have
been employed fulltime with the City of Phoenix for 36 months or less, will be
eligible to receive a long term disability benefit for no more than thirty (30)
months.

This benefit will be coordinated with sick leave, industrial insurance payments,
social security benefits, unemployment insurance and disability provisions of the
retirement plan.

Section 5-5: Holidays and Vacation Leave

A unit member shall be entitled to holiday benefits as set forth in Paragraph 2 of
Operations Order No. 3.6, including overtime compensation for hours assigned and
worked on a specified holiday in accordance with and subject to Article 3, Section 3-2,
Overtime.

A.

The compensation of a unit member who actually works on a day designated as
a holiday shall include, in addition to his regular day’s pay, additional pay or
compensatory time for hours worked up to eight (8) excluding overtime pay.

A unit member who is not scheduled to work on a designated holiday will still be
compensated for eight (8) hours pay or compensatory time for each holiday.

Paid holidays shall include:
New Year’s Day

Martin Luther King, Jr's Birthday
President's Day

43
ek

Caesar Chavez Birthday
Memorial Day

Independence Day

Labor Day

Veterans Day

Thanksgiving Day

Friday after Thanksgiving
Christmas Day

Two Personal Leave Days* & **

After six (6) months of continuous service.
Personal leave will be a total of 20 hours for all unit members.

Subject to operational and scheduling factors, a unit member's personal
leave days shall be taken each calendar year on any day of the unit
member's choosing.

For a unit member participating in the 4/10 schedule, holiday pay shall be applied
as follows:

1.

When a designated paid holiday falls on a unit member's scheduled day off,
the unit member shall be paid eight (8) hours of holiday pay.

When a designated paid holiday falls on a unit member's normally scheduled
work day and the unit member is directed to not work that day, the unit
member shall be paid for eight (8) hours of holiday pay. The additional two (2)
hours necessary to receive ten (10) hours of pay will be deducted at the unit
member’s discretion as either non-paid time, accumulated vacation or
compensatory time. If a unit member has no accumulated vacation or
compensatory time, the unit member will receive only eight (8) hours of pay.
Alternatively, the unit member may work for two (2) hours on the holiday, paid
at straight time, performing tasks at the direction of a supervisor. The
compensation of a unit member who actually works on a day designated as a
holiday shall include, in addition to his regular day’s pay, additional pay or
compensatory time for hours worked up to eight (8) hours, excluding overtime
pay.

A unit member will continue to receive holiday pay while on industrial leave.

Holidays shall be observed on the calendar days on which they fall for unit
members directly involved in providing continuous 24-hour or seven-day service
operations.

The City agrees to maintain its present vacation selection procedure and, to
every extent practicable, allow a transferred unit member to maintain his previous
vacation schedule.

44
A unit member who works a schedule at full time fifty-two (52) weeks of the year
shall be credited with vacation credits for every completed calendar month of
paid service according to the following schedule:

Through 5 years of service 8 hrs. per month

6th through 10th year of service 10 hrs. per month
11th through 15th year of service 11 hrs. per month
16th through 20th year of service 13 hrs. per month
21st year of service and thereafter 15 hrs. per month

APON>

Unit members who have accrued 312 hours or more of vacation, may elect to
have one hundred fifty (150) hours of vacation leave paid out at the member's
hourly rate in one lump sum or converted into their comp bank. The member may
only elect to exercise this benefit four (4) times in their career, and not more than
one (1) time in a fiscal year. This payment is not considered Final Average
Salary for purposes of pension calculations. Eligible employees may elect to
buy back their hours between July 1 and the last pay period in January
each fiscal year.

Additionally, eighty (80) hours of vacation time can be accumulated above the
maximum vacation carryover into the last three (3) years of service. These hours
must be used as paid time off prior to retirement.

Vacation accrual, carryover and compensation at separation is as follows:

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

MAX ACCRUAL THAT
CAN BE
MONTHLY ACCRUAL | MAXIMUM CARRYOVER | _ COMPENSATED AT
YEARS OF SERVICE RATE (HOURS) (HOURS) SEPARATION (HOURS)
o-5t 8 192 240
6h - 10% 10 240 300

 

41. 16th 11 264 330

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16th - 20!" 13" 312 390
215+ 15** 360 450
|.
** In the last three years of service an additional 80 hours may be carried over
into a new calendar year.

 

 

 

For the purposes of determining monthly vacation Accrual rates for a unit
member who had a break in service, if the unit member was reemployed within
five (5) years, the amount of time the person is gone is subtracted from his
previous service, thereby giving the unit member a new accrual service date.

45
L. A unit member may sell back up to 40 hours of vacation time each calendar year
(unit member must use a minimum of 40 hours of vacation/comp-time leave
during the calendar year to qualify for this benefit). This payment shall be made
on the first payday of December of each year, and shall be included in the unit
member's regular, bi-weekly paycheck.

M. On the second paycheck in August 2016, every unit member will receive 7 hours
of vacation time, in addition to their annual accruals, added to their vacation

leave.

Section 5-5A: Out-of-State Vacation Recall

When a unit member is temporarily recalled to duty from out-of-state while on an
authorized vacation by order of the Chief of Police, or designee, he shall be reimbursed
for necessary and provable transportation expenses as determined by the Police Chief.

Section 5-6: Uniform, Clothing and Equipment Allowance

A. Department-issued equipment, as follows:

1. The Police Department will furnish to each unit member entering the
department the following:

1

Basa aa aaa aaa

Uniform Belt

Handcuff Case

Holster

Helmet

Cartridge Case

Service Weapon

Mace Holder

Mace Canister

Pair of Handcuffs and Key
Uniform Breast Badge
Flat Badge with Case
(pair) Puncture resistant gloves

The department also agrees to provide spit masks on a continuous basis.

2. Pilot's equipment list as follows:

The Police Department will furnish the following to each unit member
assigned to the Air Support Detail:

a234Nn

Nomax (or equivalent in quality) Flight Suits
Flight Helmet

Nomax Gloves (pair)

Standard Headset

46
4 Custom Ear Protectors (ear molds) (pair)

3. The Department shall replace those items as they, in the judgment of the
Department, become unserviceable due to wear or damage in the course and
scope of official duties.

A unit member will receive one thousand one hundred and fifty dollars ($1,150)
clothing allowance per annum. Barring unforeseen circumstances, payment for
uniform allowance will be made on or before August 1 of each fiscal year. Such
payment will be made to cover the cost of uniforms, maintenance, cleaning of
such uniforms, and for other duty-related expenses and for the unit member to
provide a required flashlight and fresh batteries.

A new unit member will receive an initial fiscal year uniform allowance equal to
one-twelfth (1/12) of the annual allowance per month from the first day of the
month of his employment through the end of the fiscal year. This payment will be
made in a lump sum during the first sixty (60) days of employment.

A unit member who leaves City Employment shall repay to the City the uniform
allowance equal to one twelfth (1/12) of the annual allowance per month for each
month remaining in the fiscal year after the last day of the month in which
separation occurs, provided, however, that a unit member who retires will not be
required to repay any uniform allowance. In addition, the family or beneficiary of
a unit member who dies while in the employment of the City shall not have to pay
back any uniform allowance.

A unit member who has been on extended leave (paid or unpaid), excluding
industrial leave, sick leave, or military leave of two (2) months or longer, shall
have the next annual uniform allowance reduced by one-twelfth (1/12) of the
annual allowance for each month of extended leave.

1. On or before August 1 of each fiscal year, a unit member assigned to the
following details/squads/units will, in addition to his annual clothing allowance,
be provided a one-time payment per the following schedule upon initial
transfer to that assignment.

Canine $320
SAU (Tactical) $320
Air Patrol $320
Solo Motor $320
SCUBA Team $320
TRU $320
Detectives* $320
Bike Officers** $320
Honor Guard $320

47
Detective is defined as a certified detective who is in a detective or
investigative assignment or an assignment that normally requires the unit
member to wear civilian business clothes.

** Bicycles will be furnished by the City

. Aunit member assigned to the following details/squads/units will receive, on
or before August 1 of each fiscal year, in addition to his initia! uniform
allowances described in section F1 above, an annual maintenance allowance
per the following schedule:

Canine $320
SAU (Tactical) $320
Air Patrol $320
Solo Motor $320
SCUBA Team $320
Detectives $320
TRU $320
Bike Officers $320
Honor Guard $320

The provisions of Subsection D of this Section shall apply to this Subsection.

. A.unit member who purchases a new ballistic vest shall, upon showing proof
of purchase, be reimbursed an amount up to, but not exceeding, eight
hundred dollars ($800).

. Upon replacement of his ballistic vest, a unit member shall be entitled to the
above eight hundred dollar ($800) reimbursement every five (5) years.

. The City agrees to reimburse a unit member for the repair or replacement of
uniform items and for other personal property damaged in the course of
employment and performance of their assigned duties without fault or
negligence on the part of the unit member, other than normal wear and tear in
accordance with the schedule of items and maximum amounts authorized for
reimbursement outlined below:

Business Suit $203
Business Dress $54
Sport Coat $120
Dress Shirt $22
Dress Trousers $42
Dress Skirt $35
All Shoes $52
Uniform Boots ALL
Motorcycle Boots ALL

48
Motorcycle Gloves $100

Glasses - prescription $165
Sunglasses -non-prescription $20
Watches $62
Jewelry $53
Police Uniform Trousers ALL
Police Motorcycle Breeches ALL
Police Uniform Shirt ALL
Police Jacket ALL
Police Motorcycle Jacket ALL
Flashlight $90
Ballistic Vest ALL

Service Weapon and (up to cost of City weapon) authorized
attached accessories

2. Reimbursements for full, 3/4, 1/2, 1/4, value are based on the supervisor's
evaluation and recommendations of the article’s condition and age. Items not
listed above are not covered by the policy.

3. The option to repair or replace damaged items, and to determine whether
replaced property will be returned to unit member, rests with the City.

4. The provisions of this policy shall not apply if the unit member has concealed
or misrepresented any material fact or circumstances concerning the subject
of the loss, his interests therein, or in the case of any fraud or false
statements by the unit member relating thereto.

Upon duty related retirement, the City will provide the retiring member a Retired
Police Officer's Commission Card similar in appearance to the regular
Commission Card.

Upon duty related retirement, a unit member will receive his breast badge
mounted on a plaque, a retired flat badge and case, handcuffs, and his fully
functional department-issued service weapon, including all three (3) duty
magazines, for one dollar ($1.00). if the unit member dies in the line of duty or
while employed by the department, the unit member's spouse or an adult
survivor may elect to receive these items, except for the flat badge and case, for
one dollar ($1.00) which will be paid by PLEA. The unit member's spouse or
adult survivor will have the option of receiving the service weapon in a fully
functional condition, or may request the unit member's service weapon be
disabled and mounted in a shadow box, or may decline receiving the service
weapon. The choice will be made in writing. PLEA will provide a gun safety
device, upon request by the unit member.

A unit member assigned to the Canine Detail will have the option of purchasing
his dog as follows:

49
1.

If both the police dog and the unit member have been in the Canine Detail in
excess of five (5) years, at retirement the unit member may purchase his dog
for one dollar ($1.00).

If both the police dog and the unit member have been in the Canine Detail in
excess of five (5) years and the unit member leaves other than for retirement,
the decision to allow the purchase of his dog will be made on a case by case
basis and this decision will not be arbitrary.

Section 5-7: Reimbursement for Education Expenses

A.

A unit member who participates in the Tuition Assistance Program shall be
eligible for tuition reimbursement pursuant to the following provisions:

1.

For the 2016-2019 fiscal years, an employee may submit tuition
expenses incurred in the prior fiscal year such that the maximum total
reimbursed does not exceed $13,000 across any two-year period.

To be eligible for any reimbursement, a unit member must have successfully
completed academic or training courses approved by the Chief of Police and
the Human Resources Director as provided in existing regulations.

Unit members shall be allowed to use up to $500.00 of their reimbursement
benefit for job-related seminars, workshops, and professional memberships
each fiscal year.

Section 5-8: Leave of Absence

Subject to development of administrative controls, a unit member who has no other
accumulative paid leave may use up to ten (10) hours per year of accumulated sick
leave for non-emergency home care or medical treatment for a member of the unit
member's immediate family subject to operational and scheduling factors. When
utilizing this benefit, the member shall identify the use of such time as non-emergency
family illness. Such leave request shall not be unreasonably withheld.

Section 5-9: Workers’ Compensation

A.

Employees shall continue to receive one hundred percent (100%) of their
current rate of pay while off-duty due to an industrial injury based on
current practice which is a maximum of one (1) year per injury, thereafter
the rate becomes sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66-2/3%).

Should the Association believe that a dispute in jurisdiction is unduly
delaying a Workers’ Compensation claim, or if the Association believes the
City needs to provide greater assistance to an employee trying to reopen

50
an old claim, the Association may request a meeting with City Workers’
Compensation staff (provided the involved employee signs a release to do
so) and such meeting will be scheduled within 14 calendar days.

The City will first attempt to use physicians from specialty lists created by
City of Phoenix Pension Boards for Independent Medical Examinations for
employees in Unit 4.

Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) leave shall not run concurrent with
leave paid as industrial injury/illness (e.g. Workers’ Compensation).

ARTICLE 6: Miscellaneous

Section 6-1: Saving Clause

A.

If any Article or Section of this Memorandum should be held invalid by operation
of law or by a final non-appealable order of the Phoenix Employment Relations
Board or a final judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, or if compliance
with or enforcement of any Article or Section should be restrained by such
tribunal, the remainder of this Memorandum shall not be affected thereby; and
upon issuance of such final order or decree, the parties, upon request of either of
them, shall meet and confer to endeavor to agree on a substitute provision or
that such a substitute provision is not indicated.

It is recognized by the parties that currently the provisions of the Fair Labor
Standards Act are applicable to certain of the wage and premium pay provisions
of this Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and that this MOU shall be
administered in compliance with the Act for so long as the Act is applicable.

It is recognized by the parties that currently the provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act are applicable to certain of the provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) and that this MOU shall be administered in compliance
with the Act for so long as the Act is applicable.

Section 6-2: Copies of Memorandum

Within sixty (60) days from the date that this Memorandum is adopted by the City
Council, the Association will arrange for printing of it for furnishing one to every unit
member, unit supervisor and to management personnel. The cost of such duplication
and distribution will be borne equally by the Association and the City. Printing vendors
secured by the Association shall comply with Chapter 18, Articles IV (City Construction
Contractors' Affirmative Action Requirements) and V (Supplier's and Lessee's
Affirmative Action Requirements), Phoenix City Code.

31
Section 6-3: Aid to Construction of Provisions of Memorandum of Understanding

A.

It is intended by the parties hereto that the provisions of this Memorandum shall
be in harmony with the rights, duties, obligations and responsibilities which by
law devolve upon the City Council, City Manager, Chief of Police, and other City
boards and officials, and these provisions shall be interpreted and applied in
such manner.

The Association recognizes the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Chief of
Police as set forth in the Charter and Ordinances and that pursuant thereto the
Chief of Police has the authority to establish rules and regulations applicable to
the operation of the Police Department and to the conduct of the police officers
employed therein, subject to the express provisions of this Memorandum.

The lawful provisions of this Memorandum are binding upon the parties for the
term thereof. The Association having had an opportunity to raise all matters in
connection with the meet and confer proceedings resulting in this Memorandum
is precluded from initiating any further meeting and conferring for the term thereof
relative to matters under the control of the Chief of Police, the City Council or the
City Manager. This section shall not be construed to limit free and informal
discussions under, Section 2-2 hereof.

Section 6-4: Changes in Department Operations Orders Pursuant to this
Memorandum

A.

Within sixty (60) days from the date this Memorandum is adopted by the City
Council, the Department shall print copies of those Department and Operations
Orders reflecting changes pursuant to this Memorandum. Copies of such
changes shall be available to each unit member on or about July 1 of each fiscal
year or as soon thereafter as possible. Prior to the printing of the described
changes, the Chief of Police or his representative shall review such changes with
a representative of the Association to insure that such changes are consistent
with the specific express terms of the Memorandum.

During the preparation of changes to the Department's Operations Orders, and
precinct/bureaus manuals, drafts of the proposed changes will be staffed out to
the Association.

Section 6-5: Physical Fitness

A.

It is recognized by the parties that it is the responsibility of a unit member at all
times to make every effort to maintain his physical condition so as to be fully fit to
perform his duties with maximum effectiveness.

52
To assist a unit member in this respect, the City agrees to provide and maintain
an exercise machine for each precinct station, Deer Valley, Resource Bureaus,
620 West Washington facilities, and at the Training Academy.

The City will provide required FAA physicals to pilots assigned to the Air Support
Unit.

If a unit member, while carrying out his official duties is exposed to an infectious
disease/virus, the City agrees to pay the expenses for inoculation of the member.

The Association will participate on a Police Department Wellness Committee to
develop and implement wellness initiatives. Final approval of such initiatives
rests with the Police Chief.

Precinct personnel are allowed to work out on their “Code 7” at precincts
(approved facility) (must remain in workpants/boots). Employees who work
out on their “Code 7”:

Must adhere to Operations Order 4.1 (Meals and Breaks);
Must submit a workout memo through the Chain of Command to the
Department Fitness Coordinator;
Adhere to Operations Order 3.7 (industrial Injuries); and,
Must limit their activity to Strength Training/Cardio Training.
Employees may not work out on their “Code 7” during overtime
shifts.

¢ The Department Fitness Coordinator will be available as a resource.

Program viability will be reviewed annually by the Police Chief.

Section 6-6: Term and Effect of Memorandum

A.

This Memorandum shall remain in full force and effect beginning with the first
regular pay period commencing in July 2016, up to the beginning of the first
regular pay period commencing in July 2019.

Except as expressly provided in this Memorandum, the City shall not be
required to meet and confer concerning any matter, whether covered or not
covered herein, during the term or extensions thereof. This paragraph is not
intended to preclude informal discussions under Article 2, section 2-2 hereof.

The provisions of this Memorandum shall be subject to Federal, State, Charter,
and existing local laws that vest jurisdiction and authority in the City Council,
Phoenix Emptoyment Relations Board, and Phoenix Civil Service Board.

This Memorandum constitutes the total and entire agreements between the
parties and no verbal statement shall supersede any of its provisions.

33
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have set their hands this? ‘of May, 2016.

  
   

 
 

C)

Manager, City of Phoenix

k/ —~Q-«

Ed Zuerché, Ci
Cindy pe hesMont Huon Resources Director/Labor Relations Administrator,

City of Phoenix

 

ATTEST:

Co

Cris Meyer, City Clerk, City of Phoenix

    

City of Phoenix RY

PLEA Team: City of Phoenix Team:

Will Buividas, Chief Negotiator Cindy Bezaury, Labor Relations Administrator
Tim Baiardi Larry Lockley, HR Supervisor

William Galus Geary Brase, Commander

Jerry Gannon Greg Carnicle, Commander

Michael London Michael Kurtenbach, Assistant Chief

Becky Maldonado Donna Love, HR Officer

Toby Sexton Natalie Soto, HR Analyst

Frank Smith Christopher Tucker, Commander

Kevin Smith

HE 26 Hd 9- NNT 9102

55

1d30 WY3T0 ALLO
ATTACHMENT A

POLICE OFFICERS UNIT

Sworn police officers below the rank of Sergeant, including assignments, but excluding
all other classes and positions, including Law Specialist, Sergeants, Lieutenants,
Captains, Majors, Assistant Police Chiefs, Police Chief, and all non-sworn Police
Department employees.

35
ATTACHMENT B

DRUG TESTING

The Phoenix Police Department's Operations Order 3.21, Controlled Substance
Screening policy, is added to this Memorandum as Attachment B.

56
ATTACHMENT C

RETIREE HEALTH CONTRIBUTION
City of Phoenix

The City shall provide Basic Medical Reimbursement Plan (MERP) benefits to MERP
eligible unit retirees and to unit members who are hired before August 1, 2007 and are
eligible to retire no later than August 1, 2022 (the date of an individual's retirement
eligibility was determined on August 1, 2007), at the monthly amounts based on years
of service listed below:

5 to 14 years of service $135.00
15 to 24 years of service $168.00
25 or more years of service $202.00

Unit employees hired on or after August 1, 2007, regardless of years of service, may
qualify for a Post Employment Health Plan (PEHP) account.

Public Safety Personnel Retirement System (These benefits are not under City of
Phoenix control)*

Retiree only not on Medicare $150.00
Retiree & family not on Medicare $260.00
Retiree only on Medicare $100.00
Retiree - one with Medicare $215.00
Retiree - all on Medicare $170.00

*Rates shown are for the 2012 calendar year. For current rates, see http:/Avww.psprs.com/

57
ATTACHMENT D

Unit 4 — Police Officers
WAGES
Effective July 7, 2014

(No wage changes went into effect for the 2016-2019 MOU)

Pay Ordinance S-40940 is the governing document for the information provided below.
Per Pay Ordinance S-40940, the compensation amounts noted below are effective on and

after July 7, 2014.

Police Officer, Job Code 62210

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

STEP HOURLY BI-WEEKLY ANNUAL
1 22.23 1,778.40 46,238
2 23.40 1,872.00 48,672
3 24.75 1,980.00 51,480
4 26.19 2,095.20 54,475
5 27.74 2,219.20 57,699
6 29.34 2,347.20 61,027
7 31.01 2,480.80 64,501
8 33.47 2,677.60 69,618
9 34,82 2,785.60 72,426

Police Officer*Pilot, Job Code 62211

STEP HOURLY BI-WEEKLY ANNUAL

1 36.13 2,890.40 75,150
Police Officer* Rescue Pilot, Job Code 62212

STEP HOURLY BI-WEEKLY ANNUAL

1 37.48 2,998.40 77,958
Police Officer*Flight Instr, Job Code 62213

STEP HOURLY BI-WEEKLY ANNUAL

1 38.88 3,110.40 80,870
Police Officer* Chief Pilot, Job Code 62214

STEP HOURLY BI-WEEKLY ANNUAL

1 40.31 3,224.80 83,845

 

 

 

58
