12/14/2008 — 12/26/2009

12/27/2009 — 12/25/2010

12/26/2010 — 12/24/2011

12/25/2011 — 12/22/2012

and

12/23/2012 — 12/21/2013

AGREEMENT

BETWEEN

THE CITY OF OMAHA, NEBRASKA

AND

THE OMAHA POLICE UNION LOCAL NO. 101

AFL-CIO - 1.U.P.A.
A/K/A OMAHA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
ARTICLE

OMONMDNBRWNHE

PRRERBRR
ORONO

INDEX - BY ARTICLE

TITLE PAGE

Union Recognition
Management Rights
Check-Off......0:cee
Bulletin Boards and Ballot Boxes .
Prohibitions of Strikes .....
Discharge and Discipline.
Appeal Procedure .....
Grievance Procedure

 

  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
  
 
  
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 

Complaint Procedure .18
Seniority... .19
Probationary Employees . .20
Lay-Offs . .22

Leave Pro’ 23
Non-Discrimination. 33
Hours of Work and Duty Shift: .34
Union Activities.....0...cc eee -46
Outside Employment and Employees Duties -47

Citizens Complaints ..
Employee’s Bill of Rights.
Relief from Duty :
Attendance in Court, Conferences, Training, & Other Meetings ..53
Holidays
Overtime, Call-In Pay, & Standby Pay
Allowance For Clothing
Health Care......cccee
Injuries In the Line of Duty-Temporary Disability
Limited Duty.....
Union Business
Safety Committee
Longevity.
Savings Clause
Health Care for Retirees .
Residency ou... eee
Maintenance of Benefits
Examinations and Promotion Procedure
Pensions ......
Shift Differential
Pay for College Degree & Tuition Reimbursement.
AYE (0 [1
Job Performance Interview (Counseling
Drug Testing.
Out-of-Classifi
Specialty Pay

 

 
ARTICLE

42
43
44
45
45A
46
47

APPENDIX

mooOWw>S

TITLE PAGE

 

Premium Pay.
Compensatory
Wage Supplement for Card Employees
Continuing Negotiations
Miscellaneous
Trade Time....
Duration of Agreement.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

TITLE

Authorization for Payroll Deduction.
Wages — 2009, 2010..............
Health Care Benefit Summary...
Job Matches with Comparable Ci
Pensionable Earnings and COTA Pay Categories...
ARTICLE

22
7
19
4
3
18
43
9
45
6
39
47
18a.
33
8
23
30
20
15
24
38
12
13
25
28
32
2
45A
14
40
17
21
36
34
42
11
5
18b.
31
27
29
10
35
41

INDEX - ALPHABETICAL

TITLE PAGE

Allowance For Clothing -61
Appeal Procedure .14
Attendance in Court, Conferences, Training, & Other Meetings ..53
Bulletin Boards and Ballot Boxes . wl

 

 

  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 

Citizens Complaints ..
Compensatory Time & Excess Time Bank
Complaint Procedure ...
Continuing Negotiations
Discharge and Discipline.
Drug Testing.............-
Duration of Agreement.
Employee’s Bill of Rights.
Examinations and Promotion Procedure
Grievance Procedure...

 

Health Care.. 64
Health Care fo : 79
Holidays «0.0... cece -56

Hours of Work and Duty Shift
Injuries In the Line of Duty-Temporary Disability
Job Performance Interview (Counseling

Lay-Offs . .22
Leave Provisions. 23
Limited Dut 72
Longevity... .76

Maintenance of Benefits
Management Rights
Miscellaneous
Non-Discrimination.
Out-of-Classification Pay.
Outside Employment and Employees Duties
Overtime, Call-In Pay, & Standby Pay .........
Pay for College Degree & Tuition Reimbursement...
Pensions ...

Premium Pay.
Probationary Employees.
Prohibitions of Strikes ..
Relief from Duty
Residency .
Safety Com
Savings Clause
Seniority .......
Shift Differential
Specialty Pay ...

 
ARTICLE

46
16
26

1
37
44

APPENDIX

moOoOW>

TITLE PAGE

Trade Time...
Union Activities. -46
Union Business
Union Recognitio
WAGES...

Wage Supplement for Card Employees

 

 
 
  

TITLE

 
 
   

Authorization for Payroll Deduction.
Wages — 2009, 2010 ...........
Health Care Benefit Summary.
Job Matches with Comparable Cities .
Pensionable Earnings and COTA Pay Categories...
PREAMBLE

This Agreement, by and between the City of Omaha, Nebraska, hereinafter referred to
as the CITY, and the Omaha Police Union, Local No. 101, AFL-CIO - I.U.P.A.

hereinafter referred to as the UNION, is designed to promote and strive to maintain a
working agreement between the CITY and the UNION.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

PAGE 1P
ARTICLE 1

UNION RECOGNITION AND DEFINITIONS
The CITY recognizes the UNION as the sole and exclusive collective
bargaining representative of police officers, sergeants, lieutenants, and
captains, but excluding the Police Chief, Deputy Chiefs, and all part-
time and seasonal employees.
The term "part-time employee" means an employee who works in a
position which does not normally require more than thirty-two (32)
hours of work per week.

The term "seasonal employee" means any employee in a position of a
seasonal nature, the duration of which does not exceed nine (9)
calendar months.

The term “employee” as used elsewhere in this Agreement means
individuals employed in those job classifications which are included in
the recognized bargaining units as set forth in Section 1 hereof.

 

Throughout this contract the term "working days" is used to set various
time limits for the bringing of, or responding to, discipline or
grievances. In that context the term "working days" means any
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday which is not a
holiday as defined by this Agreement.

"Union representatives" as used in this Agreement shall mean any
employee(s) who is (are) authorized by the president of the Union to
represent the Union."

Any time the term "revolver" is used in this Agreement, or in any
S.O.P. issued by the Police Department, such term shall include any
authorized weapon where applicable.

“This Agreement” shall mean the current collective bargaining
agreement between the CITY and UNION, and all referenced
attachments and any duly enacted amendments thereto.

“Base pay” or “straight time” as used in this Agreement shall mean the
employee’s compensation as set forth in the CITY pay scales and
steps and codified in §23-178 of the Omaha Municipal Code.

Whenever male gender is used in this Agreement, it should include the
female gender when applicable.
PAGE 2P

SECTION 3 The establishment of any promotional rank below the level of Deputy
Chief will be considered a bargaining unit position and will be subject
to negotiations between the parties.
PAGE 3P
ARTICLE 2

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Except where limited by express provisions elsewhere in this Agreement, nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed to restrict, limit, or impair the rights, powers, and the
authority of the CITY as granted to it under the laws of the State of Nebraska, the Home
Rule Charter of the City of Omaha, 1956, and CITY'S ordinances. These rights,
powers, and authority include, but are not limited to the following:

1.

10.

11.

The right to determine, effectuate, and implement the objectives and goals
of the CITY.

The right to manage and supervise all operations and functions of the
CITY.

The right to establish, allocate, schedule, assign, modify, change, and
discontinue CITY operations, work shifts, and working hours.

4

he right to establish, modify, change, and discontinue work standards.

The right to hire, examine, classify, promote, train, transfer, assign, and
retain employees; suspend, demote, discharge, or take other disciplinary
action against employees for just cause; and to relieve employees from
duties due to lack of work or funds.

The right to increase, reduce, change, modify, and alter the composition
and size of the work force.

 

The right to determine, establish, set, and implement policies for the
selection, training and promotion of employees.

The right to create, establish, change, modify, and discontinue any CITY
function, operation, and department.

The right to establish, implement, modify, and change financial policies,
accounting procedures, prices of goods or services, public relations, and
procedures and policies for the safety, health, and protection of CITY
property and personnel.

The right to adopt, modify, change, enforce, or discontinue any existing
rules, regulations, procedures, and policies which are not in direct conflict
with any provision of this Agreement.

The right to establish, select, modify, change, or discontinue equipment,
materials, and the layout and arrangement of machinery.
 

20.

21.

22.

PAGE 4P

The right to determine the size and character of inventories and their
disposal.

The right to determine and enforce employee's quality and quantity
standards.

The right to contract, subcontract, merge, sell, or discontinue any function
or operation of the CITY.

The right to engage consultants for any function or operation of the CITY.

The right to sell, transfer, lease, rent, or otherwise dispose of any CITY
equipment, inventories, tools, machinery, or any other type of property or
service.

The right to establish, adopt, modify, change, and discontinue any type of
licensed processes, production, maintenance, service, or distribution
methods or facilities.

The right to control and the use of property, machinery, inventories, and
equipment owned, leased or borrowed by the CITY.

The right to determine which products are to be processed, manufactured,
or sold, and which services are to be rendered, supplied, or discontinued.

The right to establish, implement, change, modify, adjust, and discontinue
any process, technique, method, means of manufacture or distribution,
and the type of machinery or equipment to be used or operated by the
CITY or any contractor or subcontractor.

The right to determine the location, establishment, and organization of
new departments, divisions, subdivisions, or facilities thereof, and the right
to determine the relocation of departments, divisions, subdivisions,
locations, and the closing and discontinuance of the same.

The right to classify jobs and to allocate individual employees to
appropriate classifications based upon duty assignments. The CITY will
not abolish or change any UNION classifications for the purpose of
depriving the bargaining unit employees of their benefits under this
Agreement.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

SECTION 5

SECTION 6

PAGE 5P
ARTICLE 3

CHECK-OFF

The CITY shall deduct regular monthly UNION dues from the pay of
each employee covered by this Agreement, provided that at the time of
such deduction there is in the possession of the Finance Department
of the CITY a current unrevoked written assignment, executed by the
employee, in the form and according to the terms of the authorization
form attached hereto, marked Appendix "A", and made a part hereof.
Such authorization may be revoked by the employee at any time by
giving written notice thereof to the Finance Department of the CITY.

Previously signed and unrevoked written authorizations shall continue
to be effective as to employees reinstated following layoff, leave of
absence, or suspension not exceeding sixty (60) days; previous
authorizations of other employees rehired or reinstated shall not be
considered to be effective.

Such authorized deductions shall be made from each payroll period
and will within ten (10) days be remitted to the duly designated UNION
official. The UNION shall advise the Finance Department of the CITY
in writing of the name of such official.

If an employee has no pay coming for the first payroll period of the
calendar month, or if such pay period is the first pay period of a new
employee, or if the employee has signed an authorization form during
such pay period of the subsequent month, such deductions shall be
limited to the amount of the current regular monthly UNION dues, and
shall not include dues for prior months or any portion thereof.

If the Finance Department of the CITY receives an employee
revocation of authorization on or before the eighth day of the first
payroll period of the calendar month, no deductions will be made from
that payroll period or subsequent payroll periods. If such revocation is
received after the eighth day of the first payroll period, a deduction will
be made from such payroll but shall not be made from subsequent
payroll periods.

The UNION shall advise the Finance Department of the CITY in writing
of the exact amount of regular monthly UNION dues. If, subsequently,
the UNION requests the Finance Department of the CITY to deduct
additional monthly UNION dues, such request shall be effective only
upon written assurance by the UNION to the Finance Department of
the CITY that additional amounts are regular monthly UNION dues
SECTION 7

PAGE 6P

duly approved in accordance with the UNION'S constitution and by-
laws.

The CITY shall not be liable for the remittance of any sums other than
those constituting actual deductions made; and if for any reason the
CITY fails to make a deduction for any employee as above provided, it
shall make that deduction from the employee's next pay period in
which UNION dues are normally deducted after written notification to
the Finance Department of the CITY of the error. If the CITY makes an
overpayment to the UNION, the CITY will deduct that amount from the
next remittance to the UNION. The UNION agrees to indemnify and
hold the CITY harmless against any and all claims, suits, orders or
judgments brought or issued against the CITY as a result of any action
taken or not taken by the CITY under the provisions of this Article.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

PAGE 7P
ARTICLE 4

BULLETIN BOARDS AND BALLOT BOXES

The CITY shall permit the UNION to use one bulletin board,
designated by the Police Chief, at each assembly area, for posting
notices of UNION meetings and elections, results of such meetings
and elections, and reports of UNION committees.

Posted notices shall not contain anything political or anything reflecting
adversely upon the CITY or any of its employees. Any UNION
authorized violation of this Article shall entitle the CITY to cancel
immediately the provisions of this Article and prohibit the UNION
further use of the bulletin boards.

Posted notices shall be on UNION stationery.

The CITY will permit the UNION the use of one ballot box, designated
by the Police Chief or his designated representative, at each assembly
area, for use in UNION elections. Any other use of the ballot box on
CITY property must be approved by the Police Chief. No employee
shall participate in any UNION election, in any manner, during his tour
of duty. Any UNION authorized violation of this Section shall entitle the
CITY to cancel immediately the provisions of this Section and prohibit
the UNION further use of the ballot boxes.
PAGE 8P

ARTICLE 5
PROHIBITION OF STRIKES

The UNION shall neither cause nor counsel any person to hinder, delay, limit, or
suspend the continuity or efficiency of any CITY function, operation, or service for any
reason, nor shall it in any manner coerce, intimidate, instigate, induce, sanction,
suggest, conspire with, promote, support, sponsor, engage in, condone, or encourage
any person to participate in any strike, slowdown, mass resignation, mass absenteeism,
or any other type of consorted work stoppage. The UNION shall not aid or assist any
persons or parties engaging in the above prohibited conduct by giving direction or
guidance to such activities and conduct, or by providing funds, financial, and other
assistance for the payment of strike, unemployment, or other benefits to those persons
or parties participating in such prohibited conduct and activities; provided, however, that
the UNION may provide legal representation. In applying the provisions of this Article,
all of the terms used herein shall be given the meaning commonly understood. The
UNION shall not be in breach of this Agreement where the acts or actions hereinbefore
enumerated are not caused or authorized directly by the UNION.

Upon notification confirmed in writing by the CITY to the UNION that certain of its
members are engaged in a wildcat strike, the UNION shall immediately in writing order
such members to return to work at once, and provide the CITY with a copy of such an
order, and a responsible official of the UNION shall publicly order them to return to
work. Such characterization of the strike by the CITY shall not establish the nature of
the strike. Such notification by the UNION shall not constitute an admission by it that a
wildcat strike is in progress or has taken place or that any particular member is or has
engaged in a wildcat strike. The notification shall be made solely on the representations
of the CITY. In the event that a wildcat strike occurs, the UNION agrees to take all
reasonable, effective and affirmative action to secure the members’ return to work as
promptly as possible.

The CITY agrees that it shall not lock out any employees because of a labor dispute.
SECTION 1

PAGE 9P
ARTICLE 6
DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE

DISCIPLINARY ACTION-CAUSE: Any action which reflects discredit
upon the service or is a direct hindrance to the effective performance
of the CITY government functions shall be considered good cause for
disciplinary action. The following are declared to be good cause for
disciplinary action against any employee, though charges may be
based upon causes and complaints other than those listed:

(a) Habitual use of alcoholic beverages or prescription
medicines to excess, provided the employee has been given
an opportunity to seek professional help in dealing with his
problem;

(b) Has been adjudged guilty of a crime involving moral
turpitude, or infamous or disgraceful conduct;

(c) While on duty: 1. Partaking of intoxicating beverages; 2.
failing an alcohol test administered pursuant to CITY rules
and regulations; or 3. intoxication while on duty;

(d) Use of abusive or improper treatment to a person in custody,
provided the act committed was not necessarily or lawfully
done in self-defense or to protect the lives of others, or to
prevent the escape of a person lawfully in custody.

(e) Offensive conduct or language toward the public or toward
city officers or employees;

(f) Insubordination;

(g) Incompetence to perform the duties of his position;

(h) Negligence in the care and handling of CITY property;

(i) Violation of any lawful and reasonable official regulation

made or given by his superior officer, where such violation or
failure to obey amounted to an act of insubordination or a
serious breach of proper discipline or resulted, or might
reasonably have been expected to result in loss or injury to
the CITY, to prisoners of the CITY, or to the public.

(0) Commission of acts or omissions unbecoming an incumbent
of the particular office or position held, which render his
SECTION 2

PAGE 10P

admonishment, reprimand, suspension, demotion, or
discharge necessary or desirable for the economical or
efficient conduct of business of the CITY or for the best
interest of the City government;

(k) Willful violation of any of the provisions of the City Charter or
any of the rules promulgated thereunder;

0) Has induced or attempted to induce any officer or employee
in the CITY service to commit an illegal act or to act in
violation of any lawful and reasonable departmental or
official regulation or order; or has participated herein.

(m) Solicitation or receipt from any person, or participation in,
any fee, gift, or other valuable thing in the course of work,
when such fee, gift, or other valuable thing is given in the
hope or expectation of receiving favor or better treatment
than that accorded other persons;

(n) Use or attempted use of political influence or bribery to
secure an advantage in an examination or promotion;
assignment;

(0) Absence from duty without leave contrary to the provisions in

this Agreement, or failure to report after leave of absence
has expired, or after such leave of absence has been
disapproved or revoked and cancelled by the proper
authority;

(p) Any cause specified in Section 23-291 of the Omaha
Municipal Code;

(q) Use of illegal controlled substances or failure of a drug test
administered pursuant to CITY rules and regulations.

Violation of the provisions of this Section may be punishable by
reprimand, suspension, demotion, and/or discharge.

No sworn employee shall be disciplined based solely on information
gathered by Global Positioning Satellite Systems (GPS); this provision
shall not apply, however, to criminal investigations.

DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS-REPRIMAND: Any employee may be
reprimanded for cause. Such reprimand shall be in writing and signed
by the employee. A copy of the reprimand document shall be
transmitted to the employee. The original shall be transmitted to the
SECTION 3

PAGE 11P

Human Resources Department for inclusion in the employee's
personnel file.

An employee may request that any reprimand that is greater than one
year old be removed from his personnel file. This one year period
begins when the reprimand is actually transmitted to the employee.
The employee will be provided with the originals of such documents.
No copies or notations of such documents will be maintained in the
personnel file. A copy of such document will be maintained in a
separate, generic, file in the Human Resources Department. Such file
shall be maintained under no individual employee’s name but simply
under the heading “Removed Disciplinary Actions”. Such
documentation may be used only for purposes of litigation not relating
to the employee's discipline; or in appeals, arbitration or litigation
relating to the employee’s discipline only for the purposes of
impeachment.

DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS-SUSPENSIONS: An employee may be
suspended without pay for cause for a period or periods not exceeding
forty (40) working days in any twelve (12) consecutive months,
however, no single suspension shall be for more than twenty (20)
working days. Such suspension shall be in writing and acknowledged
in writing by the employee. The suspension shall include the reasons
for and the duration of the suspension. The original or a copy of the
suspension document shall be transmitted to the employee. A copy of
this shall be transmitted to the Human Resources Department for
inclusion in the employee's personnel file.

An employee may request that any suspension that is greater than five
(5) years old be removed from his personnel file. The above 5 year
time period shall begin when the notice of the suspension is actually
transmitted to the employee. The employee will be provided with the
original such documents. No copies or notations of such suspension
shall be maintained in the employee’s personnel file. A copy of such
document will be maintained in a separate, generic file in the Human
Resources Department. Such file shall be maintained under no
individual employee’s name but simply under the heading “Removed
Disciplinary Actions”. Such documentation may be used only for
purposes of litigation not relating to the officer's discipline; or in
appeals, arbitration or litigation relating to the officer’s discipline only
for the purposes of impeachment.

An employee, at his option, shall have the right to exchange annual
leave and/or compensatory time leave for suspension days if such
suspension is for five (5) working days (40 hours) or fewer. Such
exchange shall be made on a one-for-one ratio (up to the five working
SECTION 4

SECTION 5

SECTION 6

SECTION 7

PAGE 12P

day limit). Such exchange may also be made for unappealed
suspensions of more than five (5) working days (40 hours).

DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS—DEMOTION: An employee may be
demoted for cause. A written statement of the reasons for any such
action shall be transmitted to the employee and a copy transmitted to
the Human Resources Department for inclusion in the employee’s
personnel file. No demotion shall be made as a disciplinary action
unless the employee to be demoted is eligible for employment in a
lower class and shall not be made if any regular employee in a lower
class will be laid off by reason of the action.

DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS-—DISCHARGE: An employee may be
discharged for cause. Prior to the discharge becoming effective a
written statement containing the reasons for the discharge shall be
transmitted to the employee and to the Human Resources Department
for inclusion in the employee’s personnel file. The CITY may suspend
such employee immediately and indefinitely with pay. Prior to the
discharge becoming effective such employee shall be entitled to
present his side of the facts surrounding the discharge to an impartial
CITY decision maker.

Any disciplinary action must be imposed and received by the officer
within 100 calendar days from the date the alleged violation occurred.
This time limitation shall not apply if the disciplinary action results from
or is the product of a criminal investigation. The police department
shall not engage in a criminal investigation for the purpose of
bypassing the 100 calendar day time limitation. An extension of the
time period may be granted if mutually agreed upon by the Labor
Relations Director and the Union.

When a citizen's complaint is not sustained for any reason
(exonerated, not sustained, or unfounded) at the Departmental level,
no disciplinary action will be taken against the employee unless the
citizen appeals for further review within ten (10) working days of being
notified that the complaint has not been sustained at the Departmental
level. However, an extension on the time period may be granted when
mutually agreed to by the Labor Relations Director and the UNION.
This time limitation shall not apply whenever the disciplinary action
results from or is the product of a criminal investigation.

An accused officer shall be informed of the nature of the investigation
and shall receive a written notice of the allegations being investigated
against such officer at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the formal
interview by the Police Department. This twenty-four (24) hour period
may be waived if the complaint alleges intoxication or drug
SECTION 8

SECTION 9

PAGE 13P

incapacitation during on duty status. The written notice shall contain
the following information: (1) the allegations of the complaint; (2) the
time and date and location of the incident giving rise to the
investigation, if known; (3) if the complaint is a written document from
an anonymous source, such written document shall be provided to the
employee. If there exists a written complaint from a City employee
(sworn or non-sworn), such document shall not be provided to the
accused employee.

In the event that the procedures set forth above are not followed, the
charges against the officer will be dismissed without prejudice.

The CITY agrees to maintain in its Human Resources Department a
list of all disciplinary actions against all bargaining unit employees.
Disciplinary action shall be defined as all written reprimands,
demotions, suspensions and discharges. The list, to be kept current
on a weekly basis, shall denominate employee and type of action
taken against the employee, and shall be accessible to authorized
UNION representatives only.

If, during the course of a citizen complaint investigation or an internal
investigation, a violation is discovered that is unrelated to the original
complaint or allegation, and the Chief or his designee determines that
the violation is such that it should be dealt with in a non-disciplinary
fashion, such as counseling or intervention, the findings of the
investigation shall be directed back to the affected employee’s
immediate command for such intervention or counseling.

If such unrelated violation is discovered, and the Chief determines that
such violation shall be dealt with by disciplinary action (reprimand,
suspension, demotion, or termination), such disciplinary action shall be
taken through Internal Affairs to the Chief.

In the event that a violation is discovered during an investigation that is
not related to the original citizen complaint, the department will not
disclose to the citizen any findings or the disciplinary action taken
against the sworn employee.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

SECTION 5

SECTION 6

PAGE 14P
ARTICLE 7

APPEAL PROCEDURE

Any employee who has satisfactorily completed twelve (12) months of
employment with the CITY shall have the right to appeal to either the
Personnel Board or arbitration, but not both, from a suspension,
termination of employment, or reduction in classification or pay not
later than ten (10) working days after receiving notice of such action.
Any such employee who receives a written reprimand shall have the
tight to appeal to the Personnel Board only not later than ten (10)
working days after receiving notice of such action. There shall be no
right of appeal from the Personnel Board to the arbitrator or from the
arbitrator to the Personnel Board.

If an election is made to appeal to the Personnel Board the appeal
must be in writing setting forth the reasons why such action is improper
and submitted to the Human Resources Director within the ten (10)
working day time period. The Human Resources Director shall cause
such appeal to be placed on the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled Personnel Board meeting, provided the appeal is received
at least ten (10) working days prior to the regularly scheduled
Personnel Board meeting. Otherwise it shall be placed on the agenda
of the Personnel Board for the next regularly scheduled meeting.

The Personnel Board or arbitrator shall not have jurisdiction to
terminate employment of an employee upon an appeal from a
suspension.

If an employee, serving a probationary period by virtue of promotion, is
terminated from employment for cause, he shall be entitled to file and
process an appeal under the provisions of Section 1 or Section 2
hereof.

If an election is made to appeal to arbitration, the procedure for
selection of the arbitrator shall be as set forth in Article 8, Step 3,
second paragraph, of this Agreement.

An employee shall have the right to process an appeal individually, by
the UNION, and/or by an Attorney at Law. If an employee elects not to
use the UNION or its attorney in the processing of an appeal, the
decision of the Personnel Board shall not set binding precedent on the
UNION.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

PAGE 15P
ARTICLE 8

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

“Grievance” as defined in this Agreement is a claim of an employee
arising during the term of this Agreement which is limited to matters of
interpretation or application of the express provisions of this
Agreement and excluding discharge and disciplinary actions as
provided in Article 6 hereof, which actions shall be processed in
accordance with Appeal Procedure as set forth in Article 7 of this
Agreement. The UNION shall have the right to file a grievance in
accordance with Article 8.

The following procedure shall be used in the submission of a
grievance, as defined in Section 1 hereof.

Step 1. An employee or UNION who has a grievance shall present
the same, in writing, to the Police Chief, or his designated
representative, within ten (10) working days from the date on
which the employee or UNION became aware of the
grievance. The written grievance must set forth the sections
and articles of this Agreement upon which the matter of
interpretation or application is involved. The Police Chief, or
his designated representative, shall respond to the grievant
in writing within ten (10) working days from the date on
which the written grievance was received.

Step 2. In the event the employee or UNION is dissatisfied with the
response of the Chief, or his designated representative, then
the employee or UNION may, within ten (10) working days
from the date of the response given by the Police Chief, or
his designated representative appeal said decision, in writing
to the CITY Labor Relations Director, or his designated
representative. The Labor Relations Director or his
designated representative shall respond to the grievant, in
writing, within ten (10) working days from the date on which
the grievance appeal was received. An extension on the
time period may be granted when mutually agreed to by the
Labor Relations Director and the UNION.

Step 3. _ If satisfactory settlement is not reached under Step 2 hereof,
either the aggrieved employee, the UNION or the CITY by
and through the Labor Relations Director, or his
representative shall, within twenty (20) working days from
the expiration of the limits as set forth in Step 3 or any
extension thereof as set forth in Section 3, by written notice
PAGE 16P

to the other party, request arbitration. The CITY shall furnish
the UNION with a copy of any such notice sent or received
requesting arbitration.

The arbitration proceeding shall be conducted by an
arbitrator to be mutually selected by the parties within thirty
(30) calendar days after the submission of written demand
for arbitration. The UNION shall at its discretion become a
party for the purpose of selecting an arbitrator. The UNION
and the grievant shall together be considered one party. If
the parties are unable to mutually agree as to the selection
of an arbitrator within such time limit and either party
continues to demand arbitration, the parties shall jointly
request the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service
(FMCS) to provide a list of five (5) arbitrators. Each party
shall have the right to strike two (2) names from the list of
arbitrators as submitted. The party requesting arbitration
shall have the right to strike the first name and the other
party shall then strike one name with the same process
being repeated so that the person remaining on the list shall
be the arbitrator.

There shall be no appeal from the arbitrator's decision. It
shall be final and binding on the UNION, if the UNION is a
party to the arbitration, the CITY, and on all bargaining unit
employees who take part in or are represented in the
arbitration proceeding. Where an employee elects to
process a grievance without UNION representation or
assistance, the UNION shall have the right after the
arbitrator has been selected to intervene and become a
party to the proceeding.

Authority of the arbitrator is defined and limited by Article 7
and Article 8 of this Agreement. In the event the arbitrator
finds that he has no authority or power to rule in the case,
the matter shall be referred back to the parties without
decision or recommendation on the merits of the case. The
arbitrator shall be requested by the parties to issue his
decision within thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion
of the hearing.

Parties selecting the arbitrator shall share equally the
arbitrator's expenses. Each party shall be responsible for
compensating its own representatives and witnesses. If a
party desires that a record of the testimony be made at the
proceedings it may cause such a record to be made at its
SECTION 3

SECTION 4

PAGE 17P

expense; provided, however, that it supplies the arbitrator
and other party or parties with copies of such record at no
expense to the other party or parties.

Any time limitation provided herein may be waived or extended in
writing by mutual agreement of the aggrieved employee or the UNION
and the Labor Relations Director or his designated representative. If
either party fails to comply with any time limitation or extension thereof,
absent written waiver of same, the grievance shall automatically be
resolved in favor of the other party.

An aggrieved employee shall have the right to process his grievance
individually, by the UNION, and/or by an attorney at law.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

PAGE 18P
ARTICLE 9

COMPLAINT PROCEDURE

A “Complaint” as defined in this Agreement means any suggestions or
disagreements by an employee or his UNION representative
concerning the terms or conditions of his employment. A complaint
does not include matters of discharge and discipline or grievances as
defined in Section 1 of Article 8.

The employee or his UNION representative shall have the right to
discuss a complaint with the Police Chief or his designated
representative only after having first exhausted the procedures of the
Department for the processing of complaints without satisfactory
resolution. The decision of the Police Chief or his designated
representative shall be final and binding and not subject to review or
appeal by the Personnel Board or any court of law.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

PAGE 19P
ARTICLE 10
SENIORITY

Seniority shall be based on continuous length of service in
classification covered by this Agreement without a break or
interruption; provided, that any suspension for disciplinary purposes as
provided in Section 3 of Article 6, absence on authorized leave with
pay, absence on authorized leave without pay; or lay-off for thirty (30)
calendar days or less, shall not constitute a break or interruption of
service within the meaning of this Section.

Seniority shall commence from the date an employee enters a
classification covered by this Agreement.

A list of employees arranged in order of seniority by classification and
a list of employees arranged in total service with the Omaha Police
Department shall be maintained and made available for examination
by employees. The seniority list shall be revised and updated at the
end of each fiscal year and a copy of the same shall be transmitted to
the UNION. The list of employees arranged in total service with the
Omaha Police Department shall be maintained and provided for
information only.

Where two or more employees in the same classification were
appointed on the same date, their seniority standing shall be
determined in the order of their ranking on the eligibility list from which
their eligibility for appointment was determined.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

PAGE 20P

ARTICLE 11
PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEES

The probationary period of an employee shall consist of one (1) year of
actual employment except in a case of a promotion which period shall
consist of six (6) months from the effective date of promotion. Any
interruption of employment during either probationary period shall not
be counted as part of the period. Approved leave does not constitute
an interruption of employment; however, approved leave in excess of
thirty (30) days shall extend the employee's probationary period by a
like number of days. An employee rehired after termination of previous
employment shall be hired as a probationary employee and such
probationary period shall consist of six (6) months of actual
employment within the meaning of this Article and prior service shall
not be credited to such period of time.

An employee who is transferred to another position in the same or
different class in the same department prior to the completion of his
probationary period shall complete that service period in the latter
position by adding thereto his service in the former position.
Verification of satisfactory employment in the new position by the
Police Chief will be deemed to constitute verification of satisfactory
service also in the original position. The provisions of this Section will
not apply in any case of transfer from one department to another.

At any time during the probationary period the Police Chief may
remove an employee whose performance does not meet the required
standards, provided that he shall report the removal and reasons
therefore in writing to the Human Resources Director and to the
employee concerned. Any employee removed from a position during
the first twelve (12) months of the probationary period (provided,
however, the CITY may unilaterally extend this period an additional six
months upon giving notice to the employee and the UNION of the
reasons for such extension) or during the six (6) months of a
promotional probationary period, except where otherwise provided in
Section 4 of Article 7 shall not be entitled to appeal such removal or
have the same reviewed by an arbitrator or Personnel Board. An
employee removed from his position after completion of twelve (12)
months service shall have the right of appeal to the Police Chief,
Personnel Board, or an arbitrator.

At any time during the probationary period when an employee is about
to be laid off because of reduction in force, the Police Chief, with the
consent of the employee, may demote such employee, in lieu of lay-off
if he is otherwise eligible and work is available in a lower class. The
SECTION 5

SECTION 6

PAGE 21P

name of such employee shall be restored to the lists from which it was
removed at time of appointment. The probationary period of an
employee demoted in lieu of lay-off during that period shall include the
period of probation in the higher class. No demotion of this kind shall
be made if it will result in the separation of any other employees with
greater length of service. An employee serving as a result of
appointment from a promotional list, who is removed from the new
position for reasons other than misconduct or delinquency and who
was a regular employee in another position in the classified service
immediately prior to his promotional appointment, shall be reinstated in
his former position or one of like status and pay.

At least seven (7) working days prior to the expiration of an employee's
probationary period, the Police Chief shall notify the Human Resources
Director in writing whether the services of the employee have been
satisfactory and whether the employee will be continued in his position.
A copy of this notice shall be given to the employee by the Police
Chief. Upon receipt by the Human Resources Director of a favorable
report, the appointment of the employee shall be made a regular
employee at the expiration of the probationary period. In the absence
of such a favorable report, the employee shall be terminated from
employment.

All probationary employees will conform to the semi-annual detail
change seniority bid process at the completion of the first eighteen (18)
months of employment. Promotional probationary employees will be
assigned according to their seniority within that rank in compliance with
Article 15, Section 6.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

SECTION 5

SECTION 6

PAGE 22P
ARTICLE 12

LAY-OFFS

Whenever a reduction in work force becomes necessary because of a
lay off, lay-offs shall be made on the basis of seniority in classification.
For purpose of this Article only, for an employee who has at anytime
previously invoked the privileges accorded by Section 3 of this Article,
seniority-in-classification shall mean total service as an employee of
the Police Department of the CITY in all classifications above or equal
to the rank to which the employee is assigned. In all other instances
seniority-in-classification shall mean the numbered years employed in
his particular classification as set out in Article 10.

No regular employee shall be laid off from any classification while there
are provisional, probationary, part-time, or seasonal employees
working in the same classification.

In the event an employee becomes subject to lay-off in his
classification, and is qualified to perform duties in a lower classification,
he shall be permitted to take a position in the next lower classification
at that classification's rate of pay, and any employees in the lower
classification subjected to lay-off by virtue of the provisions of this
Section, shall be laid off in accordance with the provisions of Section 1
hereof.

In the event that an employee becomes subject to lay-off in his
particular classification and a vacancy exists in a position of lower
classification for which he is qualified, he may, with the approval of the
Human Resources Director, or his designated representative, be
appointed to such position in a lower classification on the basis of his
seniority.

The names of regular employees who have been laid off shall be
placed on a recall from lay-off list, maintained by the Human
Resources Department, and shall be eligible for recall from layoff for a
period of five (5) years, and the CITY shall rehire in the reverse order
of lay-off; provided, such employees are otherwise qualified to perform
the duties of the position.

Where an employee has accepted a position in a lower classification
by virtue of Section 3 or 4 hereof, he shall be recalled to his former
position when the same becomes available in the reverse order of
reduction.
SECTION 1

PAGE 23P
ARTICLE 13

LEAVE PROVISIONS

SICK LEAVE WITH PAY: Sick leave shall be earned at the rate of
4.77 hours per pay period (124 hours per payroll year) and there will
be no limit on the amount of unused sick leave an employee may
accumulate. This change takes effect upon the execution of this
Agreement. Any current employee employed on or before January 29,
1998, who initially reaches 800 hours of accumulated sick leave shall
automatically be credited with 200 hours of additional sick leave. This
credit is a one time only bonus. Should the employee subsequently
use sick leave so as to fall below 1,000 hours, he must then earn back
any used hours. Persons who begin employment as police officers
after January 29, 1998, shall not be credited with this 200 hours of
additional sick leave. Employees may with the approval of the Police
Chief utilize their allowances of sick leave when unable to perform their
work duties by reason of illness or injury, necessity for medical or
dental care, exposure to contagious disease under circumstances in
which the health of other employees or the public would be
endangered by attendance on duty or for reasons related to the
employee’s pregnancy; or her adoption of a child (up to a maximum of
480 hours). Employees shall advise their supervisors immediately
when it is necessary to be absent from work on account of sickness
due to reasons listed above. The CITY may request documentation of
the medical necessity, and the employee must provide such
documentation for the employee’s absence from work.

Employees shall keep their supervisors currently informed of their
condition. Failure to fulfill these requirements may result in the denial
of sick leave. Department Heads shall be responsible for verifying and
administering sick leave within their respective departments. The
Police_Chief may require either a certificate of a physician stating that
such illness or injury prevented the employee from working, or a
medical examination by a physician designated by the Human
Resources Director or his designated representative. Sick leave shall
not accrue during any period of absence without pay in excess of five
(5) working days per payroll period.

If an employee retires from CITY service; or dies; or resigns or is
terminated and has served a minimum of twenty (20) years of CITY
service, (except in cases where the employee has been guilty of fraud
or other activities resulting in a monetary loss to the CITY), he/she
shall be entitled to be paid straight time pay at the employee’s pay
schedule for up to and including, 1,200 hours of accumulated, unused
sick leave at the rate of one (1) hour for every one (1) hour of
PAGE 24P

accumulated unused sick leave, and one (1) hour for every (4) hours of
accumulated unused sick leave for any hours above 1,200 up to 3,200
hours. Such payment shall be pursuant to the restrictions set forth
above.

Employees may utilize forty (40) hours of sick leave in a payroll year
for illness or injury to immediate family members. "Immediate" family
member is defined as those family members covered by the Federal
Family Medical Leave Act.

Employees shall be entitled to a credit for annual leave at the rate of
two (2) hours per pay period, to a maximum of fifty two (52) hours in a
payroll year conditioned on meeting the following:

The employee must:
1. Have a sick leave balance of 1,000 hours, or more; and

2. Have, in the immediate past payroll year, used 40 hours or
less of sick leave.

The above bonus for annual leave shall operate as follows: At the end
of each payroll year, each employee who has met the above criteria
shall receive the bonus for the entire ensuing payroll year pursuant to
the credit schedule above, irrespective of whether that individual
employee goes below that criteria during that ensuing year. If an
employee does not meet that criteria on the final day of the payroll
year, he/she shall not receive the bonus for the entire ensuing year
irrespective of the fact that at some time during that ensuing year such
employee may meet the above requirements. In other words, the
concept is that the bonus is granted for a payroll year based upon the
employee’s sick leave usage in the prior year.

When an employee initially reaches 1,000 hours of accumulated sick
leave, he shall receive the above bonus for the remainder of the year
in which he reached the 1,000 hour mark irrespective of any usage for
the prior payroll year. At the end of that payroll year, he shall be
evaluated according to the criteria set forth above.

All hours of sick leave shall be counted against an employee's
balances for the purpose of accumulation of gross numbers of sick
leave. However, any sick leave usage used by an employee for her
pregnancy, (up to but not exceeding 480 hours per pregnancy) shall
not be counted only for the purpose of determining whether she
qualifies for the annual leave bonus.
SECTION 2

PAGE 25P

If sick leave is used by an employee for a single illness during the
payroll year change period (December - January) mandating two years
without bonus instead of one, the employee may request an
exemption. This exemption will be applied at the sole discretion of the
Labor Relations Director.

As a result of the change in accrual of sick leave for employees as
ordered by the CIR, some employees were subject to retroactive
reduction in their sick leave balances for 2008 and 2009. The parties
agree that these employees shall not lose their sick leave hours based
on any hours accrued in 2008 and 2009.

ANNUAL LEAVE: Effective with the passage and legal execution of
this Agreement, Annual leave shall be earned by employees at the rate
of:

Year of Service Annual Leave Hours Earned Per Year
Initial Hire to 4 years 119 (4.57 hours per pay period)
After 4 years to 5 years 148 (5.69 hours per pay period)
After 5 years to 19 years 169 (6.50 hours per pay period)
After 19 years to 24 years 189 (7.27 hours per pay period)
After 24 years or more 197 (7.58 hours per pay period)

Annual leave for such employees in excess of 320 hours shall not be
carried forward from one payroll year to the next payroll year, except
where an employee is not permitted to take annual leave during the
year by virtue of being on Injured on Duty status.

Employees shall be provided with the opportunity to take annual leave
in minimum increments of one (1) hour and the CITY shall have the
exclusive right to determine the means, methods and systems by
which annual leave is scheduled; provided, however, that employees
shall have the right to select their annual period in the unit as
prescribed by the Police Chief by virtue of their seniority as defined in
Article 10.

Any employee serving a probationary period of six (6) months by virtue
of a promotion shall be entitled to take annual leave in accordance with
the provisions of this Section; all other probationary employees shall
not have the right to use annual leave for the first twelve (12) months
of employment in accordance with the provisions of this Section, but
may at the sole discretion of the Police Chief, or his designated
representative, be granted the opportunity to use annual leave for
emergency purposes. The decision of the Police Chief, or his
designated representative, in this regard is final and binding and not
subject to the grievance procedure.
PAGE 26P

If an employee retires from CITY service, dies, resigns, or is
terminated (except in cases where the employee has been guilty of
fraud or other activities resulting in a monetary loss to the CITY),
he/she shall be entitled to be paid straight time pay at the employee’s
pay schedule for one (1) hour for every one (1) hour of accumulated
annual leave.

ANNUAL LEAVE PROCEDURES

1. Block Annual Leave is annual and/or holiday leave in which the
employee will be absent from duty a minimum of six (6)
consecutive days. Normal Block Annual Leave and Summer
Block Annual Leave must be requested in writing. Block Annual
Leave, whether Summer Block Annual Leave or Normal Block
annual leave, will prevail over “per diem” annual leave.

2. Summer Block Annual Leave is annual and/or holiday leave
taken in the months of May, June, July and/or August.
Requests for Summer Block Annual Leave shall be delivered by
the employee to the shift commander on or before April 1° of
each year. In granting Summer Block Annual Leave, seniority
will prevail. If an employee submits more than one request,
they will prioritize their requests to allow seniority prevalence.

e Normal Block Annual Leave is not subject to the April 1°
deadline, regardless of when the actual leave occurs.
Normal Block Annual Leave requests shall be granted on a
“first come, first serve” basis, regardless of seniority.

e In the event that more than one employee submits Normal
Block Annual Leave requests for the same day(s), and these
requests are submitted during the same eight (8) hour shift,
then seniority shall prevail during that shift only.

These situations may occur when an excessive number of
employees are requesting Normal Block Annual Leave for
the same day(s) which would result in exceeding the number
allowed leave from unit daily personnel assignment detail.

e If an employee commences their block leave then wishes to
cancel any remaining portion of that leave, AND that block
leave cancelled previously granted “per diem” leave, the
cancellation of the remaining block leave must be approved
by the Bureau Shift Commander.
PAGE 27P

e Inthe event that any portion of an employee’s block leave is
withdrawn, the employee whose “per diem” leave was
previously canceled as a direct result of granted block leave,
shall be allowed to resubmit their leave request.

3. “Per Diem” annual leave is annual and/or holiday leave in which
the employee will be absent from duty less than six (6)
consecutive calendar days. Whenever possible, requests for
“per diem” annual leave shall be made at least six (6) days prior
to the requested day(s) off. If the request is made six (6) days
or less than six (6) days prior to the requested day(s) off, the
Bureau Shift Commander shall authorize “per diem” leave
according to the following conditions.

The following provisions shall apply to all three of the above
paragraphs:

On any given day, a minimum of ten (10%) percent of those of
the rank of police officers assigned to a unit daily personnel
assignment detail shall be granted annual leave. In calculating
this 10% number, all sworn personnel (Police Officers,
Sergeants, Lieutenants, and Captains) shall be included. In
calculating this number, Funeral Leave, Military Leave and
Special Duty shall not apply. All other leave shall apply in the
calculations.

Annual leave for employees of the rank of Sergeant and
Lieutenant shall be granted based on the needs of the shift for
Sergeants and Lieutenants as determined by the precinct
commander on that particular day. A minimum of 50% of those
sworn employees (Sergeants and Lieutenants) assigned to work
that shift shall be granted annual leave.

“Special Unit Details” within the CIB, UPB, and all other Bureaus
shall follow the ten (10%) percent rule. Sworn personnel
assigned to the “PR” shift shall be added to the “C” Shift for
calculations of leave time.

4. Annual leave shall not accrue during a leave of absence without
pay in excess of five (5) working days per payroll period.
Annual leave shall be granted in minimum increments of one (1)
hour.

As a result of the change in accrual of annual leave for employees as
ordered by the CIR, some employees were subject to retroactive
reduction in their annual leave balances for 2008 and 2009. The
SECTION 3

SECTION 4

PAGE 28P

parties agree that these employees shall not lose their annual leave
hours based on any hours accrued in 2008 and 2009. In any event,
should the above agreement of the parties to not cause an employee
to lose annual leave hours subsequently result in an employee holding
an annual leave balance greater than 320 hours, then in that case
such employee shall be allowed to carry over these excess hours over
320 until the last day of the last pay period of December 2010. After
the last day of the last pay period of December 2010, any hours above
320 in the employee’s annual leave balance shall be forfeited.

SICK LEAVE WITHOUT PAY: Upon application of an employee, the
Police Chief may grant sick leave without pay for an entire period
under those conditions set forth in Section 1 hereof. When such
unpaid sick leave exceeds one (1) year, it may be renewed by the
Police Chief or the Human Resources Director or his designated
representative. From time to time the Police Chief shall require that
the employee submit a certificate from the attending physician or
practitioner, or submit to a medical examination. In the event of a
failure or refusal to supply such certificate or if the certificate does not
clearly show sufficient disability to preclude the employee from the
performance of his duties, such sick leave shall be cancelled and the
employee's service terminated. Employees may be entitled to unpaid
leave in accordance with the Family Medical Leave Act.

FUNERAL LEAVE: In the event of the death of an employee's father,
mother, step-parent, sister, brother, grandfather, grandmother,
grandchild, spouse, or child related by blood, marriage, or adoption,
the employee may, with the approval of the Police Chief or designated
representative, be permitted to take funeral leave, with pay of three (3)
consecutive working days

In the event of the death of an employee's father-in-law, mother-in-law,
sister-in-law, brother-in-law, grandmother-in-law or grandfather-in-law,
the employee may, with the approval of the Police Chief or his
designated representative, be permitted to take funeral leave, with pay,
of two (2) consecutive working days.

Funeral leave may be granted in such other instances as are justified
by the relationship between the deceased and the employee. The
Police Chief or his designee may, in his exercise of discretion, grant
funeral leave in addition to that provided above. All of the above is
contingent upon such employee attending the funeral, either on his day
off or on one of the above funeral leave days, unless his ability to
attend the funeral is either denied by his supervisors or by his own
sickness.
SECTION 5

SECTION 6

SECTION 7

PAGE 29P

MILITARY LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITH PAY: An employee who is a
member of the National Guard, the United States Army Reserve, the
United States Air Force Reserve, the United States Naval Reserve, the
United States Marine Corps Reserve, or the United States Coast
Guard Reserve, shall be entitled to leave of absence from their
respective duties, without loss of pay, on all days during which they are
employed with or without pay under the orders or authorization of
competent authority on active training duty or duty with troops or at
field exercise or for instruction, for not to exceed fifteen (15) workdays
in any one (1) payroll year. Such leave of absence shall be in addition
to the regular vacation leave of such employees. Any employee on
military leave shall not be counted as being on leave for the purposes
of determining the maximum number of employees who are on annual
leave.

MILITARY LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY: All employees who
leave a position for the purpose of being inducted into, enlisting in,
determining his physical fitness to enter, or performing training duty in
the armed forces of the United States or the National Guard, shall
when ordered by proper authority to active service, be entitled to a
leave of absence from such civil employment for the period of such
service, plus ninety (90) days, without loss of pay during the first fifteen
(15) days of such leave of absence; provided, such pay for the first
fifteen (15) days shall not be construed as being in addition to the pay
provided for in Section 6 hereof. The proper authority may make a
provisional appointment to fill any vacancy created by such leave of
absence. When such person is separated from active duty under
conditions other than dishonorable, he shall be entitled to return to his
former position or a position of like seniority, status, and the then
prevailing pay. If he is not qualified to perform the duties of such
position upon his return by reason of disability sustained during the
service but is qualified to perform the duties of any other position in the
CITY service, he shall be restored to such other position, the duties of
which he is qualified to perform, as will provide him with the same
seniority, status, and pay, or the nearest proximation thereof consistent
with the circumstances in his case. Application for re-employment
shall be made within ninety (90) days after he is discharged from active
duty. Such person shall not be discharged from his former or new
position without justifiable cause within one (1) year after
reinstatement.

OTHER LEAVES OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY: In addition to paid
leave, employees, including probationary employees, may be allowed
to be absent from duty without pay for a period not to exceed three (3)
months on the basis of applications for leave without pay approved by
the Police Chief and the Human Resources Director or his designated
SECTION 8

SECTION 9

SECTION 10

SECTION 11

SECTION 12

PAGE 30P

representative. Leave may be extended beyond three (3) months only
with the approval of the Personnel Board. Such leave shall be granted
only when it will not adversely affect the interests of the CITY. An
application for leave of absence for travel, study, or other educational
purposes which will equip the employee to render more effective
service to the CITY normally shall be deemed as not to adversely
affect the interests of the CITY.

CANCELLATION OF LEAVES OF ABSENCE: All leaves of absence
shall be subject to the condition that the Police Chief may cancel the
leave at any time upon prior written notice to the employee and the
Human Resources Director specifying a reasonable date for
termination of the leave. The Human Resources Director, or his
designated representative, upon prior notice to the employee and the
Police Chief, may cancel an approved leave of absence at any time he
finds that the employee is using the leave for purposes other than
those specified at the time of approval. In case of emergency, the
Police Chief may cancel all leaves by verbal or written communication.

LEAVES OF ABSENCE - LENGTH OF SERVICE: As used in this
Article continuous service or employment means employment with the
CITY without a break or interruption; provided that any suspension for
disciplinary reasons as provided in Section 3 of Article 6, any absence
on authorized leave with pay, authorized absence on leave without
pay; or lay-off for thirty (30) calendar days or less shall not constitute a
break or interruption of service or employment within the meaning of
this Section. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to military
leaves as provided in Section 6 hereof, nor to maternity leave, nor
UNION leave.

AUTHORIZATION FOR LEAVE: No leave of absence shall be granted
until leave has been properly approved. Notification of any leave of
absence without pay shall be submitted to the Human Resources
Director prior to the taking of leave.

LEAVE COMPUTATIONS: For the purpose of calculations, leave of
absence shall be computed to the nearest one-half (1/2) hour, and
leave accruals shall be credited on the same basis. Employees shall
not have deductions made from leave accumulations for holidays
which occur at the beginning, during, or at the end of a period of leave
with pay.

ABSENCE WITHOUT LEAVE: Any unauthorized absence of an
employee from duty shall be deemed to be an absence without pay
and may be grounds for disciplinary action by the Police Chief. In the
absence of such disciplinary action any employee who absents himself
SECTION 13

SECTION 14

SECTION 15

PAGE 31P

for three (3) days or more without authorized leave shall be deemed to
have resigned. Such absence may be covered, however, by the Police
Chief by a subsequent grant of leave with or without pay where
extenuating circumstances are found to have existed.

JURY DUTY: When an employee is summoned for jury duty by a court
of competent jurisdiction and his attendance in court is required during
his regularly scheduled duty shift with the CITY, he shall receive his
base pay from the CITY during such service provided he turns his jury
pay over to the CITY Finance officer for those days he is normally
scheduled to work and for which remuneration is claimed. The
employee who is summoned for jury duty, and whose regular duty shift
falls on the same day but not on the "B" shift, shall receive his base
pay from the CITY provided that he turns over the jury pay to the CITY
Finance officer for those days he is normally scheduled to work and for
which remuneration is claimed. This employee shall be assigned to
special duty "B" shift for each day he serves on the jury duty during his
regular working days.

LEAVE - UNION REPRESENTATIVE: One UNION representative or
the UNION president shall be entitled to a leave of absence with pay
unrestricted as to time while he is engaged in UNION activities.
However, the UNION shall reimburse the CITY on a monthly basis for
the full cost of such employee's pay and all fringe benefits.

SICK & ANNUAL LEAVE PAYOFF AT RETIREMENT: Those
employees who retire upon the legal execution of this labor agreement
until December 18, 2004, shall receive their payout for sick and annual
leave (pursuant to other portions of this labor agreement) in the second
pay period of January 2005. Those employees who retire from
December 19, 2004, until December 31, 2005, shall receive their
payout for sick and annual leave (pursuant to other portions of this
labor agreement) in the second pay period of January 2006. Those
employees who retire from January 1, 2006, until December 30, 2006,
shall receive their payout for sick and annual leave (pursuant to other
portions of this labor agreement) in the second pay period of January
2007. Employees who opt for the early-deferred retirement option
(Article 34, Section 10) shall receive their sick and annual leave payout
upon their retirement.
SECTION 16

PAGE 32P

BIRTHDAY LEAVE: Each employee is entitled to leave on his/her
birthday. The employee may take such leave on any day within seven
(7) days before or after the actual birthday, pursuant to the rules for
granting of “Per Diem” leave as outlined above in Section 2. The
employee and his/her supervisor may, upon mutual agreement, agree
on another day for birthday leave after the actual birthday. An
employee shall not take birthday leave on any observed holiday.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

PAGE 33P
ARTICLE 14

NON-DISCRIMINATION

The parties hereby agree not to discriminate against employees
because of age, race, color, creed, sex, religious or political affiliations.

The parties hereby agree that no officers, agents, representatives,
members or anyone connected with either party shall in any manner
intimidate, coerce, entice or reward, restrain, or interfere with the rights
of employees to form, join, or assist labor organizations, or to refrain
from any of these activities, specifically including the right of
employees to withdraw, revoke, or cancel UNION membership.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

PAGE 34P
ARTICLE 15

HOURS OF WORK AND DUTY SHIFTS

Eight (8) hours shall normally constitute a day's work, except for
employees working approved 10 or 12 hour days or on the card
system, in which case a work day shall be 10, 12 or 8 % hours
respectively. Forty (40) hours per week or the schedule set forth in
Article 15, Section 10 reflecting the card system currently in effect
which is not modified by this Agreement shall constitute a week's work.
The CITY and the UNION may mutually agree to establish a ten (10)
hour, four (4) day work week for designated positions on a trial basis.

Attendance at Police School, Police Training courses, or refresher
courses held immediately before or following the tour of active duty not
in excess of two (2) hours in any month shall not be considered as
hours worked under this Agreement.

While the initially hired employees for the position of Police Officer are
in the Academy phase (not FTO) of training, the workday requirements
are at the discretion of the training staff, based on the need for
instruction. The recruit status employee may be required to work up to
9 hours per day providing they not be worked more than 42 hours per
week. Any time requirement exceeding the 9 hour workday or 42 hour
workweek, would result in compensation at the rate of one and one-
half the number of hours worked in excess of these work hours. In
addition, during one week of the Academy phase, selected wholly at
the discretion of the training staff regarding date and location, the
following applies: recruit status employees will be required to work up
to 10 hours per day; this total time per days is regardless of continuous
or continual time worked; during this designated week, recruit status
employees will be required to work up to 47 hours prior to overtime, or
time and one-half compensation, beyond that threshold.

An employee shall be allowed a thirty (30) minute lunch period with
pay, which period shall be considered as time worked under this
Agreement.

A calendar day shall be divided into four (4) shifts designated as
follows: “A” Shift (2400-0800 hrs.); “B” Shift (0800-1600 hrs.); “C” Shift
(1600-2400 hrs.), and Priority Response (PR) Shift The “A,” “B,” and
“C” shifts may be varied not to exceed two (2) hours, except the “PR”
Shift at the sole discretion of the Police Chief or his designated
representative, provided the employees affected are provided a
minimum of sixteen (16) hours as to the change of hours for the shift
PAGE 35P

The PR Shift shall consist of 4 consecutive 10-hour days (Wed through
Sat) with 3 days off. PR Shift workdays may be changed by mutual
agreement between the CITY and the UNION. In advance of the UPB
bidding process employee management shall announce the number of
10-hour shift positions for each precinct. The exact hours of the PR
Shift shall be set by management in hours ranging between 1600-0400
hours. Affected employees shall be provided a minimum of sixteen
(16) hours as to the change of hours for their shift. The City may or
may not at its management discretion, institute the above PR shift.

PR Shift employees shall be assigned to Uniform Patrol on an
equitable basis, based on call load, to cruiser districts. These
employees shall primarily respond to calls for services with the
exception of short-term assignments necessitated by public safety
priorities. Uniform Patrol Bureau employees assigned to PR Shift shall
not exceed thirty-two (32) employees or fourteen percent (14%)
(whichever is less) of the employees assigned to a uniform patrol
bureau personnel assignment detail on “A” and “C” Shifts at semi-
annual shift change and shall not exceed four (4) uniform patrol bureau
sergeants. Assignment of employees to PR Shift will be implemented
at the September 2001 detail change and will be done in accordance
with Article 10 and Article 15.

Employees who fill 10-hour day positions (PR Shift) and have at least 4
years of service with the Omaha Police Department shall reduce the
number of 4 year employees required to be assigned to “A” and “C”
shift crew by precinct, according to the following:

One third of the 10-hour PR Shift 4 year positions assigned to a
precinct will be credited to “A” shift crews with that precinct and two-
thirds will be credited to “C” shift crews within that precinct (all fractions
shall be rounded to the nearest whole). Positions credited will be
distributed as evenly as possible among the affected crews in an effort
to balance the number of 4-year employees actually assigned to
crews.

At the start of each semi-annual detail change, UPB employees
assigned to 10-hour PR shift shall have twenty (20) hours of annual
leave credited to their payroll annual leave account. The annual leave
guidelines in effect in Article 13, Section 16, for the purposes of
determining the number of employees off on leave shall apply.

Those assigned to the PR shift shall be recognized as being on the
card system and therefore entitled to receive card pay.
SECTION 5

PAGE 36P
AIR SUPPORT UNIT (AIR WING)

All pilots and observers will be assigned to a 12-hour shift based upon
a special card system. This is for the Air Support Unit only.

Any time an employee on such 12-hour shift takes annual, sick, or any
other type of leave for his/her entire shift, such employee shall be
debited 12 hours. (The exception being Sundays, when an 8 hours
shift is worked in order to comply with FLSA guidelines regarding
maximum hours worked. If such employee's ordinary day off falls ona
holiday, he/she shall be paid according to the Union Contract - 8 hours
of pay.

Employees in the Air Support Unit working 12 hour shifts will not be
required to work any supplemental hours contained in the Labor
Agreement (All supp hours are eliminated on or after January 1, 2006).

The exact hours of the shift may be varied from time to time and shall
be in the sole discretion of the employer. Shift hours will not be
changed unless such employees are given reasonable notice.

Because of the card systems for the 12-hour shift, there will be times
when employees on two different cards will actually work within the
actual 24 hours of the holiday. When this occurs, any employee
whose shift actually begins on the holiday or birthday will receive
holiday or birthday pay for all hours worked that shift. Employees who
work a shift that does not begin on the holiday or birthday will not
receive holiday pay.

Police Officers, Sergeants, Lieutenants and Captains shall staff the
shifts, designated in Section 4, on the basis of bids submitted by such
employees to be effective on the first or second Sunday in March
(whichever is the beginning of the next payroll period), and on the first
or second Sunday in September (whichever is the beginning of the
next payroll period) of each year on the basis of their seniority as
defined in Article 10. The CITY shall establish the time periods and
manner of bidding. Prior to staffing the shifts, the Police Chief shall
have the exclusive right of assignment (irrespective of the shift bidding
process) of personnel and establishment of hours for the positions of
Lieutenant of Narcotic Unit; Lieutenant of Internal Affairs; Lieutenant of
Crime Analysis; Lieutenant of Training; Lieutenant of Inspections;
Lieutenant of Domestic Services Unit; Lieutenant of Management of
Called for Services. After the above positions have been staffed, the
Chief of Police shall determine personnel assignments. The following
exceptions apply:

 
PAGE 37P

Sergeants assigned to UPB patrol area _ positions, UPB
Administrative Sergeant positions, the court liaison Sergeant, the
front desk Sergeant, and any other Sergeant positions named after
the legal execution of this agreement shall bid for their positions
based on their seniority within the group of sergeants assigned to
these positions. Employees assigned to UPB sergeant’s area
positions shall bid for their work shifts as well as their positions
based on their seniority within the group of officers assigned to
these positions. During this process, Police Officers (no other
ranks) have the opportunity to rebid their shift and bid their UPB
sergeants areas simultaneously. The CITY shall establish the time
periods and manner of bidding.

On A and C shifts, a minimum of three (3) slots or 33%, whichever
is less per Sergeant's areas may be filled by the CITY by assigning
by seniority those employees who have completed four (4) years of
continuous service or more.

The Police Chief may under special circumstances vary the seniority
bidding system on a case-by-case basis.

The hours of designated sworn command employees assigned to
selected positions may be changed upon mutual consent of
management and the affected sworn command employee based on
the needs of that particular position. The change in hours request may
be initiated by management or the affected sworn command employee.
Any such changes agreed to shall only occur during the normal work
week (Sunday through Saturday) and shall not carry over into another
week. If a dispute arises between the affected sworn command
employee and management, the dispute will be resolved by the
payment of overtime to the employee, not to exceed one and one-half
times the actual hours worked beyond the employee’s regularly
scheduled shift. The use of the grievance process will not be used to
resolve such disputes.

Those sworn command employees eligible for consideration for
change in their ordinary work shift include:

All existing captains’ positions.

Administrative assistants to the Chief and each Deputy Chief.
Training Commander.

Prevention Programs Commander.

Public Information Office Commander.

Professional Standards (Lieutenant).

Inspections Commander (Lieutenant).

Narcotics/Intelligence (Lieutenant).

OPNOARWNE
PAGE 38P

9. Traffic Section (Lieutenant).

The CITY shall provide a live forum at which employees at the rank of
Police Officer may present their bids. Such live forum, as established
by the CITY, shall be considered optional, and will not be considered
hours worked unless an officer is scheduled during their normal duty
shift.

When employees are provided this opportunity during their first shift,
their supervisor should allow them to attend on-duty, if possible.
However, if the Police Officer is unavailable, his bid sheet form or
notarized proxy bid will serve as his preference bid for hours and
sergeant’s area.

Police Officers with at least four years of continuous service, assigned
to A or C shift in the initial bid for hours, and subsequently assigned to
UPB patrol area positions may be restricted to A or C Shift within the
group of Police Officers assigned to UPB patrol area positions, in order
to comply with the “four-year rule” described in Section 5 of the current
collective bargaining agreement.

ESTABLISHING SPECIALTY POSITION ELIGIBILITY LISTS

The specialty position application/testing process for all specialty
positions will occur twice a year. This process will take place in
December and June and the list will become effective every January
15" and July 15".

Any sworn employee who transfers from a_ specialty position
application group and desires consideration to transfer back into the
same specialty position application group within that same semi-annual
detail period may request to do so by submitting an interoffice to the
Captain of that particular specialty position application group. The
intent of this language is to allow sworn employee(s) the opportunity to
return to a specialty position, within a defined time period, without the
need to retest or re-apply.

Specialty Position Selections

Specialty Position Eligibility Lists expire January 14" and July 14" of
every year. At the discretion of the Chief, a Specialty Position
Eligibility List may be declared expired if:

e 80% of the candidates on such list have been placed in a
specialty position or have been offered and declined a
PAGE 39P

specialty position, or
e if three or less officer candidates or two or less sergeant
candidates remain on such Specialty Position Eligibility List.

If a specialty Position Eligibility List is declared expired, as defined by
the language above and prior to the regularly scheduled expiration
date (i.e. January 14” and July 14"), a candidate may be selected
outside of the Specialty Position Selection Process. At the request of
the Chief, and upon mutual agreement with the Union, a Specialty
Position Eligibility List may be extended by 6 months.

Specialty Assignments for Lieutenants

Lieutenants are assigned to Specialty Positions at the discretion of the
Chief of Police or his or her designee. A Lieutenant may be assigned
to a particular shift for a Specialty Job if they have the seniority to be
assigned to that shift at the time of the assignment of if the position is
one of the positions specified in Article 15, Section 5 of the union
contract. It is understood that once a Lieutenant is assigned to a
specialty position on a particular shift, the Lieutenant shall be entitled
to maintain the assignment in that specialty position, regardless of any
future shift bid.

Eligibility for Application—Police Officers

An officer may submit an application for a specialty position if they
have three years of service or they will attain three years of service
with the Omaha Police Department prior to the expiration of the
eligibility list. For an officer to be selected to a specialty position
he/she must have a minimum of three years of service as an Omaha
police officer at the time of his/her assignment. Officers currently
assigned to a specialty position and who are requesting a transfer to
another specialty position within the same application group regardless
of shift or position need only submit Interoffice communication to the
Bureau Captain in change of the desired position. They do not have to
submit an application to be considered for an internal transfer within
the same application group.

An application group pertains to those positions that a special
application questionnaire covers. FOR EXAMPLE: The CIB
application group covers all CIB positions. The training application
group covers all training positions. The accident investigation group
covers only accident investigation positions, not traffic enforcement
positions or canine positions, as they are separate applications with
different questionnaires.
SECTION 6

PAGE 40P
Seniority Process—Specialty Positions

For the purposes of establishing whether an officer/sergeant candidate
has sufficient seniority to be assigned to a specialty position, on a
particular shift, the officer/sergeant candidate must have had sufficient
seniority to be assigned to that particular shift according to the most
recent semi-annual Uniform Patrol Bureau bid board or Sergeant's bid
board, or as detailed below for sergeant candidates.

It is understood that once an officer/sergeant candidate is assigned to
a specialty position on a particular shift, the officer/sergeant shall be
entitled to maintain the assignment to any specialty position, within the
same application group, and shift regardless of any future UPB bid
board seniority standards or Sergeant’s bid board. If the assignment to
a specialty position is to a different shift, then the current UPB bid
board seniority standards shall apply for that particular shift. However,
if that particular officer vacates, or is removed, from a specialty
position, and is assigned to the Uniform Patrol Bureau (non-temporary
duty status) they shall be no longer so entitled.

All sergeants may submit an application for a specialty position. Fora

sergeant to be selected for a specialty position on a particular “B” shift,
he/she must fall within the following criteria:

e Must have a minimum of 6 months of service as an Omaha
police sergeant. It is understood that the 6 months time
period begins when the employee starts the duties as an
Omaha police sergeant OR,

e Fall within the top 90% of the current sergeant seniority list
OR,

e Had sufficient seniority to be assigned to that particular shift
at the time of assignment.

Any vacancy (occurring because of retirement, death, promotion,
voluntary or involuntary termination, or for any other reason) occurring
in a shift between bidding dates shall be filled without the necessity of
rebidding the shift affected. Such shift vacancy shall be filled by that
employee who, at the last bidding date, was next in seniority to go to
that now open shift position, and had bid that shift. That employee
may decline the shift change and, in that event, the vacancy shall be
filled by the next senior employee to have bid that shift at the last
bidding date. The CITY shall have the exclusive right to assign within
the shift any employee who changes positions, pursuant to the above,
between bid dates. Probationary employees are exempt from Sections
5 and 6 for the first eighteen (18) months of employment.
SECTION 7

SECTION 8

SECTION 9

SECTION 10

PAGE 41P

During an emergency as declared by the Police Chief, employee's
shifts, hours, and duties may be established at the discretion of the
Police Chief.

Any change in the work schedule that results in splitting days off shall
be by mutual agreement of the CITY and the employee, unless said
split days off apply to forty (40) hour department wide training and
unless the provisions of Article 15, Section 7, are invoked.

Employees who are going to be transferred from non-uniform job
assignment to a uniform job assignment shall be given a minimum of
five (5) working days notice.

1. Employees under the card system shall continue to work a 4-2
scheduling procedure and shall work a shift that is 8 hours 30
minutes. The additional thirty (30) minutes shall normally be
worked by working fifteen (15) minutes prior to the eight (8) hour
shift and fifteen (15) minutes at the end of the eight (8) hour
shift. It is understood and agreed that the current fifteen (15)
minute report in time is included within and not in addition to the
fifteen (15) minute time added to the front end of a sworn
employee's duty shift.

It is understood that the thirty (30) minutes provided for herein is
compensated by the base pay schedule, and no additional
compensation (either straight time or overtime) shall be paid for
these thirty (30) minutes. Further, it is understood that the
above division of such thirty (30) minute period between the
beginning or end of a shift may be changed on a case by case
basis because of special circumstances (training, special
events, lead officer, etc.).

Lead officers will still be required to report early within the
adjusted provisions of this paragraph; however, the
compensation for such time is included in the employee’s base
pay.

2. In addition to the work schedule described in paragraph 1, each
sworn employee working a 4-2 schedule shall work an
additional twelve (12) hours per payroll year, referred to as
“supplemental hours.” Beginning January 1, 2006, no sworn
employee shall be required to work any “supplemental hours”
pursuant to this paragraph.

3. The manner and method for working the twelve (12)
PAGE 42P

supplemental hours per payroll year provided for in the above
paragraph 2 shall be determined by the management of the
Omaha Police Department subject to the following conditions:

A. If such assignment does not merge with the
employee’s regularly scheduled _ shift, the
supplemental hours must be in increments of four (4)
or more hours, and the employee shall be given a
minimum of fourteen (14) days notice unless said
notice is personally waived by the employee.

B. If such supplemental hours merge with the
employee's regularly scheduled shift, they will be
assigned in one (1) hour increments, if possible, but in
no event shall they be scheduled in increments of less
than thirty (30) minutes. An employee shall be given
a minimum of sixteen (16) hours notice (from the time
such supplemental hours are to begin) of any
supplemental hours unless this notice is personally
waived by the employees.

C. The CITY shall avoid scheduling supplemental hours
of work on days off adjacent to or during pre-
approved block leave and will make a reasonable
effort to avoid scheduling supplemental hours of work
on days off adjacent to any pre-approved leave days.
The CITY shall also make a reasonable effort to
schedule supplemental work hours during employee's
regularly assigned shift hours. If an employee is
assigned to work a specific number of supplemental
hours and the nature of the work requires that those
hours be extended, such additional extended
supplemental hours shall not be compensated as
overtime, but shall be credited to the employee’s
supplemental hours requirement. If the total hours
worked exceeds the employee’s supplement
requirement for the year, such extension shall be
considered overtime and paid as such.

Employees entering the 4-2 plus day off schedule system on
and after January 1, 1997, shall begin with a balance of extra
hours of work due equal to one hour per month left in the year
for any month where at least sixteen (16) calendar days remain.
Employees leaving the 4-2 plus day off schedule system at any
time during the year shall have their balance of supplemental
hours of work due canceled.
PAGE 43P

If any employee leaves the 4-2 plus schedule and has
worked more supplemental hours than the number of
months the employee was assigned to the 4-2 plus
schedule, that employee shall be compensated for the
supplemental hours worked in excess of the amount due.
Payment shall be made at the rate of 1% times that
employee’s rate of pay as listed on the pay plan for the
number of hours worked; however, if overtime hours were
traded for supplemental hours, the pay back shall be at
straight pay at that employee's rate as listed on the pay plan.

The twelve (12) supplemental hours provided herein in no way
affect the number of hours an employee earns or uses for any
leave, compensated or uncompensated. Employees shall not
be allowed annual leave during work hours assigned pursuant
to this Section.

It is the understanding and intent of the parties that working
supplemental time as provided for in this Section shall in no way
affect the employee's compensation. If an employee is called in
to work supplemental hours in an increment of one duty shift
(eight hours) the employee shall work a shift which includes the
thirty (30) minute supplemental time.

Specifically, an employee shall have eight (8) hours deducted
from his supplemental time obligation for working a shift which is
eight (8) hours and thirty (30) minutes in length.

It is the understanding and intent that supplemental time worked
on a holiday or other supplemental times worked which
otherwise might result in additional compensation beyond eight
(8) hours of base pay shall by virtue of this Section result in
compensation for eight (8) hours. In those instances where
supplemental hours are worked during a designated holiday, the
employee's assigned compensation shall be increased only by
an additional factor of 1% times his base pay. Specifically,
when an employee works a full supplemental duty shift (8 hours
and 30 minutes) on a designated holiday such employee's total
compensation for those hours worked shall be twelve (12) hours
base pay.

The parties understand and agree that in the event an employee
working a 4-2 schedule takes paid annual leave or sick leave or
any other compensated leave for a full duty shift(s) shall be
compensated on the basis of eight hours irrespective of whether
SECTION 11

PAGE 44P

the employee worked more than eight (8) hour duty shifts as a
consequence of the implementation of this Section.

8. If an employee utilizes paid sick, annual leave or other paid
leave for a full duty shift, that employee shall have deducted
eight (8) hours from his accumulated bank of hours.

9. Employees have the option of declaring any earned overtime to
be used toward owed supplemental hours at the rate of one
hour of overtime (1% times the number of hours actually
worked) for one hour of supplemental time. (For example: one
hour worked as overtime equals 1% hours of straight pay or 112
of supplemental time, whichever employee chooses.)
Employees also have the option of declaring earned court time
for two (2) court appearances per payroll year (Article 19,
Section 2) to be used toward maximum of eight (8)
supplemental hours. However, the employee must declare the
overtime/court time referred to above to be used at the time the
overtime/court time report was made and can only be used
toward supplemental hours owed during the same payroll year.

DAYLIGHT SAVINGS TIME: When an hour is added to a shift due to
daylight savings time, an employee working nine (9) hours will get paid
the equivalent of overtime at the rate of one and one-half (112) pay for
the additional hour of work. That overtime can be taken as one (1)
hour of overtime pay or as comp time at the employee's designation.

An employee working seven (7) hours when the shift is shortened as
the result of daylight savings time, may either work seven (7) hours or
use one (1) hour (straight time) of comp time or annual leave; or the
employee can choose to work the extra hour and the City will be
allowed to determine if that additional hour should be scheduled at the
beginning or the end of the employee's shift. The employee shall
notify his/her supervisor in writing no less than fourteen (14) calendar
days in advance if he/she intends to work the eight (8) hours rather
then the seven (7). Within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of the
written notification, the supervisor will tell the employee if he/she will
work an hour prior to the seven (7) hour shift or an hour after the shift.
It is the supervisor’s discretion as to whether the employees working
the extra hour work at the end or beginning of the shift or split with
some employees working before and some employees working after
the seven (7) hour shift. If the supervisor has multiple employees
desiring to work the extra hour and the supervisor wants to split the
number of employees working early and late, the employees may
chose which time they want to work on the basis of seniority.
SECTION 12

PAGE 45P

Such procedures shall be adapted appropriately to meet the needs of a
ten (10) hour work shift.

Forms for notification of intent to work will be available through
supervisors. Employees will be provided with the forms at least
fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the daylight savings time switch. If
the supervisor fails to provide the form and an employee wants to work
the extra hour, the employee may choose when he/she wants to work
the hour. If the employee fails to timely turn in the form, the supervisor
can choose whether the employee will work the extra hour or will need
to use an hour of leave. If the supervisor fails to timely notice the
employee as to whether he or she will be working early or late, the
employee may choose when he/she will work the hour.

Upon the legal execution of this labor agreement, all sworn employees
assigned to Central Station shall be issued parking passes for spaces
in proximity to Central Station and to be used consistent with
department policy.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

PAGE 46P
ARTICLE 16

UNION ACTIVITIES

The UNION agrees that it will not at any time solicit membership or
collect UNION dues, fees, or assessments of any kind, or distribute
literature or any other type of printed material on CITY time or in CITY
buildings or on CITY property.

However, it is agreed that the solicitation of members and distribution
of UNION literature of a non-controversial nature will be allowed during
one thirty-minute presentation to be made by UNION representative to
each new police recruit class.

The UNION shall have the right to address the employees at shift
change assemblies within the following limitations:

1. approval must be granted by the Police Chief in advance of the
UNION addressing the employees;

2. approval will be granted a maximum of once every thirty (30) days;

3. such UNION address will be limited to a maximum of five (5)
minutes.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

PAGE 47P
ARTICLE 17
OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT AND EMPLOYEE DUTIES

OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT WITHOUT UNIFORM: Employees shall be
entitled to engage in outside employment, including employment or
service as an appointed officer for any public body, with full police
authority, including powers of arrest, which does not require the use of
the official uniform as defined in the Department's rules and regulations
and which is not otherwise prohibited by the provisions of this
Agreement, provided that the duties of the outside employment do not
constitute a conflict of interest nor conflict with an employee's
performance of his duties with the CITY. The provisions of this Section
shall be enforced by the Police Chief or his designated representative
whose decision shall be final and binding and not subject to appeal or
review by an arbitrator or Personnel Board.

OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT WITH UNIFORM: Employees may be
allowed to engage in outside employment, with full police authority,
including powers of arrest, which does require the use of the official
uniform as defined in the Department's rules and regulations and which
is not otherwise prohibited by the provisions of this Agreement,
provided that prior approval is obtained by the employee from the
Police Chief.

In the event an employment opportunity arises at such a time when it is
impossible to obtain the prior approval required above and an
employee desires to engage in outside employment, then, and only
then, a lieutenant or the person assigned in his stead may approve
such employment. Such approval shall not be granted unless there
remains less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the commencement
of such employment, detailing the place of employment, duration of
employment and type of employment; provided, that no approval shall
be granted unless the employment shall conclude within forty-eight
(48) hours after the employment is to commence.

Provided further, that no approval shall be granted by a lieutenant or
his stead unless: 1) the job the employee desires has been previously
approved by the Police Chief; or b) the nature or type of employment is
that which has been previously approved by the Police Chief, which
shall be determined by existing regulations and procedures; or c) on
short term notice, a lieutenant may authorize any outside employment
not in conflict with the CITY.

The regular procedure for approval must be utilized where the
employment is continuing after 48 hours from commencement or the
SECTION 3

PAGE 48P

employee has more than seventy-two (72) hours notice. The
provisions of this Section shall be enforced by the Police Chief or his
designated representative whose decision shall be final and binding
and not subject to appeal or review by an arbitrator or Personnel
Board.

EMPLOYMENT IN TWO OR MORE DEPARTMENTS: No employee
shall be employed simultaneously by two (2) or more departments of
the CITY when the total number of hours worked exceeds the normal
work week in either department.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

SECTION 5

PAGE 49P
ARTICLE 18
CITIZEN COMPLAINTS

For the purpose of this Article only “private citizen" is defined as an
individual not in the employ of the Omaha Police Department and
“formal complaint" is defined as a report by a private citizen alleging
misconduct by an employee against that citizen while the employee is
engaged in his official police duties.

A private citizen who desires to file a formal complaint against an
employee shall be required to sign and attest a formal complaint form
specifying the misconduct of the employee in the presence of a
command officer or an Internal Affairs officer of the Omaha Police
Department.

The Police Department will receive, and is not precluded by the above
from receiving, information or other complaints on an informal basis.
Third party complaints will be received as information and investigated
by Internal Affairs (not as a Citizens Complaint) on an individual basis.

This Article is not subject to review under Article 7, APPEAL
PROCEDURE.

Upon assignment of discipline, and prior to appeal of said discipline,
the UNION president and/or his designee, shall be allowed to review
the entire Internal Affairs report including transcriptions of all
interviews, transcriptions of all audio tapes, all video tapes, and all
documentation used during the investigation.

ARTICLE 18a
EMPLOYEES’ BILL OF RIGHTS

All employees within the Bargaining Unit shall be entitled to the
protection of what shall hereafter be termed as the "Police Officers’ Bill
of Rights" which shall be added to the present Rules and Regulations
of the Omaha Police Department. The rights and procedures
contained herein shall not apply to any criminal investigations.

A. The Omaha Police Department will not solicit any formal
citizens’ complaints against any employee; solicitation shall not
be construed to mean any follow-up of a third-party complaint or
follow-up of first-party complaints.
PAGE 50P

An employee shall not be subjected to any offensive language,
nor shall he be threatened with dismissal, transfer or other
disciplinary punishment as a guise to attempt to obtain his
resignation, nor shall he be intimidated in any other manner. No
promises or rewards shall be made to the employee as an
inducement to answer questions.

An accused employee shall be informed of the nature of the
investigation and shall receive a copy of the written formal
citizens’ complaints against him at least twenty-four (24) hours
prior to his formal interview by the Police Department. This
twenty-four (24) hour period may be waived if the complaint
alleges intoxication or drug incapacitation during on duty status.
The accused employee shall be permitted to have either his
choice of an attorney or UNION Official or both present during
the interview. Should the employee not be able to obtain and
consult with a UNION representative, the employee may be
granted a reasonable time, up to 24 hours by the Internal
Affairs Lieutenant or designee to obtain such representative.
The employee being interviewed shall be made aware of the
fact that any statement made may be used by the Department
as part of the investigation. If the Department chooses to tape
record any portion of the proceedings, it must record the entire
proceedings and the employee shall be made aware that a
recording is being made. Only the Internal Affairs investigator
shall be allowed to record the investigative interview. Should
any disciplinary action be taken as a result of this investigation,
the CITY will provide, at the employee’s request, a complete
duplicate recording of his taped interview and a transcript.

At any time during the course of an interview of a witness
employee, if it is reasonable for the Internal Affairs investigator
to believe that the witness employee has become a possible
target in an investigation, which could result in disciplinary
action, the witness employee shall be so informed by the
Internal Affairs investigator that he/she has become a possible
target of an investigation.

If, during the course of an interview, a witness employee
reasonably believes that he may become the target of an
investigation which could result in disciplinary action, such
employee may request UNION representation and 24-hour
notice as well as other rights afforded under Article 18(a). The
Internal Affairs investigator will document the request by the
witness employee and use his sole discretion whether to
complete the interview. Prior to being interviewed such witness
PAGE 51P

employee shall be advised, in writing, of the above.

If an employee is being investigated and interviewed by superior
officers in his/her command (known as a “line investigation”)
because of an internal infraction, the following procedure must
be followed. The subject employee shall be permitted to have a
Union representative during the interview, and the employee
shall have one (1) hour to procure such Union representative.

If the result of the line investigation, which shall be completed
within the next three (3) scheduled duty shifts of the subject
officer, shows that the discipline to be recommended by the
employee’s supervisor(s) will be greater than a_ written
reprimand, the continuing investigation shall be performed by
the Internal Affairs Unit or the Professional Standards
Commander.

When the investigation is being conducted by Professional
Standards or the Internal Affairs Unit, the employee will be
afforded the protections outlined in Sub-Section (C) of this
Article.

The interview shall be conducted at a reasonable hour,
preferably at a time when the employee is on duty, or during the
normal waking hours for the employee. If such interview is
conducted during off-duty time, the employee shall be
compensated in accordance with regular overtime procedures.

The employee shall be informed prior to the interview of the
name and rank of the person in charge of the interview, the
interviewing officers, and all other persons to be present during
the interview. All questions directed to the employee during the
interview shall be asked by only one interviewer at one time.

The interview session shall be for a reasonable period taking
into consideration gravity and complexity of the issue being
investigated. The person being interviewed shall be allowed to
attend his own personal physical necessities, telephone calls,
and rest periods, with one ten (10) minute intermission every
hour.

Each employee involved in an investigation shall be given a
form or card outlining the expressed language and protections
in Article 18 prior to questioning.

Unless agreed to by the employee, the CITY shall not divulge
PAGE 52P

the reason for any disciplinary action that is not appealed
beyond the Human Resources Director. The CITY shall make
every reasonable effort to insure that no employee’s home
address, home telephone number or photograph of the
employee which the CITY may possess, is released to the news
media, or for public consumption. Should it be determined that
this information was released, this, in and of itself, shall not be
reason for change, in any fashion, of the disciplinary action that
was imposed. However, if it is determined that this information
was released by a CITY employee, that employee shall be
disciplined in accordance with appropriate rules, UNION
contracts, the CITY Charter and CITY Code.

In the event that the procedures set forth in this Section and
Article, (excluding Sub-Section 1), are not followed, the charges
against the employee will be dismissed without prejudice.

All rights provided in this Article shall apply to the second and
subsequent interview of the accused employee regarding the
same investigation.

ARTICLE 18b

RELIEF FROM DUTY: Relief from duty may be used in limited
circumstances. An employee may be relieved of duty under the
following circumstances.

A.

An employee scheduled to go on duty or is on duty and the
employee is physically or mentally incapacitated to the extent
that in the opinion of his superior it would be unsafe to allow the
employee to go on duty or continue on duty.

An employee is scheduled to go on duty or is on duty and some
matter comes to the attention of his superior which in his opinion
is of such serious nature that would warrant his being removed
from duty.

Relief from duty is a temporary situation and there is no loss of
salary or benefits during this period.
PAGE 53P

ARTICLE 19

ATTENDANCE IN COURT, CONFERENCES, TRAINING, & OTHER MEETINGS

SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

Attendance in court or before an administrative tribunal in connection
with an employee's officially assigned duties, the performance of other
authorized duties in connection with CITY business or authorized
attendance at a trade or professional meeting which relates directly to
official CITY business during his duty shift shall not be considered
leaves of absence. Any employee who is officially authorized to attend
such functions or meetings shall be paid at his base rate of pay for the
period of attendance.

If an employee is required to attend County Court, District Court, or
United States District Court during his off-duty periods, he shall be
compensated at a minimum of three (3) hours at time and a half (1%)
or the actual hours in attendance at time and a half (11%), whichever is
greater.

If an employee is required to attend a Personnel Board hearing without
the issuance of a subpoena or with or without forty-eight (48) hour
notice, during off-duty periods, he shall be compensated at a minimum
of two (2) hours straight time or two (2) times the number of hours, for
actual time and attendance, whichever is greater.

If an employee is required to attend a Personnel Board hearing
through the issuance of a subpoena or by the giving of forty-eight (48)
hours notice or other meeting directly related to his official duties,
during his off-duty periods, he shall be compensated at a minimum of
two (2) hours at straight time or one and one-half (1%) times the
number of hours, for actual time and attendance, whichever is greater.

Employees who voluntarily or who are ordered to attend training
seminars, workshops, or schooling outside the City of Omaha shall be
paid at their base pay while in attendance at such functions and shall
not be entitled to overtime, call-in, or any minimum hours of pay.

The CITY shall give all employees notice of any schooling or training
available. The City of Omaha will agree to provide a minimum of
sixteen (16) hours of department-wide in-service training per year for
every sworn Police employee. Additionally, the City will make every
reasonable effort to provide an additional eight (8) hours of training per
year. The exact items that sworn Police employees will be trained
upon will be at the discretion of the Police Chief.
SECTION 5

SECTION 6

SECTION 7

SECTION 8

SECTION 9

PAGE 54P

In the event an employee is required to or voluntarily accepts an
assignment, requiring the employee to attend and give testimony
before any court or quasi judicial tribunal more than one hundred miles
from the corporate limits of the City of Omaha such employee’s
hours/work shifts may be changed or adjusted (PO-45) to
accommodate his/her travel and attendance. Conversely, if under
such circumstances attendance is required, or voluntarily accepted,
before a court or quasi judicial tribunal less than one hundred miles
from the corporate limits of the City of Omaha such employee’s
hours/work shifts will not be changed or adjusted without the voluntary
consent of the employee.

In the event an employee is assigned to or voluntarily accepts the
responsibility for traveling outside the limits of the City of Omaha for
the purposes of taking custody of a prisoner and such destination is
more than 100 miles from the corporate limits of the City of Omaha,
such employee’s hours/duty shifts may be changed to accommodate
this assignment. Conversely, if the employee is assigned to or
voluntarily accepts the responsibility for traveling to a location to take
custody of a prisoner when of Omaha, such employee’s hours/duty
shifts will not be adjusted for the purposes described herein without the
voluntary consent of the employee.

Any voluntary training attended by an employee may serve as the
basis for adjusting or changing that employee’s hours/duty shifts.

Nothing contained herein shall allow the splitting of days off unless
same is the subject of a mutual agreement by and between the CITY
and the employee involved. The Police Administration shall notify the
UNION of an agreement reached pursuant to this paragraph.

For the purpose of this Agreement, Temporary Duty Assignment (TDA)
is defined as assignment to any duty shift other than the employee's
regular duty shift. Any affected employees duties on TDA, whether by
assignment, employee consent, or mutual agreement, shall not include
appearance in court or administrative tribunals. Nor will the affected
employee be directed to perform enforcement, investigative or
administrative duties.

The CITY may assign any employee to TDA consisting of one (1)
continuous eight (8) hour shift in a calendar month for the purpose of
attending meetings. The CITY shall provide the employee not less
than three (3) days notice, and shall not assign any employee to
temporary duty assignments more than four (4) times in a calendar
year.
PAGE 55P

With the consent of the employee, the CITY may assign any employee
to TDA of two (2) days, each consisting of one (1) continuous eight (8)
hour shift, within a calendar month.

The CITY may assign any employee to TDA exceeding the two (2) day
limit only with the express consent of the employee and the UNION.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

SECTION 5

PAGE 56P
ARTICLE 20

HOLIDAYS

New Years Day

Martin Luther King's Birthday

President's Day

Memorial Day

Independence Day

Labor Day

Veteran's Day

Thanksgiving Day

The Friday immediately following Thanksgiving Day

Christmas Day

Patriots Day (September 11" or as designated by the Federal
Government or the Mayor; this holiday begins in the 2007 payroll year)

The Mayor and President of the UNION will meet and determine the
specific calendar days for the above.

For those employees working under a card system, or the scheduling
set forth in Article 15 - Section 10, the holidays shall be observed in
accordance with Section 1 hereof. For those employees who do not
work under the card system, whenever a holiday falls on a Sunday, the
following Monday shall be observed as the holiday. Whenever a
holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed as
the holiday.

All work performed on any observed holiday shall be compensated for
at the rate of one and one-half (1 1/2) times the actual number of hours
worked on such holiday. In addition to holiday pay an employee shall
also receive his straight time pay for the day worked on the observed
holiday.

Whenever a holiday occurs during an employee's regularly scheduled
day off, such employee shall receive compensation for the holiday on
the basis of one (1) duty shift of pay at straight time at the employee's
base pay at the time of the observed holiday..

Whenever an observed holiday falls during an employee's authorized
leave, such observed holiday shall not be charged against the
employee's authorized leave; provided that the employee shall not be
compensated for the observed holiday in accordance with the
provisions of Section 4 hereof.
SECTION 6

SECTION 7

SECTION 8

SECTION 9

PAGE 57P

Employees who are absent without leave on the work day immediately
preceding or following the observed holiday shall not be entitled to
holiday pay or other provisions of this Article. Any suspension made
under the provisions of this Agreement shall be treated as absence
without leave under this Section. Any employee who is on Injured on
Duty status on the date of the observed holiday shall receive holiday
pay.

Beginning in the 2007 payroll year, all employees not assigned to
Uniform Patrol shall be required to work the following nine (9) holidays
per year unless leave is granted pursuant to normal procedures:

Martin Luther King's Birthday
President's Day

Memorial Day
Independence Day

Labor Day

Patriots Day

Veteran's Day

Thanksgiving Day

Day after Thanksgiving

Only probationary employees may be directed not to work a regularly
scheduled holiday.

“SPECIAL TIME OFF” BANK: Prior to this contract, employees were
allowed to bank hours into a “special time off’ bank. Some employees
still maintain balances in this bank. Employees may cash out those
hours or utilize those hours for time off pursuant to the rules for the
granting of annual leave (Article 13).

However, an employee shall be paid any accumulated balance in
his/her “special time off’ bank upon their retirement. It is understood
that this money will be paid as wages to each employee and from the
gross amount normal wage deductions will be taken, including pension
contribution, and that the pension contribution will be paid into the
pension system. The employee has the right not to utilize or cash out
any hours in their “special time off’ bank until his/her separation from
City service. The City shall not deduct leave time from this “special
time off” bank unless specifically requested by the employee. The City
shall not pay out the holiday hours in the “special time off’ bank unless
specifically requested by employee.

Effective September 3, 2009, through December 25, 2010, employees
of the rank of Police Officer hired on the following dates: 9-23-2002; 6-
23-2003; 1-5-2004; 8-16-2004; 10-25-2004; 3-28-2005; and 6-5-2006;
PAGE 58P

shall receive special time off at the overtime rate in lieu of the payment
of overtime for work performed on any holiday designated in this
Article. This special time off accumulated shall never be paid in cash to
any employee and may be used only for actual time off.

Effective December 27, 2009, each Employee shall receive special
time off at the overtime rate instead of the payment for the initial 4.5
hours of overtime worked in the 2010 payroll year. This special time
off bank accumulated shall never be paid in cash to any employee and
may be used only for actual time off.

Effective December 27, 2009, each Employee shall receive special
time off at the overtime rate in lieu of the payment of overtime for hours
worked on the holidays of President's Day and Labor Day. This
special time off accumulated shall never be paid in cash to any
employee and may be used only for actual time off. Such special time
off for these two (2) holidays is for the 2010 payroll year only.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

PAGE 59P
ARTICLE 21
OVERTIME, CALL-IN PAY, & STANDBY PAY

For employees normally working an 8-hour day, work performed by
employees in excess of eight (8) hours per day shall be compensated
at the rate of one and one-half (1 1/2) times for number of hours
worked in excess of eight (8) hours per day and in excess of the
normally scheduled work week. For employees working the card
system as set forth in Article 15, Section 10, work performed by an
employee in excess of 8 hours 30 minutes shall be compensated at the
rate of one and one-half (1 1/2) times for number of hours worked in
excess of 8 hours 30 minutes per day and in excess of the normally
scheduled work week. For employees normally working an approved
10 or 12-hour day, work performed in excess of 10 or 12 hours
respectively shall be compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1
1/2) times for number of hours worked in excess of 10 or 12 hours
respectively per day and in excess of the normally scheduled work
week. Overtime shall not be paid twice for the same hours worked.
Holidays (worked or not worked) shall be considered hours worked for
the purpose of overtime, however all other paid leave time including
annual leave, sick leave, funeral leave, and compensatory time shall
not be considered as hours worked for the purpose of computing daily
overtime in connection with the regularly scheduled tour of duty.

If an employee is called to duty during his off-duty time and such duty
time does not merge with his scheduled tour of duty, such employee
shall be paid a minimum of four (4) hours at the overtime rate of or the
actual number of hours worked at the overtime rate, whichever is
greater. Provided however, that the provisions of this Section shall not
apply where leave has been cancelled pursuant to the provisions of
Section 9, Article 13. Call-in pay is applicable only when the employee
must actually report for duty to somewhere other than his home
residence. Call-in pay shall not be paid for work performed by simply
using the telephone from a location other than the worksite. All call-in
pay must be ordered and approved by the employee's supervisor.

In calculating overtime pay, the following rules shall apply:

If an employee works less than eight (8) minutes of overtime, he shall
not receive any compensation for overtime. If an employee works
eight (8) minutes of overtime, and less than 23 minutes of overtime, he
shall receive overtime pay of 15 minutes. If the employee works 23
minutes or more, but less than 38 minutes of overtime, he shall receive
overtime compensation of one half (2) hour. If the employee works 38
minutes or more of overtime, but less than 53 of overtime, he shall be
SECTION 4

SECTION 5

SECTION 6

PAGE 60P

compensated for 45 minutes of overtime. If the employee works in
excess of 53 minutes to one (1) hour, he shall be compensated for one
hour of overtime.

Employees may be temporarily assigned to duty shifts other than their
regular duty shifts for the purpose of in-service training and shall not
receive call-in pay; provided, however, that notice be given at least
three (3) working days in advance of the required reporting time.

Each employee shall receive from the Police Department a copy of all
overtime slips or other such documentation presented by that
employee within fourteen (14) days of the overtime worked.

Operational necessity of the City may require police officers to be
considered an “Off-Duty Contact Officer’ and/or be placed on
“Standby” status.

An Off-Duty Contact Officer is further defined as an officer of any rank who is
designated by a command officer to be available for assignment outside their
regular duty work hours. Such assignment may include but is not limited to
providing assistance via telephone. Standby status is further defined as any
officer who has been ordered to cease any activity that would prevent them
from effectively performing their specialty job to which they are potentially
being called out to duty for, ie. SWAT team, traffic investigator, etc. All
designations either as an Off-Duty Contact Officer or Standby status must be
authorized by a supervisor of Lieutenant rank or above (or designee). When
operationally practical a standby or Off-Duty Contact schedule shall be
posted and available within their respective units. An employee who is
designated as an Off-Duty Contact Officer or placed on standby status must
be available for contact by pager or telephone. During this time period the
employee is able to engage in non-work related activities. Upon call out, the
employee is expected to be capable of performing assigned duties and is to
respond in accordance with department instructions. The employee is
responsible for informing their supervisor of prescribed drugs or alcohol use
that would render them incapable of responding to a call out.

Off-Duty Contact Officers shall be paid thirty (30) minutes of overtime per day
that he/she is designated as a standby or Off-Duty Contact Officer.
Additionally, such employee shall be paid overtime for the total hours actually
worked in a day. For example, an employee who takes five (5) seven-minute
phone calls during a day shall be paid for thirty-five (35) minutes of overtime.
Officers on standby status shall be paid thirty (30) minutes of overtime
minimum or such employee shall be paid overtime for their total hours of their
standby time, whichever is greater, from the time the officer was notified to
the time they are allowed to re-engage in their previous activity.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

SECTION 5

PAGE 61P
ARTICLE 22
ALLOWANCE FOR CLOTHING

Each plain-clothes employee who during a monthly payroll period has
received compensation from the CITY for work performed or utilization
of paid leave shall receive an allotment for the purchase and
maintenance of personal items of clothing and equipment as
prescribed by the CITY, provided that the CITY shall furnish and
maintain all other items of clothing and equipment. This allotment shall
be $40.00 per month to be paid in equal increments coinciding with the
employee's pay periods.

In addition to the allowance in Section 1 above, all employees shall
receive $533 per year in the form of a voucher in order to purchase
approved equipment. Such approvals for voucher reimbursement shall
not be unreasonably denied. Effective December 14, 2008 (the
beginning of the 2009 payroll year) until December 25, 2010 (the last
day of the 2010 payroll year), all sworn employees shall waive this
equipment voucher.

If there is a termination of employment, the uniform allotment provided
in Section 1 hereof shall be paid on a pro-rata basis for compensated
hours during the payroll period for work performed or utilization of paid
leave.

Payments made pursuant to the provision of the Nebraska Workmen's
Compensation Act, payment at termination of accrued vacation leave,
and payment at termination of earned compensatory time shall not be
considered compensation for work performed or utilization of paid
leave within the meaning of this Article. lOD payments shall be
considered compensation within the meaning of this Article.

Any employee whose official authorized uniform listed below in Section
9 is damaged or lost in the line of duty while on duty shall have same
replaced by the CITY. The terms of this provision shall apply only to
official authorized uniform and equipment.

If such uniform item's actual cost exceeds the cost of the CITY issued
equivalent, such item shall be replaced at the cost of the CITY issued
item, except for flashlight which shall be replaced up to $60 or the
actual cost to the employee, whichever is less. Flashlights will be
replaced maximum of once during any 12 month period. For any
replacement, employee shall be required to furnish purchase receipt.
SECTION 6

SECTION 7

PAGE 62P

Any other item of uniform or equipment damaged or lost in the line of
duty while on duty (including watches) shall be replaced by the CITY,
however, no replacement shall exceed $125.00 per item except that
eyeglasses shall be replaced or repaired not to exceed Two Hundred -
Fifty Dollars ($250) per pair. Replacement or repair of an employee’s
revolver shall be up to, but not exceed, Five Hundred Dollars ($500).
The terms of this Section shall also apply to civilian clothing for C.1.B.
personnel.

The CITY and the UNION shall mutually establish a Uniform and
Equipment Committee consisting of five (5) members; two (2)
appointed by the UNION President, two (2) appointed by the Police
Chief, and one appointed by mutual agreement. The Committee shall
meet monthly, or as the Committee deems necessary. The Committee
shall be advisory in nature and shall research and evaluate selected
items of interest, and advise concerning rules and regulations on
uniforms and equipment. The Committee's purpose shall be
maintenance of standards of safety for the police employee.

The Uniform Committee shall keep up to date and furnish the UNION
and the CITY with a complete product list of all authorized or optional
uniform wearing apparel, service revolvers, leather goods, and body
armor. The list shall include manufacturer and product name, address,
phone number, and manufacturer suggested "wear out" period. For
each item where information is not available, it shall be so indicated.
The CITY, in its efforts to provide this information is merely passing on
manufacturer's information, and this in no way implies any warranty or
guarantee of such items on the part of the CITY. The product list shall
be sent to the President of the UNION and the Police Chief by 30 June
of each year and will be updated each time a new item is authorized
for purchase.

The CITY shall continue to provide a list (by make and model) of
semi-automatic, double action weapons which shall be approved, as
optional equipment, for use as employee's service revolver. The CITY
shall maintain such list and shall have the right, from time to time, to
add weapons to the list. It is understood that the entire cost for
obtaining and maintaining such optional weapon (cost of weapon and
appropriate magazines all ammunition - except street ammunition; and
cost of upkeep) shall be borne solely by the employee.

The CITY shall provide the ammunition for rifle certification and
recertification. The City’s obligation to provide this rifle ammunition is
limited to 300 rounds per certification or recertification attempt.
SECTION 8

SECTION 9

SECTION 10

PAGE 63P

Employees shall not be entitled to any new issue of uniform except by
way of replacement of non-serviceable items of uniform which shall be
replaced on an exchange basis. Any determination as to serviceability
and fair wear and tear shall be made by the Police Chief or his
designee utilizing the manufacturer suggested wear out period and
maintenance of standards of safety and appearance for the Police
Department.

Uniform shall consist of hat, shirt, tie, and O.P.D. patches, trousers and
body armor, belt, utility belt which shall include, holster, ammunition
carriers, street ammunition, cuff pouch, mace and mace pouch, baton
and baton ring, portable radio carrying case, boots or shoes (one pair
per year unless replaced pursuant to Section 4, above), riot helmet,
one winter coat, rainhat and raincoat, and flashlight.

The uniform for employees who are newly employed shall be provided
by the CITY to include: hat, ties, two summer and two winter shirts
with O.P.D. patches, two trousers and striping, body armor, belt, utility
belt which shall include holster, ammunition carriers, street
ammunition, cuff pouch, handcuffs, mace and mace pouch, baton and
baton case, portable radio carrying case, boots or shoes, riot helmet,
winter coat, rainhat and raincoat, training cap, two (2) utility training
uniforms, sweatshirt and sweatpant, and flashlight.

Body armor may be upgraded to a higher priced model with additional
expense being the responsibility of the requesting employee. Ballistic
capabilities must be equal to or exceeding minimum department
standards. Upon expiration of manufacturer’s warranty or termination
of employment, body armor shall be turned over to the police supply
unit.
SECTION 1

SECTION 1A

PAGE 64P
ARTICLE 23

HEALTH CARE

Health Care Benefit: The CITY shall provide group health care
benefits to employees and covered dependents. The health care
coverage provided herein shall commence on the first day of the month
following employment, provided that the employee has completed and
submitted to the Human Resources Department the application forms
required by the carrier. The health care benefits provided herein shall
be substantially similar to the benefits currently provided under the
master contract on file with and administered by the CITY’s third party
administrator or health insurance provider, a summary of which is
attached as Appendix "C".

The health care benefits provided herein shall include, at a minimum:

A. In-patient Hospital Precertification: - All in-hospital admissions
must be certified. Planned admissions must be certified in
advance. Emergency admissions must be certified within 24
hours of admission or as soon as medically possible. The
penalty for failure to certify is $500 of the hospital charges.
Hospitalizations beyond the certified number of days must be
recertified. If the hospitalization is recertified, there is no
penalty. The penalty for hospitalization past certified number of
days without recertification: is a reduction by 50% of both
physician and hospital charges.

Hospital certifications (and recertifications) shall be phoned in to
a telephone number provided each employee on his |.D. card.
The employee or any person on his behalf (e.g., spouse, nurse,
doctor, hospital personnel) may precertify.

Any disputes regarding precertification or recertification in a
particular case may be presented to the CITY’S Disputes
Committee.

B. This is a Base/Major Medical Plan with a Preferred Provider
(PPO) network component. For Base Services (inpatient care,
and inpatient or outpatient surgeries), when services are
rendered by a preferred provider of the third party administrator,
there will be no deductible or coinsurance required from the
covered person. For Major Medical services, there will be a
$100 Deductible and 20% Coinsurance requirement, up to a
Deductible and Coinsurance Limit of $500 per person--per
calendar year with family aggregate of twice the individual
PAGE 65P

amount. When services are rendered by an out-of-network
(non-Preferred) provider, a $300 deductible and 20%
coinsurance will be applicable to all services. The Deductible
and Coinsurance Limit for the non-PPO services will be $1,000
for an individual and/or $2,000 aggregate per family per
calendar year.

Effective December 27, 2009, there will be a deductible of $300
per year, regardless of the employee’s election of coverage or if
services were rendered in or out of network. The City shall pay
80% coinsurance and the employee shall pay 20% coinsurance,
regardless of whether services were rendered in or out of
network.

The maximum lifetime benefit per plan member is unlimited.

Prescription Coverage: The CITY agrees to institute an
employee “prescription card" plan. The parties agree that such
plan will include:

1. Each employee will be issued a card which will allow the
employee or covered family members to purchase
prescriptions by paying, at the time and site of purchase,
20% of the cost of each prescription after said employee
has met a yearly deductible.

2. The yearly deductible shall be $60.00 for single or family.
The prescription deductible and co-payment are
separate and distinct from the health insurance
deductible and co-payment, except that prescriptions
dispensed in hospital shall be applied to the health
insurance deductible and co-payment.

3. Unless specifically required by the physician, generic
drugs will be dispensed whenever possible.

4. The card will be valid at the majority of pharmacies in the
Omaha area, however, it is understood that some
pharmacies may not participate. In order to be covered
for in-City charges, the employee must use a
participating pharmacy.
PAGE 66P

5. After an employee has expended $500 after payment of
deductible (i.e, 20% of $2,500 post-deductible
prescription expenses) in a given calendar year, the card
will allow the employee to obtain prescriptions at a flat
rate of $3.00 per prescription.

6. It is understood that the employee percentage cost per
prescription may be higher when prescriptions are
purchased outside the City if participating pharmacies are
available. Additionally, the employee will be required to
pay the total cost and then seek reimbursement through
a claim filing process.

7. Covered persons who require medication(s) for an
extended period of time (in excess of thirty days) may be
required to purchase such medications from a designated
dispensary through the U.S. mail.

Effective June 1, 2001, coverage for corrective eye surgery is
eliminated as a covered benefit for the subscriber’s dependent.
Effective June 1, 2001, all fertility procedures and fertility drug
coverage is eliminated as a covered benefit for the subscribers
and their dependents.

WELLNESS PROGRAM: Upon legal execution of the labor
agreement, the City will institute a Wellness Program where the
City will pay, per calendar year, the first $200 for each covered
individual for preventative services of well baby exams, routine
physicals, school physicals, annual well woman examinations,
routine colonoscopies, routine mammograms, immunizations,
and pap smears. Once the $200 is paid on any of these listed
preventive services, any further preventative services are
subject to the normal deductible and coinsurance under the
health care plan.

VISION PROGRAM: Upon the legal execution of the labor
agreement, the City shall provide the following vision plan per
covered employee: $40 benefit payable each calendar year for
an exam (including refractions) and $150 benefit per calendar
year for eyeglasses, frames, contact lenses. In the event that
dependent vision coverage is determined to be a prevalent
benefit in the comparability determination as referenced in this
agreement, such coverage, as stated above, shall apply to
covered employee’s eligible dependents effective the first pay
period of the 2011 payroll year.
SECTION 2

PAGE 67P

H. HEALTH CARE PREMIUM: The health care benefits designated
in Appendix C shall be dependent upon payment of a premium
(via employee paycheck withholding) as follows:

Family coverage: 15% of the blended health care premium
equivalency rate.

Single + 1 coverage: 14% of the blended health care premium
equivalency rate.

Single coverage: 10% of the blended health care premium
equivalency rate.

The blended health care premium equivalency rate shall be
determined using the experience of both current active sworn
employees and all future sworn retirees (those who retire under
the Career Overtime Average (COTA) Pension Plan provision).

Effective the first payroll period of 2011, 2012, and 2013, the
City and the Union shall use the “midpoint” methodology to
establish the employee health care premium percentage. In
order to establish such midpoint, the City and the Union will use
the array of comparable cities, as listed in Article 37 and
Appendix “D”.

Premiums from comparable cities with multiple health care
plans shall be determined using the employee premium paid for
the plan selected by the majority of sworn police employees in
that city.

Should the parties not be able to agree to any of the above
calculations, the specific calculation under disagreement shall
be submitted to arbitration pursuant to the grievance procedures
in Article 8 of this agreement to hear evidence and determine
comparable health insurance premiums by the above criteria.
Should either party wish to use the Expedited Arbitration as
established by the FMCS process in order to settle their
disagreement, then such arbitration process shall be used.

DENTAL BENEFIT: The CITY shall provide single dental coverage for
the employee, and shall pay 70% of the cost of the premium if the
employee elects such coverage. The CITY shall provide family dental
coverage and shall pay 38% of the cost of the premium if the employee
elects such coverage. The employee shall have the right to select the
SECTION 3

SECTION 4

PAGE 68P

CITY’S dental plan or the HMO Plan, however the premium obligation
for the HMO plan shall not exceed the amount of the premium for the
CITY plan. Under the CITY plan the limits of the benefits shall be:
orthodontic dental work - Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000) per person
per lifetime; non-orthodontic dental work - $1,000 per person, per
calendar year.

Employees shall be given a two (2) week period in November of each
year, as designated by the CITY Human Resources Department, to
change dental programs. No further changes between plans will be
then allowed until the following November. Such changes will go into
effect January 1 of the following year.

Effective the first payroll period of 2011, 2012, and 2013, the City and
the Union shall use the “midpoint” methodology to establish the
employee dental care premium percentages for single and family
coverage. In order to establish such midpoint, the City and the Union
will use the array of comparable cities that provide such paid coverage,
as listed in Article 37 and Appendix “D”.

Premiums from comparable cities that provide paid dental care shall be
determined using the employee premium paid for the care selected by
the majority of sworn police employees in that city.

Should the parties not be able to agree to any of the above
calculations, the specific calculation under disagreement shall be
submitted to arbitration pursuant to the grievance procedures in Article
8 of this agreement to hear evidence and determine comparable health
insurance premiums by the above criteria. Should either party wish to
use the Expedited Arbitration process as established by the FMCS in
order to settle their disagreement, then such arbitration process shall
be used.

Effective upon the legal execution of the agreement, sworn employees
and their dependents shall now have composite fillings covered under
their dental coverage.

Life Insurance Benefit: The CITY shall also provide a $40,000 Group
Term Life Insurance Policy for each employee and such employee
shall pay 3% of the premium each month.

An employee may decline to pay such premium and thereby decline
CITY coverage only if he/she has in full force and effect equivalent
health insurance coverage from another source. The CITY shall be the
sole judge in determining equivalency and such decision shall not be
appealable by grievance or any other legal action.
SECTION 5

SECTION 6

SECTION 7

SECTION 8

PAGE 69P

If an employee covered by this Agreement is married to another
employee covered by this Agreement or another CITY employee, such
covered employee may decline to pay such premium and rely on
spouse's policy for family coverage. However, it is understood that in
such a situation benefits would only be paid up to the limits of that one

policy.

The CITY shall not be responsible for providing any life, health or
dental coverage referred to in this Article for any employee who within
any calendar month has not received any compensation from the CITY
for work performed or utilization of paid leave (except as provided in
Article 13, Section 15), except as provided under the Family Medical
Leave Act or COBRA. Payments made pursuant to the provisions of
the Nebraska Workmen's Compensation Act, payment at termination of
accrued vacation leave, and payment at termination of earned
compensatory time shall not be considered compensation for work
performed or utilization of paid leave within the meaning of this
Section. IOD payments shall be considered compensation within the
meaning of this Section.

If an employee for whom the CITY is not providing life, health or dental
coverage by virtue of the provisions of Sections 4 and 5 desires to
continue such coverage, if available, it shall be the responsibility of the
employee to make the necessary arrangements for coverage in
accordance with the terms and conditions prescribed by the carrier, or
CITY, at the employee's cost.

If an employee for whom the CITY is not providing life, health or dental
coverage by virtue of the provisions of Sections 4 and 5, becomes
re-eligible for coverage with the CITY such coverage shall commence
at such time as coverage is provided in accordance with the prescribed
terms and conditions of the group policy, or if the employee has
maintained such coverage at his own cost at such time as the
employee becomes re-eligible for such coverage.

The CITY and UNION shall study and make recommendations on
reducing the CITY’S cost of health coverage. The committee will
review the present hospital and medical insurance program and
determine modifications needed to reduce the cost of health care to
the CITY.

The joint committee shall be made up of six (6) members: the Chief
Negotiator for the UNION, the Labor Relations Director, two members
from the UNION negotiation team and two from the CITY negotiation
team.
SECTION 9

SECTION 10

PAGE 70P

The CITY shall provide employees subject to “street duty" with
Hepatitis and Tuberculosis vaccinations. The vaccination program
shall include all medically necessary vaccine and follow-up; it shall be
given on the employees’ off duty time; and it shall be provided at the
employee's option.

The CITY will select the provider at it's sole option.

The family of any sworn employee who dies while on duty during the
performance of his official police duties shall be provided health care
and dental coverage by the CITY consistent with those benefits
provided by this Article. Said health insurance benefits are hereby
provided to the surviving spouse and dependent children of any sworn
employee qualifying under this Section by virtue of a work related
death, as described hereinabove, occurring on or after the effective
date of this Agreement. Provided, that said health benefits (1) for any
surviving spouse qualifying under this Section shall cease upon his/her
remarriage or the attainment of age sixty-five (65) or whatever age of
entitlement to Medicare as set by Federal Law, whichever event comes
later. In the event the spouse of the decedent does not qualify for
Medicare, the health insurance coverage provided herein shall cease
upon the surviving spouse’s 65" birthday; and (2) for any dependent
children shall extend through age nineteen (19) or through age twenty-
three (23) so long as such children are full time students.
PAGE 71P

ARTICLE 24
INJURIES IN THE LINE OF DUTY - TEMPORARY DISABILITY

SECTION 1 Any employee who is a member of the Police and Fire Retirement
System who shall sustain injuries or sickness, arising out of and in the
course of his employment which are of such a character as to unfit him
temporarily for active duty, shall be paid his full base pay for the period
of such temporary disability, but not to exceed three hundred sixty-five
(365) calendar days for each such injury or sickness. In addition
thereto, the CITY shall pay such medical, surgical and hospital
expenses as may be incurred as a result of the injury or sickness, but
the salary and other benefits, being in excess of benefits under the
Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Act, shall be in lieu thereof.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

PAGE 72P
ARTICLE 25

LIMITED DUTY

Employees who by virtue of accident, injury or sickness, are unable to
perform their regular assigned job duties and are on authorized leave
or injured on duty status in excess of three (3) working days may be
required by the Police Chief, or his designated representative, to return
to work to perform such limited duties as assigned and designated by
the Police Chief, or his designated representative; provided, however,
that there is a doctor's certificate evidencing the employees' abilities to
perform such limited duties. Each such incidence of limited duty shall
not exceed one (1) calendar year from date of such accident, injury or
sickness.

Seniority, as defined in Article 10, shall be inapplicable in all respects
to any employee required to return to work under the provisions of this
Article.

The provisions of this Article shall not be subject to appeal or review by
an arbitrator, Personnel Board, or any Court of Law.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

SECTION 5

PAGE 73P
ARTICLE 26
UNION BUSINESS

UNION representatives, not exceeding five (5) in number, shall be
entitled to participate in functions relative to the operation of this
Agreement or to attend UNION functions. Leave with pay for the
purposes recited in this section shall be limited to a total of 1,000 hours
for all UNION representatives per calendar year.

Members of the UNION negotiating team, not exceeding seven (7) in
number, will be carried on Special Duty while actually engaged in
negotiations with the CITY. During negotiation years, the UNION may
be granted additional UNION leave in 100 hour increments by the
Chief of Police.

UNION officials, not exceeding four (4) in number, shall be permitted to
take leave without pay for the purpose of attending UNION functions or
to participate in functions relative to the operation of this Agreement.

The CITY will assign the President of the UNION to the "B" shift (with
his consent) without regard to Article 10, Seniority, during the duration
of his presidency.

In addition to the number of hours granted for UNION leave above, the
UNION is hereby granted an additional 200 UNION leave hours per
calendar year to be designated as "hardship hours." These hours may
only be utilized by the UNION if they are used by an employee who
has an insufficient number of hours of leave to cover a hardship
situation. The granting of such hours shall be upon mutual agreement
of the UNION president and the CITY Labor Relations Director, who
shall establish criteria for the granting of such hours.

The Union and the City may also agree to an additional 200 hardship
hours (past the aforementioned 200 hours in this section) per calendar
year based upon the following criteria: an unusually large number of
employees have had need to use these “hardship hours,” or one
employee has had need to use an unusually high amount of “hardship
hours. It is understood that, by this section, the Union may be granted
a total of 400 hardship hours by mutual agreement of the CITY Labor
Relations Director and the UNION president.
SECTION 6

PAGE 74P

UNION PRESIDENT / REPRESENTATIVE — FULL TIME RELEASE
STATUS: In accordance with the recent ruling of the Commission of
Industrial Relations, a sworn employee of the Omaha Police
Department elected and/or serving as President of the Omaha Police
Union local 101, or another elected Union representative designated
by the Union President shall, beginning Monday, March 16, 2009, be
granted full release time to conduct union business. While working in
this full time release capacity, the Union President, or his/her designee,
shall receive his/her full salary and benefits to which he/she is normally
entitled as a sworn member of the Omaha Police Department, of
equivalent rank, working a (40) hour Monday through Friday work
week on B shift. This full time Union representative shall be assigned
under the office of the Chief, but shall be free to conduct the affairs of
the Omaha Police Union local 101.

The Union President or President’s designee shall not be entitled to
overtime resulting from engaging in Union activity, unless otherwise
ordered by the Chief or his designee, but shall not be restricted in
his/her ability to request consideration for, and participation in, police
related overtime assignments available to any other sworn employee
of the same rank.

In the event that the Union President elects to assign another elected
union representative as his/her designee, such designee shall not hold
a rank greater than the rank of Sergeant.

On May 1° of each year, the Union shall advise the Chief of who will
hold the full time release position.

Any changes to the full time release position mid year shall be
communicated to the Chief no less than 30 days prior to the change.

The Union President reserves the right to not be carried on full time
status and instead hold his/her current assignment.

The Union President reserves the right to not assign a full time release
designee.
PAGE 75P

ARTICLE 27
SAFETY COMMITTEE

The CITY and the UNION agree jointly to establish a safety committee consisting of
seven (7) members. Said Committee shall be composed of three (3) representatives
designated by the UNION, the Police Chief or his designee, one (1) representative
designated by the Police Chief, and the CITY Labor Relations Director, or his designee.
The seventh (7) member shall be elected by majority vote of the aforementioned
individuals.

This committee will meet one time a month, providing that upon a majority vote the next
meeting may be cancelled on a month-to-month basis. Meetings of the Safety
Committee shall be on the employees regularly scheduled duty shift; or, such employee
shall receive overtime for time actually in attendance at such meetings; or employees
will be carried on special duty status, as determined by the Police Chief or his designee.

The recommendations of the Safety Committee will be forwarded to the Mayor and the
Police Chief.
PAGE 76P

ARTICLE 28
LONGEVITY
SECTION 1 Each employee who during a biweekly payroll period has received
compensation from the CITY for work performed or utilization of paid
leave shall receive longevity pay in addition to his base pay on the
basis of the following schedule. The employee shall be paid in equal
increments, coinciding with the pay periods.
The schedule for longevity will be as follows:
Years of Yearly Payment 2011 (3% increase)
Service
5 $678 ($26.08 per pay period) $698.34 ($26.86 per pay period)
6 $790 ($30.38 per pay period) $813.70 ($31.30 per pay period)
7 $838 ($32.23 per pay period) $863.14 ($33.20 per pay period)
8 $838 ($32.23 per pay period) $863.14 ($33.20 per pay period)
9 $895 ($34.42 per pay period) $921.85 ($35.46 per pay period)
10 $981 ($37.73 per pay period) $1,010.43 ($38.86 per pay period)
11 $1,150 ($44.23 per pay period) $1,184.50 ($45.56 per pay period)
12 $1,259 ($48.42 per pay period) $1,296.77 ($49.88 per pay period)
13 $1,366 ($52.54 per pay period) $1,406.98 ($54.11 per pay period)
14 $1,473 ($56.65 per pay period) $1,517.19 ($58.35 per pay period)
15 $1,580 ($60.77 per pay period) $1,627.40 ($62.59 per pay period)
16 $1,688 ($64.92 per pay period) $1,738.64 ($66.87 per pay period)
17 $1,796 ($69.08 per pay period) $1,849.88 ($71.15 per pay period)
18 $1,904 ($73.23 per pay period) $1,961.12 ($75.43 per pay period)
19 $2,026 ($77.92 per pay period) $2,086.78 ($80.26 per pay period)
20 $2,134 ($82.08 per pay period) $2,198.02 ($84.54 per pay period)
21 $2,244 ($86.31 per pay period) $2,311.32 ($88.90 per pay period)
22 $2,321 ($89.27 per pay period) $2,390.63 ($91.94 per pay period)
23 $2,397 ($92.19 per pay period) $2,468.91 ($94.96 per pay period)
24 $2,474 ($95.15 per pay period) $2,548.22 ($98.01 per pay period)
25 $2,550 ($98.08 per pay period) $2,626.50 ($101.02 per pay period)
26 $2,750 ($105.77 per pay period) $2,832.50 ($108.94 per pay period)
27 $2,850 ($109.62 per pay period) $2,935.50 ($112.90 per pay period)
28 $2,950 ($113.46 per pay period) $3,038.50 ($116.87 per pay period)
29 $3,100 ($119.23 per pay period) $3,193 ($122.81 per pay period)
30 years $3,300 ($126.92 per pay period) $3,399 ($130.73 per pay period)
or more
SECTION 2 Employees shall become eligible for longevity pay after completing four

(4) years of service with the City of Omaha Police Department.
SECTION 3

SECTION 4

SECTION 5

SECTION 6

SECTION 7

PAGE 77P

Service with the Police Department of the CITY within the meaning of
this Article shall mean all periods of time in which an employee of the
Police Department has while in such capacity received compensation
from the CITY for work performed or utilization of paid leave.
Suspension for disciplinary purposes as provided in Section 3 of Article
6 shall constitute service with the Police Department within the
meaning of this Article.

An employee shall begin to earn his longevity pay on the first pay
period of the month immediately following his longevity qualification
date.

The provisions of Section 23-148 of the Omaha Municipal Code in
effect on the date of this Agreement are inapplicable where an
employee is paid at a rate which exceeds that of an employee senior in
rank solely by virtue of the payment of longevity pay.

If there is a termination of employment, the longevity pay provided in
Section 1 hereof shall be paid on a pro-rata basis for compensated
hours during the payroll period for work performed or utilization of paid
leave.

Payments made pursuant to the provisions of the Nebraska Workers’
Compensation Act, payment at termination of accrued annual leave,
and payment at termination of earned compensatory time shall not be
considered compensation for work performed or utilization of paid
leave within the meaning of this Article. lOD payments shall be
considered compensation within the meaning of this Article.
SECTION 1

PAGE 78P
ARTICLE 29
SAVINGS CLAUSE

If any provision of this Agreement is subsequently declared by the
proper legislative or judicial authority to be unlawful, unenforceable, or
not in accordance with applicable statutes or ordinances, all other
provisions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect for the
duration of this Agreement.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

PAGE 79P
ARTICLE 30

HEALTH CARE FOR RETIREES

CITY agrees to provide health care coverage for those employees and
their dependents who retire on or after January 1, 1979. Said health
insurance coverage is to be substantially the same as that currently
provided for employees and their dependents, as more specifically
provided for in Article 23 and Appendix "C" hereof. Additionally,
employees that retire will be required to pay the requisite health care
premium for such coverage, should they choose to continue such
coverage, pursuant to Article 23. Employees that retire after the legal
execution of this agreement, shall be entitled to the same coverage
and blended health care premiums under the health insurance plan
negotiated for active bargaining unit employees from time to time.
Such coverage and blended health care premiums may change from
time to time based on the collective bargaining agreement between the
parties.

It is expressly understood and agreed to by the parties that the health
care benefit provided herein is to be an obligation of the CITY with
respect to those employees (and their dependents) who obtain:
1. a normal service retirement under the conditions set forth in
Section 2 below, or
2. aservice connected disability pension, or
3. anon-service connected disability pension for an employee who
meets the criteria for a normal service retirement as set forth in
Section 2 below.

A. If an employee retires with a normal service retirement pursuant
to Article 34, Section 3, and has a minimum of 10 years of
service but less than 20 years of service, and has reached the
minimum age of 55, he/she shall be entitled to health care
coverage, as stipulated in Section 1.

B. If an employee retires with a normal service retirement pursuant
to Article 34, Section 3, and has a minimum of 20 years of
service and has reached the minimum age of 50, he/she shall
be entitled to health care coverage, as stipulated in Section 1.

Cc. Beginning payroll year 2006, if an employee retires with a
normal service retirement pursuant to Article 34, Section 3, and
has a minimum of 22 years and 6 months of service and has
reached the minimum age of 45, he/she shall be entitled to
health care coverage, as stipulated in Section 1.
SECTION 3

SECTION 4

PAGE 80P

“GAP” INSURANCE

Beginning in payroll year 2006, if an employee retires pursuant to
Article 34, Section 3, and has a minimum of 20 years of service up to
22 years and 6 months of service, and has reached the minimum age
of 45, he/she shall be allowed to continue his/her current health care
coverage pursuant to the following criteria:

In order to continue his/her health care coverage, he/she must pay to
the CITY, on a monthly basis, the full COBRA premium. This payment
will be made by automatic deposit to the city with the proper account
set up as soon as practically possible following the date the employee
leaves CITY service. When the former employee reaches 22 years
and six months of service (had the employee continued to work),
he/she shall receive health care coverage pursuant to Section 1, above
(Employee no longer is required to pay full premium, rather they will
pay the blended premium pursuant to Article 23).

Any failure to pay the full COBRA premium will result in permanent
cancellation of health care benefits, including the right to Section 1
coverage (no premium) after the employee receives a deferred
retirement.

An employee who leaves CITY employment and pays the “gap” health
care premium pursuant to the above shall receive the same health
care coverage during the “gap” period as do sworn employees. When
such coverage is converted to Section 1 and Section 4 retiree
coverage, all other provisions of that Section shall apply.

It is further understood by and between the parties that any health care
coverage referenced above in Sections 1, 2, and 3, shall cease on the
first day of the month in which the retiree turns 65 years of age, or
whatever age of entitlement to Medicare as set by Federal Law,
whichever event comes later, or dies. In the event the retired
employee does not qualify for Medicare, the health insurance coverage
provided herein shall cease upon the employee’s 65th birthday.
PAGE 81P
ARTICLE 31

RESIDENCY

Any employee who was a member of the Omaha Police Department prior to, or is
employed during the effective period of this Agreement, shall not be restricted in his/her
right to establish residency within or outside the corporate limits of the CITY. City wheel
tax for non-residential employees shall be deducted automatically from his first pay
period in March of each year.
PAGE 82P
ARTICLE 32

MAINTENANCE OF BENEFITS

The CITY shall maintain the benefits as set forth in this Agreement for the term of this
Agreement.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

PAGE 83P
ARTICLE 33

EXAMINATIONS AND PROMOTION PROCEDURE

Notice of promotional examination shall be given one hundred twenty
(120) days prior to the administration of the initial phase of the
examination process, which examination shall take place ninety (90)
days prior to termination of the current eligibility list. At the time of
posting, such notice shall contain the date of the written exam as well
as the date(s) of the subsequent steps in the selection process. Such
notice shall include a complete bibliography upon which the
examination shall be based.

The certified promotional eligibility list shall continue in force two (2)
years, unless prior to this time all names on the certified promotional
eligibility list have been exhausted. If no names remain on the certified
promotional eligibility list, then that list shall be considered as
terminated and, within thirty (30) days, a posting of a promotional
examination shall be made in accordance with Section 1.

Eligibility requirements, including school points and seniority city
service points shall be met prior to the first day of the month in which
the first examination phase is given.

School and city service points must be earned prior to the first day of
the month in which the first examination phase is given.

It is understood and agreed that the CITY has the absolute right to
establish minimum qualifying standards for any Bargaining Unit
classification within the Omaha Police Department. Qualifying
standards shall include but are not limited to, educational, medical,
physical, testing procedures and years of experience requirements.

To be eligible for a promotional examination for a bargaining unit
classification rank within the Omaha Police Department, the candidate
must establish the minimum years of qualifying experience as a sworn
employee with the CITY Police Department, without any breaks or
interruption in service from either the date of employment or
re-employment of the employee provided that lay-off of one year or
less, any suspensions for disciplinary purposes, absence on
authorized leave with or without pay, absence while receiving
temporary total disability benefits under the Nebraska Workmen's
Compensation Act, shall not constitute a break or interruption in
service within the meaning of this Article.
SECTION 5

SECTION 6

PAGE 84P

The candidate must establish the minimum years of qualifying
experience as a sworn police officer with the Omaha Police
Department prior to the first day of the month in which the first
examination phase is given. The following minimum years of service
are required in order to take a promotional test as indicated:

A. Sergeant Test — four (4) years of service with the Omaha Police
Department.
B. Lieutenant Test — six (6) years of service with the Omaha Police

Department which must include two (2) years of service at the
rank of Sergeant within the Omaha Police Department.

Cc. Captain Test — eight (8) years of service with the Omaha Police
Department which must include two (2) years of service at the
rank of Lieutenant within the Omaha Police Department.

Vacancies in the classifications above police officer shall be filled from
the then current certified promotional list as they occur, but no later
than thirty (30) days from the date of vacancy. It is understood that
any promotion shall be retroactive to the date of the vacancy for the
purposes of seniority. Any promotion made after the 30" day will be
retroactive to the 30" day of the vacancy for the purposes of pay. If
the vacancy occurs at any time during the existence of any two (2)
year list, such vacancy shall be appointed from that list. It is also
understood that the date the employee actually undertakes the duties
of his/her new position is the date the employee’s probation begins.

College and city service points shall be included for sworn Police
Department promotional examinations as follows:

A. Such points shall be computed by the Human Resources
Department using criteria identified in the posting;

B. Such points shall not be added unless a candidate has first met
the pre-established pass/fail score for each part of the
examination;

Cc. 1. The score for the initial phase of the examination, which is a

precondition to continuing in the examination process, shall be
calculated by adding:

e The earned score on the initial phase of the
examination, which shall have a maximum of one
hundred (100) points,

e A maximum of ten (10) points for city service. As
PAGE 85P

used hereafter, city service points shall mean and be
computed as follows:

Credit for service with the City will be given on the
basis of one-twelfth (1/12") of a point per completed
month of service as a sworn member of the Police
Department, to a maximum of ten (10) points after the
service years needed to meet the experience
requirements, as identified on the posting, have been
subtracted.

A maximum of ten (10) points for college for Police
exams. As used hereafter, college shall mean and be
computed as follows:

College credits for Police promotional exams will be
given on the basis of one-twelfth (1/12") of a point for
each credit hour of completed course work toward a
Bachelor's Degree in Criminal Justice or Law
Enforcement, to a maximum of ten (10) points. A
candidate who has a post graduate degree, such as a
Master’s Degree, Ph.D., law degree, will receive ten
(10) points for college.

Credits will be evaluated on the basis of the course
catalog from the University of Nebraska at Omaha.

2. The final score from which the ranking on the eligibility list is
determined, shall be computed as follows:

70% of the percentage score (based on a 100%
scale) achieved on the subsequent phases(s) of the
examination process, plus

24% of the percentage score (based on a 100%
scale) achieved on the initial test identified in C(1)
above, plus

3% of the city service points identified in C(1) above,
(computed as a percentage of the total points
available) plus

3% of the college points identified in C(1) above
(computed as a percentage of the total points
available).

The following example serves to illustrate how such points are

allocated:

Assume that an applicant for a Police Sergeant promotional
exam achieves a score of 80% on the initial test, (the multiple-
choice exam), out of a possible 100%. Also assume that this
applicant has 10 city service points, and 5 college points. This
PAGE 86P

candidate’s scores would be combined, for a total of 95 points,
in order to determine if he/she would be invited to the second
phase of the testing process, the Assessment Center.

Assume that this candidate qualified to participate in the
Assessment Center, and achieved a rating on the Assessment
Center of 70%. The candidate’s rating of 80 on the multiple
choice will receive a weight of 24%, college and city service will
each receive a weight of 3%, respectively, and his/her rating of
70% on the Assessment Center will receive a weight of 70%.
This combined score will determine the candidate’s final ranking
on the eligibility list. In this example, this candidate’s final score
will be 72.7, which is computed as follows:

Multiple Choice exam: (This candidate answered 80% of the
questions correctly, and therefore achieved 80% of the total
possible points on this test.)

80% x 245 192

City Service (10 points out of a possible 10 or 100%):

100% x .03 = .03

College (5 points out of a possible 10 points or 50% of the
available points)

50% x .03 = .015
Assessment Center: 70% X = 49
Total: 727

Therefore, the candidate in this example received a combined
rating of .727, which is equal to 72.2% of the available points or
total number of points possible on all parts of the test combined,
based on the following:

80% of the total possible on the written test (which was
weighted 24%)

100% of the total possible number of city service points
(weighted 3%)

50% of the total possible number of college points (weighted
3%)

70% of the total possible points from the Assessment Center
(weighted 70%).
PAGE 87P

Under this contractual provision, college and city service points
will be considered during the initial phase of the exam process,
as well as the subsequent phase(s). However, these points are
assigned a lower weight when computing the final score than
they received at the initial phase.
PAGE 88P
ARTICLE 34

PENSIONS
SECTION 1: DEFINITIONS
Board: Shall mean the Board of Trustees of the System.

Member: Shall mean any person who by virtue of his employment status is participating
in the System.

Pensionable Earnings: Shall have the same meaning as the term “pensionable
earnings” as that term is defined in Chapter 22 of the Omaha Municipal Code.

Retiree: Shall mean any person receiving a disability or regular service retirement, who
is no longer contributing to the System.

System: Shall mean the Police and Fire Retirement System.
SECTION 2: CONTRIBUTIONS

To fund all benefits within this Article, each member and the CITY shall contribute to the
System. The member shall contribute every bi-weekly payroll period 14.55% of his/her
pensionable earnings. Upon the legal execution of the labor agreement, the member
shall contribute every bi-weekly payroll period 15.35% of his/her pensionable earnings.
Effective the first payroll period of 2011 through and ending on the last day of the 2013
payroll period, the member shall contribute an additional 1% of his/her pensionable
earnings every bi-weekly payroll period for a total of 16.35%. Upon expiration of this
agreement, the member’s pension contribution shall revert back to 15.35% unless
agreed otherwise. The member’s contribution shall be deducted prior to federal income
tax withholding as allowed by IRS 414(h). The CITY shall contribute annually 20.17%)
of each employee's pensionable earnings.

SECTION 3: UNFUNDED ACTUARIAL LIABILITY CONTRIBUTIONS AND BENEFIT
REDUCTIONS

As of January 1, 2009, the Police & Fire Pension System has an unfunded actuarial
liability of approximately $520 million dollars, as determined by the actuary firm of
Milliman Inc. The City and the members, through the collective bargaining process,
have agreed that by the end of this labor agreement, each will contribute at least 13.5%
of payroll (either through additional cash contributions or benefit reductions), as verified
by the actuary firm of Milliman Inc., in order to take the necessary steps to reduce this
unfunded actuarial liability over time and make the pension system financially viable.
The members have agreed that they will achieve their percentage of payroll through
various benefit reductions and cash contributions detailed in this labor agreement with
savings verified by the actuary firm of Milliman Inc.
PAGE 89P

Those savings and cash contributions, as a package, are:

SAVINGS AS A PERCENT OF PAYROLL
BENEFIT REDUCTION (AS VERIFIED BY MILLIMAN INC.)

 

As part of the pension calculation, the City will 74%
compute for all sworn employees each

member's career overtime average (COTA),

using the applicable pensionable earnings, and

will apply such COTA to a member's final

pension calculation.

All current employees and those employees 1.8%
hired after January 1, 2010, except for those

employees who at the time of the legal

execution of the labor agreement who are at

least 45 years of age with at least 20 years of

service, shall have their applicable

measurement period be the member's highest

consecutive 78 bi-weekly payroll periods within

the member's final 130 pay periods of service.
BENEFIT REDUCTION

PAGE 90P

SAVINGS AS A PERCENT OF PAYROLL
(AS VERIFIED BY MILLIMAN INC.)

 

For those current employees with less than 20
years of service, they shall retire with 20 years
of service at a 50% pension, 25 years of service
at a 70% pension; 30 years of service at 75%
pension.

For these employees hired after January 1,
2010, those employees shall retire with 20
years of service at a 50% pension, 25 years of
service at a 65% pension; 30 years of service at
75% pension. These employees must have a
minimum age of 50 to retire, however, should
the employee retire at an age less than 55
years, such employee shall have their final
monthly pension calculation reduced by 7% per
each year less than 55 years of age, as
described below.

For these employees hired after January 1,
2010, if such employee retires and dies, the
widow or widower shall receive a monthly
pension equal to 50 percent of the monthly
pension that the member was receiving or
eligible to receive at the time of member's
death.

Employees will contribute additional pension
contributions into the system.

TOTAL

3.5%

0.8% additional contribution

13.5% of payroll
PAGE 91P

Other pension changes (detailed in other areas of Article 34) that are effective upon the
legal execution of the labor agreements are:

CostT/SAVINGS AS A PERCENT OF

 

BENEFIT CHANGE PAYROLL
(AS VERIFIED BY MILLIMAN INC.)
The pensionable earnings for all members hired Savings of 0.3%

after January 1, 2010, shall exclude the COTA
pay categories. The City’s payroll pension
contribution for these members shall remain the
same as members hired before January 1,
2010.

Any member hired after January 1, 2010, who Cost of 0.2%
retires at an age less than 55 years but with at

least 30 years of sworn service, shall avoid

having their final monthly pension calculation

reduced by 7% per each year less than 55

years of age.

Upon the legal execution of this agreement, the City shall, contribute annually a cash
contribution of payroll equal to the following:

 

TIME CONTRIBUTION
Legal Execution of the Labor Agreement 12.5%
2011 anniversary date of the legal execution of 13.0%

the labor agreement (“anniversary date”)
2012 “anniversary date” and beyond 13.5%

The City’s contribution will be paid no later then the first payroll period of 2012. The City
shall pay all interest on any delayed contributions to the pension system as determined
by the pension board's actuary.

The City’s monetary contributions toward this unfunded actuarial liability shall not be
considered pension contributions in any litigation before the Commission of Industrial
Relations or used as a basis for comparison with member contributions for any
purposes under the Nebraska Industrial Relations Act. The parties agree that this
limitation is not intended in any way to waive the requirements and language of City of
Omaha Section 6.09 and that neither party will advance such an argument in any
dispute or litigation that should ever arise between the parties.
PAGE 92P
SECTION 4: RETIREMENT BENEFITS

Pensions will be calculated using the applicable percent of the member’s pay from the
highest consecutive 26 bi-weekly payroll periods within the final 130 pay periods of
service, unless changed below.

Upon legal execution of the labor agreement, as part of the pension calculation, the City
will compute each retiring member's career overtime average (COTA). Career overtime
average (COTA) is calculated as follows: each hour an employee earns for overtime
(e.g. court time, call-in pay, comp time paid as cash, or any other methods the City has
paid such employee for “overtime” hours and for which a member has paid a pension
contribution) shall be computed back to their date of hire or 1991 (whichever is later)
and divided by the number of years the employee has served after December 31, 1990,
thus arriving at his career overtime average, which shall be included in the employee’s
pension calculation. A listing of a member’s pensionable earnings and COTA pay
categories is listed in Appendix “E”.

Pensionable earnings are used to determine the member's final monthly pension
benefits and shall be equal to the sum of the member’s COTA multiplied by the
member’s average hourly pay rate plus the member's pensionable pay, pursuant to
Chapter 22, (except for any “overtime” worked or paid in the applicable period). Both the
member’s hourly pay rate and pensionable pay shall be averaged over their highest
applicable measurement period.

The intent of the COTA is to ensure that each employee's final pensionable year(s) are
representative of that individual employee’s career overtime earnings. Using a
member’s COTA eliminates a member's ability to “spike” their pension.

The pension benefit is based upon the ordinances in effect at the time employment is
severed or terminated (i.e., pensions are calculated using the method and percentage in
effect at the time the member leaves CITY employment). Changes to the pension
benefit enacted after the date a member leaves CITY service shall not be applicable to
such member.

In order to insure that pension eligible members may make an informed retirement
choice, each such member shall have from the later of (1) the date this agreement
becomes legally effective; or (2) twenty (20) calendar days after the City provides the
final COTA calculation to the Union and member, to determine if they wish to retire
under the pension benefits existing prior to this labor agreement. If a pension eligible
member chooses to retire under the pension benefits existing prior to this labor
agreement, they must submit their retirement paperwork to the City of Omaha Human
Resources Department and work their last day of actual employment on or before the
date calculated pursuant to the previous sentence. This provision is intended to insure
that an employee who makes a decision to retire in that time period will receive the
pension benefits existing prior to this labor agreement and not in this labor agreement.
PAGE 93P

The actuary firm of Milliman Inc. has determined that applying the COTA to all sworn
member's final pension calculation is a savings of 7.4% of payroll.

The pensionable earnings for all members hired after January 1, 2010, shall exclude the
COTA pay categories. The City’s payroll pension contribution for these members shall
remain the same as members hired before January 1, 2010. The actuary firm of
Milliman Inc. has determined that applying the COTA to all sworn member's final
pension calculation is a savings of 0.3% of payroll.

Any member who is at least 45 years old and has at least 20 years of service may retire
with a normal service retirement according to the chart below.

Upon the legal execution of the labor agreement, any member with at least 20 years of
service and who then subsequently reaches the requisite years of service and age for
their pension to commence, may retire with a normal service retirement according to the
chart below. However, the applicable measurement period for this group is the
member's highest consecutive 78 bi-weekly payroll periods within the member's final
130 pay periods of service.

 

 

Minimum Years Age at Which
of Service Pension Commences Percentage
10 55 20%
15 55 30%
20 45 55%
20 & 6 months 45 57%
21 45 59%
21 & 6 months 45 61%
22 45 63%
22 & 6 months 45 65%
23 45 67%
23 & 6 months 45 69%
24 45 71%
24 & 6 months 45 73%
25 45 75%

Upon the legal execution of the labor agreement, any member with less than 20 years
of service and who then subsequently reaches the requisite years of service and age for
their pension to commence, may retire with a normal service retirement according to the
chart below. However, the applicable measurement period for this group is the
member's highest consecutive 78 bi-weekly payroll periods within the member's final
130 pay periods of service.
PAGE 94P

 

 

Minimum Years Age at Which
of Service Pension Commences Percentage
10 55 20%
15 55 30%
20 45 50%
20 & 6 months 45 52%
21 45 54%
21 & 6 months 45 56%
22 45 58%
22 & 6 months 45 60%
23 45 62%
23 & 6 months 45 64%
24 45 66%
24 & 6 months 45 68%
25 45 70%
25 & 6 months 45 71%
26 45 72%
26 & 6 months 45 73%
27 45 74%
27 & 6 months 45 74%
28 45 74%
28 & 6 months 45 74%
29 45 74.5%
29 & 6 months 45 74.5%
30 45 75%

Any member hired after January 1, 2010, who then subsequently reaches the requisite
years of service and age for their pension to commence, may retire with a normal
service retirement according to the chart below. The pensions for these members will
be calculated using the applicable percent of the member’s pay from the highest
consecutive 78 bi-weekly payroll periods within the member's final 130 pay periods of
service (the member’s annual figure will be determined by taking the highest 78 bi-
weekly payroll periods and dividing by 3 then apply the applicable percent of the
member's pay). Any of these members who retire under the chart below at an age less
than 55 years with less than 30 years of sworn service, shall have their final monthly
pension calculation, as shown in the chart below, reduced by 7% per each year less
than 55 years of age. For example, if an employee is 50 years old and has 26 years of
service, then he may retire according to the chart below, however, their final monthly
pension calculation will be reduced by 35% (7% x 5 years less than 55 years old).

 

 

Minimum Years Age at Which
of Service Pension Commences Percentage
10 55 20%
15 55 30%

20 50 50%
PAGE 95P

 

 

Minimum Years Age at Which
of Service Pension Commences Percentage
20 & 6 months 50 51.5%
21 50 53%
21 & 6 months 50 54.5%
22 50 56%
22 & 6 months 50 57.5%
23 50 59%
23 & 6 months 50 60.5%
24 50 62%
24 & 6 months 50 63.5%
25 50 65%
25 & 6 months 50 66%
26 50 67%
26 & 6 months 50 68%
27 50 69%
27 & 6 months 50 70%
28 50 71%
28 & 6 months 50 72%
29 50 73%
29 & 6 months 50 74%
30 50 75%

SECTION 5: DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PROGRAM - “DROP”

Upon legal execution of the labor agreement, the parties agree to implement a cost-
neutral DROP option. Both parties are desirous of creating this DROP option because
the actuaries have determined that such program will be beneficial to the pension
system by giving members incentive to stay longer in order to participate in such DROP
option. No employee will be eligible to enter the DROP option and still "spike" his or her
pension.

Eligibility for this option is as follows:

e Current members with at least 20 years of service at the time of the
legal execution and ratification of the labor agreement are eligible
to participate in the DROP option at 22.5 years of service, if they
are at least 45 years of age.

e All other pension members, who have reached minimum pension
age, may participate in the DROP option at 25 years of service.

The wages of the DROP participant shall include all wages normally earned by a
similarly situated sworn employee and the DROP participant shall continue to pay
pension contributions into the system as if they were an active employee. The City will
also contribute its pension contribution for such DROP participant into the pension
system. A DROP participant shall be considered an active employee for all purposes
except the following: the DROP participant is not eligible for early deferred retirement,
PAGE 96P

for promotion, for longevity pay, and for either service or non-service connected
disability retirement (except as provided in the section entitled “Service connected
disability” below).

The parties intend that the DROP option is designed to be at least cost-neutral to the
pension plan. The Board of Trustees of the Police pension system and the actuaries
will monitor the DROP option each year and will report its conclusions to the City and
the Union. If after the conclusion of the third year of the DROP option, it is determined
that it is not at least cost-neutral, the parties agree that the City and the Union shall
have a period of 120 days to negotiate changes to the DROP option. Such 120-day
period may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties. If the parties have not
come to an Agreement within this 120-day period (or any extension agreed to by the
parties), the DROP option shall terminate. Any individuals currently in the DROP option
shall continue their involvement and commitment but shall not be credited for any
interest earnings during the remainder of their DROP term (0%).

In designing a cost-neutral DROP option, the parties agree that the DROP option will
include the following features:

1. The member must make an irrevocable election to participate in
DROP for the DROP election period. A member who makes the
irrevocable election shall be called a DROP participant. A member
shall apply for DROP on a form prescribed by the Pension Board
and shall agree to sever employment at the end of the DROP
election period. The DROP election period shall be for a minimum
for three years and a maximum for 5 years. A DROP participant
who does not complete the DROP election period shall be ineligible
for the payment of the portion of his/her DROP account balance
that represents the interest credit with respect to the DROP election
period. The above shall not apply if the DROP participant is
required to sever employment because of the mandatory retirement
age, does not complete the DROP election period due to hardship
or disability as described below, or the DROP participant dies.

2. During the DROP election period, an amount equal to the
retirement benefit that the DROP participant would have received if
the DROP participant had retired on the day before his or her
DROP election period shall be credited to the DROP participant's
DROP account. The DROP account is a notional account in the
pension plan.

3. The member's DROP account shall be credited annually with
interest as determined by the Pension Board, in consultation with
the actuary, in the range of 0 to 7%. The credit rate shall be
determined after the close of the calendar year, with respect to the
calendar year. For example, the interest crediting rate for 2010
shall be determined in the first quarter of 2011 and shall be credited
to the DROP account as of December 31, 2010. The credited
PAGE 97P

interest rate is intended to be cost-neutral. In order to further this
goal, interest may only be crediting in a year in which rate of return
on the investments of the pension plan reach the assumed
investment rate of return (on a market value basis) and with respect
to such a year the interest credited may not exceed 50% of the
actual rate of return. For example, if the assumed investment rate
of return is 8%, interest may only be credited with respect to 2010 if
the pension fund earns 8% in 2010; and in that event, the DROP
interest credited for 2010 cannot exceed 4%.

4. It is understood that the awarding of interest into an employee’s
DROP account is at the complete discretion of the Pension Board
within the parameters set above. The Pension Board in the
exercise of its discretion shall offset any negative balances
experienced by such system during the DROP period of prior years.

5. Upon actual retirement at the end of the DROP election period or at
mandatory retirement age (whichever is earlier), a DROP
participant is entitled to receive his/her DROP account balance and
to begin receipt of his/her retirement benefit that was calculated as
of the day before his/her DROP election period.

6. The DROP account balance shall be distributed in a lump sum with
the first monthly retirement benefit after severance from
employment. Any additional interest shall be distributed when
determined.

7. The DROP account balance (and any additional interest) shall be
treated as an eligible rollover distribution to the extent permitted by
law.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1 above that requires an irrevocable election to complete
the DROP election period, a member may withdraw, without penalty, from DROP prior
to the expiration of the member's DROP election period for the following reasons,
subject to the approval of the Pension Board:
a. Hardship/Non-Service Connected Disability) A DROP
participant may apply to withdraw from the DROP option in
the case of unexpected, life-changing situations, including
the death of a spouse and terminal illness of a spouse or
child, or upon the granting by the Pension Board of a non-
service connected disability for an injury suffered during the
DROP period. A DROP participant whose application to
withdraw on account of either hardship or a non-service
connected disability approved by the Pension Board shall
receive, as of the date of his/her severance from
employment, his/her DROP account balance and _ shall
commence his/her retirement benefit calculated as of the
day before his/her DROP election period.
b. Service connected disability: A DROP participant who is
granted a service connected disability for injuries suffered
PAGE 98P

during the DROP period shall be entitled to withdraw the
funds in his DROP account, however, he shall receive no
additional sums as disability payments (he maintains the
same pension that he had been entitled to upon entering the
DROP option). Such employee’s medical bills shall be paid
under contract provisions for a normal service retirement,
not under the provisions for a service-connected disability.
However, such employee shall receive workers
compensation benefits to which may be entitled.

If an employee is injured during the DROP period and is assigned light duty, the
provisions of Article 25 shall be followed and may not be waived by the parties.

In the event that a DROP participant dies during a DROP election period, the DROP
participant's DROP account balance shall be paid to his/her spouse or children or
estate, pursuant to other provisions of this contract and the applicable pension rules.

The Pension Board may adopt administrative policies, procedures, and forms to
implement this DROP option.

SECTION 6: RETIREMENT — INJURY — ILLNESS

Any member of the Police and Fire Retirement System, covered by this Agreement,
who should sustain an injury or illness not in the line of duty and as a result becomes
unfit for active duty shall receive the following percentage of the member's average final
monthly compensation.

Years of Service Percent
Less than 10 10
10 and over 20
15 and over 30
20 and over 45 or *
25 *

* Same percentage employee would get if he/she took a normal
service retirement, however the 7% reduction for each year below the
age of 55 years shall not apply.

Any member of the Police and Fire Retirement System, covered by this Agreement,
who should sustain an injury or illness in the line of duty and as a result becomes unfit
for active duty shall receive the following percentage of the member's average final
monthly compensation.

Years of Service Percent
Less than 20 50
20 or more *
PAGE 99P

* Same percentage employee would get if he/she took a normal
service retirement, however the 7% reduction for each year below the
age of 55 years shall not apply.

Pension payments for service-connected disability retirements shall be
reduced by the dollar amount equivalent to any worker's compensation
benefits paid to the retiree times the percentage contributed to the System
by the CITY.

SECTION 7: DEFERRED RETIREMENT

Any member of the Police and Fire Retirement System whose employment with the City
shall be severed or terminated prior to attaining eligibility for a normal service retirement
but who has served at least ten (10) years, can elect to leave the contribution in the
system and thereby shall be eligible for a deferred service retirement pension,
computed on the member's years of service credit and average final monthly
compensation as of the date of termination as follows:

Years of Service Minimum Age Percent
10 years and over 55 20%
15 years and over 55 30%
20 years and over * *

* Same percentage employee would get if he/she took a normal
service retirement

An employee who "vests" his/her pension rights pursuant to the above, shall not
thereafter be entitled to any benefits upon commencement of pension provided for
retirees elsewhere in this Agreement (e.g. health insurance).

SECTION 8: CHILDREN’S PENSION

A monthly pension shall be payable to each unmarried child under the age of eighteen
(18) of a deceased member or retiree. The monthly pension shall be based on the
deceased's total annual compensation from the member's designated measure period,
described above.

 

 

Number of Eligible Percent
Children
1 15
2 30
3 45

4 or more 50
PAGE 100P

The percent of the deceased's annual total compensation from the highest consecutive
26 bi-weekly payroll periods within the last five (5) years of service shall be divided
equally among eligible children. The pension for each child shall be paid monthly to age
18 or death or marriage, whichever occurs first. In the event any child is totally disabled
at the time of death of a member or retiree and has been so totally disabled or totally
dependent for support since prior to age 18, whether or not such child was under the
age of 18 at the time of such death, such monthly pension benefit shall be paid until the
cessation of total disability or dependency for support, whichever occurs first. Any
payment made under the section, regardless of whether due or hereinafter to become
due, at the option of the CITY, may be paid to any parent or guardian of the child or
children for his/her or their care, either method of payment being in full satisfaction of
the requirements of this section.

SECTION 9: WIDOW OR WIDOWER

Beginning March 6, 2003, a monthly pension shall be payable to a widow or widower of
an active or retired member of the Police and Fire Retirement System as long as the
widow/widower was legally married to the deceased member at least one full year prior
to the member's death. Benefits will continue for the widow/widower until death unless
he or she shall remarry. If widow/widower should remarry all rights to such pension
shall be terminated forever. That pension shall be as follows:

A. If an active member with less than twenty-five (25) years of service dies from causes
connected with service, the widow or widower shall be paid a monthly pension equal
to 49 percent of the deceased member's average final monthly compensation. If an
active member with twenty-five (25) years of service or more dies from causes
connected with service, the widow will receive 69 percent of the deceased member's
average final monthly compensation.

The actuary firm of Milliman & Robertson, Inc. has determined the cost of this benefit
to be 0.28% of payroll. The amount shall be paid as follows:

e Beginning the first pay period after March 6, 2003, the city shall pay one-half
of the cost (0.14%) into the pension system or trust account.

e Beginning the first pay period after March 6, 2003, employees shall pay one-
half of the cost (0.14%) into the pension system or trust account.

In the event such active member shall die as a result of injuries or illness sustained
in the line of duty and:

e widow or widower was not legally married to said member for a full year, or

e if the widow/widower should remarry after commencing benefits under this
section, or
PAGE 101P
e if spouse of deceased member predeceased him or her,

then benefits normally payable under this Section to a widow/widower shall be
placed in a trust fund for the education of the minor child(ren), if any, of the
deceased member, until such child(ren) attain age 18, marry, or die. Said benefit
will be paid into the trust equally for each child(ren).

B. If an active member dies from causes not connected with service, the widow or
widower shall be paid a monthly pension as follows:

e If the deceased member had at least three (3) years and up to ten (10) years
service credit under the Police and Fire Pension System, such member's
widow or widower shall receive a pension equal to 35 percent of the
deceased active member's average final monthly compensation. In addition,
for a deceased member who has over ten (10) years of service, the widow or
widower will be compensated an additional 1.4% for each additional year of
service up to the deceased member having twenty (20) years of service.
Therefore, a deceased member having twenty (20) years of service credit will
entitle his/her widow to receive 49 percent of his/her average final monthly
compensation. A widow of a member who dies having twenty (20) years of
service credit up to and including twenty-four (24) years of service credit will
be entitled to receive 49 percent of his/her average final monthly
compensation.

e If the deceased member had 25 or more years of service, such member's
widow/widower shall receive a pension equal to 69 percent of the deceased
member's average final monthly compensation.

e The actuary firm of Milliman & Robertson, Inc. has determined the cost of the
pension benefit here in the above section for widows to be 0.13% of payroll.
This amount shall be paid as follows:

= Beginning the first pay period after March 6, 2003, the city shall pay
one-half of the cost (0.065%) into the pension system or trust account.

= Beginning the first pay period after March 6, 2003, employees shall
pay one-half of the cost (0.065%) into the pension system or trust
account.

If a retired employee dies, the widow or widower shall receive a monthly pension equal
to 75 percent of the monthly pension that the member was receiving or eligible to
receive at the time of member's death. For employees hired after January 1, 2010, this
benefit is reduced to 50 percent.
PAGE 102P

SECTION 10: REFUND OF CONTRIBUTIONS

Refunds of accumulated contributions to the System shall be made from the System as

follows:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

6)

Upon approval by the System’s Board of an application for refund of
contributions when employment is terminated and the member is not eligible
for retirement, full refund of member contributions with interest shall be made.

Upon approval by the System’s Board of a former member's application for
refund of contributions when the former member had elected deferred service
retirement and is not yet eligible to receive pension payments, full refund of
employee contributions with interest shall be made.

Upon the death of an employee or retiree where no widow or widower or
children are left surviving who are entitled to pension benefits, a lump sum
refund equal to the employee’s accumulated contributions, or the retiree’s
balance of accumulated contributions in excess of total pension payments
made to the retiree, or $500.00, whichever is greater, shall be made to the
designated beneficiary or heirs at law.

Upon cessation of pension benefits to a widow or widower or child(ren), a
lump sum payment equal to the balance, if any, of the deceased’s
accumulated contributions in excess of the total amount of pension payments
made to the retiree, widow, widower, and child(ren) shall be made to the
widow or widower or child who is last to cease receiving a pension benefit
from the System. Upon the payment of such lump sum amount, if any, the
widow or widower and children shall have no future rights and privileges
under the System.

Such refund as provided herein shall forever forfeit any and all rights to
pension benefits from the System.

SECTION 11: DEATH BENEFITS

Within three (3) business days from the date the Human Resources Department
receives appropriate certification of a member’s or retiree’s death, a lump sum death
benefit shall be paid to the deceased's designated beneficiary.

A. Upon the death of a member where a widow or widower or child(ren) are left
surviving who are eligible for pension benefits, a lump sum death benefit equal to
one year’s pay plan salary shall be made. One year’s pay plan salary shall be
based on the top step pay rate for Police Officer from the current pay plan.
PAGE 103P

B. Upon the death of a retiree where a widow or widower or child(ren) are left surviving
who are eligible for pension benefits, a lump sum death benefit of $1,000.00 shall be
made. The lump sum death benefit shall be charged against and deducted from the
accumulated contributions of the deceased retiree.

C. Upon the death of a member or retiree where there is no widow or widower or
child(ren) surviving who are eligible for pension benefits, a lump sum equal to the
deceased member’s accumulated contributions, if any, or $500.00, whichever is
greater, shall be made to the designated beneficiary.

SECTION 12: EARLY DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION

Any sworn police employee who is eligible for a normal service retirement within ten
(10) months, may apply for, and be granted, an early, deferred retirement according to
the following rules:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Such employee must sign a binding agreement to retire on a date certain
within the ensuing twenty (20) pay periods (“mandatory retirement date”).

Additionally, such employee must declare a “binding separation date” (last
day the employee will perform job duties). Employee must elect an “early
deferred retirement” (time between the binding separation date and the
mandatory retirement date) up to a maximum of twenty (20) pay periods.

It is the employee’s obligation, with the assistance of the Human Resources
and Finance Department, to determine the employee’s “payout bank” (the
dollar amount the employee is entitled to in sick and annual leave payoff upon
retirement pursuant to other Articles of this agreement). In order to be eligible
for this early deferred retirement option, an employee must have a sufficient
“payout bank” to cover all “early deferred retirement” time and any service
years assessment salary reduction obligation (if applicable; see Article 37,
Section 9). From the time between the binding separation date and the
mandatory retirement date, the employee shall be paid his/her regular salary
by reducing the balance of the employee’s payout bank.

When an employee is on "early deferred retirement” time, he/she shall be
assigned to a “5-2” schedule (Monday through Friday, excluding weekends,
on the “B” Shift). Such employee shall be entitled to receive an hourly rate
equal to the hourly pay schedule rate the employee was receiving
immediately before the employee elected to go on "early deferred retirement”
time. This means that from the time between the binding separation date and
the mandatory retirement date, the employee shall be paid his/her regular
salary by reducing the balance of the employee’s payout bank.
6)

(6)

(7)

(8)

PAGE 104P

The City shall pay to the employee any college incentive pay and longevity
pay that the employee was being paid even though the employee is not
performing any work for the City. Should a holiday occur on the employee’s
“5-2” schedule, or if the employee has a birthday during the "early deferred
retirement” time, the employee shall be paid for the respective Holiday Leave
and Birthday Leave (both leaves equivalent to 8 hours pay at regular rate of
pay) by the City. If the employee is required to attend court or other tribunal
sessions during his/her “early deferred retirement” time, no additional pay
shall accrue for such attendance during what would have been the
employee’s normal working hours (Monday through Friday, 8:00 A.M. to 4:00
P.M.). If, however, an employee is required to attend such tribunals outside
of his/her normal working hours such time shall be compensable as court
time, pursuant to Article 19, or overtime, pursuant to Article 21, depending on
the circumstances. If an employee is “called in” to actually perform services
during this “early deferred retirement” time, he/she shall be compensated
according to Article 19, Section 2 (“call in”)

The Human Resources and Finance Department shall calculate the binding
separation date and the mandatory retirement date, as set forth above, and
shall prepare such agreements for the employee’s signature. The Police and
Fire Pension Board must approve both such signed agreements prior to
becoming effective.

During the “early deferred retirement” period, an employee shall accrue sick
and annual leave pursuant to other Articles of this agreement. At the end of
the “early deferred retirement” period, the employee will be paid for
accumulated sick and annual leave balances in cash upon retirement
pursuant to other provisions of this labor agreement.

The Human Resources and Finance Departments shall issue, if necessary,
reasonable rules and regulations to administer and regulate this early,
deferred retirement option. The rules and regulations shall be implemented
upon the mutual consent of the parties.

An employee electing the Early Deferred Retirement Option may not
participate in the DROP option.

SECTION 13: PENSION SUPPLEMENT

The CITY will provide a pension supplement of three percent (3%) or fifty dollars ($50)
per month, whichever amount is less, beginning in the thirty-seventh (37) month of
retirement. This supplement shall continue on an annual basis with increases effective
on the pension anniversary date. For all employees that retire the first pay period after
March 6, 2003, the benefits will begin on the thirteen (13) month of retirement. The
cost of changing of this benefit from 37 months to 13 months has been determined by
the actuary firm of Milliman & Robertson, Inc. to be 0.36% of payroll. The amount shall
PAGE 105P

be paid as follows:

e Beginning the first pay period after March 6, 2003, the City shall pay one-half
of the cost (0.18%) into the pension system or trust account for the duration of
this agreement.

e Beginning the first pay period after March 6, 2003, employees shall pay
0.18% into the pension system or trust account for the duration of this
agreement.

The above method of payment has been determined by Milliman & Robertson, Inc. to
be sufficient to fully fund this benefit increase.

For any member participating in the DROP option, their pension supplements shall
continue on an annual basis with increases effective on the member’s pension
anniversary date.

SECTION 14: “QUALIFIED PLAN”

The CITY shall take such action as is necessary so that the System will continue to be a
plan qualified under applicable Internal Revenue Service rules, which status will allow
the employee to pay his portion of the pension contribution before federal income tax is
withheld.

SECTION 15:

Any employee who has any of his/her highest twenty-six (26) pay periods, for the
purposes of calculation of pension under this labor agreement, fall within payroll years
2004, 2005, or 2006 shall receive an additional 3.5% added on to his/her gross wages
for any of those twenty-six pay periods upon which his/her pension is calculated. It is
understood that this money will be paid as wages to each employee for any time (in
2004, 2005, or 2006) that is used to calculate his/her highest twenty-six pay periods.
This means that, from the gross amount, normal wage deductions will be taken,
including pension contribution, and that the pension contribution will be paid into the
pension system.

Any employee whose highest twenty-six (26) pay periods, for the purposes of pension
calculation, include any time period which falls within payroll years 2004 or 2005; and
whose pension calculation is reduced because of the “special time off bank” obligation,
in Article 20, Section 9, shall have the following apply:

e Those holidays in which the employee worked and would have received
compensation in wages paid at the time earned, may be added at the
employee’s discretion to their highest 26 pay period for the purposes of
calculation of his/her pension.
PAGE 106P

e This applies only to those holidays actually worked and not those holidays an
employee takes holiday leave.

The intent of this provision is to not have the “special time off” bank obligation (Article
20, Section 9) reduce the highest 26 pay period amount for the purposes of calculation
of pension. However, if an employee cashes out, any or all of his/her time off bank in
order to enhance the highest 26 pay period amount for purposes of calculation of
pension, the employee shall have the option of choosing whichever calculation would be
more beneficial to the employee.

SECTION 16: SPLITTING OF THE POLICE AND FIRE RETIREMENT SYSTEM

The City has been informed by the Union, and also by the Professional Firefighters
Association, Local 385, that they desire to change the current pension system by
dividing it into two separate systems; one a Police pension system and one a Fire
pension system. While nothing has been agreed to between the parties, it is anticipated
that the following guidelines could govern such separation:

A. The two pension systems would segregate the funds of each party, however, the
funds could be co-mingled for investment purposes only.

B. The actuary firm of Milliman, USA has been the actuary firm for the pension system
for some time and could be responsible for aiding and assisting the parties in
separating the system, including the determination of how to separate the funds.

C. In order to effectuate the contemplated separation of the pension system, each
Union individually must vote in favor of the separation by a majority vote of those
voting on the issue.

The City agrees to provide any information necessary to the Unions or to Milliman,
USA, so that such separation may be accomplished. Additionally, the City will agree
to such separation as long as the pension system pays the entire cost for such
separation and the separation does not result in any increased contributions to either
the City or the employee.

D. The new Police Pension Board, created by this separation of the current system,
would consist of the following members: two (2) sworn Police employees elected
similar to the election of current members; the City Human Resources Director; the
City Finance Director; a member of the City Council selected by Council procedures;
and two (2) appointments by the Mayor. Of these seven (7) people, one (1) member
must be a woman and one (1) member must be a member of a minority group (other
than being a woman).
PAGE 107P

E. The City and the Police Union agree to explore a base wage percentage payout
system in determining pension amounts. The Police Union will be responsible for
any and all costs for determining the cost of such change. Any change to a base
wage percentage payout system will require mutual agreement of the parties.
PAGE 108P
ARTICLE 35

SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL

All sworn employees, except those assigned to the "B" Shift, shall receive a sixty five
cent (0.65) per hour (beginning January 1, 2006: eighty cents per hour, $0.80; and
beginning December 31, 2006: one dollar per hour, $1) shift differential pay for hours
worked, regardless of when those hours are worked.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

PAGE 109P
ARTICLE 36

PAY FOR COLLEGE DEGREE & TUITION REIMBURSEMENT

The CITY shall pay for advanced educational incentive to all
employees who have completed two (2) years of service with the
Omaha Police Department. It is understood that the employee is
entitled to such college incentive pay for only the highest degree
obtained by such employee. The CITY shall pay the employee in
equal increments, coinciding with the pay periods as follows:

a) Each employee who has obtained an Associate’s degree from
an accredited college or university shall receive $608 per year
or $23.38 per pay period.

b) Each employee who has obtained a Bachelor’s degree from an
accredited college or university shall receive $1,410 per year or
$54.23 per pay period.

c) Each employee who has obtained a Master’s or Doctorate
degree from an accredited college or university shall receive
$1,725 per year or $66.35 per pay period.

The City will provide tuition reimbursement for college classes up to
two (2) semesters a year at the per semester cost of three (3) credit
hours at the University of Nebraska-Omaha.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

PAGE 110P
ARTICLE 37

WAGES

Beginning December 14, 2008 (the 2009 payroll year), all employees
covered by this Agreement shall receive a 0% base pay increase. (See
Appendix B)

Beginning December 27, 2009 (the 2010 payroll year), all employees
covered by the Agreement shall receive a 0% base pay increase. (See
Appendix B) Effective December 27, 2009, the pay scale identified
and described in Appendix B as the 2010 pay scale shall be
implemented. This new pay scale represents a compression of the
steps based upon comparable cities, but includes a 0% across the
board pay increase for payroll year 2010.

Effective December 27, 2009, all employees holding a promotional
rank shall be placed on the pay step of the promoted rank set forth in
the pay plan upon consideration of the following: 1) Placement at the
pay step which most proximately represents a 5% increase in the wage
rate; 2) If such step placement results in any junior rank Employee
earning a wage rate greater than the promoted Employee, such
promoted Employee shall be advanced to the next step on such pay
plan; and 3) time in rank.

Effective upon the legal execution of this agreement, in addition to the
above language, the rate of any promoted employee shall be
increased to that pay step in the new range which provides for a
minimum five percent (5%) pay increase.

The City and the Union shall establish comparable wages the first pay
period of 2011, 2012, and 2013, using the available data from the array
of cities from the 2008 CIR decision (Denver, Oklahoma City, Tulsa,
Cincinnati, St. Paul, Wichita, and Fort Worth). Effective December 8,
2013, if necessary due to the unavailability of 2013 comparability
information, there shall be an additional wage adjustment for 2013 in
order to comply with the above provision.

If any city has experienced a midyear wage adjustment (e.g. settled a
contract for the calendar year in the middle of such calendar year but
did not pay the employee retroactively or a scheduled midyear wage
increase), the hourly rates will be blended, consistent with the CIR
ruling process, to represent the actual rate for the total calendar year.
PAGE 111P

Beginning in 2011, the command pay scale structure will be modified
to the following: Sergeant — 8 steps in 9 years, Lieutenant — 6 steps in
5 years, Captain — 5 steps in 7 years. These pay scale structures shall
continue throughout the life of this contract.

For the purposes of establishing the wage minimums and the
maximums of each rank, the parties will use the same job match and
midpoint methodology established by the CIR unless otherwise set
forth in this agreement (ex. Omaha top officer is equivalent to top Sgt
in Oklahoma City). The officer minimum will be established using the
hourly rate earned by sworn officers upon graduation of the academy,
in other words, the date in which they become sworn police officers.
For purposes of establishing the hourly rates for steps between the
minimum and the maximum, each step progression will increase at an
equal amount throughout the pay scale.

Upon establishment of the comparable wages either by agreement of
the parties or by decision of the arbitrator, the City shall pay any owed
monies (“backpay wages”) retroactive to the beginning of the
respective payroll year within 45 calendar days of an agreement
between the parties or decision of the arbitrator. As to implementation
forward of any new pay scales, such implementation shall commence
within two pay periods after of an agreement between the parties, or
decision of the arbitrator. If the City does not pay any owed past
monies or implemented forward any pay scales by the time deadlines
specified above, then the City shall pay interest (judgment interest rate
set by law) to the employees.

Should the parties not be able to agree to any of the above
calculations (for example, major changes to the pay plans in the
comparable cities during this contract that impact establishing
comparable hourly wages), the specific calculation under disagreement
shall be submitted to arbitration pursuant to the grievance procedures
in Article 8 of this agreement to hear evidence and determine
comparable wages and health insurance by the above criteria. Should
either party wish to use the Expedited Arbitration as established by the
FMCS process in order to settle their disagreement, then such
arbitration process shall be used.

Using the above comparability methodology, should it be determined
that hourly wages are at or greater than comparability at the beginning
of the 2011, 2012 or 2013 payroll year, the hourly wage rate of such
affected employees shall not change in that payroll year.
SECTION 4

SECTION 5

PAGE 112P

Appendix “D” shall state the job matches between the Omaha Police
Department ranks and the corresponding ranks of the comparable
cities.

The number of pay steps shall be nine (9) for Police Officers, six (6)
for Sergeants, and five (5) for Lieutenants and Captains.

The amount of time from minimum to maximum shall be thirteen (13)
years for Police Officers ten (10) years for Sergeants, six (6) years for
Lieutenants, and nine (9) years for Captains.

At the beginning of the 2011 payroll year, a new pay scale structure
will be established with a Sergeant at eight (8) steps in nine (9) years,
Lieutenant at six (6) steps in five (5) years, and a Captain at five (5)
steps in seven (7) years. This pay scale structure shall continue
throughout the life of this labor agreement.

The number of years necessary to move from step to step on a given
rank is located on the respective pay scales in Appendix B.

Effective December 27, 2009, employees either at or promoted to the
rank of Captain will be placed on the pay scale based on their total
years of sworn service with the Omaha Police Department at the time
of their promotion to Captain. Initial placement for such employees is
based on the following:

Years of Service Initial Placement
8 to less than 12 years Step “A”
12 to less than 20 years Step “B”
20 years or more Step “C”

All of the above only applies to the initial placement of an employee to
Captain. After this initial placement, a Captain moves from step to step
based upon his time in rank, as outlined in the pay scales in Appendix
B, except that any Captain upon their 12 year anniversary as a sworn
employee shall at a minimum be either at or above Step “B” and any
Captain upon their 20 year anniversary as a sworn employee shall ata
minimum be either at or above Step “C”.

Effective upon the legal execution of the agreement, any Sergeant or
Lieutenant with at least 20 years of sworn service shall be placed at
the top pay step of their respective pay scale.
SECTION 6

SECTION 7

SECTION 8

PAGE 113P

Movement from one step to the next will continue to be based upon
satisfactory job performance. In determining whether or not any
individual employee merits a step increase all factors of that
employee's job performance shall be considered. Disciplinary actions
taken against an employee pursuant to Article 6, Discharge and
Discipline, shall not automatically bar advancement within pay range
steps.

The City shall continue its practice of an “every other week payroll
system.” Annual salary is negotiated and determined and then paid to
the employee in equal installments every two weeks. Wages shall be
paid only by direct deposit of funds into an employee bank account at a
recognized financial institution pursuant to direct deposit procedures
required by the Finance Department.

LATERAL HIRES: Upon legal execution of the labor agreement, the
parties agree that it takes a total of thirteen (13) years after graduation
from the academy for an employee at the rank of police officer to reach
their top pay step. Should the City hire a lateral class (“fast-track”) with
an abbreviated academy, it is understood that the City shall adjust the
time such a fast-track employee is at their “B” step to ensure the
employee does reach their top pay step in 13 years after graduation
from the academy.
SECTION 1

SECTION 2

SECTION 3

PAGE 114P
ARTICLE 38

JOB PERFORMANCE INTERVIEW (COUNSELING)

The CITY shall institute formalized employee job performance
interviews (counseling). These interviews will be conducted with
employees on an as needed basis. The purpose of these interviews is
to bring to the attention of the affected employee his unacceptable job
performance and/or failure to follow specific job instructions. Such
interviews shall be documented in writing on a form provided by the
CITY. The employee must sign such documentation form. The
original of the form shall be maintained in the employee's individual
personnel file at the Police Department; a copy shall be given to the
employee. No other copies of the form shall be distributed.

An employee, on request, may inspect his Departmental personnel file,
however no material may be removed or mechanically reproduced
from this file except as herein provided. Should the employee feel that
such file contains erroneous information he may request an
administrative review by the Police Chief. Any other inspection of an
employee's Departmental personnel file may be done only with the
authorization of the Police Chief. This form must provide a space for
the employee to explain his actions. No employee job performance
interview over one (1) year old will be used as a basis to show any
type of behavioral or performance pattern.

An employee may request that any job performance interview that is
greater than one (1) year old be removed from his Police file. The
employee will be provided with such document. No copy or notation of
such document will be maintained in the employee’s Police file;
however, such job performance interview will be maintained in a
generic Police file not under any employee’s name. Such
documentation may be used only for purposes of litigation not relating
to the employee's discipline; or in appeals, arbitration or litigation
relating to the employee's discipline only for purposes of impeachment.
SECTION 1

PAGE 115P
ARTICLE 39

DRUG TESTING

All sworn employees of the Omaha Police Department shall be
required to take drug tests, on a random basis pursuant to the below
listed policy.

Omaha Police Department employees, for the purposes of random
drug testing, shall be divided into two groups:

Group "A"
all personnel assigned to Internal Affairs
Chief and all Deputy Chiefs
all personnel assigned to drug/narcotic enforcement
all probationary employees
all E.R.U. team members

Group "B"
any other sworn employees

Every six months (at duty change) the Police Chief shall provide to the
Human Resources Director of the CITY a list of Group "A" sworn
employees. Such list shall be by serial number and the name of each
employee shall not be noted. The Human Resources Director, at any
time, may direct the Police Chief to order all members of Group "A" to
take a drug test within 48 hours of notification. It is the general intent
and desire of the CITY to test Group "A" employees approximately
twice a year. However, tests may be ordered at any time, and the
cumulative effect of such orders may be more or less than a twice a
year average.

The Human Resources Director may direct the Police Chief to order
members of Group "B" to take a drug test pursuant to the following:

1. Every six (6) months (at duty change) the Police Chief shall
provide to the Human Resources Director of the CITY a list
of Group "B" sworn employees. Such list shall be by serial
number and the name of each employees shall not be noted.

2. Twice during any given six (6) month period the Human
Resources Director may provide a list of approximately 1/6
of employees on "B" list to the Police Chief. The Human
Resources Director may direct the Police Chief to order
those employees to submit to a drug test within 48 hours of
notification.
PAGE 116P

All drug tests ordered pursuant to the above random testing
policy shall be performed in accordance with the mandates of
the currently existing CITY Drug/Alcohol policy. In selecting
Group "B" personnel for testing, the Human Resources Director
shall utilize a probability sampling technique called “simple
random selection with replacement." A computer generated file
of random employees shall be used.

The purpose is to insure that each member of Group "B" has a
similar probability of being selected if the drug test is ordered.

The CITY agrees to strike that language from current CITY
Policy on Drug/Alcohol which mandates termination of sworn
employees for positive tests for alcohol.

Any notification of an employee of the results of any test given
pursuant to Random Drug Test Policy or the CITY’S for-cause
test policy shall be either: 1) personally delivered; or 2)
delivered by certified mail or bonded courier.

Further, it is understood by and between the parties that St.
Joseph's Hospital is currently designated by the CITY pursuant
to the CITY Policy to be the testing facility. St. Joseph's has, in
its agreement with the CITY (which agreement the UNION has
reviewed and is familiar with), agreed to certain minimum
standards for privacy and lab integrity. The CITY agrees that
those minimum standards shall be at all times maintained.

Further, it is agreed that should an employee test impaired for
alcohol pursuant to any CITY policy, that employee need not
necessarily be terminated, but shall be disciplined pursuant to
the provision of the CITY’S Policy on Drugs/Alcohol. This could
include termination, but termination is not the only option.

Employees on sick leave or 1.0.D. status shall be directed to
take the drug test if their serial number is selected (as either
Group "A" or "B"). However, in so doing, the Police Chief shall
give special consideration to the particular illness/injury of the
employee. Any questions as to whether or not the employee is
medically able to submit to such testing shall be decided by a
competent physician. Verifiable phone communication from
such physician can be the basis for the CITY declining to order
the employee to appear.

Employees on pre-approved annual leave will not be ordered to
SECTION 2

PAGE 117P

submit to drug testing while on such leave. When such
employee returns from leave, he shall be ordered to take the
drug test, pursuant to the above policy.

Whenever possible, random drug testing shall be ordered during
an employee's regularly scheduled work hours.

In addition to the above random testing, it is further agreed that any
employee may be required to submit himself to drug testing if: 1. that
employee has been involved in an on-duty automobile accident; 2.
that employee has fired his weapon on-duty other than in a training
situation. For this accident/occurrence testing, all the same rules and
safeguards provided above shall apply to the employee.
PAGE 118P
ARTICLE 40
OUT-OF-CLASSIFICATION PAY

Employees required to work out-of-classification in a higher rank (or on any approved
paid leave while working in such higher classification) shall be paid such higher rank
classification base pay beginning with the performance of such work on the sixth (6)
consecutive day. Such employee shall be paid at the lowest base rate of the higher
rank.

The parties agree that out-of-classification pay shall not occur unless the employee is
specifically ordered by police management (Chief or Deputy Chief) to work the position.
If the employee is directed to work out of class by other than police management, he
should notify his Deputy Chief immediately. If the affected employee is not notified to
the contrary by police management, by the 30 working day, he shall consider the
assignment approved. Further, the CITY agrees that upon the designation of a
particular employee to work out-of-classification, that particular employee designation
will continue on for the duration of the incumbent’s vacancy, except for cause.
PAGE 119P
ARTICLE 41
SPECIALTY PAY

Effective December 27, 2009, any sworn employees (officers, sergeants, lieutenants)
whose primary assignment is as a detective or an investigator, assigned in units whose
primary function is to conduct both initial and follow-up investigations shall receive 3%
of their base pay. The City shall pay employees in equal increments coinciding with the
pay periods. The list of employees entitled to receive Detective/Specialty pay shall
include the following detective units/squads:

Internal Affairs Unit
Background Inspections Unit
Traffic Accident Investigation Squad
Major Crimes Unit

North Investigations Unit
South Investigations Unit
Homicide Unit

Special Victims Unit

Gang Unit

Narcotics Unit

Crime Analysis Lieutenant
Pawn Squad

CIB Operations

The actual names of these jobs may change or the job may be assigned to another unit.

It is the intent of the parties that irrespective of such title changes or assignment of the
job to another unit, that it is the actual work performed by the employees in the above
job listings that will entitle an employee to such specialty pay.
PAGE 120P
ARTICLE 42
PREMIUM PAY

All employees, during the time assigned to these duties, shall be paid “Premium Pay” by
the City. Such employees shall receive an additional one and one half percent (1.5%)
and/or three percent (3%) of the maximum Police Officer’s base pay. The CITY shall
pay these employees in equal increments, coinciding with the pay periods as follows:

One and one half percent (1.5%) Three percent (3%)
Training ERU
Narc Dog Handler Motorcycle
Bomb Dog Handler Bomb Squad
Clan. Lab Helicopter Pilots
*Bilingual
Canine

*Bilingual - If an employee speaks a language other than English, including sign
language for the deaf, with proficiency, as determined by a test administered by the
Human Resources Department, and such employee is specifically assigned and
required to use such skills in the performance of his duties, he shall receive Specialty
Pay as above. This pay is contingent upon the Chief of Police specifically assigning
and requiring the use of such skills; however, in so doing, the Chief may not force an
employee to change shifts or sergeant’s area in violation of Article 15 of this contract.

$75.00 PER WEEK, WHEN ACTUALLY ASSIGNED A RECRUIT
Field Training Officers (F.T.O.)
This F.T.O. pay is limited to trained F.T.O.'s.
PAGE 121P
ARTICLE 43

COMPENSATORY TIME & EXCESS TIME BANK
COMPENSATORY TIME:

An employee shall have the option of accruing compensatory leave time at a rate of one
and one-half (11%) times the actual hours worked in lieu of the payment of overtime.
Employees may accrue a maximum of one hundred thirty-four (134) hours of
compensatory time. The compensatory time off shall be taken at a time mutually
agreed upon by the employee and his/her supervisor. The employee may accrue and
retain the above limit indefinitely until separation from service; however, the employee
retains the right to cash out his/her compensatory time at any time.

It is understood that the usage of compensatory time is to be requested just like annual
leave, and may be denied as any other annual leave. Pursuant to Article 13, Section 2,
for the purpose of determining the number of employees off on leave, comp time shall
be considered as annual leave.

For purposes of this Article, time worked shall include court or call-in time.

Any overtime, including holiday pay for time actually worked, court pay or call-in pay is
eligible to be selected by the employee. Any pay earned at straight time shall be placed
in the employee's comp time bank at straight time; any pay earned at overtime rates
shall be placed in the employee's comp time bank at time and one-half.

EXCESS TIME BANK:

Pursuant to the Commission of Industrial Relations Final Order issued on January 20,
2009, the amount of compensatory time that may be banked by an employee was
reduced from 360 hours to 134 hours. Henceforth, a new “excess time bank” is created
in which all the hours in the compensatory time bank over 134 for each employee will be
deposited. This excess time bank will be separate and apart from the compensatory
time bank or any other bank currently in existence or that has been in existence at any
point in the past.

The City and the Union agree that this excess time bank shall only be used for this
purpose and that no additional hours may be accrued or placed in such excess time
bank other than those placed in it as a result of the Final Order of the CIR.

This excess time bank may be used by employees in a manner similar to the traditional
compensatory time off. Employees shall have the option of either using the hours to
take time off from work subject to the rules and regulations already in existence for the
use of compensatory time or they shall have the option of cashing out the hours in the
excess time bank at such time that they desire consistent with how compensatory time
has been paid in the past between the parties.
PAGE 122P

Employees subject to the labor agreement are able to cash out the time in the excess
time bank whenever they desire and at no time shall they be required to cash out any
portion of the excess time bank except for when they leave City employment.
PAGE 123P
ARTICLE 44
WAGE SUPPLEMENT FOR CARD EMPLOYEES
Beginning December 31, 2006, those employees working under the card system shall
be paid “card pay” by the CITY and shall receive an additional two and one half percent

(2.5%) of the top Police Officer's base pay. The CITY shall pay this employee in equal
increments, coinciding with the pay periods.
PAGE 124P
ARTICLE 45
CONTINUING NEGOTIATIONS
Notwithstanding that this Agreement settles all issues of wages, hours, and working

conditions for the years covered, the parties agree to negotiate during the term of this
Agreement regarding the following issues:

1. a new “performance based" pay system;

2. the utilization of one, or more, H.M.O. options to current health insurance
coverage;

3. the creation and implementation of a voluntary, minimum physical fitness

standard which shall be graded according to the age of the employee.

Furthermore, the parties agree to negotiate all pension benefits currently provided
should Social Security become mandatory.

The CITY and the UNION agree to create procedures to jointly, strongly urge
employees to give at least one (1) year notice of planned retirement.

ARTICLE 45A — MISCELLANEOUS

During the term of this negotiation, the parties were not able to reach agreement on
certain items with regard to the application of the ruling from the Commission of
Industrial Relations (CIR). One item that the City changed voluntarily was its
interpretation of the CIR’s language on initial step placement upon being promoted.
Chapter 23 of the Omaha City Code provides that initial step placement will be based
upon an increase that is nearest to a 5% increase. While the City took a contrary
position on the utilization of this “5% rule” it subsequently has changed its position and
determined that the implementation of the “5% rule” is proper. One item which the City
and the Union were unable to agree in regards to the CIR case are:

1. Did the City properly follow the CIR ruling when it interpreted the ruling to result
in a continued 3,200 hour cap on sick leave payout upon retirement? See Article
13, Section 1.

The parties have agreed that nothing in this contract is an implication that either side
may not seek to litigate either of these matters. Should that occur, the ultimate results
of such litigation shall be placed in this contract as applicable.
PAGE 125P
ARTICLE 46

TRADE TIME

Subject to prior supervisory approval, and if allowed (without additional pay) under the
Fair Labor Standards Act, non-probationary employees within the same classification
and shift, shall be allowed to voluntarily trade duty shifts. Supervisory approval shall not
be unreasonably denied. The CITY shall not incur overtime solely as a result of the
trade. Trades shall be in minimum increments of full shifts, and shall be on a temporary
basis. Designated holidays shall be excluded.

Written notification signed by both employees involved in the trade must be provided on
a form supplied by the Omaha Police Department. All trades must be completed within
the same semi-annual detail time period. Trade time cannot be utilized more than four
(4) times in a calendar year by any individual employee.

At any time an employee leaves employment with the Police Department and becomes
entitled to pay off of his accrued sick and/or annual leave, a determination shall be
made by the CITY of whether that employee owes another employee trade time pay
back. Should it be determined that the employee owes trade time it is understood that
such amounts will be withheld and paid to the CITY. Employees shall, upon application
for retirement, be required to sign an agreement reflecting the above.
PAGE 126P
ARTICLE 47

DURATION OF AGREEMENT

This Agreement shall be and shall remain in full force and effect from and after
December 14, 2008, until December 21, 2013, and thereafter for successive one (1)
calendar year periods, unless one of the parties hereto on or before April 1st of any
such year shall notify the other party hereto in writing of its desire to modify the same, or
any part thereof.

 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands this day of day
of , 20
OMAHA POLICE UNION LOCAL NO. 101 CITY OF OMAHA
by. by.
Aaron Hanson, President Jim Suttle, Mayor
and Chief Negotiator
ATTEST:

City Clerk of the City of Omaha

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

 

Deputy City Attorney
PAGE 127P

APPENDIX A

AUTHORIZATION FOR PAYROLL DEDUCTION

Omaha Police Union, Local No. 101

Effective | hereby request and authorize you to deduct from my
earnings each payroll period an amount sufficient to provide for regular payment of the
dues established by the Omaha Police Union, Local No. 101. The amount shall be
certified by said Local Union and any changes in such amount shall be certified. The
amount deducted shall be paid to the Omaha Police Union, Local 101.

This authorization is revocable at any time upon giving written notice, pursuant to Article
3, Section 5, to the Payroll Section of the Accounts and Finance Division of the City of
Omaha, Nebraska.

 

 

x Social Security No. / /
(Employee's Signature)

Print or Type

Last Name First Middle Initial Date Card Signed

 

Street Address City State Zip
PAGE 128P

APPENDIX B

CLASSIFICATIONS - POLICE BARGAINING UNIT

2009 Salaries: Effective December 14, 2008

 

Class Class Pay
Code Title Range T
9005 Police 1 UP
Officer — AN. 38,459.20
Probationary BW. 1,479.20
HR. 18.49
Class Class Pay
Code Title Range A B c D E F G H 1
9010 Police 3UP
Officer AN. 44,158.40 46,904.00 49,649.60 52,395.20 55,140.80 57,866.40 60,632.00 63,377.60 66,102.40
BW. 1,698.40 1,804.00 1,909.60 2,015.20 2,120.80 2,226.40 2,332.00 2,437.60 2,542.40
HR. 21.23 22.55 23.87 25.19 26.51 27.83 29.15 30.47 31.78
9030 Police 7UP
Sergeant AN. 66,019.20 67,600.00 69,180.80 70,761.60 72,342.40 73,881.60
BW. 2,539.20 2,600.00 2,660.80 2,721.60 2,782.40 2,841.60
HR. 31.74 32.50 33.26 34.02 34.78 35.52
9050 Police 9UP
Lieutenant AN. 75,316.80 77,376.00 79,435.20 81,494.40 83,574.40
BW. 2,896.80 2,976.00 3,055.20 3,134.40 3,214.40
HR. 36.21 37.20 38.19 39.18 40.18
9070 Police 11 UP
Captain AN. 85,217.60 88,545.60 91,873.60 95,201.60 98,488.00
BW. 3,277.60 3,405.60 3,533.60 3,661.60 3,788.00
HR. 40.97 42.57 44.17 45.77 47.35,

STEP PROGRESSION:
POLICE OFFICER — PROBATIONARY

Step Requirement
“T” Initial Hire

POLICE OFFICER

Step Requirement

“A" At Academy graduation (5 months)
“B" Nineteen and one half months (19.5 months) at step “A”
“c" Nineteen and one half months (19.5 months) at step “B”

(
“D" Nineteen and one half months (19.5 months) at step “C”
“E" Nineteen and one half months (19.5 months) at step “D”
“PY Nineteen and one half months (19.5 months) at step “E”
“Ge” Nineteen and one half months (19.5 months) at step “F”
“H" Nineteen and one half months (19.5 months) at step “G”
“vr Nineteen and one half months (19.5 months) at step “H”
POLICE SERGEANT

Step
“pr
“Be
“c
“>
“Ee
“pe

Requirement

Initial Promotion

Twenty-four months (24 months) at step “A”

Twenty-four months (24 months) at step “B”
Twenty-four months (24 months) at step “C”
Twenty-four months (24 months) at step “D”
Twenty-four months (24 months) at step “E”

POLICE LIEUTENANT

Step
“pr
“Be
“c
“>
“Ee

Requirement

Initial Promotion

Eighteen months (18 months) at step “A”
Eighteen months (18 months) at step “B”
Eighteen months (18 months) at step “C”
Eighteen months (18 months) at step “D”

POLICE CAPTAIN

Step
“pr
“Be
“c
“>
“Ee

Requirement

Initial Promotion

Twenty-seven months (27 months) at step “A”
Twenty-seven months (27 months) at step “B”
Twenty-seven months (27 months) at step “C”
Twenty-seven months (27 months) at step “D”

PAGE 129P
PAGE 130P

APPENDIX B

CLASSIFICATIONS - POLICE BARGAINING UNIT

2010 Salaries: Effective December 27, 2009

 

Class Class Pay
Code Title Range T
9005 Police 1 UP
Officer — AN. 38,459.20
Probationary BW. 1,479.20
HR. 18.49
Class Class Pay
Code Title Range A B c D E F G H 1
9010 Police 3UP
Officer AN. 44,158.40 46,904.00 52,998.40 55,003.00 57,359.90 58,500.00 60,632.00 63,377.60 66,102.40
BW. 1,698.40 1,804.00 2,038.40 2,115.50 2,206.15 2,250.00 2,332.00 2,437.60 2,542.40
HR. 21.23 22.55 25.48 26.44 27.58 28.13 29.15 30.47 31.78
9030 Police 7UP
Sergeant AN. 66,019.20 67,600.00 69,180.80 70,761.60 72,342.40 73,881.60
BW. 2,539.20 2,600.00 2,660.80 2,721.60 2,782.40 2,841.60
HR. 31.74 32.50 33.26 34.02 34.78 35.52
9050 Police 9 UP
Lieutenant AN. 75,316.80 77,376.00 79,435.20 81,494.40 83,574.40
BW. 2,896.80 2,976.00 3,055.20 3,134.40 3,214.40
HR. 36.21 37.20 38.19 39.18 40.18
9070 Police 11 UP
Captain AN. 85,217.60 88,545.60 91,873.60 95,201.60 98,488.00
BW. 3,277.60 3,405.60 3,533.60 3,661.60 3,788.00
HR. 40.97 42.57 44.17 45.77 47.35

STEP PROGRESSION:
ALL OFFICERS HIRED AFTER DECEMBER 27, 2009:

 

POLICE OFFICER — PROBATIONARY
POLICE OFFICER — PROBATIONARY
Step Requirement
“T" Initial Hire Step Requirement
“T" Initial Hire
POLICE OFFICER
POLICE OFFICER
Step Requirement

“A" At Academy graduation (5 months) Step Requirement

“B" Nineteen months (19 months) at step “A” “A” One (1) year at step “T”
“Cc” One (1) year at step “B” “B” One (1) year at step “A”
“Dp” One (1) year at step “C” “c" One (1) year at step “B”
“E" One (1) year at step “D” “Dp” One (1) year at step “C”
“PY Two (2) years at step “E” “E" One (1) year at step “D”
“Ge” Two (2) years at step “F” “e Two (2) years at step “E”
“H” Two (2) years at step “G” “Gr Two (2) years at step “F”
“" Thirteen (13) years after academy graduation “H" Two (2) years at step “G”

“vr Thirteen (13) years after academy graduation
POLICE SERGEANT

Step
“pr
“Be
“c
“>
“Ee
“pe

Requirement

Initial Promotion

Twenty-four months (24 months) at step “A”

Twenty-four months (24 months) at step “B”
Twenty-four months (24 months) at step “C”
Twenty-four months (24 months) at step “D”
Twenty-four months (24 months) at step “E”

POLICE LIEUTENANT

Step
“pr
“Be
“c
“>
“Ee

Requirement

Initial Promotion

Eighteen months (18 months) at step “A”
Eighteen months (18 months) at step “B”
Eighteen months (18 months) at step “C”
Eighteen months (18 months) at step “D”

POLICE CAPTAIN

Step
“pr
“Be
“c
“>
“Ee

Requirement

Initial Promotion

Twenty-seven months (27 months) at step “A”
Twenty-seven months (27 months) at step “B”
Twenty-seven months (27 months) at step “C”
Twenty-seven months (27 months) at step “D”

PAGE 131P
PAGE 132P
APPENDIX C

HEALTH CARE BENEFIT SUMMARY

BASIC BENEFITS:

INPATIENT

HOSPITALIZATION:

OUTPATIENT
FACILITY
SERVICES:

PHYSICIAN'S
SERVICES:

All inpatient care must be pre-certified by third party administrator

100% co-insurance up to the maximum benefit allowed for necessary covered
services per 365-day benefit period.
e Semiprivate room
¢ Cardiac care or intensive care unit
e Use of operating, recovery and other appropriate treatment rooms and
equipment
« Anesthesia
e Respiratory care
e FDA-approved drugs, intravenous solutions or medicine which are prescribed
and administered while hospitalized
e Administration and processing of intravenous solutions and blood
e Supplies, materials and equipment except take home supplies and
convenience items
e Radiology and pathology and other diagnostic services billed by the hospital
e Radiation and chemotherapy — high dose chemotherapy is limited to
provisions under organ and tissue transplants
e Physical, Occupational, & Speech Therapy when provided by licensed
therapist or under the direct supervision of licensed therapist

e = Injury, if treated within 72 hours of an accident

e Surgery

Emergency medical condition if treatment is received within 24 hours of its
onset

Rabies injections

Cancer chemotherapy or radiation therapy

Renal dialysis

Treatment of burns

Reapplication or adjustment of casts

X-ray and laboratory tests performed within 72 hours before an inpatient
admission for surgery

Surgery

Surgical Assistance on specified covered procedures
Anesthesia Services as determined by third party administrator
Inpatient hospital visits

Inpatient Consultations when necessary

$100.00 per Membership Year Maximum on Out-Patient

Diagnostic X-Rays and Laboratory Procedures performed in an outpatient department
of a hospital or in a physician's office.

Maternity: covered on same basis as any other confinement for both Mother and
Baby.
PAGE 133P

Major Available subject to applicable major medical deductible and/or coinsurance for
MEDICAL: following medically necessary covered services and supplies:

Physician home and office visit and consultations

Radiology, pathology and other diagnostic services not covered under the
basic coverage

Ambulance service as allowed

Outpatient or home sessions for physical, occupational or speech therapy
sessions, chiropractic or osteopathic physiotherapy or manipulative
treatments or adjustments with specified limits per calendar year

Services for renal dialysis

Rental or initial purchase of certain medical equipment and supplies

Diabetes education as specified

Home Fusion

FDA-approved injectables and injectable supplies

Screening mammograms

Home health aide

Skilled nursing care

Skilled nursing facility

Hospice services

Outpatient treatment of mental illness, alcoholism or drug abuse

PRESCRIPTION Subject to annual deductible and applicable co-insurance up to annual out of pocket
DRUG PROGRAM: ~=maximum

Retail — up to 30 day supply

Mail Order — up to 90 day supply

The above list only highlights the covered benefits under the basic and major medical
provisions. For a more extensive review, consult the employee Benefit Plan Description
provided by the City’s third party administrator.
APPENDIX D

PAGE 134P

JOB MATCHES WITH COMPARABLE CITIES

OMAHA POLICE RANKS

Recruit
Officer
Sergeant
Lieutenant
Captain

OMAHA POLICE RANKS

Recruit
Officer
Sergeant
Lieutenant
Captain

OMAHA POLICE RANKS

Recruit
Officer
Sergeant
Lieutenant
Captain

OMAHA POLICE RANKS

Recruit
Officer
Sergeant
Lieutenant
Captain

CINCINNATI POLICE RANKS

Minimum

Recruit

Officer Minimum
Sergeant Minimum
Lieutenant Minimum
Captain Minimum

Maximum

Recruit

Specialist Maximum
Sergeant Maximum
Lieutenant Maximum
Captain Maximum

DENVER POLICE RANKS

Minimum

Officer Minimum
Officer Minimum
Sergeant Minimum
Lieutenant Minimum
Captain Minimum

Maximum

Officer Minimum
Officer Maximum
Sergeant Maximum
Lieutenant Maximum
Captain Maximum

Fort WoRTH POLICE RANKS

Minimum

Recruit

Officer Minimum
Sergeant Minimum
Lieutenant Minimum
Captain Minimum

Maximum

Recruit

Officer Maximum
Sergeant Maximum
Lieutenant Maximum
Captain Maximum

OKLAHOMA Clty POLICE RANKS

Minimum

Recruit (A)

Recruit (B)
Lieutenant Minimum
Captain Minimum
Major Minimum

Maximum

Recruit (A)

Sergeant Maximum
Lieutenant Maximum
Captain Maximum
Major Maximum
OMAHA POLICE RANKS

Recruit
Officer
Sergeant
Lieutenant
Captain

OMAHA POLICE RANKS

Recruit
Officer

Sergeant

Lieutenant
Captain

OMAHA POLICE RANKS

Recruit
Officer
Sergeant
Lieutenant
Captain

PAGE 135P

TULSA POLICE RANKS

Minimum

Recruit

Officer Minimum
Sergeant Minimum
Captain Minimum
Major Minimum

Maximum

Recruit

Corporal Maximum
Sergeant Maximum
Captain Maximum
Major Maximum

St. PAUL POLICE RANKS

Minimum

Trainee

Officer Minimum with
District Force

Sergeant Minimum with

Premium

N/A

Commander Minimum
with Premium

Maximum

Trainee

Officer Maximum with
Premium and District Force
Sergeant Maximum with
Premium

N/A

Senior Commander
Maximum with Premium and
Senior Premium

WICHITA POLICE RANKS

Minimum

Recruit

Officer Minimum
Sergeant Minimum
Lieutenant Minimum
N/A — No Scale

Maximum

Recruit

Officer Maximum
Sergeant Maximum
Lieutenant Maximum
N/A — No Scale
APPENDIX E

PAGE 136P

PENSIONABLE EARNINGS AND COTA PAY CATEGORIES

Pensionable
Earnings for
Employees

COTA
categories for
Employees

Pensionable
Earnings for
Employees
Hired After
January 1, 2010

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Earning Hired Before Hired Before (Regular Pay
ID Code Earning January 1, 2010 January 1, 2010 Only)

001 Regular Pay Y N Y

005 Suspended With Pay Y N Y

010 Sales Tax Bonus Y N Y

017 Sick Leave Used Y N Y

020 Annual Leave Used Y N Y

032 Jury Duty Y N Y

033 Election Duty Y N Y

040 Limited Duty Y N Y

042 |OD/WC Y N Y

043 Injured On Duty Y N Y

044 WC Sick Leave Used Y N Y

045 Military Leave Y N Y

046 Working Out Of Class Y N Y

047 Funeral Leave Y N Y

048 Union Business Y N Y

211 Raise Adjustment Y N Y

235 Shift Differential Y N Y

320 Birthday Y N Y

330 Longevity Y N Y

351 Language Y N Y

o 415 Court Time Straight Y Y N
o 416 Court Time And Half Y Y N
420 Holiday Straight Y N Y

o 421 Holiday Time And A Half Y Y N
o 423 Overtime 10 Y Y N
o 424 Overtime 15 Y Y N
oe 425 Call In Straight Y Y N
o 426 Call In Time And A Half Y Y N
429 FLSA Pay Cur Yr Y N Y

517 Family Sick Leave Used Y N Y

e 520 Comp Used Y Y Y
e 525 Special Time Off Used Y Y Y
o 526 Special Time Off Accrued N Y N
529 Special Time Off Overage Y N Y

530 Special Time Off Payoff Y N N

543 Police Assessment Y N Y

Y N Y

544

SOS Pilot
Pensionable
Earnings for
Employees

COTA
categories for
Employees

PAGE 137P

Pensionable
Earnings for
Employees
Hired After
January 1, 2010

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Earning Hired Before Hired Before (Regular Pay
ID Code Earning January 1, 2010 January 1, 2010 Only)
545 Narcotics Dog Handler Y N Y
546 Bomb Dog Handler Y N Y
547 Clandestine Lab Y N Y
548 Air Spotter Y N Y
549 School Res Officer Y N Y
550 Helicopter Pilot Pay Y N Y
551 Mounted Patrol Pay Y N Y
554 Training Pay Y N Y
555 Canine Pay Y N Y
556 Police ERU Pay Y N Y
557 Police Motorcycle Pay Y N Y
558 Police Bomb Pay Y N Y
559 Field Training Pay Y N Y
560 Police Specialty Pay Y N Y
561 Card Spec Pay Y N Y
562 Standby Pay Y N N
601 College Incentive AA Y N Y
602 College Incentive BA Y N Y
603 College Incentive MA Y N Y
oe 625 Comp Accrual N Y N
o 626 Comp Acc Call In 1.0 N Y N
o 627 Comp Acc Call In 1.5 N Y N
o 628 Comp Acc Court 1.0 N Y N
o 629 Comp Acc Court 1.5 N Y N
720 Comp Payoff Y N N
817 FMLA Pregnancy Y N Y
e 820 Prior Comp Used Y Y Y
840 Prior Year Comp Payoff Y N N
862 FMLA Exempt Sick Y N Y
863 FMLA Exempt Annual Y N Y
e 864 FMLA Comp Used Y Y Y
865 FMLA Sick Used Y N Y
866 FMLA Annual Used Y N Y
920 Holiday Not Worked Y N Y
Notes: @ These earnings are considered as COTA for the purposes of the pension calculation.
(These hours are added together.)
@ These earnings are considered as comp time used for purposes of the COTA portion of

the pension calculation. (These hours subtract from hours added above.)

dks - revised 02/09/2010
