COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER
AND
DENVER POLICE PROTECTIVE ASSOCIATION

2015 — 2017

 

D-b4O/- 2/00
ARTICLE 1
ARTICLE 2
ARTICLE 3
ARTICLE 4
ARTICLE 5
ARTICLE 6
ARTICLE 7
ARTICLE 8
ARTICLE 9
ARTICLE 10
ARTICLE 11
ARTICLE 12
ARTICLE 13
ARTICLE 14
ARTICLE 15
ARTICLE 16
ARTICLE 17
ARTICLE 18
ARTICLE 19
ARTICLE 20

ARTICLE 21

TABLE OF CONTENTS

DEFINITIONS

 

[RESERVED]
ASSOCIATION RIGHTS. ....sssssssssessssesseesnessssssnsesesssssesesssssssasasssssasssssssssssssassssses 5

CHECK OFF AND FAIR SHARE.L.Q....ssssesssssssssesssecssesssssssscssucssaveesessnesesnes

 

[RESERVED]

LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE...

 

SICK LEAVE

 

BEREAVEMENT LEAVE..

 

MILITARY SERVICE LEAVE .......cccsccsssscssssseesssnssessseecessecssssessssnessssetessseeeeee TT

NUMBER OF HOURS IN WORK PERIOD/DAYS OFF...

 

CALL BACK...

 

sass vevenanaeaeseneneseueseseneseeneesessssseseseasereeseseaeaeaeasseseaes 23
CHANGE OF SHIFT AND CANCELLATION OF DAYS OFF u...cecsesccssseeeesse 24

EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE

 

WORK ASSIGNMENT IN HIGHER RANK oocccecccssssssecssssecccssvecssssecssseessssseesese 26

ii
ARTICLE 22

ARTICLE 23

ARTICLE 24

ARTICLE 25

ARTICLE 26

ARTICLE 27

ARTICLE 28

ARTICLE 29

ARTICLE 30

ARTICLE 31

ARTICLE 32

ARTICLE 33

TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)

INJURY IN LINE OF DUTY oo..ccscccesscesssessseesseesssecssecsseesssccsseceseesssesssvssssessseeee 27
FUNERAL EXPENSES .......cscssesseessssesssecsseessueesneesssecsnscsssessessasesssecsssecssecssssesase 28

LIFE INSURANCE ......csccesseesssessenseseeeseentenneesneenee

 

HEALTH AND DENTAL INSURANCE ..00..csesscssssssssssesssseccsssessssseseessessssseeese 30
DEATH AND DISABILITY CONTRIBUTION .....ccscsssessssessseesssessseesseesseseseee 32
PAY RATES AND LONGEVITY ou... ccssesssssseesssseccssseessssesssssecssrsveessseesseneeenee 33

RETIREE HEALTH 36

 

GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE. ..eccssscssssssssssssssssseesssseeess 37

GENERAL AND DURATION.......scesssesssessosee

 

PAYMENT ON SEPARATION. ....0....ccccccesseesseseesssesceasessecsserseseeens evs 42

iii
PREAMBLE

This Contract entered into on this day of , 2014 between the
CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER (hereinafter referred to as “City”), and the DENVER
POLICE PROTECTIVE ASSOCIATION (hereinafter referred to as “the Association”), has as its
purpose the establishment of a productive relationship between the City and the Association, and
to set compensation and certain other conditions of employment as specified in § 9.8.3(B) and
(D) of the Charter.
Article 1 RECOGNITION

The City recognizes the Association as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent chosen by the
members of the bargaining unit for purposes of negotiating subjects specified in § 9.8.3(B) and
(D) of the Charter.
Article 2

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

2.6

2.7

2.8

2.9

2.10

2.11

2.12

2.13

2.14

2.15

DEFINITIONS

“City” means the City and County of Denver, Colorado.
“Association” means the Denver Police Protective Association.
“Bargaining agent” means the Denver Police Protective Association.
“Officer” means a member of the bargaining unit as defined below.
“Chief” means the Chief of Police of the City and County of Denver.

“Commission” means the Civil Service Commission of the City and
County of Denver.

“Department” means the Police Department of the City and County of
Denver.

“Rank” is defined by § 9.6.6 of the Charter.

“Bargaining Unit” means all officers in positions of the classified service
of the Police Department of the City, except the Chief of Police, Deputy
Chiefs, Division Chiefs and Commanders.

“Charter” means the Charter of the City and County of Denver.

“Executive Board” or “Board of Directors” means those seven
members of the Association who are elected to serve as officers, directors
or members of the Executive Board of the Denver Police Protective
Association by the Association's membership.

“Base Pay” is the sum total of an officer’s annual salary plus longevity as
calculated in accordance with this Agreement. “Base Rate of Pay” is
base pay divided by two thousand eighty (2,080) hours.

“Regular Rate of Pay” is the sum total of an officer’s base pay, as
defined in 2.12 above, plus any other regularly recurring remunerations
the officer may be receiving under Article 27 of this Agreement, divided
by two thousand eighty (2,080) hours.

“Hourly Rate” is the annual salary for a given rank, divided by two
thousand eighty (2,080) hours.

“Accrued Time” is the sum total of an officer’s vacation time, saved
vacation time, saved holiday time, compensatory time and/or birthday
leave time under this Agreement.

Reference to the male gender throughout this Agreement shall include references to the female

3
gender and vice versa.
Article 3 [RESERVED]
Article 4

4.1

4.2

43

4.2.1

4.2.2

4.2.3

4.2.4

4.2.5

ASSOCIATION RIGHTS

When the Chief or his designee has granted prior approval, Association
officials or representatives shall be allowed time away from their assigned
duty station in order to conduct Association business. Nothing herein
shall limit the discretion of the Chief or his designee in approving such
time off.

Bulletin Boards

The Association may maintain one (1) secure bulletin board at each of the
decentralized stations and other police facilities and two (2) secure bulletin
boards at the Police Administration Building. The Chief or his designee
will approve the location of such bulletin boards. All notices posted on
these bulletin boards must first be approved by the Chief or a Deputy
Chief before being posted. These boards may be used for the following
notices:

Recreation and Social Affairs of the Association.
Association Meetings.

Association Elections.

Reports of Association Committees.

Information to police officers concerning their employment.

There shall be no postings regarding any political candidate or candidates,
nor postings concerning any issues being considered as part of a federal,
state or municipal election.

The bulletin boards will be paid for by the Association who shall also be
responsible for their maintenance and security.

Subject to prior approval by the Chief or a Deputy Chief, not more than
twice a month, or as the Chief may additionally allow, notices concerning
matters related to scheduled meetings or affairs of the association or
incidental to this Agreement may be sent to Association members via the
Department’s e-mail system in accordance with procedures determined by
the Department. Notwithstanding the above, the Association’s newsletter
will not be distributed to Association members via the Department’s e-
mail system.

Members of the Association’s Executive Board may, at the discretion of
the Chief or his/her designee, be permitted to speak at shift roll call
meetings about Association business, and shall be permitted to address
each Department recruit class for a period not to exceed two (2) hours

6
44

concerning Association membership and benefits.

In response to requests for information, the parties will provide
information deemed reasonably necessary for purposes of preparing for
negotiations and/or impasse or grievance arbitrations. Responses to
requests for information shall be made within a reasonable period of time.
Denial of any request for information or the response to any request for
information shall not be subject to the grievance or arbitration procedures,
but may be admissible in any subsequent impasse or grievance arbitration.
Article 5

5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5

CHECK OFF AND FAIR SHARE

Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the commencement of
this agreement or within thirty (30) days after being hired into the
bargaining unit, and continuing thereafter on the last day of each calendar
month, and as a condition of employment, any officer who is not an active
member of the Association shall tender to the Association the o fficer’s fair
share of the cost of negotiating and administering this Agreement,
including all costs germane to collective bargaining and/or to the
collective bargaining process.

Any officer who is a member of and adheres to established and traditional
tenets or teachings of a bona fide religion, body or sect which has
historically held conscientious objections to joining or financially
supporting labor organizations shall not be required to financially support
the Association as a condition of employment; except that as a condition
of employment, such officer shall be required to pay, in lieu of fair share
payment, sums equal to such fair share payment to one of the following
nonreligious nonlabor organizations all of which are exempt from taxation
under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3): the Denver Police Officers Foundation, the
Denver Police Protective Association Relief Fund, the AMC Cancer
Research Center or the American Diabetes Association.

The City agrees to deduct the Association membership dues, assessments
and fair share payments from the pay of such officers who individually
request in writing that such deductions shall be made on a form agreeable
to the City. The Association shall certify to the City the amount to be
deducted. The written authorization for Association dues deduction and
assessments or fair share payments shall remain in full force and effect
until revoked in writing by the officer.

The payment to the Association will normally be made by the first day of
the month after such deductions are made. If the City makes a good faith
effort to meet this time frame, the Association agrees that it will not make
any claim for damages, interest or other monetary compensation for the
time the payment is not received. The Association agrees that it will
indemnify and save the City harmless from all suits, actions, and claims
against the City or persons acting on behalf of the City whether for
damages, compensation or any combination thereof, arising out of the
City’s compliance with the terms of this Article. The Association shall
reimburse the City for any and all reasonable costs and reasonable
attorneys fees arising out of the defense of any such action against the
City. The City agrees to cooperate with the Association and its counsel
concerning any such litigation.

The department will provide to the Association strength reports,
assignment rosters, drop reports, and separation information on a monthly
basis.
Article 6 [RESERVED]
Article 7

7A

7.2

7.3

7.4

75

LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

The City and the Association agree to set up a Labor Management
Committee which shall consist of three (3) representatives appointed by
the Association President and three (3) representatives appointed by the
Chief. If an issue is brought to either the City or the Association by
another organization of police officers, a representative of that
organization shall have the right to attend the meeting at which that issue
is discussed.

The committee shall discuss matters of concern to either the Association
or the Department which are not addressed in this Agreement and/or the
procedures to be followed with respect to matters which are addressed in
the Agreement, including matters and equipment relating to officer safety.
Statements by committee members made during Labor Management
meetings shall not be used as evidence or admissions in any proceeding
between the parties. Issues presented to the committee shall be resolved
within fifteen (15) days of the meeting at which the issue was discussed,
or as mutually agreed by the parties. If the issue is not resolved within
fifteen (15) days or at the time mutually agreed by the parties, or if the
Association is not satisfied with the resolution, the issue may be raised
with the Chief in a meeting to be scheduled as soon as practicable.
Following such meeting, the issue will be resolved by the Chief, or in the
Chief's absence, the Acting Chief, within twenty (20) days. Resolution
may include notification of the need for further research and deliberation
as necessary.

Unless otherwise agreed upon, the Labor Management Committee shall
meet on a monthly basis at a time and place mutually agreed upon
between the Chiefs designee and the Association President. Either party
may request additional meetings as needed, and such meetings will occur
at a time and place mutually agreed upon by the Chief’s designee and the
Association President.

The Committee’s discussion of an issue does not affect whether that issue
is or is not a mandatory or permissive subject of bargaining.

The Chief shall arrange for Committee officers who are on duty to be
released to attend such meetings. Committee officers who are off duty
shall be compensated at their regular rate of pay for the amount of time
actually spent at the meeting.

10
Article 8 SENIORITY

Seniority shall be defined as the length of service in the Department within the officer’s civil
service rank following the officer’s most recent appointment to that rank. When two (2) or more
officers in the same rank were appointed on the same day, seniority shall be determined by their
position on the certified promotional list for that rank. Time spent on authorized paid leave or
military leaves of absence shall be included in length of service. If an officer who has been
promoted reverts to a rank formerly held, the officer’s seniority shall be the sum of the seniority
earned in the promotional rank and in the rank to which the officer reverts.

il
Article 9

9.1

9.2

9.3

9.4

9.5

9.3.1

VACATIONS

Officers hired on or after January 1, 1996 shall accrue vacation as follows:

Length of Annual Leave Hours Accrued
Employment Each Year of Regular Time Worked
1st through 4th year 112 hours

Sth through 9th year 136 hours

10th through 14th year 144 hours

15th through 19th year 168 hours

20th through 24th year 184 hours

25th year and thereafter 200 hours

Officers hired prior to January 1, 1996 shall continue to receive their
vacation entitlement pursuant to the schedule in effect in 1995, except that
effective on January 1, 1996, officers with 20 or more years of service
accrue 23 days; effective January 1, 1997, officers with 25 or more years
of service accrue 24 days; effective January 1, 1998, officers with 25 or
more years of service accrue 25 days.

Vacation shall be accrued for each month of service, prorated on the above
schedule.

Subject to the limitations of 9.3.1, vacation time must be used in the
calendar year in which it is received except that an officer may carry over
up to 144 hours of vacation time to be used subsequent to the time of
accrual. Officers may, solely at the Chief’s discretion, use their excess
accrued vacation in increments of eight (8), ten (10) or twelve (12) hours
dependent upon the officer’s regularly scheduled duty shift.

Officers shall not be entitled to use accrued vacation time during the
calendar year of their year of hire.

Upon the separation of an officer from service for any reason other than
for cause, the officer shall be entitled to a lump sum payment for all
accrued and unused vacation time calculated at his or her base rate of pay
pursuant to Article 33. Upon the death of an officer, such lump sum
payment shall be paid to the officer’s estate. Payment due under this
article shall be made within sixty (60) days of the date of the officer’s
separation from the department or within sixty (60) days from the officer’s
death or the appointment of a personal representative on behalf of the
officer’s estate.

Vacation voting for the upcoming year shall take place during the last
quarter of the preceding year.

12
9.6

9.7

9.8

9.9

9.10

Vacation shall be voted based on seniority in accordance with this article.
Vacation shall be voted by work period or half work period. Officers who
vote to split their vacation are entitled to take the first fourteen (14) days
or the last fourteen (14) days of the work period subject to the availability
of accrued time. If the vacation is split, both the first half and second half
will be voted by seniority provided that the split vacation voting does not
increase leaves which have been allotted through proportional scheduling.
Officers shall be required to pre-select either a full vacation or a split
vacation. Officers may, however, split their accrued vacation time only if
the aggregate of their accrued or saved vacation time is eighty (80) hours
or more. When vacation time is split, during any two (2) week vacation
period officers working ten (10) hours shifts shall use five (5) regular days
off and officers working eight (8) hours shifts shall use three (3) regular
days off, whenever possible, in addition to the split vacation time. Any
additional accrued time available to the officer may be used to extend the
officer’s period of vacation subject to the needs of the department and the
Chief's discretion.

Officers voting full period vacations who are entitled to in excess of
twenty-eight (28) days, including vacation days and regular days off, shall
be granted the days preceding or following the twenty-eight (28) day
period at the discretion of the commander.

Transfers after vacation voting:

a. When the transfer is requested by the officer, all rights to the
original vacation voting are relinquished. Vacation time will be
granted strictly at the convenience of the Commander of the
Bureau/District to which the officer is assigned until the next
vacation voting period.

b. When the transfer has not been requested by the officer, insofar as
it is possible without affecting the efficient operations of the unit,
the unit commander will attempt to honor the original vote.

In the event a vacation or accumulated sick leave time slot becomes
available, the commanding officer shall post notice of such available time
for a period of fifteen (15) days, provided a fifteen-day period exists prior
to the available time slot. If less than fifteen (15) days is available, the
commanding officer shall post notice of such available time as soon as
practicable following the date of availability until commencement. Such
available time shall be awarded to officers on a priority based on seniority
subject to procedures to be established by the Department.

Except in an emergency under procedures determined by the Chief, no
part of vacation time voted in a full work period or half work period will
be cancelled, nor shall an officer be called back during his/her use of such
voted vacation time.

13
9.11

9.1L

The use of vacation time shall be voted by seniority as follows:

Throughout the department, voting in each Bureau/District shall be
according to seniority in rank. Rank includes the following
positions: Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant, and Police Officer. The
appointed positions of detective, corporal and technician are not
civil service ranks. Division Chiefs may permit voting within
individual units subject to the approval of the Deputy Chief of the
affected area of Operations or Administration. In the absence of a
Division Chief, the Deputy Chief of the affected area of Operations
or Administration may permit voting within individual units. The
Chief of Police may establish exceptions to this rule as he deems
necessary for the efficient operation of the department.

14
Article 10

10.1

10.2

10.3

10.4

10.5

SICK LEAVE

Each officer shall be allowed one hundred forty-four (144) hours of sick
leave per year with full compensation at the officer’s base rate of pay.
The unused portion of such sick leave may be accumulated until the
officer shall have a reserve of seven hundred twenty (720) hours of sick
leave. At any time the accumulated reserve of sick leave shall exceed
seven hundred twenty (720) hours, payment for the time in excess of
seven hundred twenty (720) hours shall be made to the officer at the
officer’s base rate of pay, provided the Chief approves such payment; and
if such payment is not so approved, the time in excess of seven hundred
twenty hours shall be added to the officer’s annual vacation. The
maximum amount of accumulated sick leave to be compensated in any
one year is one hundred forty-four (144) hours in excess of a seven
hundred twenty (720) hour bank.

At the termination of an officer’s term of service with the department, for
any reason, the officer shall pursuant to Article 33 receive compensation
in full at the officer’s base rate of pay for all accumulated sick leave due
the officer at the termination of service. Upon the death of an officer, the
cash benefits attributable to the officer’s accumulated sick leave shall be
paid to the officer’s surviving spouse or, if there be no surviving spouse,
then the officer’s surviving child or children or, if there be no surviving
child or children, then to the officer’s estate.

Sick leave may be used when an officer is incapacitated by sickness or
injury; for medical, dental and optical examinations or treatment; and for
the necessary care and attendance during sickness of a member of the
officer’s immediate family. For purposes of this Article 10.3, “immediate
family” includes the officer’s spouse, son, daughter, mother, father,
grandparents, grandchildren, brother, sister, in-laws, or domestic partner
as defined by the City.

Officers shall be provided Family and Medical Leave Act (“FMLA”)
leave consistent with the FMLA and its corresponding regulations.
Officers shall use accrued paid leave in conjunction with any leave
granted under the FMLA.

An officer may donate sick leave to the sick leave bank of another

member of the bargaining unit. Any sick leave donated to another
officer’s sick leave bank shall be converted to the hourly rate of the donee.

15
Article 11

11.1

11.2

11.3

11.4

HOLIDAYS
The following are recognized and observed as holidays:

New Year’s Day

Dr. Martin Luther King Day
Presidents Day

Cesar Chavez Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day

Labor Day

Thanksgiving

Veterans Day

Christmas Day

Officer’s Birthday (to be taken off in accordance with procedures
issued by the Chief)

In addition to his base pay, an officer shall be paid one and one-half times
his base rate of pay for any time actually worked on a holiday.

If the day on which a holiday is observed falls on an officer’s scheduled
day off, the officer shall receive, in addition to the officer’s base pay, pay
for the holiday at the officer’s base rate of pay.

At the discretion of the Chief and subject to the needs of the department,
an officer may request eight (8) hours of time off in lieu of receiving pay
for the recognized holiday under 11.2 or 11.3 and may save up to four (4)
such holidays for a maximum of thirty-two (32) hours of holiday time
which can be voted at the time of the vacation leave vote. Such requests
for time off and voting for such holiday time block will be dealt with in
accordance with procedures to be developed by the department, after
consultation with the Association through the Labor Management
Committee. When an officer requests and is granted eight (8) hours of
time off in lieu of a specific holiday, he has no entitlement to either the
premium pay under 11.2 for work on the holiday or payment under 11.3 if
the holiday as observed falls on the officer’s scheduled day off.

16
Article 12 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

Upon proper notification to his commanding officer, an officer shall be granted forty (40) hours
of paid leave of absence in the event of the death of the officer’s husband, wife, mother, father,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, child, stepchild, brother, sister, brother-in-
law, sister-in-law, grandparent, grandchild, domestic partner as defined by the City, or other
person within the officer’s immediate household. On the occasion of the death of any other
relative, including a relative by marriage, an officer shall be granted a one (1) day paid leave of
absence. Bereavement leave pursuant to this Article may be taken in conjunction with the
officer’s regularly scheduled days off and/or previously scheduled leave time. Bereavement
leave is to be taken in connection with matters related to the death.

17
Article 13

13.1

13.2

13.3

13.1.1

13.1.2

13.1.3

MILITARY SERVICE LEAVE

Officers who are absent from work for military service in one of the
uniformed services and who are otherwise eligible under the Uniformed
Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (“USERRA”) shall
be granted leaves of absence for such military service.

Officers shall give the Department advance written or verbal notice
ofan absence due to military service.

Officers shall be eligible for up to fifteen (15) days, not to exceed
one hundred twenty (120) hours, of paid military leave each
calendar year.

Any officer who remains in military service beyond the time for
which paid military leave is allowed shall be placed on military
leave without pay. However, an officer may elect to use any
accrued vacation leave or compensatory time, in lieu of unpaid
leave, for all or any portion of the officer’s absence due to military
service.

Officers absent on military leave for less than thirty-one (31) days are
entitled to continued health and dental insurance coverage as provided by
this Agreement. Officers who serve more than thirty (30) days in the
military may elect continued health and dental insurance coverage for
themselves and their dependents, at their own expense.

While on paid military leave, an officer’s seniority and eligibility for pay
increases and vacation and sick leave accrual shall not be affected. While
on any unpaid military leave, an officer’s seniority will not be affected.

During the term of this Agreement, officers shall receive military pay or
benefits currently provided by D.R.M.C § 18-164 or, subsequent to the
expiration of said ordinance, in accordance with and at the level provided
to any Civil Service or Career Service employee in any ordinance
subsequently enacted in lieu or, to replace, or to supplement D.R.M.C §
18-164. In the event D.R.M.C § 18-164 expires and is not subsequently
re-enacted, the level of benefits therein contained shall continue during the
term of this Agreement.

18
Article 14 LEAVE OF ABSENCE

A leave of absence without pay of up to one (1) year may be granted by the Chief or his designee
to an officer who has completed at least five (5) years of continuous service. Leave shall not be
unreasonably denied. Ifthe leave is denied, the reason for denial shall be provided to the officer
in writing.

19
Article 15

15.1

15.2

NUMBER OF HOURS IN WORK PERIOD/DAYS OFF

During each twenty-eight (28) day work period, the normal work cycle
shall be one hundred sixty (160) hours, inclusive of authorized leave time.
During each twenty-eight (28) day work period, each officer shall receive
eight (8) days off, or the equivalent, depending on the officer’s regularly
scheduled duty shift.

In the event that the department adopts a fourteenth (14") period during
any calendar year, each officer shall receive an additional two (2) days off,

or the equivalent, depending on the officer’s regularly scheduled duty
shift.

20
Article 16

16.1

16.2

OVERTIME

Pursuant to § 7(k) of the Fair Labor Standards Act (29 U.S.C. § 207(k)), a
work period for officers of twenty-eight (28) days is established.

The overtime rate of pay shall be at time and one-half of the officer’s
regular rate of pay. Except as noted in section 16.3 below, all officers up
to and including the rank of lieutenant shall be paid at the overtime rate for
all hours worked in excess of their normal daily work shift or for all hours
actually worked in excess of one hundred seventy-one (171) hours in the
work period. Captains shall be compensated for all hours worked in
excess of their normal duty shift at their regular rate of pay, except as
noted in section 16.3 below. For purposes of this article, the term “hours
worked during a normal daily work shift” shall include all types of paid
leave or time off except compensatory time. The parties expressly
acknowledge that the time spent donning and doffing the uniform and
safety gear required by the Department to be wom by officers does not
constitute compensable work time under the FLSA or this Agreement.

All overtime worked, other than off-duty overtime specified in section
16.3 below, shall be compensated in either money or time off pursuant to
this agreement, unless external funding sources dictate otherwise. All
overtime work must be approved by the officer’s supervisor prior to the
work being performed. Time worked will be recorded pursuant to the
Department’s established record keeping procedures.

After working overtime the officer will designate whether he wants to be
compensated in money or time off. If the officer requests compensation in
money, that request will be honored unless a supervisor, for reasonable
cause, denies the request. Any such denial is subject to review through the
chain of command and ultimately through the grievance procedure of the
collective bargaining agreement. If the officer requests compensation in
compensatory time off, said request shall be granted, absent extraordinary
circumstances, until the officer achieves a bank of eighty (80) hours. Ifan
officer has accumulated a bank of eighty (80) hours or more, then a
request for further accrual of compensatory time off must be approved by
the Chief or his designee.

Compensatory time for all non-Patrol Officers may be used within a
reasonable period after making the request, if the use of the compensatory
time does not unduly disrupt the operations of the Department.
Compensatory time for all Officers within the Patrol Division shall be in
accordance with those practices more specifically set forth in a Settlement
Agreement and Order Approving Settlement entered in a civil action
entitled Nick Rogers, et al v. City and County of Denver, Civil Action No.
07-CV 00541-RPM, dated January 31, 2012. Under all circumstances,
pre-approved vacations take precedence over requests to use
compensatory time.

21
16.3

16.4

16.5

Overtime in off-duty positions paid through the department shall be
compensated as follows:

a. Officers below the rank of sergeant working overtime in an off-
duty position paid through the department shall be compensated at
their overtime rate.

b. Officers at or above the rank of sergeant working overtime in an
off-duty position in a supervisory capacity paid through the
department shall be compensated at their overtime rate.

c. Unless otherwise approved by the Chief or his designee, officers at
or above the rank of sergeant working overtime in an off-duty
position in a non-supervisory capacity paid through the department
shall be compensated at one and one-half times the hourly rate of
pay of a detective with 25 years longevity.

Actual overtime worked is to be converted to the nearest 1/10th hour until
such time as the Department has the ability to record and pay overtime to
the minute. At that time, actual overtime worked will be calculated and
paid to the minute.

Officers shall not be required to declare their intention to request

compensation in money or time off prior to overtime being assigned to
perform unscheduled operational, investigative or enforcement duties.

22
Article 17

17.1

17.2

17.3

CALL BACK

Each officer up to and including the rank of Lieutenant called back to
work by an authorized superior officer after the completion of the officer’s
last regular shift and within two (2) hours of the officer’s next regularly
scheduled shift shall be paid for two (2) hours at one and one-half times
the officer’s regular rate of pay, payable in compensatory time off or pay,
at the officer’s discretion. Each officer up to and including the rank of
Lieutenant called back to work by an authorized superior officer after the
completion of the officer’s last regular shift and two (2) or more hours
prior to the officer’s next regularly scheduled shift shall be paid a
minimum of three (3) hours or the actual time worked, whichever is
greater, at one and one-half times the officer’s regular rate of pay, payable
in compensatory time off or pay, at the officer’s discretion. Captains shall
be entitled to pay under this provision at their regular rate of pay. Call
back pay commences upon notification of the officer to immediately
return to duty, or if the officer is not ordered to immediately return to duty,
when the officer’s work assignment begins.

An officer shall not be obligated to modify or flex the hours of his/her
regularly scheduled duty shift in lieu of or as a method to avoid call back
compensation.

Officers up to and including the rank of Lieutenant required to attend
scheduled meetings after the completion of the officer’s last scheduled
shift and before the beginning of the officer’s next regularly scheduled
shift shall be paid at one and one-half times the officer’s regular rate of
pay for a minimum of two (2) hours or actual time worked, whichever is
greater. Captains required to attend scheduled meetings after the
completion of the officer’s last scheduled shift and before the beginning of
the officer’s next regularly scheduled shift shall be paid for two (2) hours
at the officer’s regular rate of pay or the actual time worked at the officer’s
regular rate of pay, whichever is greater.

23
Article 18

18.1

18.2

18.3

COURT TIME/JURY DUTY

Any officer up to and including the rank of Lieutenant who is off duty and
is subpoenaed to testify concerning matters arising out of the performance
of his or her assigned duties shall be paid at one and one-half times the
officer’s regular rate of pay for a minimum of two (2) hours or actual time
worked, whichever is greater, except:

(1) Testimony commencing within two (2) hours prior to the officer’s
regularly scheduled shift will be viewed as continuous duty;

(2) Testimony commencing when an officer is on duty and concluding
when an officer is off duty will be viewed as continuous duty;

(3) Officers who are on inactive duty because of a line of duty injury
will receive no compensation for appearing in court; and

(4) If an officer is using sick leave, the officer shall be compensated at
his or her base rate of pay for time spent in court, without
deduction of that time from his or her sick leave bank.

Any officer who is summoned to perform jury duty shall suffer no loss of
pay or benefits for any and all time spent in the performance of such
service or in response to such summons.

The parties agree that members of the bargaining unit subpoenaed to
appear in court shall call into the police department within twenty-four
(24) hours prior to the day of the required court appearance in order to
determine whether the subpoena has been cancelled. Should the
employee fail to call the police department within the twenty-four (24)
hour period and appear in court for a case which has been cancelled, no
call back or overtime compensation shall be paid to the employee.

The twenty-four (24) hour time frame for the call into the police
department shall be a window period of 5:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. (midnight)
of the day preceding the required court appearance. The employee shall
be paid court time if he or she calls within the required time period, is told
to appear, and then the case is cancelled.

24
Article 19

19.1

19.2

19.3

19.4

CHANGE OF SHIFT AND CANCELLATION OF DAYS OFF

Except in cases of emergency, any time an officer is required to begin a
new shift less than eight (8) hours from the end of the officer’s previous
shift, the officer shall be entitled to overtime compensation for those hours
less than eight (8).

The schedule of voted days off, the schedule of shift assignment and hours
of shift assignment shall be posted by the commanding officer or designee
not less than seven (7) days prior to the beginning of each work period.
Each schedule shall be signed by the commanding officer or designee and
the date and time of posting shall be noted. The schedule shall be posted
in a location within the unit of command where it can be viewed by
officers assigned to that duty location.

Except in an emergency under procedures determined by the Chief,
anytime the posted schedule of days off is ordered changed by the
commanding officer within seven (7) days of the date of an officer’s
scheduled day off, the officer(s) affected by the change shall receive four
(4) hours of compensatory time or pay at his/her regular rate of pay. Any
time the posted hours of a shift are changed within seventy-two (72) hours
of the commencement of the shift, the officer(s) affected by the change
shall receive two (2) hours of compensatory time. The determination of
an emergency situation shall not be subject to grievance or arbitration.

In the event an officer is required to work on his or her previously
scheduled day off, and in the further event the officer does not receive a
substitute day off during the same work period, the officer shall receive
overtime compensation at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the
officer’s regular rate of pay for all hours worked on the officer’s
previously scheduled day off.

25
Article 20

20.1

20.2

20.3

20.4

20.4.1

20.4.2

20.4.3

EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE

The City shall pay each officer an allowance of $700 for the acquisition,
maintenance and repair of equipment. This payment shall be made on or
before November 30 of each year of the Agreement.

The items contained in Uniform Supply Directive Numbers 97-02, 97-13,
97-14, 97-17, 97-19, 97-20, 97-23, 97-24, 97-28 shall be provided by the
City at the discretion of the Chief. There will be an opportunity for input
by the Labor Management Committee before any change is implemented.

The “Colorado Peace Officers’ Statutory Source Book” and the “Colorado
Revised Statutes Pertaining to Criminal Law” published by the Colorado
District Attorneys Council will be available for review and reference at
each of the decentralized stations and other police facilities and the Police
Administration Building.

VESTS

For each officer who graduates from the academy, the City will
provide reimbursement of up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750)
for the purchase of a protective vest.

All other officers shall be entitled to reimbursement of up to seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750) for the purchase of a protective vest on
the fifth year anniversary of the prior reimbursement to the officer
for the purchase of such vest. Reimbursement shall only be
available with proof of purchase of a replacement vest of replacing
the one for which reimbursement had previously been received, or
a new vest if no reimbursement was previously made.

Notwithstanding the above and foregoing, if, at any time during the
term of this Agreement, a protective vest previously issued by the
City or a vest which was previously the subject of reimbursement
by the City becomes unserviceable in accordance with the
manufacturer’s warranties, such vest shall be surrendered to the
City and a replacement vest issued to the officer or a
reimbursement made to the officer for the actual purchase of a
replacement vest, up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750).

26
Article 21

21.1

21.2

WORK ASSIGNMENT IN HIGHER RANK

Any officer who, for more than one-half of the officer’s regularly assigned
shift is temporarily assigned by his supervisor to a rank higher than that
which the officer currently holds and assumes the duties of that higher
rank shall be compensated at the hourly rate of pay of the higher rank for
the entire duty shift in which he or she is so assigned. If, during the period
of temporary assignment, the officer also works overtime as defined by
Article 16 of this Agreement, the officer shall be paid overtime as
provided by Article 16.

If the Chief or his designee assigns any Police Officer 1“ Grade to perform
the duties of a Technician, Detective or Corporal, then that officer will be
compensated at the rate associated with that assignment for the entire
period the officer is acting in that capacity. For purposes of calculating
overtime under Article 16 of this Agreement, the acting pay provided by
this Article 21.2 shall be considered the officer’s “regular rate of pay”
until such time as the officer is no longer working in an acting capacity.
The acting pay provisions above shall not apply to detective training
programs or limited duty assignments.

27
Article 22

22.1

22.2

22.3

22.4

22.5

INJURY IN LINE OF DUTY

Any officer who shall become injured in line of duty shall be provided
when necessary with hospitalization, doctors, surgeons, nurses and
medical care.

Any officer who shall become so physically or mentally disabled by
reason of bodily injuries received in the discharge of the duties of the
officer in the department that the officer is rendered unable to perform
duties in the department, shall be granted any necessary leave of absence
not to exceed one (1) year at full salary for the rank which the officer
holds in the department, and shall be compensated from the regular police
department payroll.

Should such officer need additional leave of absence in excess of one (1)
year, the officer may use accumulated sick leave and should the officer
still need additional leave of absence, the officer may be granted
additional leave of absence at one-half of the salary for the rank the officer
holds in the department, to be paid from the “pension and relief fund”;
provided, however, that should such officer be eligible for retirement on a
pension, the officer shall not be entitled to receive such additional
disability leave, but instead shall be retired from active service at the
expiration of one (1) year’s leave of absence and accumulated sick leave.

Compensation shall not be denied under this section because the injury
was not received on the tour of duty to which the officer has been
assigned, if it was received in the discharge of the duties of the officer and
if the officer conducted himself in a legal manner and in compliance with
tules and regulations governing the department.

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the Charter, or Article 22.3
above, when the City has admitted liability or accepted a workers’
compensation claim, no officer shall be required to use accumulated sick
leave for any line of duty injury or illness.

28
Article 23 FUNERAL EXPENSES

In the event an officer is killed in the line of duty or dies from injuries sustained in the line of
duty, the City shall pay the cost of reasonable funeral expenses up to a maximum of $10,000.00,

which amount shall be offset by any other payments for these purposes made by any other
agency or organization.

29
Article 24 LIFE INSURANCE

The City shall provide group life insurance coverage for each officer in an amount equal to one
and one-half times the officer’s base pay.

30
Article 25

25.1

HEALTH AND DENTAL INSURANCE

Health Insurance: The City shall offer health care plan options from no
fewer than two (2) insurance providers, in addition to Denver Health, if
coverage from Denver Health is offered. The amount of the City’s
contribution will depend on the plan selected by the officer. During the
term of this Agreement, the City shall make the following contributions
towards health insurance premiums:

Effective January 1, 2015, the City shall contribute 80% of the premiums
for the plan selected by the officer.

Effective January 1, 2016, if the provider selected by the officer offers two
plans, the City shall contribute 70% of the premiums if the officer selects
the high premium plan; the City shall contribute 90% of the premiums if
the officer selects the low premium plan. If the provider selected by the
officer offers only one plan, the City shall contribute 90% of the premiums
for that plan.

For the 2016 calendar year, if an officer selects a high deductible plan and
also elects to open a Health Savings Account (HSA), then the City will
contribute, on a 1:1 matching basis, up to one hundred dollars ($100)
every month to the officer’s HSA if the officer has enrolled in an
employee-only health plan; if the officer has enrolled in a multi-party plan,
then the City will contribute, on a 3:1 matching basis, up to three-hundred
dollars ($300) every month to the officer’s HSA.

For the 2017 calendar year, if an officer selects a high deductible plan and
also elects to open a Health Savings Account (HSA), then the City will
contribute, on a 1:1 matching basis, up to fifty dollars ($50) every month
to the officer’s HSA if the officer has enrolled in an employee-only health
plan; if the officer has enrolled in a multi-party plan, then the City will
contribute, on a 3:1 matching basis, up to one hundred fifty dollars ($150)
every month to the officer’s HSA.

Coverage under the high deductible plans offered by the City will be
substantially similar to the plan benefits provided by the HMO plans
offered in 2015. However, it is understood that the co-insurance will be
shared between the provider and the employee on an 80/20 split, the
deductible for the plans will be no more than $1,500 for single coverage
and no more than $3,000 for multi-party coverage and the maximum out-
of-pocket cost for employees shall not exceed $4,500 for single coverage
subscribers and $9,000 for multi-party coverage subscribers.

If any of the health care plans offered by the City in 2016 are no longer
offered in 2017, the City’s premium contribution levels stated above shall
apply to any replacement plan offered by the City and the benefit levels of
any new plan shall be substantially similar to the plan it replaces.

31
25.2

25.3

25.4

Dental Insurance: The City shall offer dental insurance to officers.
Regardless of plan selected by the officer, the City’s level of contribution
shall be equivalent to 80% of the premium costs of the mid-level dental
plan offered to officers. In no event shall the City’s contribution exceed
the actual cost of coverage as determined by the provider. The mid-level
dental plan offered to officers shall be substantially similar to the current
Delta Dental EPO plan.

This Article shall not be administered in any manner that would be in
conflict with or violate the terms and conditions of any contracts between
the City and health and dental insurance providers.

The Association will substantially participate with the City in the
development of health and dental plans to be offered to officers. The
Association will have the opportunity to comment and make
Tecommendations on proposals before health and dental plans are offered
to officers. In addition, a member of the Association chosen by the
Association shall be appointed by the Mayor to the Employee Health
Insurance Committee.

32
Article 26 DEATH AND DISABILITY CONTRIBUTION
26.1 During the term of this Agreement the City shall pay the state mandated

contribution for death and disability coverage pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-31-
811(4) for all officers hired on or after January 1, 1997.

33
Article 27 PAY RATES AND LONGEVITY
27.1.1 Effective January 1, 2015, the annual salary for officers will be as follows:

Police Officer Recruit $48,086
Police Officer 4th grade $53,429
Police Officer 3rd grade $59,136
Police Officer 2nd grade $63,314
Police Officer 1st grade $79,644

Technician $84,982
Detective $87,696
Corporal $87,696
Sergeant $95,223
Lieutenant $109,206
Captain $123,017
27.1.2 Effective January 1, 2016, the annual salary for officers will be as follows:
Police Officer Recruit $49,769

Police Officer 4th grade $55,299
Police Officer 3rd grade $61,206
Police Officer 2nd grade $65,530
Police Officer Ist grade $82,432

Technician $87,956
Detective $90,765
Corporal $90.765
Sergeant $98,556
Lieutenant $113,028
Captain $127,323
27.1.3 Effective January 1, 2017, the annual salary for officers will be as follows:
Police Officer Recruit $50,764

Police Officer 4th grade $56,405
Police Officer 3rd grade $62,430
Police Officer 2nd grade $66,841
Police Officer 1st grade $84,081

Technician $89,715
Detective $92,580
Corporal $92,580
Sergeant $100,527
Lieutenant $115,289
Captain $129,869
27.1.4 Effective July 1, 2017, the annual salary for officers will be as follows:
Police Officer Recruit $51,779

Police Officer 4th grade $57,533

34
27.2

27.3

27.4

Police Officer 3rd grade $63,679
Police Officer 2nd grade $68,178
Police Officer 1st grade $85,763

Technician $91,509
Detective $94,432
Corporal $94,432
Sergeant $102,538
Lieutenant $117,595
Captain $132,466
LONGEVITY

All officers, upon reaching their fifth (5th) anniversary date of
employment, shall be paid longevity pay. Officers entitled to longevity
pay shall be paid at the rate of twelve dollars ($12.00) per month for each
year of service.

Officers assigned to the following assignments shall, in addition to the pay
rates above, receive the following:

27.3.1 Bomb technician: $150 per month

27.3.2 Motorcycle: $75 per month

27.3.3 Helicopter chief pilot: $525 per month

27.3.4 Helicopter pilot: $375 per month

27.3.5 Canine handler: Officers assigned as canine handlers shall

receive, in addition to their annual salary, eight (8) hours of
compensatory time and eight (8) hours of additional pay per
work period.

27.3.6 Bilingual officers: Officers who are certified and
designated as bilingual officers in accordance with
procedures published by the Chief or the Chief’s designee:
one hundred dollars ($100) per month. Additionally,
officers who are certified with advanced levels of expertise
may be paid up to a total of $200 per month in accordance
with published standards and procedures.

ON CALL

Officers placed in “on call” status by the Chief or his designee shall be
compensated for each hour or part thereof spent in on call status at the rate
of one percent (1%) of the officer’s regular rate of pay. For purposes of
this Article, being placed in on call status means any time an officer is
required to remain available to respond to a call to duty and is subject to
possible disciplinary action for failing to respond. The determination of
those officers placed in on call status shall rest solely with the Chief or his
designee.

35
In the event an officer in on call status is called back to work by an
authorized superior, the officer will no longer be in on call status and will
be compensated in accordance with Article 17 of this Agreement.

36
Article 28 PAY PERIODS
28.1 Officers shall be paid on a biweekly basis, on alternating Fridays.

Whenever a payday falls on a recognized holiday specified in Article ii,
payment of salaries shall be made on the preceding business day.

37
Article 29

29.1

29.2

RETIREE HEALTH

Subject to annual appropriation, during each year of this Agreement the
City will make annual contributions in the amount of $805,000 to the
Denver Police Retiree Health Fund (“Trust”) which has been established
for the sole purpose of providing some assistance with the payment of
health insurance premiums for officers who retire on or after January 1,
1996. Quarterly payments to the Trust by the City will be made on
January 10, April 10, July 10 and October 10 of each year.

The Association shall provide the City with financial reports of the Trust
on a quarterly basis. The Association shall also notify the City of any
changes to the Articles of Incorporation, governing by-laws or terms of
administration of the Trust for approval, to ensure that the Trust is being
administered consistently with the intended purpose of this Article.

38
Article 30

30.1

30.2

30.3

30.4

GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURES

A grievance is a claim that the City has violated an express provision of
this Contract, and does not include any disciplinary matters.

Any officer or group of officers or the Association may discuss any matter
with their Division Chief, Deputy Chief or the Chief, without invoking the
formal grievance procedure provided for in this Article. No agreements
reached in such informal discussion shall be binding on the Association or
any other officer nor shall they be binding on the City or officer raising the
issue except for the specific incident which led to the discussion.

Neither the City nor the Association shall threaten or coerce any officer
for filing a grievance under this Contract.

All grievances shall be settled in the following manner:

Step 1. A grievance must be initiated by either an aggrieved officer
or by the Association on behalf of one or more member(s)
of the bargaining unit. The grievant must reduce the
grievance to writing and present the written grievance to
the Deputy Chief within thirty (30) calendar days after the
grievant knew or should have known of the facts which
gave rise to the grievance. The written grievance must
contain (a) a statement of the grievance and the facts upon
which it is based; (b) the specific section(s) of the Contract
allegedly violated; and (c) the remedy or adjustment
sought. In addition, if the grievance is initiated by the
Association, the written grievance shall identify the name
of the member(s) on whose behalf the Association is filing
the grievance. The Deputy Chief shall hold a meeting with
the grievant within ten (10) calendar days from the receipt
of the grievance and shall within ten (10) calendar days
from the date of such meeting issue a written response to
the grievant and the Association. The Association shall be
given notice of the meeting and shall have the right to
attend if it so chooses.

Step 2. If the grievance is not resolved at Step 1, the grievant shall
have fifteen (15) calendar days from the issuance of the
Step 1 denial to present the grievance to the Chief. Within
fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the grievance at Step
2, the Chief shall hold a meeting with the grievant and
Tepresentative(s) of the Association. Within fifteen (15)
calendar days of such meeting the Chief shall issue a
response in writing to the grievant and Association.

39
30.5

30.6

Step 3.

If the grievance is not resolved at Step 2, the Association
may demand arbitration. Any demand for arbitration must
be in writing and received by the official designated by the
City within fifteen (15) calendar days of the Association’s
receipt of the Step 2 denial.

The parties shall obtain a panel of seven Western States
Region arbitrators from the Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service. The Grievance Arbitrator shall be
selected by a method of alternative striking of names from
the panel, with the first strike determined by the flip of a
coin. The final name left on the panel shall serve as the
Grievance Arbitrator.

The Grievance Arbitrator shall have the authority to hold
hearings and make procedural rules.

The award of the Grievance Arbitrator shall be final and
binding on the City and the Association. The Grievance
Arbitrator shall have no authority to add to, subtract from,
alter or modify any terms of this Contract.

The award of the Grievance Arbitrator shall be rendered
within thirty (30) days of the closing of hearing or the
submission of briefs following hearing, whichever is later.
The costs of any arbitration shall be borne equally by the
parties to this Contract.

Either party may request a certified court reporter to take a
stenographic record of the evidence taken at the arbitration
hearing. If such a stenographic record is taken, a copy of
the transcript shall be provided to the Grievance Arbitrator.
The party requesting a stenographic record shall pay the
cost thereof, except that if the other party shall request a
copy of any transcript, the parties shall share equally the
entire cost of making the stenographic record.

Ifthe grievant or Association fails to comply with any time limit set forth
in this Article, the grievance shall be deemed forfeited. If the City fails to
comply with any time limit set forth in this Article, the grievance shall be
deemed denied as of the last day of the time limit and may be moved to

the next step within the time frames set forth in that step.

The following matters are not subject to the grievance procedures of this

Contract: Any matter covered by the Charter of the City and County of
Denver, the Rules and Regulations of the Department not inconsistent
with the express terms of this Contract, and the Operations Manual of the
Department not inconsistent with the express terms of this Contract, the

40
30.7

30.8

Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service Commission of the City and
County of Denver adopted pursuant to its authority, City Ordinances,
Statutes and Constitutional provisions.

The time limits for processing grievances as set forth in this Article may
be extended by agreement between the Chief or a designee of the Chief
and a representative of the Association. Any such agreements shall be
memorialized in writing. If the last day of any time limits set forth in this
Article occurs on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the limit shall be
automatically extended to the next calendar day which is not a Saturday,
Sunday or holiday.

Any grievance which impacts more than one officer can be filed by the
Association directly at Step 2 within fifteen (15) days of when the grievant
or the Association knew or should have known the events giving rise to
the grievance.

41
Article 31 SAVINGS CLAUSE

Should any section or portion thereof of this contract be held unlawful and unenforceable by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall apply only to the specific section or portion
thereof directly specified in the decision, and the remaining parts or portions of the contract shall
remain in full force and effect. Upon the issuance of such a decision, the parties agree
immediately to commence negotiations for a substitute for the invalidated section or portion
thereof.

42
Article 32

32.1

32.2

GENERAL AND DURATION

The Association is not bound by any agreements or understandings that
the City might make with any officer(s) or any other organization of
officers unless such agreements or understandings are specifically stated
in this Contract.

This contract shall be effective as of January 1, 2015 through December

31, 2017 and its terms shall remain in full force and effect until a new
contract is effective.

43
Article 33 PAYMENT ON SEPARATION

Payments due pursuant to the terms of this Agreement for all accrued and unused leave and
compensatory time shall be payable within sixty (60) days of an officer’s separation from the
Department, at the officer’s base rate of pay at the time of separation.

44
DENVER POLICE PROTECTIVE
ASSOCIATION

CITY AND,.COUNTY OF DENVER

  

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

D. Scott Martinez, City Attorney
City and County of Denver

By: ~, la—.

45
