CONTRACT

BETWEEN

THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA

     

a N

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
LODGE NO. 5

FOR THE TERM

JULY 1, 2009 through JUNE 30, 2014

3
i,

 

John McNesby
President

Dear Brothers and Sisters:

| am proud to provide to each active FOP member this con-
tract book which will serve as a portable resource available to
you at all times. It is sized so that you can carry it with you in
your briefcases, backpacks, purses or in your back pockets as
a constant reminder of your rights under our Collective
Bargaining Agreement with the City or with regards to issues
hammered out outside the arbitration process.

This book is and has been a goal of mine since | took office
in 2007 and now can be accomplished because of the
issuance of the 2008-2009 and the 2009-2014 arbitration
awards and the resolution of issues outside that process.

Since the last time the “contract” was published you will see
a progression of positive, innovative and unprecedented
changes in your wages, benefits and working conditions.
Make no mistake these improvements were obtained for you
through the input, testimony and support of members just like
you, combined with the hard work and commitment of mem-
bers of Lodge 5’s Executive Board.
This book was designed and made in such a way as to last and
be a source of information for you in years to come.

| have said it before and mean every word “we at the FOP are
only a phone call away.” Should you have any questions
about this book or anything involving your careers as
Philadelphia Police Officers please do not hesitate to contact
us at Lodge 5.

Fraternally yours,

John McNesby,
President

Jim Wheeler,
Recording Secretary

Philadelphia Lodge 5
Fraternal Order of Police
ARTICLE

Vi.

INDEX (continued)

PREAMBLE ................0.0 000200 e eeu ee
SCOPE OF AGREEMENT.
A. Recognition
UNION RIGHTS, UNION MEMBERSHIP
AND DUES CHECKOFF.
A. FOP Rights ....
B. Information to FOP.
C. Agency Shop...
D. Dues Check off.
E. New Employees
Management Rights . :
JOINT LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES. .
Designation of Committees . .
Composition of Committees
Chairman .
Time and Conduct of Committee Meetings.
Committee Advisory Reports. .
Effect of Report.
Work Schedules . .
Assignment of Perm
Civilianization
Day Care...
Bulletproof Vests :
Joint Testing and Examination Committee . .
Commanders.
Pension Labor-!
Transfers
Catastrophic Leave Bank Committee
Health Care Cooperation Committee
Scheduling Officers for Court .

OURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME .
Work Week .
Work Day
Overtime... . :
Compensatory Time (In Lieu of Overtime). .
Call In Time on Scheduled Day Off .......

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

  
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

QP OZEDATHTOMMONE>

 

 

 

MOOPPED,
ARTICLE

s

HEALTH AND WELFARE AS OF JULY 1, 2009

VIL.

INDEX (continued)

Call Back After Completion of Shift .......
Appearance Before Civil or Judicial Bodies .
Standby Time For Prosecution

Detectives’ Class... ..... 0.6 ..2222-20 005
Appearance To Answer Charge

Against Oneself.
Drop-Back Vacancy Assignments .
Work Schedules
Assignment of Permanent Midnight
iEALTH AND WELFARE .
City Contribution .
OptOut.....
Joint Program
Non-Duplicatioi
Coordination of Benefits
Covered Retirees... ..
National Health Insurance .
Death in Active Status . .
Health Care Cooperation Committee
Life Insurance . .
Human Dignity .
Legal Services .

zom

   
 
  
    
    
 
 
 

PATH TO™moO RSTO AT

Monthly Contributory Requirement .
Health Benefits to Active and
Retired Police Officers
Self-Insurance ....
Run Out Escrow Acc«
Drug and Doctors’ Vi
LEHB Reserves ...
Resolution of Issues .
SICK LEAVE. :

A. Allowance
B. Sick Leave Policy.
VACATION LEAVE
A. Allowance .. .

 

 

 
 
  
 
  
 

O™mON @>

 

 
ARTICLE

XIL.

XII.

INDEX (continued)

Accrual... 0.0

Use of Vacation Leave Upon Expiration

of Sick Leave... 2.0... eee eee eee

Payment of Accumulated Vacation Leave

Upon Retirement ..........0..00. 00.005

Payment of Accumulated Vacation for

Employees Other than Retiring Employees. .

Selection of Vacation During Designated

Vacation Period. ..............02 2000206

G. Recession and Rescheduling of
Vacation Periods. .

H. Vacation Scheduling -

I

J

K,

go 99

mom

  
 
  
    
 

Vacation Purchase .
Request for Annual V.
Disability - Payment of Accrued
Vacation Benefits
L. Catastrophic Leave Bank
ANNUAL ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE
HOLIDAY COMPENSATORY TIME.
A. Holidays......... 20.2005
B. Holidays Compensatory Time .
Cc. Payment / Accumulation of Holiday
Compensatory Time........0..00.000005
D. Payment of Accumulated Holiday
Compensatory Time Upon Retirement.
Payment of Accumulated Holiday
Compensatory Time for Employees for
Other Than Retiring Employees
FUNERAL LEAVE
A. For Immediate Family.
B. For Family Member Other Than Member
of Immediate Family
C._ Immediate Family Members.
JURY DUTY AND COURT DUTY,
A. Jury Duty .
B. Witness for Personal or Non-City Matters .. .

 

 

m

 

 

 

 

 

 
ARTICLE

XIV.
xv.
XVI.

XVII.

XIV.

INDEX (continued)

MATERNITY/PATERNITY LEAVE .............-
MILITARY LEAVE. . .
FOP LEAVE ...
A. Elected Official
B. Appointed Officials.
C. Directors .
COMPENSATION.
Basic Salary . .
Stress Differential .
Longevity
Clothing Allowance and Clothing
Maintenance. . .
Meal Allowance . .
Work in a Higher R
Manner of Payment .
Bomb Squad
District Commander’s Compensation
Commanders.
PENSION. .
General
Fringe Benefits Upon Normal Retirement
Retiree Joint Trust Fund
Hires After January 1, 2010 (Plan 09)
Addition of Option Four for Plan 87/Pension
Calculated at Next Higher Rank if Killed in
the Line of Duty ..
DISABILITY PROGRAM
General .......
Temporary Service Connected Disab
Permanent Service Connected Disability.
Duplication of Benefits..............
Ordinary Disability Retirement Benefits .
100% Paid for Heroic Action. ......
Catastrophically Disabled Police Officer

 

   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 

gne>

 

 

 

moos>g--zo7™

 

  
 

 

  

ammone>
ARTICLE

XXI.

XXIL.

INDEX (continued)

H. Disability - Payment of Accrued
Vacation Benefits
|. Disability - Heart and Lung Benefits .
DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE.
General ..............
Police Board of Inquiry (PBI)

 

  
 
 

 

gop>

Health / Medical Payments Upon
Suspension
Written Reprimands in Personnel File
Vacation Time Lieu of Suspension.
Hair Testing. .
Probationary Period .
RIEVANCE AND ARBITI
Definition.
Step |. .
Step Il. .
Step Ill .
Election of Remedies .
Selection of Arbitrator
Costs and Fees .....
Authority of Arbitrator
Effect of Decision .
Back Pay
MISCELLANEOUS. PROVISIONS
Performance Reports .
Buddy Days......
Access to Personnel Files
Badge Upon Retirement.
Examinations
Continuity
Charitable Solicitation.
Clothing Board .
Bulletin Boards .
Cost of Printing Contract

 

    
 
   
  
   
 
   
 

 

 

 

 

 

   

TPO IO™MMOOS PEM“ LO™MOOPPOTOMM

 

Announcements of Disciplinary Actions... .

PAGE
ARTICLE

XXL.
XXII.

APPENDIX A: SHIFT SCHEDULE
APPENDIX B: EXTERNAL TRAINING .
APPENDIX C: UNIFORM CHANGE .
APPENDIX D: POLICE GOLF SHIRTS .

SEPARABILITY AND SAVINGS .
TER!

KSEKCAYROVOZEOA

INDEX (continued)

   
  
 
   
 
 
    
 
  
 

 

Outside Employment 81
Transfers........... 81
Service Connected Death . 82
Squad Schedule Cards . . . 83
Off-Duty Firearms Training. 83
Firearms. . 83
Pay Stub: 84
Tuition Reimbursement. 84
Civilianization: Use of Deputy Sheriffs 85

Payment of Costs .
Residency ..
Furloughs.

Aviation Unit Training
The Existing Agreement .

 

APPENDIX E: HEALTH CARE REOPENER 2005-2007... 101
APPENDIX F:: MANPOWER IMPROVEMENT

INITIATIVE... 0.0.0... eee 103

APPENDIX G: JOINT LABOR-MANAGEMENT

HEALTHCARE EVALUATION
COMMITTEE..................02055 105

APPENDIX H: SHIFT CHANGE FOR 5 & 7

PLATOON...............0.00000005 114

APPENDIX I: BIDDING PROCESS FOR

MIDNIGHT SHIFT..................- 116

APPENDIX J: CATASTROPHIC LEAVE BANK

POLICY ........... 00.0000 cece eee 118

APPENDIX K: PENSION PLAN 09 SUPPLEMENTAL

APPENDIX L: PAY SCH!

AWARD. . 123

 
PREAMBLE

This Contract is entered into by and between the City of
Philadelphia (hereinafter referred to as ‘the City”) and the
Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge No. 5. (hereinafter
referred to as ‘the FOP’).

SCOPE OF AGREEMENT

A.

Recognition
The City recognizes Lodge No.5 of the Fraternal
Order of Police as the exclusive collective bargain-
ing representative of the bargaining unit covered by
this Contract, pursuant to Act 111, including the fol-
lowing classes of full-time Civil Service employees
with permanent appointments: Police Officer;
Police Officer |; Police Corporal; Police Detective;
Police Sergeant; Police Lieutenant; Police Captain;
Police Staff Inspector; Police Inspector; Chief Police
Inspector; Graphic Artist; Prosecution Detective |;
Prosecution Detective II; Prosecution Detective
Sergeant; Prosecution Detective Lieutenant;
Prosecution Detective Captain; Deputy Chief
Prosecution Detective; Criminal Prosecution Special
Investigator in the Office of the District Attorney.

The parties have included herein certain provisions
that have arisen by virtue of Act 111 Awards and
negotiations and also provisions contained in cur-
rent Civil Service Regulations that were not mandat-
ed by Act 111 Awards or negotiations. The inclusion
of these Civil Service Regulations is for the purpose
of providing a more complete and lucid document
and is not intended to abridge in any way the right
of the City under the Home Rule Charter to manage
its employees and to effect changes in all personnel
matters, including the right of the Civil Service

-1-
Commission to amend any Civil Service Regulations
consistent with the City’s obligations under the
requirement of the Act 111.

II UNION RIGHTS, UNION MEMBERSHIP AND DUES
CHECKOFF
A. FOP Rights

1.

The FOP shall be notified of all substantive
changes or new rules and regulations applicable
to the Police Department affecting members of
the FOP bargaining unit at least ten (10) days
before the effective date of such change, unless
the change is occasioned by an emergency.

The eighteen (18) elected Executive Board
members whose names have been submitted
to the Police Commissioner and the Personnel
Director shall be permitted to visit police dis-
tricts to conduct necessary Union business.
This provision shall not be construed to permit
the conduct of Union meetings in police dis-
tricts. Visits shall be preceded by reasonable
notice of not less than one (1) hour.

The FOP may use Police facilities for the con-
duct of its elections. The FOP shall conduct
these elections in such a fashion so as not to
disrupt the operation of that facility.

B. Information to FOP
The City shall provide the following information to
the FOP so that it may administer this contract:

1.

Injury reports which are released by the individ-
ual employee;
2. Notification of employees on leaves of
absences including maternity; and

3. Copies of disciplinary actions when employees
are notified.

4. When back pay is awarded in a grievance arbi-
tration, the City will provide the FOP with a
copy of the distribution sheet and will keep the
FOP informed concerning compliance with the
Award.

c. ‘agency Shop

‘Any employee who fails voluntarily to acquire
and maintain membership in the FOP shall, as a
condition of continued employment be
required, beginning on the thirtieth day follow-
ing the end of the initial probationary period,
and thereafter, to pay to FOP a monthly service
fee as a contribution toward the administration
of this Contract. The monthly service fee shall
be $1.00 (one dollar less than the regular
monthly dues of an FOP member. The afore-
mentioned service fee shall be deducted by the
City, biweekly from the pay of those employ-
ees who do not acquire and maintain FOP
membership.

2. This obligation may be met by the dues check
off procedure set forth in Section D below, or
the individual may discharge this obligation by
paying the FOP directly.

D. Dues Check off
1. The City shall deduct the dues and initiation
fees of the FOP from the pay of those employ-

-3-
ees who individually request or authorize in
writing that such deductions be made.

2. The amounts deducted from the pay of bargain-
ing unit members as set forth in paragraph 1
above, shall be certified to the City by the FOP
and the aggregate deductions of all members
of the bargaining unit shall be remitted, togeth-
er with an itemized statement to the FOP by
the last day of the succeeding month after such
deductions are made.

3. The FOP shall indemnify and hold the City harm-
less against any and all claims, suits, orders, dam-
ages or judgments brought or issued against the
City as a result of any action taken or not taken
by the City under the terms and conditions of
this Contract as it relates to these deductions.

E. New Employees

The provisions of Section A. subsection 1. of this
Article shall become and be effective for new employ-
ees after thirty (30) calendar days from completion of
their initial probationary period; provided, however,
that any police officer shall have the right to join the
FOP on a voluntary basis at any time subsequent to.
their appointment and authorize dues check off in
the manner prescribed in Section B of this Article.

IV. Management Rights
The city, consistent with sound discretion, possesses the
right, in accordance with applicable laws, to manage all
operations, including but not limited to the direction of
the work force and the right to plan, direct and control
the operation of all equipment and other property of the
City, except as modified by this Award and those provi-

-4-
sions of the agreement which are not inconsistent with or
contrary to the exercise of such discretion.

Matters of inherent managerial policy are reserved exclu-
sively to the City. Except as specifically addressed in this
Award and the collective bargaining agreement, matters
of inherent managerial policy include, but are not limited
to, such areas of discretion or policy as civilianization of
bargaining unit member positions, as addressed in the
Award, the functions and programs of the City, standards
of service, the overall budget and the organizational
structure of the Police Department, and the selection
and direction of personnel.

When and if the City determines to amend a Civil
Service Regulation not covered by this Award or the
resulting agreement, the City shall first meet with the
FOP and discuss the matter. In no event shall the City
amend Civil Service Regulations in a manner inconsistent
with the Home Rule Charter as presently constituted or
as amended, or in a manner which would alter wages or
fringe benefits.

JOINT LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES
A. Designation of Committees
1. The parties hereby establish advisory commit-
tees on the following subjects:
a. practice and procedure:
b. equipment and standardization
c. advancement and training: and
d. medical benefits and treatment, for on-
duty and off-duty injuries and illnesses.

2. The City and the FOP shall create a joint Labor-
Management Committee to consider changes
in policies and procedures to strengthen

-5-
departmental ethics and accountability. Topics
to be considered by the Committee shall
include, but not be limited to:

a. the disciplinary code;

b. the grievance and arbitration process;

c. criteria for transfers; and

d. field training officers.

The Committee shall meet and discuss the topics
listed above, and may create subcommittees as nec-
essary. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
abridge the rights of the City and the Police
Department under XXI-R, Management Rights or the
rights of the FOP under Act 111 or the collective
bargaining agreement.

Composition of Committees

The Committees shall be comprised of six members,
three of which shall be selected by the Police
Commissioner and three by the FOP.

The three members appointed by the Police
Commissioner to the Joint Labor-Management
Committee shall be of a responsible rank so as to
address the subject matter of the committee.

The City shall appoint a high ranking member of its
Personnel Department as a member of the Testing
Committee.

Chairman

The parties agree to divide the responsibility of
chairing the meeting equally. Thus, the City and the
FOP shall each appoint a chairperson to two of the
above referenced four committees from among
their members on that committee.

-6-
Time and Conduct of Committee Meetings
Committee meetings shall be conducted not less
than once every two months to consider topics
raised by Committee Members, at which time mem-
bers will have the opportunity to discuss and/or to
present expert testimony on the issues before the
Committee.

Committee Advisory Reports

Each committee shall issue an annual report detail-
ing its findings and recommendations. The members
shall be permitted to append additional concurring
or dissenting reports to the findings of the Annual
Report.

Effect of Report

The Committees and the Annual Reports of the
Committees shall be advisory only and shall not con-
stitute any limitation on the management preroga-
tives of the Police Commissioner and the City.

Work Schedules
Refer to Article VI, section K

Assignment of Permanent Midnight Shift
Refer to Article VI, section L

Civilianization

The City shall be entitled to consider the civilianization
of those classifications and positions presently occu-
pied by police officers enumerated in City Exhibit No.
133, subject to certain conditions. The City is entitled
to consider changing the enumerated police officer
positions to the civilian classifications of Clerk Typist |,
Correctional Officer, Police | Communications
Dispatcher and Criminal Evidence Specialist.

-7-
Prior to implementing civilianization of the above-
enumerated classifications, the City shall meet with
designated representatives of the FOP to discuss the
jobs the City intends to civilianize and the reasons
and need for such civilianization. If the parties, after
sixty days subsequent to the initial meeting, are
unable to agree upon the need for and conditions
applicable to the civilianization of the jobs under
discussion, then the City may-implement the civilian-
ization of such jobs and the FOP may submit the
propriety of such civilianization to arbitration consis-
tent with the provisions of the collective bargaining
agreement.

The maximum number of jobs subject to civilianiza-
tion shall be the 179 such positions referred to in
City Exhibit No. 133.

No civilian shall supervise a sworn police officer at
the first level.

Day Care
A joint committee with an equal number of repre-
sentatives of labor and management shall be estab-
lished to study the issue of daycare services for
members of the bargaining unit and to make a rec-
ommendation thereon to the City within six (6)
months of the date of this Award.

Bulletproof Vests

A joint committee with an equal number of repre-
sentatives of labor and management shall be estab-
lished to study industry practices and standards
regarding replacement of bulletproof vests and to
make recommendations thereon to the Police
Commissioner.
Joint Testing and Examination Committee

The parties shall form a joint Testing and Examination
Committee composed of three (3) representatives of
the FOP named by the President of the FOP and
three (3) representatives of the City named by the
Personnel Director, including one high-ranking mem-
ber of the Personnel Department. The Testing and
Examination Committee shall meet regularly and at
least once before and after each examination and
shall make non-binding recommendations to the City
regarding the improvement of testing and examina-
tion procedures. The FOP representatives shall
recuse themselves from any meeting for which the
particular representative is a candidate.

Commanders

A six-member committee composed of three mem-
bers selected by the City and three members select-
ed by the FOP shall be formed for the purpose of
determining unresolved issues regarding the ranks of
Captain and above.

The Arbitration Panel shall retain jurisdiction, in the
event the Committee is unable to reach agreement
by October 31, 1998, the Panel shall reconvene and
issue an appropriate award.

Pension Labor-Management Committee

1. The City and the FOP shall create a Joint Labor-
Management Committee to consider changes in
pension benefits such as development of a cost
of living increase mechanism and the issue of
extending health care coverage for future retirees.

2. The Committee shall be composed of six mem-
bers; three selected by the City and three

-9-
selected by the FOP and shall meet at least
once a month.

3. The Committee shall issue a report of its finding
by no later than June 30, 1999.

Transfers

A transfer committee comprised of equal numbers.
of representatives appointed by the Police
Commissioner and the FOP shall address issues
related to the transfer of employees including trans-
fers of officers at the rank of lieutenant and above
and an equitable system for transfers of officers out
of specialized units for non-disciplinary reasons
other than essential manpower requirements.

Catastrophic Leave Bank Committee

The City and the Union will establish a program to.
permit employees covered by this agreement to
donate accrued vacation leave to a leave bank. The
program shall be administered by a Joint Labor
Management committee consisting of three (3)
members appointed by the Union and three (3)
members appointed by the City. The program shall
be subject to the following rules:

1. Each year during the period of January 1 to
March 31, employees may contribute accrued
vacation leave to the leave bank.

2. Employees may only donate earned accrued
vacation leave and must indicate such volun-
tary, irrevocable transfer in writing. Employees
may contribute from one to five days in whole
day increments only.

-10-
3. Eligibility for transfer of vacation leave shall be
limited to employees who have donated a vaca-
tion day to the leave bank in the last contribu-
tion period. Only employees who can demon-
strate a catastrophic medical condition and
who are approaching exhaustion of all paid
leave are eligible for a grant of leave time from
the transfer of leave bank.

4. The committee shall have the sole authority to
determine eligibility for a grant of leave. The
committee shall review applications from
employees for a grant of leave from the leave
bank and determine the amount of leave to be
granted. Grants of leave shall be limited to a
maximum of thirty (30) leave days. Employees
may apply for a maximum of two grants during
a calendar year.

5, Employees receiving such transferred leave
shall only be credited in accordance with the
Civil Service Regulations governing maximum
leave accrual.

If an employee who has received transferred
leave separates from City service for any reason,
there shall be no payment for unused transferred
leave. Unused transferred leave shall be returned
to the leave bank. No aspect of this benefit shall
be subject to the grievance procedures

Q. Health Care Cooperation Committee
The City and the FOP with, if possible, the other
City Unions will establish the Joint Labor-
Management Healthcare Evaluation Committee
(“Committee”). The attached Appendix describes

-W-
the Committee's structure and goals and is incorpo-
rated into and shall be part of this Award. Appendix
is listed as A.

Scheduling Officers for Court
A Committee comprised of two (2) representatives
from the F.O.P. and the City shall meet monthly with
a court liaison officer and a representative of the
District Attorney in an effort to minimize the sched-
uling of officers for court at times other than a
scheduled holiday and shift.

VI. HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME
A. Work Week

B.

The normal work week for the employees covered
by this contract shall be forty (40) hours, Monday
through Sunday, inclusive.

Work Day

The normal work day for the employees covered by
this contract shall be between eight (8) and eight
and one-quarter (8.25) hours, which shall include a
thirty (30) minute lunch period. Solely for the pur-
pose of computing leave usage and accrual, an eight
(8) hour day will be used.

Cc. Overtime

1. All employees below the rank of Captain shall
receive compensation at the rate of one and
one half times their regular rate of pay for all
hours worked in excess of the normal work day.

2. Equalization of Overtime
Supplemental services hiring or scheduled
absentee replacement that the Department
makes available within each district/unit shall

-12-
be offered on a rotating basis by seniority, with-
in rank, within each district/unit among those
who have volunteered in writing for such
assignments. Employees on the Sick Abuse List
shall not be eligible to participate in this rota-
tion. An employee who declines an offered vol-
untary overtime assignment shall not be offered
another voluntary overtime assignment until
his/her name is reached again on the rotation.

D. Compensatory Time (In Lieu of Overtime)

1.

Employees at the rank of Captain or above shall
be granted compensatory time in lieu of over-
time for all hours worked in excess of the nor-
mal work day. Compensatory time shall be
computed on an hour for hour basis, and may
be accrued up to eleven hundred (1,100) hours
maximum, effective July 1, 1998.

Upon the retirement of an employee holding
the rank of Captain and above, the City shall
purchase up to five hundred fifty (550) hours
effective July 1, 1998 of the accumulated com-
pensatory time.

‘An employee holding the rank of Captain and
above shall have the right to take annually five
(5) days of compensatory time consecutively,
to be scheduled with the approval of the
appointing authority.

The lump sum purchase of the three hundred
twenty-five (325) and/or three hundred fifty
(350) hours as of July 1, 1989 of accumulated
unused compensatory time shall be in addition
to the compensatory time that employees at

-13-
the rank of Captain and above may presently
take off prior to the effective date of their retire-
ment, which is not to exceed one hundred
twenty (120) hours. In no event, however, shall
the run off and purchase of compensatory time
exceed four hundred forty-five (445) hours
effective July 1, 1989 and four hundred seven-
ty (470) hours as of July 1, 1990.

Employees holding the rank of Captain or
above may cash in two (2) weeks of accumulat-
ed, unused compensatory time per year, pro-
vided that all cashed-in compensatory time
shall be deducted from an employee's balance
of unused compensatory time.

Effective July 1, 2011, officers at the rank of
Captain and above will be permitted to accu-
mulate compensatory time on an hour for hour
basis up to a cap of 1200 hours. These employ-
ees will be permitted to cash out up to 600
hours of compensatory time at retirement from
the Department subject to the existing rules
and regulations.

Call In Time on Scheduled Day Off

Any employee who is required to report for work on
anon-scheduled work day shall be paid overtime for
work performed on this call-in tour of duty for not
less than eight (8) hours, except as set forth in
Section G below.

Call Back After Completion of Shift

Any employee who is called back and required to
work on any day after the completion of a regular
tour of duty shall receive overtime pay for not less

-14-
than two (2) hours of work; however, this shall not
apply to the situation where an employee continues
with work immediately after his/her scheduled day’s
work, subject to interruption for meals.

Appearance Before Civil or Judicial Bodies

Any employee who, in the performance of official
duties is required by the City to appear before des-
ignated Civil or Judicial Bodies shall be eligible for
overtime pay as follows:

1.

If required to appear on a scheduled work day
at a time other than his/her regularly assigned
shift, the employee shall receive not less than
two (2) hours overtime pay, or, where such
required appearance exceeds two (2) hours,
any and all time beyond the minimum of two
(2) hours shall be compensated at the overtime
rate.

If an employee is required to appear before a
Court of Record or Grand Jury and his/her nor-
mal duty tour is:

a. From 12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m., the tour
of duty shall terminate two (2) hours
before the normally scheduled quitting
time; and,

b. From 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight, the
employee shall be required to report to
work as scheduled and shall have two (2)
additional hours added to her/his earned
but unused vacation time. An employee
who has an earned but unused vacation
leave balance of 70 days (560 hours) or
more shall, in lieu of additional vacation
leave, have two (2) additional hours added

-15-
to his /her holiday compensatory time.

Employees required to appear on a scheduled

day off may request to work a full tour of duty

on that day (normally 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.) by:

a. reporting for work and performing work
assignment;

b. appearing before the civil or judicial body;

c. after such appearance. return to his/her
work assignment for the balance of the
tour of duty; and,

d. any employee working as set forth in (a),
(b), and (c) above, shall be paid eight (8)
hours overtime in lieu of their day off.

When an employee is required to appear on a
day off, but does not elect the option set forth
in Section G, subsection 3 of this Article,
he/she shall be guaranteed a minimum of four
(4) hours pay at overtime rates. In the event that
the four (4) hour period is exceeded, the
employee shall be compensated at the over-
time rate for all hours spent before the civil or
judicial body.

For purpose of this Section, Civil or Judicial
bodies shall include the following:
Bureau of Highway Safety;

Civil Service Commission;

Court(s) of Record;

Departmental Board of Inquiry;
Grand Jury;

Medical Examiner’s Board;

Police Advisory Board;

Traffic Court;

Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board;

rae mp ange

-16-
Workmen’s Compensation Hearings;
A person authorized to take depositions
for use before a civil or judicial body;
|. Any other civil or judicial offices as may be
designated by the Personnel Director.

mo

6. A Committee comprised of two (2) representa-
tives from the F.O.P. and the City shall meet
monthly with a court liaison officer and a repre-
sentative of the District Attorney in an effort to
minimize the scheduling of officers for court at
times other than a scheduled holiday and shift.

7. Effective January 1, 2010, officers who do not
receive notice at least 48 hours in advance of
the time they are directed to appear for a
required court appearance, other than a prelim-
inary hearing, scheduled for a date the officer is
not scheduled to work, shall be paid a mini-
mum of 4 hours of overtime at a rate of 2.5
times the employee's regular rate.

Standby Time For Prosecution Detectives’ Class
Employees in these classes who, following their reg-
ular working hours, as well as on Saturdays, Sundays
or holidays, when such employees are not normally
expected to work, serve in a standby capacity by
being available or subject to call for work in accor-
dance with a pre-arranged weekly authorized sched-
ule for such standby work, shall be entitled for such
weekly standby duty to eight (8) hours of time off
from work with pay (compensatory time), such time
to be used at the authorization of the City.

Appearance To Answer Charge Against Oneself
If the appearance is required to answer charges pre-

-17-
ferred against the employee, no overtime pay shall
be granted.

Drop-Back Vacancy Assignments

The Police Department may assign employees to fill
vacancies on a drop-back shift caused by the
absence of the employees who were scheduled to
drop back. Volunteers will be given priority for this
assignment. The assignment of employees to fill
drop-back vacancies shall not be considered a sched-
ule change under Paragraph 30 of the 1992-1996
Interest Arbitration Award {Section IV-H of this con-
tract} or entitle the employees to any overtime Pay.

Work Schedules

Shift Schedule

Except as provided below, any proposal by the
City to modify work schedules shall be submit-
ted for discussion to a joint committee with an
equal number of representatives of the FOP and
the City. If no agreement is reached regarding
the City’s proposal, the disagreement shall be
submitted to a mutually agreed upon neutral
who shall be required to fully resolve the issues
in dispute within ten (10) days of the date of the
submission. The City may not implement any
terms of its proposal until issuance, of the, neu-
tral’s decision. Any proposal by the FOP to mod-
ify work schedules also shall be submitted to the
committee; however, no such proposal will be
submitted to the neutral and will not be imple-
mented unless the parties reach agreement.

2. Once during each calendar year the City shall
have the right to change schedules within a rec-
ognized work unit without the requirement of a

-18-
submission to a neutral, provided that affected
bargaining unit members are given at least thirty
(30) days notice of a change in schedule. A
schedule change shall not result in a change of
more than one day in an employee's work week,
more than eight (8) hours going forward from
the employee's regular shift, split shifts or more
than two different starting times in a work week.

Bargaining unit members will be excused from
the work schedule change for hardship, provid-
ed that this is consistent with the Police
Department's operational needs.

The additional rights provided for in Section IV-
H-4 above shall only be applicable if the Police
Department establishes a fixed non-rotating
“last-out” 4-2, 5-2 shift for the patrol districts
and detectives, and will remain in effect only so
long as the fixed, non-rotating “last-out” 4-2, 5-
2 shift is in effect.

The Panel shall retain jurisdiction over the new
provisions for ninety (90) days following the
date of this Award. During this ninety (90) day
period, the Panel reserves full authority to
review these new provisions to ensure that they
meet the needs of the parties. The Parties exist-
ing rights under the Work Schedule provision of
the contract shall remain unchanged and the
Panel shall have no authority to alter or dimin-
ish these rights.

The Panel recognizes that crime, particularly
violent crime, is a significant problem in the
City and that the new Administration has made

-19-
reducing crime a top priority and is taking
aggressive action to do so. In order to aid in
those efforts, the Panel believes it is appropriate
to give the Department additional flexibility to
respond to crime patterns.

a.

The Department shall be entitled to adjust
an employee’s normal scheduled starting
time by four (4) hours up to six (6) days per
year without the payment of overtime.
Employees will be given at least twenty-
four (24) hours advance notice whenever
practical.

The Department shall have the right to
change the scheduled starting time of
employees in the rank of detective by up
to three (3) hours three (3) times per calen-
dar year for an entire workweek without
payment of additional — overtime.
Employees will be given at least seventy-
two hours notice of the change.

The Department shall continue to have the
right to change the scheduled starting time
of employees in the Highway Patrol Unit
and the Strike Force by up to three (3)
hours without payment of additional over-
time to respond to crime patterns. All
changes shall be made in accordance with
the requirements of the 2000 Award for
similar changes to the work schedules of
the tactical Five/Seven Squads.

The City will provide the FOP with at least
ninety (90) days written notice of its intent

-20-
to change the work schedule for the entire
bargaining unit.

8. Tactical Five/Seven Squads

a.

Assignment of employees to the Tactical
Five/Seven Squads in each of the 23 Police
Patrol Districts shall be voluntary.

In order to address crime patterns, the City
shall have the right to change the sched-
uled starting time of employees assigned
to tactical Five/Seven Squads in each of
the 23 Police Patrol Districts by up to three
(3) hours without payment of additional
overtime, unless the change increases the
employee’s actual hours of work to a level
requiring such payments. For purposes of
this Section, “tactical” shall be defined to
include employees assigned to Five/Seven
Squads, with the exception of administra-
tive employees and those assigned to foot
patrol.

Changes in starting times will be communi-
cated to affected employees during the
work week preceding the work week in
which the change is to take effect and the
new starting time shall be in effect for the
entire work week.

At no time shall the changes described in
this Section result in an employee being
scheduled for less than two (2) consecu-
tive days off between tours without the
payment of overtime.

-21-
L. Assignment of Permanent Midnight Shift
1. Assignment to the Permanent Midnight Shift
shall be provided as set forth below:

a. The Commissioner shall designate the first
fifty percent (50%).

b. The remaining fifty percent (50%) shall bid
on openings in each District. The most sen-
ior Officer who bids shall be awarded the
shift unless the Commissioner determines
that the Officer is not qualified but shall state
the reasons in writing for that determination.
In the event that a sufficient number of
Officers by rank do not bid for the shift, the
Commissioner shall have the right to assign
a sufficient number of less senior Officers by
rank in inverse seniority within the District.

2. As of January Ist of each year, bidding for
assignment of the permanent Midnight Shift
shall be opened within each District or
Division. The bidding process shall be complet-
ed by January 31st.

3. Atany time during the term of this contract, the
Commissioner may assign a new Academy
graduate to the Permanent Midnight Shift in the
place of an Officer who has expressed a desire
in writing for reassignment to another Platoon.

VIL. HEALTH AND WELFARE
A. City Contribution
1. The FOP has selected a jointly administered
plan (“Joint Program”). The FOP may elect to
change its selection and accept the City man-

-22-
aged care program (“City Administered
Program”) by written notice to the Mayor nine-
ty (90) days before the start of any health plan
year for the City Administered Program.

The City’s contribution to the Joint Board (or
“Fund”) shall be as follows:
Effective July 1, 2008, the City’s monthly dol-
lar contribution to the Joint Board shall be
$1,165 per member per month.

The Monthly Payment required by Section A.2,
shall be paid over to the Joint Program in twelve
monthly installments as selected by the
Director of Finance. All payments shall be
made to the Treasurer of the Joint Program. A
Monthly Payment shall be made for each active
employee and for each employee/retiree of the
categories hereinafter listed:

a.) Each employee receiving benefits under
Regulation 32 in a secondary position or
awaiting placement;

b.) Each full time employee terminating
his/her employment after ten (10) years of
continuous service to immediately
become pensioned under one of the
City’s pension plans.

B. OptOut

1.

A bargaining unit member may chose to opt
out of City financed health coverage during
specified opt-out periods. Opt-out periods shall
take place annually from November 1 to
December 15, with an effective date of January

-23-
Cc.

2.

3.

1. Any otherwise eligible participant (including
employees who are affected by Paragraph D,
Non-Duplication of Benefits, below) may waive
all health benefit coverage, including dental,
optical and prescription, upon presentation to
the City on the provided form of proof of ade-
quate alternative coverage.

‘Any employee who receives such a waiver shall
be credited with a “buy- back payment” of
$120.00 per month for the waiver period,
which payment shall be accumulated and paid
to the employee at the end of each calendar
year. This sum shall not be considered as part
of a bargaining unit member's base salary. The
City shall finance these “buy-back” payments in
lieu of a requirement to contribute to the FOP.
Joint Trust on behalf of such employees.

Upon receiving such a waiver, the waiver shall
remain in effect until the next opt-out period,
unless the employee has a lifestyle change and
elects to revoke the waiver. Lifestyle changes
shall be defined as: marriage, divorce, birth or
adoption of a child, death of a spouse or quali-
fying dependent, or starting or ending of a
spouse’s employment. In the event of divorce,
the employee must drop the divorced spouse
from all City health plans as part of the lifestyle
change election.

Joint Program

1.

The benefits and coverages for eligible employ-
ees, eligible former employees and their eligible
dependents shall be determined exclusively by
the Board of Trustees for the Joint Program.

-24-
The City may appoint up to 20% of the Board
of Trustees for the Joint Program (“Board of
Trustees”). The Board of Trustees for the Joint
Program shall be increased by one (1) member
which shall be appointed by the City.

The Joint Program shall keep and maintain (or
cause to be kept and maintained) all books and
records relating to its health and welfare pro-
grams, including any health/medical arrange-
ment under FOP control which receives, direct-
ly or indirectly, any City financial contributions.
City-appointed Trustees shall have full and com-
plete access to all books and records relating to
the Fund.

The Fund shall be subject to annual audit to be
conducted by an independent certified public
accounting (CPA) firm and/or a qualified employ-
ee benefits consulting firm selected by the Board
of Trustees of the Fund. The City may also, at its
own expense, select an independent CPA firm
and/or a qualified employee benefits consulting
firm to conduct an annual audit of the Fund.

The Board of Trustees shall undertake serious
analysis and consideration of cost containment
strategies for the medical plans and dental, opti-
cal and prescription plans with the objective,
among others, of identifying plan design and
benefit structure modifications which will lead
to a reduction in City costs for providing health
benefits. To achieve this objective, no less than
two (2) meetings per year of the Board of
Trustees shall include an in-depth discussion of
alternative cost containment strategies.

-25-
6. Onor about July 1 each year, the City shall con-
tribute $50,000 towards the cost of operation
of the Joint Board.

7. All funds paid to the Joint Program by the City
under this Agreement, and all funds held by the
Joint Program shall be held in trust subject to nor-
mal fiduciary standards and shall be applied only
for the purpose of providing health and welfare
benefits to eligible employees, eligible former
employees and, and their eligible dependents.

Non-Duplication of Benefits

The following non-duplication rules shall apply in the
City Administered Program and the Joint Program.
Where any current or former employee (or their
dependents) is eligible for coverage under health
insurance program (whether funded by City contri-
butions or not), such current or former employee (or
their dependents) shall not be eligible for coverage
under the City Administered Program or the Joint
Program, and the City shall not be obligated to
make any contribution to the Joint Program on
behalf of any such current or former employee.

Coordination of Benefits

The City and the Union shall administer the City
Administered Program and the Joint Program (or
shall cause each plan to be administered) to provide
for maximum coordination of benefits, with the City
Administered Program and/or the Joint Program to.
be the secondary coverage to the maximum extent
possible. Steps taken to ensure maximum coordina-
tion of benefits shall include, but shall not be limited
to, full disclosure by employees of eligibility for
health medical benefits through other plans.

-26-
The coordination of benefits required pursuant to
this paragraph shall not result in a reduction of the
Monthly Payments to which the Joint Program is
entitled pursuant to this Article.

Covered Retirees
Covered retirees shall be in one of the above
described plans and subject to the provisions of
Sections D and E.

National Health Insurance

The adoption of national health insurance or any
other form of universal care may alter the fundamen-
tal underpinnings of this Article. If any such provision
is enacted into law, either party may reopen this
Article by serving written notice upon the other. If the
parties have not reached agreement within 90 days
after receipt of such notice, the dispute may be sub-
mitted by either party for final resolution pursuant to
Pennsylvania Act 111 and any other applicable law.

Death in Active Status

1. In the event a bargaining unit member is killed
in the line of duty, the City shall pay all funeral
expenses up to a maximum of fifteen thousand
dollars.

2. The City will provide psychological counseling
to all family members of police officers killed in
the line of duty, if so requested. The spouse,
children and parents of such officer shall be eli-
gible for such counseling, and the cost shall be
borne by the City.

3. If an employee dies while in active City service
and, at the time of death has ten (10) years of

-27-
continuous service as a member of the bargain-
ing unit, the City will continue to make contri-
butions for health coverage for eligible depend-
ents of the employee provided such depend-
ents are receiving a survivor's pension, for a
period of five (5) years from the date of the
employee’s death. The payments for the eligi-
ble surviving spouse and eligible dependents
shall cease if the dependent becomes ineligible
for a survivor’s pension. Any such payments
shall be made in accordance with the provi-
sions governing health and welfare payments at
the time the payment is due.

Health Care Cooperation Committee

The City and the FOP with, if possible, the other
City Unions will establish the Joint Labor-
Management Healthcare Evaluation Committee
(“Committee”). The attached Appendix describes
the Committee's structure and goals and is incorpo-
rated into and shall be part of this Award.

Life Insurance

1. The City shall provide the FOP the sum of
money that it would cost the City to provide life
insurance in the amount of twenty-five thou-
sand dollars ($25,000) with double indemnity
to each employee.

2. In addition to the foregoing life insurance ben-
efits, the City shall provide all active, full-time
employees covered by this Award with a
$25,000 accidental death and dismemberment
policy without cost to the employee.

3. The City shall pay to the FOP Four Thousand

- 28 -
Five Hundred Dollars ($4,500.00) per month
for administrative duties.

4. The City shall have the right to conduct an
annual audit of the FOP Accident and Illness
Fund.

Human Dignity
The safe and efficient operation of the offices and
premises staffed by employees covered by this
agreement has been described as a major concern
to both the City and the FOP. The parties have rec-
ognized that a safe, healthful work environment and
safe work practices are essential not only for the effi-
cient management and operation of the Police
Department, but also for the health, safety and
morale of the members of the bargaining unit. Both
parties have recognized that bargaining unit mem-
bers and the public they serve are entitled to condi-
tions which reflect the highest standards of human
dignity. The City shall make all necessary provisions
for the health and safety of its employees while at
work and will abide by applicable federal and state
laws. The City will provide police officers with clean
and sanitary bathroom facilities at all locations.

Legal Services

1. Within sixty (60) days of the issuance of the
Award, the City shall make a lump sum pay-
ment of two million ($2 million) to the FOP.
Legal Services Fund.

2. Effective July 1, 2009, the City’s contribution to

the FOP Legal Services Fund shall be increased
by $2 per member per month to $26.00.

-29-
3. The City’s contribution under this paragraph
shall not be used for the institution of legal pro-
ceedings against the City of Philadelphia or its
affiliated organizations, their agents, officers,
employees or representatives. However, legal
aid may apply to criminal, tort and labor mat-
ters with respect to the City.

4. The Legal Services Plan shall include that:

a. All decisions regarding the Legal Services
Plan, its benefits and its operations shall be
made solely and exclusively by the
Trustees of the Plan that shall be no more
than five (5) in number, whose decision
shall be final and binding, and;

b. The Trustees as fiduciaries shall exercise
their independent judgment in matters
that come before them, and;

c. The Plan shall be amended to specifically
define all benefits, including criminal
defense benefits and employmentrelated
benefits.

HEALTH AND WELFARE AS OF JULY 1, 2009
A. Monthiy Contributory Requirement
Effective July 1, 2009 the City’s monthly con-
tributory requirement to the Joint Trust shall be
$1,165 per member per month.

2. Effective January 1, 2010 through and including
June 30, 2010, the City’s monthly contributory
requirement to the Joint Trust shall be $965 per
member per month.

-30-
B. Health Benefits to Active and Retired Police Officers

1.

Except as provided herein and except as may
be determined by Law Enforcement Health
Benefits, Inc (“LEHB”), the Plan of Benefits pro-
vided by LEHB on and in effect on June 30,
2009 for Active and Retired Police Officers and
their families and eligible dependents shall
remain unchanged for the duration of this
Award.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, if LEHB should
determine to substantively improve benefits
during the term of the Award, the costs of such
improvements shall not be reimbursed by the
City and shall be specifically excluded from any
obligation of the City to fund replacement of
any reserves through creation of the escrow
account provided for in this Award. The modifi-
cation of benefits to achieve specific cost sav-
ings, such as a flu shot program, health fairs,
etc, shall not be considered a substantive mod-
ification to those benefits. The cost of benefit
changes mandated by federal or state law or
regulations shall be reimbursed by the City.

C. Self-Insurance

1.

Effective July 1, 2010 and until modified by a
subsequent award or written agreement of the
parties, LEHB shall provide to eligible active and
retired police officers, their families and eligible
dependents the level of benefits that was in
effect as of June 30, 2009, except as modified
pursuant to this Award, through a completely
self-insured benefit program in strict accor-
dance with the provisions of this Award.

-31-
LEHB shall be exclusively responsible for the
administration of the self-insurance program for
so long as authorized by the Joint Trust and
shall prudently administer the program. This
responsibility shall include, but is not limited to
the selection of all providers (such as TPA/ASO,
stop loss carriers, consultants, disease manage-
ment and other services deemed necessary by
LEHB currently and in the future to implement
and maintain the modification to self insurance
required by this Award. All contractual relation-
ships regarding and arising from the selfinsur-
ance shall be exclusively between LEHB and
the chosen providers. The City shall not have
privity with those providers as a result of this
Award.

LEHB shall, at least each calendar quarter, as
soon as reasonably possible after the end of the
quarter, provide the City with periodic reports
of de-identified information regarding usage
and experience in such detail as is reasonably
necessary for the City to audit the claims being
made and to demonstrate compliance with this
Award. This information shall be considered
highly confidential and shall be provided to a
designated City representative. It shall be used
solely to monitor LEHB’s usage and experience
under the self-insured program required by this
Award.

Commencing with the first billing for medical,
drug, dental and vision benefits received after
July 1, 2010 from the selected providers as well
as Related Expenses as defined below, LEHB
shall transmit the bill thus received by the most

-32-
expeditious means possible to the designated
City official. Within three business days after
presentation of the bill for prescription drug
claims and within fifteen calendar days after
presentation of the bills for other expenses pro-
vided for in this paragraph, the City shall trans-
mit directly to LEHB by wire transfer or other
agreed-upon method the entire amount neces-
sary to pay the bill as presented in a timely and
businesslike manner. LEHB shall be responsible
to forward the money to the provider with
proof of payment being made to the City. In
that regard it is recognized that different ven-
dors and providers might require different pay-
ment dates and cycles. LEHB shall be empow-
ered to obtain such payment dates and cycles
as it deems most desirable and advantageous in
performing the requirements of this Award. Any
objection that the City might raise to such
billing shall be resolved independent of the
obligation to make such payment and shall not
under any circumstance be used to set off or
otherwise delay payment.

As used herein, the term “Related Expenses”
shall mean expenses directly attributable to pro-
vision of benefits, such as TPA/ASO, stop loss,
disease management and bundled services. It
shall not include day-to-day administrative
expenses.

Prior to September 1, 2010 and prior to each
September 1 thereafter, LEHB shall provide the
City with a statement setting forth the actual
costs of medical, drug, dental and vision bene-
fits and projected incurred claims as well as

-33-
Related Expenses for the plan year ended the
prior June 30th and the trend to be applied for
the plan year beginning the previous June 30th
(“Budgeted Cost”). The trend shall be the aver-
age of the projected trend for this specific plan
as determined by the Segal Company and a
recognized benefits consulting firm designated
by the City.

Within thirty (30) days before July 1, 2010 and
each July Ist thereafter, LEHB shall present to
the City a budget of projected administrative
costs for the upcoming plan year. Commencing
on July 1, 2010, and on the first day of each
month thereafter, the City shall pay LEHB one-
twelfth of the budgeted administrative costs.
Within thirty (30) days of the end of the plan
year, LEHB shall provide the City with a state-
ment prepared by its auditor of actual adminis-
trative costs for the previous plan year. If the
actual administrative costs are less than the
budgeted administrative costs for that plan
year, the City shall take a credit against the
administrative costs payable in the current plan
year. If the actual administrative costs are
greater than the budgeted administrative for
that plan year, the City shall make payment for
those additional administrative costs within thir-
ty (30) days. Any disputes about the reason-
ableness of the projected or actual administra-
tive costs shall be resolved as set forth in this
Award.

Within ninety (90) calendar days after October
1, 2011 and each October 1 thereafter, the par-
ties shall compare the actual cost of benefits

-34-
D. Run

and Related Expenses as provided by LEHB and
as determined by the LEHB’s auditor, to the
Budgeted Cost for the last completed plan year.
If the actual cost is less than the Budgeted Cost
for the last completed plan year, the City shall
immediately pay LEHB one-half of the differ-
ence thus determined. If the actual cost is more
than the Budgeted Cost for the last completed
fiscal year, there shall be no additional pay-
ments for the last completed fiscal year.

Out Escrow Account

On or before December 31, 2010, the City
shall establish, fund and thereafter maintain an
escrow account in an amount equal to benefits
incurred in three full months of benefit pay-
ments (hereinafter referred to as “run out”). The
escrow account shall be subject to an escrow
agreement between the City and LEHB pro-
hibiting the City from withdrawing funds from
the escrow account unilaterally, except as pro-
vided in this Award.

The purpose of the Run Out escrow shall be to
fund and satisfy all incurred but unpaid claims
for which LEHB is responsible under this Award
if and when the self-insured structure is replaced
by an insured structure as a result of future Act
111 proceedings between the parties.

To the extent, upon termination of the self-
insured structure created herein for any reason,
that the Run Out Escrow account should prove
inadequate to cover such incurred but
unclaimed program benefits, the City shall
immediately pay all such difference. If there are

-35-
funds remaining in the Run Out Escrow
account six months after termination of the self-
insured structure, the City shall be entitled to
an immediate return of those funds.

4. To the extent that interest earned on the
account causes the account to exceed the
three month limit described above, the City
may withdraw such interest and utilize it for its
own purposes.

Drug and Doctors’ Visits Benefits

Effective July 1, 2010, the benefits provided by LEHB
shall include prescription drug copayments and doc-
tors’ visits copayments in the following amounts.

1. Prescription Drug
a. Retail
1. Generic - $5.00
2. Formulary Brand - $10.00
3. Non - Formulary Brand - $15.00

b. 90 Day Mail Order
1. Generic - $10.00
2. Formulary Brand - $20.00
3. NonFormulary Brand - $30

2. Doctors’ Visits
1. Doctor's Visits - $15
2. Specialist Visits - $25

If LEHB should determine, in its discretion, to subsi-
dize some or all of the increased costs to employees
of these co-pays, the City shall bear no responsibili-
ty for the cost of the subsidy and any costs incurred
by LEHB in providing the subsidy shall be credited

-36-
against the three month reserve in paragraph F so
that the City shall not be required to fund these
costs in any way.

F. LEHB Reserves

1. Onor before July 1, 2013, the City shall estab-
lish an escrow account in an amount equal to
then prevailing cost of providing three full
months of all health care benefits plus adminis-
tration less the assets remaining in the reserves
of LEHB and Joint Board not including realty.
The escrow account shall be subject to an
escrow agreement between the City and LEHB
prohibiting the City from withdrawing funds
from the escrow account unilaterally, except as
provided in this Award.

2. The escrow fund shall be payable to LEHB in
the event that the self-insurance funding is
replaced during the term of this Award with any
other funding mechanism to provide the bene-
fits provided in this Award. If the self-insurance
model remains in effect under the next award
and the next award is of three years or greater
duration, the City shall be entitled to reclaim
the escrowed funds.

3. To the extent that interest earned on the account
causes the account to exceed the amount
described above, the City may withdraw such
interest and utilize it for its own purposes.

G. Resolution of Issues
The neutral chairman of the Panel shall retain juris-
diction as a single arbitrator over this matter for the
duration of this Award solely to resolve any disputes

-37-
that might arise in the implementation of this Award.
In that regard, the Chairman shall be empowered to
hold emergency hearings within twenty-four (24)
hours of notice by the parties of a dispute and to
issue emergency injunctive relief enforceable in a
court of appropriate jurisdiction to either party if he
should deem it appropriate to do so. Such resolution
shall be considered an arbitration award issued pur-
suant the grievance and arbitration procedure other-
wise set forth in the collective bargaining agree-
ment.

VIL SICK LEAVE

A.

Allowance

Current bargaining unit members shall continue to
accrue twenty (20) days of sick leave per year,
which will be accrued, as they are at present, on a
monthly basis, of one and two-thirds (1 2/3) working
days. Bargaining unit members hired or rehired on
or after the date of this Award (March 23, 1993)
shall accrue fifteen (15) days per year, which will be
accrued, as they are at present, on a monthly basis,
at one and one-fourth (1 1/4) days.

1. Sick leave shall continue to be earned and
accrued during any leave of absence with pay,
period of authorized sick or vacation leave or
absence due to a service connected disability
(except as may be otherwise provided by Civil
Service Regulation 32 in the case of service
connected disability). (Civil Service Reg. 2
1,033 & 21.0331)

2. Utilization of sick leave shall be in conformity
with the procedures set forth in Civil Service
Regulation 21.

-38-
B. Sick Leave Policy
The document appended to this contract as
Appendix D entitled “Police Department Sick Leave
Policy” is incorporated into and shall be part of this
agreement. The Appendix D following is different
than Appendix D in the rear of this Contract Booklet.

APPENDIX D
POLICE DEPARTMENT SICK LEAVE POLICY

Sick leave is a benefit to protect employees from loss of
wages due to injury or illness. Proper use of sick leave will pro-
tect employees from income loss while assuring continued
program accomplishment for the City. It is the purpose of
these rules and regulations to control and reduce, to the
extent possible, the abuse of sick leave by employees which
has had a detrimental effect upon the City.

It is further the purpose of these rules and regulations to pro-
vide a uniform procedure for the administration of sick leave
as set forth in Civil Service Regulation 21, and to familiarize
all employees with their responsibilities when they wish to
obtain sick leave benefits. This policy supersedes all previous
sick leave policies.

1. PAYMENT FOR ACCUMULATED SICK LEAVE UPON
RETIREMENT
A. An employee of the Police Department in a position
represented by the Fraternal Order of Police, upon
retirement, or in the event of the death of said
employee — his/her beneficiary, will be paid for
accumulated sick leave as follows:

Effective November 6, 2007, the following sick leave
conversion formula will be in effect:

-39-
1. Sick hours accumulated up to 2499 hours can
be sold or converted at 50% of accumulated
time.

2. Sick hours accumulated over 2500 hours can
be sold or converted at 60% of accumulated
time.

At retirement, occurring on or after July 1, 2004, an
employee who has retired may elect to use all or part
of his or her accumulated sick leave to purchase an
extension of the five (5) year period of retiree health,
medical, dental, optical and prescription coverage in
lieu of receiving a cash payment as provided in
Appendix D of the 1990 Act III Interest Arbitration
Award. For purposes of purchasing extended cover-
age, one hundred twenty (120) hours of accumulat-
ed sick leave will buy six (6) months of extended cov-
erage. All such purchases must be in full blocks of
one hundred twenty (120) hours.

The number of compensable sick leave hours for
employees who have retired above the rank of police
officer shall be determined by applying the cash pay-
ment formula as provided in Appendix D of the 1990
Act 111 Interest Arbitration Award, Those compensa-
ble hours may be used to purchase extended cover-
age, according to the following schedule:

Employee in Hours of Post Formula Sick Leave
Pay Ranges: Required to Purchase 6 (Six) months
Of Additional Health Insurance

202, 203, 299 120
204 110
205 105

- 40 -
206 95

208 80
209 75
210 70.
211 65

All such purchases must be in full blocks of the
amount required to purchase six (6) months of
extended coverage. Hours of compensable sick
leave not exchanged for extended health care cov-
erage, shall be compensated at the employee’s rate
of pay at the time of separation.

Deferred Sick Leave

Effective July 1, 2007: Members deferring coverage
will be entitled to receive the same number of
month’s coverage, as the number of months they
deferred.

Il. SICK LEAVE CREDITS/CONVERSIONS

A.

If the average number of sick days used per employ-
ee in a department in a calendar year is 20% less
than the average number of sick days used in the
prior calendar year, then any employees in the
department who use no sick leave will be eligible to
receive two (2) additional Administrative Leave days;
and any employee in the Department who used less
than five (5) days of sick leave will be eligible to
receive one (1) additional Administrative Leave day.

Administrative Leave days granted under this section
must be used by June 30 of each year in accordance
with applicable Civil Service Regulations.

Any full-time employee with more than eighty (80)
days accumulated sick leave to his/her credit may

-41-
exchange annually up to ten (10) days of such sick
leave at this rate of two (2) sick leave days for each
day of said vacation leave. Such conversion shall be
permitted up to a maximum of five (5) vacation days
per year and must be converted as full vacation days.
Employees converting earned but unused sick leave
to vacation leave shall notify the Police Department's
Personnel Office of this conversion between
December 15 and January 15 of each year of this
Contract. This conversion can only be accomplished
during this time period. The scheduling of this vaca-
tion leave shall be in conformity with the provisions
of Regulation 20 of the Civil Service Regulations.

An employee who chooses to convert sick leave to
vacation leave shall reduce his/her accumulated sick
leave balance accordingly, even if that sick leave bal-
ance is in excess of 225 days (1800 hours).

Il. NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS

A. A non-shift employee who is unable to report to
work because of authorized sick leave as defined in
Civil Service Regulations must contact the appropri-
ate authority or designee no later than one (1) hour
after the scheduled start of work. A shift worker is to
contact his/her appointing authority or authorized
delegate at least one-half (1/2) hour before the start
of the shift.

An employee who is unable to contact his/her office
using the assigned departmental number, should
call the special number designated for sick leave
call-in,

B. An employee on sick leave will be required to call in
only on the first day of any absence, indicating the

-42-
expected date of return, the reason for absence, and
the address and telephone where confined if differ-
ent from that on file in the department. If unable to
return to work on the date originally indicated, the
employee must call in again indicating the new
expected date of return.

During the regular working hours, when an employ-
ee is home on sick leave, the employee must notify
the appointing authority or designee when leaving
home and upon return. An employee is to remain at
home except to go to the doctor's office, the phar-
macy, the polling place, a place of worship or a retail
outlet which sells primarily food. Employees may
leave home for other reasons with the approval of
the Commanding Officer. The basis for the preced-
ing is to allow employees who are unable to work
because of illness or injury to leave their home for
personal, illness or injury needs which are basic.
Abuse of this procedure constitutes a violation of the
policy and is subject to the penalties in Section VI.

An employee with 150 days (1200 hours) or more
of credited sick leave will not be called or visited by
a Sick Leave Investigator or be called or visited by
any other personnel for the purpose of checking
sick leave.

IV. EXCESSIVE USE OF SICK LEAVE LIST

A.

‘An employee, who in a calendar year used a total of
eight (8) sick days without a medical certificate, will
be place on the “Excessive Use of Sick Leave List” The
employee shall be notified after having used five (5)
days that three (3) additional days of sick leave during
calendar year will result in the employee being placed
on the “Excessive Use of Sick Leave List.”

-43-
An employee who develops a pattern of taking sick
leave may be placed on the “Excessive Use of Sick
Leave List’. A pattern of taking sick leave shall be
defined to include but shall not be limited to:

1. three or more occurrences of undocumented
usage before or after regular days off or group
days off;

2. three or more occurrences of undocumented
usage on any specific tour of duty;

3. three or more occurrences of undocumented
usage of a specific day of the week;

4. two or more occurrences of usage of sick leave
after being denied other leave.

‘An employee shall remain on the “Excessive Use of
Sick Leave List” for one (1) year for the date of being
placed on the list. Repeated occurrences of being
placed on this list may affect requests for transfers
and eligibility for promotion.

1. Effective July 1, 1993, any employee placed on
the “excessive use of sick leave list” shall not be
paid for the first day of sick leave for the next
four (4) occasions or the next twelve (12)
months, whichever is shorter.

Any employee who has an earned sick leave bal-
ance of 800 hours or more will not be placed on the
“Excessive Use of Sick Leave List” until a formal
inquiry is held with the Commissioner of designee
and an F.O.P. representative.

-44-
E.

The F.O.P. shall be notified on a monthly basis of all
bargaining unit members placed on the “Excessive
Use of Sick Leave List.”

V. MEDICAL CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS

A.

A medical certificate is required for all absences of
more than three (3) consecutive days, and must be
submitted to the employee’s appointing authority or
designee within two (2) working days after the
employee returns to work. An employee has the
option of voluntarily producing a medical certificate
in order to avoid the day being charged to excessive
sick leave. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an
employee who has been placed on the Excessive
Use of Sick Leave List as set forth in Section IV
above shall be required to bring a medical certificate
for all subsequent use of sick leave. In order to be
compensated, an employee must be absent more
than 10 work days must submit a medical certificate
during each pay period, unless the employee's
physician submits a written statement giving an esti-
mated date of return to work which, covers the peri-
od in question.

A medical certificate must contain the following
information:

1. the date and time the employee was treated:

2. if appropriate, the date of expected return to
work:

3. the address and telephone number of the doc-
tor or practitioner:

4. date and doctors authorized signature.

-45-
Vi.

PENALTIES

A.

‘An employee who violates any of the provisions of
these rules and regulations under Sections III or V
will not be paid for the days not worked and will be
disciplined in accordance the following procedure.

First Occurrence — Written Warning
Second Occurrence — One (1) Day Suspension

Third Occurrence — Three (3) Day Suspension
The employee shall be counseled and advised, by
the supervisor, when given the three (3) day suspen-
sion. Prior to the meeting on the suspension, an
employee shall also be advised of the right to have
a Union Representative present.

Fourth Occurrence — Ten (10) Day Suspension
The employee shall be counseled and advised by
the Division Head or designee in the presence of a
Union Representative, if requested by the employee,
when given the ten (10) day suspension.

Fifth Occurrence — Maybe Discharged

An occurrence is a violation of any of the provisions
under Sections Ill and V of these rules and regula-
tions in a calendar year or for twelve (12) months
after an employee is placed on the Excessive use of
Sick Leave List.”

Use of Sick Leave for Maternity Related Absence

1. An employee who is incapacitated as a result of
pregnancy will be permitted to use sick leave as
follows:

- 46 -
a. An employee who, during the term of
pregnancy. is incapacitated in any way as a
result of the pregnancy will be considered
eligible for sick leave in the same manner
as any other incapacitating illness or injury;

b. In the period prior to delivery, sick leave
may be used, with the approval of the
appointing authority, upon the written rec-
ommendation of the employee’s doctor
that the employee can no longer work:

c. Without other justification. sick leave may
be used from the time of delivery forward
for four (4) calendar weeks:

d. Additional sick leave may be utilized
beyond the four (4) week postpartum peri-
od when:

(1) certified by the employees physician,
and

(2) recommended by the appointing
authority, and

(3) approved by the Personnel Director.

C. Non-Service Connected Disability
Bargaining unit members who have been deter-
mined to be permanently disabled by the City with
anon-service injury or illness may be separated from
employment pursuant to the provisions of the Civil
Service Regulation 17.07

IX. VACATION LEAVE
A. Allowance
Employees shall be entitled to paid vacations and
shall earn these vacation days at the following rates:

-47-
‘An employee with five (5) full years or less of
continuous service shall be entitled to ten (10)
vacation days per annum earning these days at
a rate of five-sixths (5/6) vacation day for each
calendar month of service.

‘An employee with more than five (5) full years
of continuous service, but less than nine (9) full
years of continuous service shall be entitled to
twelve (12) vacation days per annum, earning
these days at a rate of one (1) vacation day for
each calendar month of service.

‘An employee with nine (9) full years of contin-
uous service but less than fourteen (14) full
years of continuous service shall be entitled to
seventeen (17) vacation days per annum, earn-
ing these days at a rate of one and five-twelfths
(1-5/12) vacation days for each calendar month
of service.

‘An employee with fourteen (14) or more full
years of continuous service shall be entitled to
twenty-two (22) vacation days per annum, earn-
ing these days at a rate of one and five-sixths (1-
5/6) vacation days for each calendar month of
service.

Vacation leave shall continue to accrue during
leaves of absences with pay and during the
time an employee is on authorized sick and
vacation leave.

Utilization of vacation leave shall be in con-
formity with the provisions of Civil Service
Regulation 20.

- 48 -
Accrual

Any vacation leave which is not used in any year may
be accumulated: provided, however, that an employ-
ee may not have to their credit more than 560 hours
of vacation time at the end of a calendar year.

Use of Vacation Leave Upon Expiration of Sick
Leave

In the event an employee is on authorized sick leave
and has insufficient sick leave credits to cover the peri-
od of his/her absence, the earned vacation leave may
be used for this purpose if the employee so elects.

Payment of Accumulated Vacation Leave Upon
Retirement

Any member of the bargaining unit who leaves the
City’s service in order to retire under the Municipal
Retirement System has the option to receive a lump
sum cash payment for the balance of his/her earned
and unused vacation leave within thirty (30) days of
retirement, payable at their daily rate of pay at the
time of retirement or to exhaust this earned and
unused vacation leave of retirement.

Payment of Accumulated Vacation for Employees
Other than Retiring Employees

An employee who leaves the City’s service for any
reasons other than to retire under the Municipal
Retirement System shall receive payment in a lump
sum for the period representing the balance of
his/her earned vacation leave, if any, and in lieu of
such vacation leave.

Selection of Vacation During Designated Vacation
Period
1. If any employees are otherwise equally quali-

-49-
fied for paid vacation and should there be an
impasse between two or more employees in
the same class concerning the scheduling of a
designated vacation period, the date that each
employee entered the Police Academy shall be
the determining factor and the employees shall
then choose vacation periods with the employ-
ee having the earliest date since entering the
Police Academy choosing first.

2. Employees hired on or after December 18,
2009, will be guaranteed only one (1) week of
vacation during the period of the Summer
Vacation Schedule from May 1 to September
30 annually during their first five (5) years of
sworn employment in the Police Department.

The dates of the summer vacation schedule are
detailed in VIII-H.

Recession and Rescheduling of Vacation Periods

Should an employee's previously approved vacation
leave be rescinded, the City shall make every good
faith effort to reschedule the vacation leave as soon
as possible with the employee who is being resched-
uled receiving priority for requested dates if possible.

Vacation Scheduling

Effective with the vacation schedules for the sum-
mer of 1991, and thereafter the Summer Vacation
Schedule shall be extended to include vacation peri-
od next following May 15th up to and including the
week ending September 30th.

Vacation Purchase
The Police Department may offer to purchase vaca-

-50-
Xi.

tion periods from employees in the classes of Police
Officer and Detective who are scheduled for vaca-
tion. The Police Commissioner shall determine the
number of tours to be purchased and the time peri-
od covered. Employees shall receive full pay for the
vacation period purchased and shall have their bank
of vacation leave reduced accordingly. An employee
whose vacation period has been purchased shall
work during the period purchased. No other
employee shall be permitted to utilize the vacation
slot vacated by the employee whose vacation has
been repurchased by the Department.

Request for Annual Vacation

Employees shall submit their vacation requests for
the next calendar by December 15th of preceding
year.

Disability - Payment of Accrued Vacation Benefits
Any officer retiring as a result of a work-related dis-
ability shall be entitled to payment for any accrued,
unused vacation.

Catastrophic Leave Bank
Refer to Article V, section P

ANNUAL ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE

‘An employee shall be granted four (4) days annual leave
in the form of administrative leave. This leave shall be
taken in conformity with the provisions of Regulation
19.0 18 of the Civil Service Regulations.

HOLIDAY COMPENSATORY TIME
A. Holidays

1. The following are recognized holidays: New
Year’s Day, Martin Luther King’s Birthday,

-51-
President’s Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day
(as of 1997), Columbus Day, Thanksgiving Day,
and Christmas Day.

2. Birthday as Holiday
Effective with calendar year 2007, and for each
year thereafter, each employee shall be entitled
to his or her birthday as a holiday.

Holidays Compensatory Time

During the term of this agreement, Police
Department employees shall receive, in lieu of the
ten (12) holidays specified above, compensatory
time off with pay on an hour for hour basis aggregat-
ing during a full calendar year, eighty (96) hours.

Payment / Accumulation of Holiday Compensatory
Time

Each employee shall have the right to use holiday
compensatory time at their convenience consistent
with past practice, to be paid in cash for such time
at the end of the fiscal year, or to accumulate this
time without limit.

Payment of Accumulated Holiday Compensatory
Time Upon Retirement

Each employee may, if he or she elects, receive a
lump sum cash payment for all holiday time not uti-
lized by the date of retirement payable at the salary
rate in effect at the time of retirement.

Payment of Accumulated Holiday Compensatory
Time for Employees for Other Than Retiring
Employees

Each employee who leaves the City’s service for a

-52-
reason other than to retire under the Municipal
Retirement System shall receive payment in a lump
sum for all unused holiday compensatory time not
utilized by the date of separation, payable at the
salary rate in effect at the time of separation.

XI. FUNERAL LEAVE

A.

For Immediate Family

An employee shall be entitled to up to four (4) con-
secutive days off for the death of a member of
his/her immediate family. The employee shall be
paid for any such day which is a regularly scheduled
work day.

For Family Member Other Than Member of
Immediate Family

An employee shall be entitled to one (1) day off to
be granted on the day of the funeral of a family mem-
ber other than a member of the immediate family.

Immediate Family Members

For purposes of this Article; “Immediate family” shall
include: wife, husband, children, parents, brother
and sister.

An employee's mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandpar-
ent and grandchild shall be included in the definition
of immediate family for funeral leave purposes.

XII. JURY DUTY AND COURT DUTY

A.

Jury Duty
A leave of absence with pay shall be granted to an
employee upon his/her request to perform jury
duty, unless excused there from, provided however,
that such employee waives or remits to the City
his/her jury fee.

-53-
XIV.

xv.

z

Witness for Personal or Non-City Matters

A leave of absence without pay shall be granted to
an employee appearing under subpoena or on
his/her own behalf in litigation involving personal or
private matters.

MATERNITY/ PATERNITY LEAVE

An employee shall be granted a maternity leave of
absence without pay. The employee shall retain her
same position if such leave does not exceed six (6)
months duration.

The City will provide up to twelve (12) weeks of
unpaid maternity/paternity leave each fiscal year
(with continuation of City-paid health and welfare
benefits). Upon the effective date of the Family and
Medical Leave Act of 1993, P.L. 103-3, the provi-
sions of the Act will apply, and this provision shall
terminate.

MILITARY LEAVE
Military Leave shall be governed by the provisions of
Section 22.08 of the Civil Service regulations.

|. FOP LEAVE
A.

Elected Officials

Any member of the bargaining unit who is serving as
a full-time elected officer to FOP Lodge 5, shall,
upon written application to his/her appointing
authority, be granted a leave of absence without pay
for the period of such service. This leave of absence
shall be valid only for the period that the employee
has been elected to serve as a full-time officer of the
organization. If the employee is re-elected as a full-
time officer, the leave of absence without pay shall
again be granted upon written application to the

-54-
appointing authority. Notices of all leaves of
absences granted under this section shall be filed
with the Personnel Director. The seniority rights of
all employees on FOP leave shall be protected and
they shall accumulate during such employee's peri-
od of service with the FOP.

B. Appointed Officials

Any member of the bargaining unit who is serving as
a full-time staff representative of FOP Lodge 5, shall,
upon written application to his/her appointing
authority and upon approval of the Personnel
Director, be granted a leave of absence without pay
for the period of such service. This leave of absence
shall be valid only for the period of time requested,
not to exceed three (3) years, or until termination of
the appointment by the FOP, whichever occurs first.
If an employee is re-appointed to this position, the
leave of absence without pay shall be granted upon
written application to the appointing authority and
Personnel Director approval. Notices of all such
leaves of absences shall be filed with the Personnel
Director. The seniority rights of such employees
shall be protected and they shall accumulate during
such employee’s service with the FOP.

C. Directors
All FOP Directors shall be permitted one hour per
month of E-time to attend monthly FOP meetings.

XVII. COMPENSATION
A. Basic Salary
1. Effective January 1, 2009, there shall be an
across-the board wage increase in the Police
pay schedule of 2%.

-55-
Effective July 1, 2009, there shall be no
across-the-board wage increase in the Police
pay schedule.

Effective July 1, 2010, there shall be a three
percent (3%) across the-board wage increase
in the Police pay schedule.

Effective July 1, 2011, there shall be a three
percent (3%) across the-board wage increase
in the Police pay schedule.

There shall be a reopener in 2012 before this
Panel for the sale purpose of determining the
amount of wages to be paid to members of
the bargaining for the years beginning July 1,
2012 and July 1, 2013. During any hearing
on the reopener, each party shall be limited
to no more than two days of presentation
and there shall be no more than one day of
rebuttal for both parties combined. The
Panel’s award shall have an effective date of
July 1, 2012.

A salary differential of fourteen (14%) per-
cent between police officer and sergeant,
sergeant and lieutenant, captain and inspec-
tor, and chief inspector, shall be established
and maintained.

{2000-2002 AAA Award changed by item #4}

A salary differential or ten (10%) percent
shall he maintained between police officer
and corporal or detective, and between
Captain and Staff Inspector.

-56-
The existing pay range differential between
police captain and police lieutenant shall be
increased from fourteen percent (14%) to six-
teen percent (16%).

B. Stress Differential

1.

All members of the bargaining unit who are
regularly assigned to rotating shift work shall
be paid in addition to their regular base pay
a shift differential of four (4%) percent of
their regular straight time hourly rate for all
hours worked or on vacation, holiday, or
other authorized paid leave There shall be no
pyramiding of the shift differential and over-
time premium pay. The differential shall con-
tinue to be paid to employees temporarily
assigned to non-shift duties. Effective July 1,
2003, the four percent (4%) stress pay cur-
rently received by bargaining unit members
shall be included in pension calculations, sick
leave, vacation pay, holiday and other AL
leave.

Effective July 1, 2010, the stress differential
shall be increased to five percent (5%). The
five percent (5%) stress differential shall be
included in pension calculations, sick leave,
vacation pay, holiday and other AL leave.

C. Longevity
Effective January 1, 2009, each bargaining unit
member shall be entitled to longevity based upon
the following schedule, computed on the base
salary plus stress differential for the respective
rank:

-57-
Years: Percentage

1-2 0

3-4 3.3%
5-9 3.8%
10-14 45%
15-19 5.2%
20-24 5.7%
25-29 6.3%
30-35 6.8%

D. Clothing Allowance and Clothing Maintenance

1.

Effective July 1, 2008, employees shall
receive a uniform allowance of Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) per year.

Effective July 1, 2008, employees shall
receive a uniform maintenance allowance of
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per year

Clothing Issue for New hires

Newly appointed employees shall be sup-
plied all clothing requirements at the City’s
cost.

Special Units Clothing:
An employee who is transferred to a special
unit (this does not include an employee who
is detailed into a special unit for a limited
period of time during which special clothing
or equipment is not required) for which the
City requires individual uniform clothing or,
equipment that is unique to that unit, in addi-
tion to the maintenance allowance otherwise
described herein, shall be provided with the
first issue of each item of clothing or equip-
ment so required provided that the employ-

-58-
ee has not received such individual uniform
clothing or, equipment in a previous unit.
Such items shall be provided as soon as fea-
sible, after the employee is transferred to the
unit provided that the employee continues to
actively work in the unit when the item
becomes available. Regular street clothing
such as casual or business attire is not includ-
ed in this provision.

Meal Allowance

1. For each meal required as a result of over-
time work, an employee shall receive the
actual cost of the meal up to Seven Dollars
($7.00).

2. To receive this allowance, the employee must
work in excess of three (3) or more overtime
hours.

Work in a Higher Rated Classification
‘An employee working in a higher rated classifica-
tion shall receive the rate of pay of the first step of
the higher class for all hours worked.

Manner of Payment

All paychecks shall indicate the exact amount of
overtime to the half hour that an employee has.
worked and shall be shown for the most recent
pay period as practicable.

Bomb Squad
Police Officers assigned to the Bomb Squad shall
receive a pay increase of three percent (3%) as a
differential for the hazardous nature of their work.
This differential is limited to Bomb Squad person-

-59-
nel, and the Panel's granting of this in no way
established a precedent. Individuals assigned to
the bomb squad shall receive their pay differential
after transferring into the squad and obtaining cer-
tification as a Hazardous Device Technician and
shall cease receiving the differential on transfer or
separation from the squad. There shall be no
options to these conditions. The establishing of a
pay differential for the Bomb Squad in no way
alters or limits the Police Department's ability to
transfer employees into or out of the Bomb
Squad.

District Commander’s Compensation

1. Effective July 1, 1998, each Captain, while
assigned as a District Commander to a dis-
trict designated by the Police Commissioner
as an “A” district, shall earn an additional 8%
of his/her base pay. Also effective July 1,
1998, each Captain, while assigned as a
District Commander to a district designated
by the Police Commissioner as a “B” district,
shall earn an additional 4% of his/her base

pay.

2. In the event a Captain should be reassigned
to or from such “A” or “B” districts, the 8% or
4% to be received by reason of such assign-
ment shall cease accordingly. In the event
that a Captain should be resigned from such
“A” or “B" districts the 8% or 4% shall be
reinstated accordingly.

3. The transfer of Police Captains and the classi-
fication of Police Districts shall not be sub-
jects to the grievance and arbitration provi-

-60-
sions of this contract. The additional pay pro-
vided for above shall not be the basis for pen-
sion benefits.

Commanders

1.

Effective July 1, 2008, officers at the rank of
Captain and above shall receive straight time
pay for all hours worked on the following
four occasions: Mummers’ Parade, Fourth of
July, Greek Picnic, and Bike Race.

Effective July 1, 2010, Commanders shall
receive straight time pay for all hours worked
at the Puerto Rican Day parade.

Effective July 1, 2011, Commanders shall
receive straight time pay for working one
weekend per year in Weekend Command.
There shall be no pay for any stand-by time.

Effective July 1, 2011, officers at the rank of
Captain and above will be permitted to accu-
mulate compensatory time on an hour for
hour basis up to a cap of 1200 hours. These
employees will be permitted to cash out up
to 600 hours of compensatory time at retire-
ment from the Department subject to the
existing rules and regulations.

XVIII. PENSION

General

Employees in the bargaining unit shall be entitled
to pension benefits as set forth in the Municipal
Employees Retirement Ordinance. All employees
hired on or after July 1, 1988, shall have pension
benefits as defined in Plan 87.

A.

-61-
B. Fringe Benefits Upon Normal Retirement
1. Medical Coverage:

An employee who terminates his or her
employment to immediately become pen-
sioned on or after July 1, 2000 under the City
Pension Plan with ten (10) or more years of
credited service, shall have his or her health,
medical, dental, optical and prescription pay-
ments continued for five (5) years following
retirement, as provided for in Civil Service
Regulation 27.0111 to 27.01151. In the
event a retired employee dies within this five-
year period, benefits for his/her spouse and
dependent children shall continue for the
entire five-year period.

2. Deferred Medical Coverage:
Employees who separate from City service
after July 1, 1998, and who are otherwise eli-
gible for the covered medical coverage peri-
od of post-retirement City contributions for
health medical coverage may elect to defer
receipt of the covered medical coverage peri-
od and the contribution the City would oth-
erwise make on the employee's behalf.
Deferred coverage shall be for a continuous
five year period. The election must be made
in writing to the City on a form and in con-
formance with a procedure to be established
by the City. A retiree’s election to begin
deferred coverage must be exercised during
the open enrollment period of the relevant
health insurance plans and may not be exer-
cised during any year in which the City had
made contributions on the employee's
behalf for health medical coverage. The con-

-62-
tribution amount shall be fixed at the rates in
effect for the covered period at the time the
employee separates from City service to
immediately become pensioned, and shall
not be subject to any increases beyond those
occurring in the covered period. Deferred
payments shall be subject to all eligibility
requirements which apply to City contribu-
tions for employees who do not elect a defer-
ral of such contributions. No City contribu-
tions shall be used for any purpose other
than to provide health medical coverage con-
sisted with the terms of the Trust Agreement
establishing the Joint Fund.

3. Purchased of Additional Medical Coverage
with Accumulated Sick Leave
At retirement, an employee may elect to use all
or part of his or her accumulated sick leave to
purchase an extension of the five (5) year peri-
od of retiree health, medical, dental, optical
and prescription coverage in lieu of receiving a
cash payment as provided in Appendix D of the
1990 Act 111 Interest Arbitration Award. For
purposes of purchasing extended coverage,
one hundred twenty (120) hours of accumulat-
ed sick leave will buy six (6) months of extend-
ed coverage. All such purchases must be in full
blocks of one hundred twenty (120) hours.
(Refer to VII-B-Appendix D)

Retiree Joint Trust Fund

The Board of Trustees, who shall determine the
benefits and coverages for eligible former employ-
ees and their eligible dependents, shall be made
up of one-third representation by City Trustees

-63-
and two-thirds representation by FOP Trustees.
The City-appointed Trustees shall have full and
complete access to all books and records relating
to the Joint Retiree Trust Fund. The Joint Retiree
Trust Fund also shall be subject to an annual audit
to be conducted by an independent CPA firm
selected by the Board of Trustees. The City may
also, at its own expense, select an independent
CPA firm to conduct an annual audit of the Joint
Retiree Trust Fund.

1.

Within sixty (60) days of the issuance of the
‘Award, the City shall make a lump sum pay-
ment of four million dollars ($4 million) to the
Retiree Joint Trust Fund.

On or before July 1, 2010, the City shall
make a lump sum payment of four million
dollars ($4 million) to the Retiree Joint Trust
Fund.

On or before July 1, 2011, the City shall
make a lump sum payment of four million
dollars ($4 million) to the Retiree Joint Trust
Fund.

On or before July 1, 2012, the City shall
make a lump sum payment of four million
dollars ($4 million) to the Retiree Joint Trust
Fund.

On or before July 1, 2013, the City shall
make a lump sum payment of four million
dollars ($4 million) to the Retiree Joint Trust
Fund.

-64-
Hires After January 1, 2010 (Plan 09)

At the time of hire, all employees hired on or after
January 1, 2010 shall make a one-time, irrevoca-
ble election between participating in Plan B (also
known as Plan 87) as defined in the Philadelphi.
Retirement Code, as modified below, or partici-
pating in Plan 09, which shall be made part of the
Retirement Code. The FOP will be given a reason-
able opportunity to address any newly-hired
employees before employees are asked to submit
their election.

 

Employees who elect to participate in Plan B shall
be subject to all the terms of Plan B as set by the
Retirement Code, except that they shall be
required to make an employee contribution in the
amount of 6% of their pensionable earnings.

Plan 09 shall provide for both a defined benefit plan
with an employee contribution, and a defined con-
tribution plan, where an employee shall have the
option of contributing into said plan up to a speci-
fied percentage of pensionable earnings. The terms
of this Plan 09 shall be designed to reduce the cost
to the City by at least the same level of cost reduc-
tion to the City resulting from the increase in
employee contribution from 5% to 6% for Plan B.

The parties shall meet over the next 30 days to
attempt to reach an agreement on the specific
terms of Plan 09. If the parties do not reach such
an agreement, this Act 111 Panel shall issue a sup-
plemental award no later than March 1, 2010,
effective immediately upon issuance, setting forth
the terms of Plan 09. Refer to Appendix K for the
supplemental award.

-65-
XIV.

Between the date of this Award and March 1,
2010, any new hires shall enroll in Plan B and con-
tribute 6% of their pensionable earnings, When
Plan 09 becomes effective, any such new hires
shall be afforded a onetime option of switching to
Plan 09.

Addition of Option Four for Plan 87/Pension
Calculated at Next Higher Rank if Killed in the
Line of Duty

Effective July 1, 2008, the City will revise
Police Plan 87 by adding the unreduced,
50% Survivor Benefit Option (“Option 4”)
that is contained in Police Plan 67.

Any member of the bargaining unit who is
killed in the line of duty as an immediate result
of the violent conduct of a third party that was
directed towards the officer or a member of
the public or an immediate result of perform-
ing other heroic action in an emergency situa-
tion in the line of duty on or after January 1,
2006 shall have his or her pension calculated
as if the officer retired at the next rank, exclud-
ing corporal, above the rank held by the offi-
cer at the time of his or her death (e.g. Officer
to Sergeant). This section shall not cover death
resulting from vehicular accidents.

DISABILITY PROGRAM

The Panel finds that, by reforming the disability pro-
gram for employees represented by the FOP in the
same manner as provided in the agreements negotiat-
ed between the City and the AFSCME unions, the City
may achieve substantial savings without significantly
disrupting the basic benefits available to employees

- 66-
who incur injuries or illnesses. These reforms are
intended to reduce the amount of disability pay to a
level commensurate with an employee’s pre-injury net
salary and to eliminate abuses of the present system.
The City shall amend Civil Service Regulation 32 and
the Pension Ordinance to conform to this Award.

A.

General

The Civil Service Commission shall continue to
have sole jurisdiction as to the resolution of dis-
putes pertaining to the entitlement to benefits pro-
vided by Civil Service Regulation 32. Employees
shall be required to cooperate with and accept all
reasonable and appropriate medical care, treat-
ment, testing, therapies and established corrective
surgical procedures. In the case of such corrective
surgical procedures, the City shall allow an
employee to obtain a second opinion from his/her
private physician at City expense and shall provide
for a neutral third determinative opinion in disput-
ed cases. This shall not change the current require-
ment that employees are otherwise required to
treat with City physicians in order to be eligible for
benefits under Regulation 32.

 

Employees receiving any disability benefit shall be
required to report and verify any outside earned
income, in such manner as the City may deter-
mine, including but not limited to the provision of
federal tax returns. The City shall retain the right
to terminate a disability benefit if an employee
fails to comply with any requirement of the City’s
disability program.

Temporary Service Connected Disability
Employees shall be compensated at a rate of 75%

-67-
of base pay (which shall exclude overtime, shift
differential, paid hours, holiday pay and outof-
class pay) at the time of injury or recurrence. Such
employees shall not accrue vacation time and
shall accept medically appropriate limited duty
assignments. Without modifying the current
career limit (3 years), 1.O.D. no duty time shall be
limited to one year for each work-related incident
causing work-related injuries.

Permanent Service Connected Disability

1. Partial Disability: A partially disabled
employee must be available for and cooper-
ate with placement by the City in a second-
ary position and shall provide the City with
reports from his/her physician regarding any
medical restrictions. Pending such place-
ment, disability pay shall be calculated in
accordance with paragraph B above. If the
employee has not been so placed within six
months from the date of determination of
permanent disability (extendible to 12
months in the City’s sole discretion), he/she
shall be separated from employment with the
City and may apply for a service connected
disability retirement benefit. The benefit
amount shall be reduced by one dollar for
each two dollars of outside income earned
by an employee receiving such benefit (a “2-
for-1 offset”).

2. Total Disability: An employee determined to
be totally disabled shall be separated imme-
diately from employment with the City and
may apply for a service connected disability
retirement benefit. If the employee earns any

- 68 -
outside income, he/she shall be reclassified
as partially disabled and shall become sub-
ject to the 2-for-1 offset set forth above.

Elimination of the “2-for-1 offset” for outside

income earned by those bargaining unit

members who become partially and perma-

nently disabled as

a. an immediate result of the violent con-
duct of a third party that was directed
toward the officer or a member of the
public; or

b. an immediate result of performing other
heroic action in an emergency situation
in the line of duty.

The determination of eligibility for elimina-
tion of the “2-for-1 offset” shall be made by
the Pension Board in its sole discretion.

Effective July 1, 2004, the dollar setoff applied
to outside income, affecting those individuals
with permanent service-connected disabili-
ties, shall not be applied to the first $25,000
in outside income. Effective July 1, 2007, the
dollar setoff will be completely eliminated if it
is not applied to firefighters at that time.

Duplication of Benefits

It shall be within the Pension Board's sole discre-
tion to determine for which disability retirement
benefit an applicant is eligible. The Pension Board
may in its sole discretion meet the City’s obliga-
tion under any workers’ compensation award by
issuing a City service connected disability retire-
ment benefit when appropriate. If an employee

-69-
receives an award of a workers’ compensation
benefit for a period for which he/she received
sick time, the City shall receive a work-for-week
credit against the award for each week of sick
time provided. An employee receiving any City
disability benefit who also receives a workers’
compensation specific loss of use benefit shall
have his/her benefit offset on a dollar-for-dollar
basis by the amount of the workers’ compensa-
tion benefit if the two awards are for injuries aris-
ing from the same work-related incident.

Ordinary Disability Retirement Benefits

Ordinary disability retirement benefits shall not
be awarded for service connected injuries. Any
employee who receives an award of workers’
compensation shall cease to be eligible for an
ordinary disability benefit and shall have such
benefit terminated. An employee receiving an
ordinary disability benefit who has not yet
reached minimum retirement age (as defined in
the applicable pension plan) shall be subject to
the 2-for-l offset set forth above.

re Paid for Heroic Action
Effective August 11, 1998, a police officer
who is injured on duty as (1) an immediate
result of the violent conduct of a third party
that was directed towards the officer or a
member of the public, or (2) an immediate
result of performing other heroic action in an
emergency situation in the line of duty, shall
receive IOD pay at 100% (as opposed to
80%) of the officer’s pre-injury pay, including
longevity. This section shall not cover injuries
resulting from vehicular accidents in which

-70-
the injured officer is a vehicular occupant at
the time of the injury.

2. The determination of eligibility for the 100%
(as opposed to 80%) pre-injury pay benefit
shall be made by the Police Commissioner in
his sole discretion, and shall not be subject to
the grievance and arbitration provisions of
the contract.

G. Catastrophically Disabled Police Officers:
‘An employee who is eligible for a periodic
adjustment under Section 401 (5) of the
Public Employees Retirement Code and who
actually receives the first of such adjustments
shall in addition receive a one-time lump sum
payment equivalent to the amount of that
adjustment for the period from the com-
mencement of eligible pension benefits until
the effective date of the first periodic adjust-
ment. In no event shall this one time lump
sum exceed the amount of the adjustment
times seven years of eligibility.

2. This provision applies to all employees who
have received a pension benefit which quali-
fies for the periodic adjustment and who
have not received such adjustment prior July
1.2000. No provision of this article nor any
benefit awarded shall be subject to review
under the grievance and arbitration proce-
dure contained in the collective bargaining
agreement.

3. The parties shall meet and discuss compen-
sation for Mrs. Mindy Marynowitz for the pri-

-71-
mary care she renders to her husband John
Marynowitz in light of the specific evidence
placed on the record regarding their circum-
stances.

Disability - Payment of Accrued Vacation Benefits
Any officer retiring as a result of a work-related
disability shall be entitled to payment for any
accrued, unused vacation.

Disability - Heart and Lung Benefits

1.

Effective upon the issuance of this Award, a
panel of non-party appointed specialists shall
make independent medical examinations
(IME) evaluations of officers who have made
a claim to benefits under the Heart and Lung
Act or whose continuation of benefits under
the Act is contested by the City. The Panel
shall be selected by the two neutral arbitra-
tors assigned to hear the Heart and Lung
cases as well as the partisan arbitrators desig-
nated by the parties in this proceeding. The
decisions of those non-party appointed spe-
cialists shall thereafter be accorded substan-
tial deference by the Heart and Lung
Arbitrators.

Provided that the physician is contractually
bound by the treatment costs and protocols
imposed by the City’s Risk Management
Department on physicians in the panel of
doctors who treat police officers pursuant to
the Heart and Lung Act, an officer receiving
medical treatment under the Heart and Lung
Act may treat with a physician of his or her
own choosing.

-72-
3. The Heart and Lung Arbitration Panels shall
continue to have authority to issue whatever
orders are necessary to achieve justice.

XX. DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE

A.

General

No employee shall be disciplined or discharged
except as is consistent with the Home Rule
Charter and the Regulations of the Civil Service
Commission.

Police Board of Inquiry (PBI)
Employees appearing before the Police Board of
Inquiry shall be given:

1. five days’ notice of the scheduled hearing:

2. a copy of the notice of the hearing: and,

3. _ the right to a representative who shall he per-
mitted to review the charges prior to the
hearing.

Announcements of Disciplinary Actions
Announcements of disciplinary actions at roll calls
shall be made without naming the employee
receiving the discipline. This clause shall not apply
to announcements of disciplinary actions in
response to publicized incidents.

Health / Medical Payments Upon Suspension
The city shall continue to pay and provide
health/medical payments to any employee under
suspension except under suspension with intent
to dismiss, until Civil Service and/or arbitration
procedures have been exhausted.

-73-
E. Written Reprimands in Personnel File
Written reprimands in a personnel file shall be
removed from the record after two (2) years if the
employee receives no further written reprimands
or further disciplinary action within that period.

F. Vacation Time Lieu of Suspension

The Police Commissioner may, in his sole discre-
tion, charge a bargaining unit member’s accumu-
lated vacation bank in lieu of time off, for discipli-
nary suspensions, in all cases except those involv-
ing insubordination, charges of criminal miscon-
duct, and refusal to submit to a drug or alcohol
test.

G. Hair Testing
The Police Department shall have the right to
include reasonable procedures for hair testing in
its existing drug testing procedures.

H. Probationary Period
The probationary period for employees appointed
after November 2, 2000 to the classification of
Police Officer | shall be extended from six (6)
months to one (1) year.

XXI. GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
A. Definition
1. Grievances as defined herein shall he limited
to contract violations, disciplinary suspen-
sions, demotions, and discharges.

2. The grievance and arbitration procedure set
forth herein shall include within its subject
matter only alleged violations of Act 111
Awards and this Contract.

-74-
Grievances involving contract violations
other than suspensions, demotions or dis-
charges may be initiated only by the FOP.

Grievances involving disciplinary suspen-
sions, demotions, or discharges may be initi-
ated by a permanent employee only.

In the event of an alleged violation of the con-
tract, the Grievance and Arbitration Procedure
shall be the exclusive remedy of the parties.

Discipline cases may be grieved or submitted
to Civil Service at the election of the employ-
ee, to the extent that the Civil Service
Commission has jurisdiction.

Step |
For members of the bargaining unit employed in
the Police Department, the Police Commissioner
or his/her designee shall be the first step in the
grievance procedure prior to binding arbitration.
For members of the bargaining unit employed in
the Office of the District Attorney, the Chief of the
County Detectives or his/her designee shall be
the first and final step in the grievance procedure
prior to binding arbitration.

1.

The Grievant/FOP must, within thirty (30)
days of the occurrence giving rise to the
grievance, or within thirty (30) days after the
Grievant/FOP is notified of the suspension or
discharge, submit the grievance in writing.

The Police Commissioner or his/her designee
or the Chief of the County Detectives or

-75-
his/her designee shall have four (4) weeks
from the receipt of the grievance to receive
evidence or argument thereon and render his
decision, which shall be in writing. The time
limits contained herein may be extended for
a reasonable time by mutual agreement, if
additional time is needed to provide for a full
and complete presentation of the facts sur-
rounding the grievance.

Step Il
If there is no resolution of the grievance at the
First Step hearing described herein, the
Grievant/FOP shall file the grievance with the
Director of Labor Relations. The Managing
Director or designee shall establish a meeting
date concerning the grievance within three (3)
days of filing. Within ten (10) working days of the
grievance meeting, the Director of Labor
Relations or designee shall respond in writing.

Step Ill
‘Any appeal from the decision of the Managing
Director must be taken to arbitration within thirty
(30) days of the date of his decision or the date
when his decision was due to the American
Arbitration Association, pursuant to the rule for
voluntary labor arbitration of the Association.

Election of Remedies

The remedy set forth herein is provided as an alter-
native to the procedures set forth in Civil Service
Regulations and the Home Rule Charter. Should an
employee elect an avenue of redress other than the
procedure contained herein, he/she will waive the
contractual right to pursue a grievance through this

-76-
procedure, and in no event shall the matter be arbi-
trable. Should an employee elect to pursue the mat-
ter through the procedure contained herein, he/she
shall waive the right to pursue the matter through
the procedures provided by the Home Rule
Charter. The decision of an arbitrator shall be final
and binding on all parties and the employee and/or
FOP shall not pursue any other avenue of redress.

Selection of Arbitrator
The selection of arbitrators and the conduct of
hearings shall be in accordance with the Rules for
Voluntary Labor Arbitration of the American
Arbitration Association.

Costs and Fees
The costs and fees of arbitration shall be shared
equally by the City and the FOP.

Authority of Arbitrator

The arbitrator selected shall have no authority to
add to, subtract from or in any way alter the terms
of this contract, Act 111 arbitration awards or the
scale of wages set forth therein.

Effect of Decision

The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and
binding upon the City, the FOP, and the employ-
ees covered by this Contract.

Back Pay

When back pay is awarded in a grievance arbitra-
tion, the City will provide the FOP with a copy of
the distribution sheet and will keep the FOP
informed of issues concerning compliance with
the Award.

-77-
XXIL.

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

A.

Performance Reports

The performance rating system shall provide satis-
factory and unsatisfactory ratings only. In order to
qualify for a promotional examination, a police
officer will be required to have an overall satisfac-
tory rating.

Buddy Days

A police officer shall have the right to trade shifts
or other days off with another police officer in the
same station house with the permission of the
commanding officer of the station house.

Access to Personnel Files

All officers may inspect their personnel folders
during working hours (9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.) for
any negative letters from outside the Department
or comments from his/her commanding
officer(s). The officer shall be permitted to
respond in writing to those statements and
request their withdrawal.

1. The parties shall be governed by the terms of
Act of November 6. 1978. P.L. 1212. No.
286; 43 P.S. 1321 except that access may be
denied to matters under current investiga-
tion.

2. In the event that any Employees file or its
contents is subpoenaed by any City
Department, Federal Agent or Agency, State
Agent or Agency or Commission, the
Employee and the FOP shall receive prompt
notice thereof from the police department.

-78-
Badge Upon Retirement
Upon retirement each member of the bargaining
unit shall be given his/her badge at no charge.

Examinations

1.

The City shall be required to use its best
effort’ to publish the results of promotional
tests as soon as is practical after the adminis-
tration of such tests, with an earnest effort
being made to achieve such publication with-
in thirty (30) days of said test.

Effective for examinations announced after
January 1, 1997, the City shall establish and
publish a “source list” for each objective-type
promotional examination. There shall be a
“source list” for each rank. The City, in its sole
discretion, shall have the right to change each
“source list” from time to time, however:

a. the City shall provide reasonable notice
of any such changes in advance of any
examination that will be subject to the
changed “source list;” and

b. in no event shall such modification of a
“source list” take place less than one
hundred twenty (120) days prior to the
examination for the affected class.

c. A promotional examination shall be
announced at least ninety (90) days
prior to the date that it is given.

‘An employee shall be eligible to take a pro-
motional examination upon having complet-
ed one (1) full year of service in their current
rank with the year concluding upon the date
of the promotional examination with the

-79-
exception that a two (2) year requirement
shall apply to Police Officers applying to take
the Sergeants examination.

Educational Credits

For all promotional exams administered and
eligibility lists established there from after the
issuance of the 2000 Award, employees who
otherwise achieve eligibility for promotion to
a higher rank and have successfully complet-
ed a course of study at an accredited college
or university will have .50 points added to
their final score if the highest degree
received is an Associate’s Degree, 1.0 points
added to their final score if the highest
degree received is a Bachelor's Degree and
1.5 points added to their final score if the
highest degree received is a Master's
Degree.

 

RULE OF TWO

In the case of a second certification of an eli-
gible from a promotional list, the employee,
if not selected, shall be provided with a state-
ment of the reason for non-appointment and
shall be granted, upon request, an interview
with a responsible official regarding his/her
non-appointment.

Continuity
The parties have entered into the first written con-
tract pursuant to the Arbitration Award covering
the periods July 1, 1982 through June 30, 1984.
In the event that there are any benefits still in
effect which were obtained through previous Act
111 negotiations and arbitrations that are not

- 80-
addressed herein, they shall nonetheless be con-
sidered to be of full force and effect and incorpo-
rated herein by reference.

Charitable Solicitation

Charitable solicitation shall be permitted only
with the joint agreement of the Police
Commissioner and the FOP.

Clothing Board
A police officer designated by the FOP shall be
assigned full time to the Clothing Board.

Bulletin Boards

The FOP shall be entitled to place a bulletin board
in a prominent place chosen by the FOP in all dis-
tricts and other employment locations. The pur-
pose of such bulletin boards shall be to receive all
official FOP notices and personal notices author-
ized by FOP.

Cost of Printing Contract

The City will share in the cost of printing of the
contract up to an amount of Five Thousand
Dollars ($5,000.00)

Outside Employment
Approved outside employment may not exceed
thirty-two (32) hours per work week.

Transfers

1. Transfers shall be for the purpose of maintain-
ing essential manpower requirements.
Transfers may be part of the formal discipli-
nary system that is subject to the procedures
contained in Article XIX. Transfers shall not

-81-
be made on the basis of personal animus. All
transfers shall be personally communicated
by the transferred employee’s commanding
officer of the unit from which the employee
was transferred.

Transfers between the Police Department
and District Attorney's Office shall not be
unreasonably denied.

M. Service Connected Death

1.

Funeral Expenses

In the event a bargaining unit member is
killed in the line of duty. The City shall pay all
funeral expenses up to a maximum of fifteen
thousand dollars ($15,000).

Psychological Counseling
The City will provide psychological counsel-
ing to all family members of police officers
killed in the line of duty, if so requested. The
spouse, children and parents of such officer
shall be eligible for such counseling, and the
cost shall be borne by the City.

Addition of Option Four for Plan 87/Pension

Calculated at Next Higher Rank

If Killed in the Line of Duty

a. Effective July 1, 2008, the City will revise
Police Plan 87 by adding the unreduced,
50% Survivor Benefit Option (“Option
4”) that is contained in Police Plan 67.

b. Any member of the bargaining unit who
is killed in the line of duty as an immedi-
ate result of the violent conduct of a
third party that was directed towards the

-82-
officer or a member of the public or an
immediate result of performing other
heroic action in an emergency situation
in the line of duty on or after January 1,
2006 shall have his or her pension calcu-
lated as if the officer retired at the next
rank, excluding corporal above the rank
held by the officer at the time of his or
her death (e.g. Officer to Sergeant). This
section shall not cover death resulting
from vehicular accidents.

Squad Schedule Cards
The cost of printing Squad Cards shall be paid for
by the City.

Off-Duty Firearms Training
Any police officer who engages in familiarization
(“plinking”) for firearms training shall be provided
two (2) boxes of ammunition by the Police
Department.

Firearms
The City will supply a GLOCK 9MM automatic
weapon to any police officer who requests such a
weapon.

Any weapon paid for by the City (either directly
or through reimbursement to the police officer)
shall be the property of the City.

Beginning July 1, 2010, employees who are qual-
ified by the Department to do so shall, at the
employee’s request, be provided with an
approved GLOCK 40 or 45 mm handgun and
accompanying approved holster. Provided, how-

-83-
ever, that the number to be equipped in any year
shall depend on the Department's training capac-
ity, so long as any officer who so requests shall
have the opportunity to receive the training by
June 30, 2013. The FOP will be consulted by the
Department regarding the order of training and
distribution. Employees who purchased and were
qualified by the Department on an approved
GLOCK 40 mm or 45 mm handgun and who pro-
duce a receipt or other proof of purchase show-
ing the cost paid for such weapon will be reim-
bursed by the Department for the cost of the
weapon and approved holster by July 1, 2012.

Pay Stubs

Effective July 1, 1993 the City will generate pay
stubs each pay period for all employees showing
the balances available for vacation, sick, holiday,
and compensatory time.

Tuition Reimbursement

1. Effective July 1, 2008, the Department will
adopt a program to provide tuition reim-
bursement at levels to be determined by the
Department after discussion with the FOP to.
officers who successfully complete educa-
tion courses approved by the Commissioner
in advance in a field related to public safety
or administration at an accredited college or
university.

2. Educational Incentive
Effective July 1, 2010, the Department shall
provide up to $250,000 per year in tuition
reimbursement to employees who satisfy the
requirements set by the Department. This

-84-
amount shall be prorated for the remainder
of the current fiscal year, which ends on June
30, 2010.

Civilianization: Use of Deputy Sheriffs

The Department shall be permitted to use Deputy
Sheriffs for transportation of prisoners that is cur-
rently performed by members of the Police
Department.

Payment of Costs

In this proceeding, the City argued forcefully for a
contract term of one year, while the FOP sought a
three year term. The Panel has considered the argu-
ments of both sides in support of their suggested
term and has determined that it is appropriate to
grant the Mayor the one year term he requested
from the Panel in order to allow the City the time
it needs to address the serious structural challenges
it faces, including the cost of employee benefits.

The Panel recognizes, however, that a one year
contract term imposes a significant burden on the
FOP to engage in interest arbitration proceedings
two years in a row if the parties are unable to
reach agreement on the terms of a contract to
begin on July 1, 2009. In light of these extraordi-
nary circumstances, the Panel makes the follow-
ing award, which shall not be considered to set a
precedent for future awards:

Within sixty (60) days of the FOP presenting rea-
sonable documentation supporting its expendi-
tures, the City will reimburse the FOP for up to
$500,000 of legal expenses and expert fees
incurred in this proceeding.

-85-
Residency

a. Effective July 1, 2010, employees who are eli-
gible for or currently enrolled in the DROP.
will not be required to live in the City of
Philadelphia.

b. Effective January 1, 2012, employees who
have five (5) or more years of service as a
police officer in the City of Philadelphia will
not be required to live in the City of
Philadelphia.

c. All employees will be required to reside in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

Furloughs
Upon seven (7) days advance notice to the FOP
and the affected employee(s) the City shall have
the unrestricted right to temporarily furlough any
employee or employees for a definite length of
time, which shall not exceed thirty (30) days in
any fiscal year. Time spent on furlough shall be
unpaid and shall be treated as time spent on tem-
porary layoff for purposes of accruing pension
and service credits, but shall not be treated as a
layoff for any other purpose and the City shall not
be required to follow any contractual lay off pro-
cedure with regards to such furloughs. The City
will continue to make health benefit contributions.
on behalf of the employee during the furlough
period. Furloughs shall not be considered a sepa-
ration from service for purposes of the DROP pro-
gram. In the event of a temporary closing of a
facility or work unit, all represented employees
within the designated work unit shall be sched-
uled off on furlough for one or more days.

- 86-
XXIL.

Otherwise, the Department will issue a schedule
of furlough days. In the event that not all employ-
ees in a job title are required to serve the same
number of furlough days in accordance with the
schedule generated by the Department, the most
senior employees shall serve the smallest number
of furlough days required by the schedule.

Aviation Unit Training,

Once an employee is selected for an assignment in
the aviation unit, the City will pay for the reason-
able and necessary cost of any required certifica-
tions obtained after the employee was hired by the
Department to allow the employee to maintain his
or her pilot’s license. The City’s maximum obliga-
tion to pay for required certifications already
obtained by current members of the aviation unit in
accordance with this paragraph shall be $60,000.

The Existing Agreement

Except as modified by this Award, all other terms
and conditions contained in the collective bar-
gaining agreement between the City and the FOP
in effect from July 1, 2008 to June 30, 2009 shall
remain in effect. All other proposals and requests
for change submitted by the City and the FOP to.
the Panel, which have not been specifically
addressed in this Award, were considered and
have not been awarded.

SEPARABILITY AND SAVINGS

The parties to this Contract believe that it complies
with all City, State and Federal laws. Accordingly, it is
agreed that nothing contained in this Contract shall
require the FOP or the City to do anything which vio-
lates the law.

-87-
XXII.

The parties agree that all the clauses of this contract
shall be severable. Any clause which may be prohibit-
ed by, invalid under, or in contravention of any opera-
ble City, State, or Federal law shall be null and void,
but in such event, the remaining clauses shall continue
in full force and effect for the term of the contract and
any renewal thereof. The parties agree in good faith to
attempt to replace any such null and void clause with
a clause which conforms with the law. The parties fur-
ther agree that if during the term of this Contract, or
any renewal thereof, any such null and void clause
becomes legal or permissible by legislative enactment,
a subsequent decision of the Courts or otherwise,
such null and void clause shall automatically again
become part of this Contract.

TERM
This Award shall be effective for five (5) years, from
July 1, 2009 through June 30, 2014.

Retention of Jurisdiction

The Panel shall retain jurisdiction over this Award in
order to resolve any disputes regarding implementa-
tion of its terms.

- 88 -
APPENDIX A: SHIFT SCHEDULE

AMERICAN ARBITRATION ASSOCIATION

In Re:

FRATERNAL ORDER OF

POLICE, LODGE NO. 5, PHILADELPHIA POLICE
DEPARTMENT

and

THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA.

AWARD

CASE NO.
14390026088W

The below-named arbitrators were designated by parties
to comprise the Board of Arbitration for the of an
“impasse” regarding a new work shift schedule in accor-
dance with the collective bargaining agreement of July 1,
1988 Numerous days of hearings were held before the
Board regarding the issues over which the impasse had
occurred.

The Fraternal Order of Police and the City of Philadelphia
both recognize that the present shift t schedule is unsat-
isfactory. The Panel recognizes that any new schedule
must balance the management prerogatives of the Police
Department to insure its responsibility for the safety of
the public as well as the legitimate bargaining concerns
of the FOP for the well being of its members.

-89-
While there was common agreement that the current
“6-2” shift structure is unsatisfactory, there were vast dif-
ferences between the parties as to what type of shift
structure should be adopted to replace it.

No shift, whether it be the 35th District Experimental
Shift, the Lawley Schedule, or the Exhibit C-7 Schedule is
flawless and will meet all of the objectives advanced by
the parties. However, we view our function as attempt-
ing to structure a shift that will address the most funda-
mental interests and objectives advanced and will pro-
vide the citizens of Philadelphia with the most effective
Police coverage in general and particularly during critical
periods of need.

In that regard, we view the interests of the FOP to be in
the implementation of a shift that rotates in a forward
direction, contains a shorter work week with longer peri-
ods of time between rotation and that links regular days
off into some type of meaningful and useful pattern that
advances and fosters the understandable family interests
of the Police Officer.

We view the interests of the Philadelphia Police
Department, as articulated during the course of these
hearings, to be in a shift schedule that provides signifi-
cant administrative flexibility in the scheduling of Police
Officers. This flexibility would permit the Department to.
schedule Officers in response to “high crime” or “high
activity” periods of the day. In that regard, both parties
agree that the day and evening shifts are such periods.

As stated above, no shift structure that is produced by
this Panel will be flawless. Clearly, there are numerous
factual circumstances that are not and cannot be fore-
seen at the present time. Accordingly, any shift that

-90-
would result from these proceedings must have within it
a mechanism by which the unforeseen can be promptly
and finally addressed.

After careful consideration, the Board of Arbitrators here-
by enters its Award:

1.

The new shift schedule to be adopted by the Police
Department is the schedule referred to in the record
as Exhibit C-7 which is attached hereto and marked
Exhibit 1.

The Police Department is directed to implement the
new shift schedule by January 8, 1990.

The Shift Change Study Committee established in
Article IV, Paragraph G of the collective bargaining
agreement between the parties shall be maintained
for the purpose of resolving difficulties and disputes
that may arise out of the implementation of the new
shift.

Either the City or FOP may request the Chairman of
this arbitration panel to assist as a neutral third party
for mediation and resolution of differences that arise
during the transition period.

H. Thomas Felix, Il, Esq.

Arbitrator

Thomas J. DiLauro, Chair

Thomas J. Jennings, Esq.
Arbitrator

Nov. 21, 1989

-91-
APPENDIX B: EXTERNAL TRAINING

AGREEMENT.

BY AND BETWEEN

CITY OF PHILADELPHIA POLICE DEPARTMENT

AND.

LODGE NO.5 OF THE FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
REGARDING EXTERNAL TRAINING.

WHEREAS, Fraternal Order of Police Lodge No.5 (“Lodge
5”) and the City of Philadelphia (“City”) are parties to an
effective collective bargaining agreement; and,

WHEREAS, Bargaining Unit Members are employed by
the City of Philadelphia, and are members of the bargaining
unit represented by Lodge 5, and are covered by the provi-
sions of said agreement; and,

WHEREAS, Bargaining Unit Members volunteer periodical-
ly to attend external job related training, such as, but not limit-
ed to Northwestern University Staff and Command School,
Harvard University, the F.B.l. National Academy, POLEX, and
POSIT. This voluntary external training often necessitates a
change in the scheduled hours of work and days off; and,

WHEREAS, The City and Lodge 5 realize the importance
of providing employees with training opportunities;

NOW THEREFORE, It is hereby agreed by and between
the City of Philadelphia Police Department and Lodge No.5
of the Fraternal Order of Police as follows:

1. The City shall publish the training schedule for the course
or program it intends to make available, prior to accepting vol-

-92-
unteers. Only employees volunteering to attend shall be sub-
ject to this Agreement. A copy of the training schedule will be
posted and sent via teletype to all Units involved.

2. This agreement shall apply to all external voluntary train-
ing including, but not limited to: Northwestern University Staff
and Command School, Harvard University, the F.B.I. National
Academy, POLEX, and POSIT.

3. Bargaining Unit Members who voluntarily attend such
training will not be paid overtime to attend said training. The
hours of attendance of the volunteering employee shall not
be considered a change of work schedule.

4. The parties agree that the terms of tins agreement will
not be used as precedent or evidence in any grievance, arbi-
tration, lawsuit or other dispute, except as necessary to
enforce the terms of this agreement.

5. This agreement shall remain in effect unless and until
either party hereto provides the other with ninety-calendar
days written notice of intent to terminate. Upon the expiration
of the ninety-calendar days written notice, this agreement
shall be null and void. However, any program or course that
was scheduled prior to the notice to terminate shall, at the
City’s discretion, remain in effect.

CITY OF PHILADELPHIA
POLICE DEPARTMENT By:

By: Signed by the Police Commissioner
Date: 2/14/02

LODGE NO.5 OF THE FRATERNAL
ORDER OF POLICE

By: Signed by the President of Lodge #5
Date: 2/15/02

-93-
AGREEMENT

BETWEEN

CITY OF PHILADELPHIA POLICE DEPARTMENT
AND

LODGE NO.5 OF THE

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

REGARDING TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES,

It is hereby agreed between the City of Philadelphia Police
Department and Lodge No.5 of the Fraternal Order of Police
as follows:

1. In order to provide the training opportunities set forth
hereinafter, the Department may change the shift of bargain-
ing unit members who are assigned to permanent midnight to.
8 a.m. without the payment of overtime, under the circum-
stances set forth in this Agreement.

2. The training opportunities for bargaining unit members
who are regularly scheduled to work from midnight to 8 a.m.
that are covered by this Agreement are as follows:

a. Once each calendar year the hours of work of cov-
ered bargaining unit members may be changed to either 8
am. to 4 p.m., or 4 p.m. to midnight to attend mandated
Municipal Police Officer Training for a period of three to four
consecutive classroom days and one (1) range day, which
may be separately scheduled. In the event that this continu-
ous block of training is interrupted by the employee using any
type of leave, the remaining training days may be rescheduled
without any overtime being incurred.

b. On one occasion, the hours of work of covered bar-
gaining unit members may be changed to either 8 a.m. to 4
p.m., or to 4 p.m. to midnight for three consecutive work days
to attend Mobile Data Terminal (MDT) training.

-94-
c. On one occasion, the hours of work of covered bar-
gaining unit members may be changed to either 8 a.m. to 4
p.m., or to 4 p.m. to midnight for three consecutive work days
to attend PARS training.

d. On one occasion, the hours of work of covered bar-
gaining unit members of the rank of Sergeant and/or
Lieutenant may be changed to either 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., or 4
p.m. to midnight for one workday to attend Taser training.

 
   

e. On those occasions where it is necessary to train or
retrain employees on the use of Department procedures,
equipment and/or technology, the hours of work of the cov-
ered bargaining unit members may be changed to either 8
a.m. to 4 p.m., or 4 p.m. to midnight up to five days once a
year to attend the training,

f. In addition to the foregoing, the hours of work of
covered bargaining unit members in Special Units may be
changed to either 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., or 4 p.m. to midnight to
attend mandatory non-repeating training based on the written
particularized need of the Special Unit. As used, herein, the
term “Special Unit” shall mean any work unit, including NETS
Units, other than a numbered Police District.

3. In order to be covered by this Agreement, notice of the
training described above in paragraphs 2a, b, c, d, e, and f shall
be provided to the affected employee in not less than thirty (30)
calendar days prior to the date on which the training is to com-
mence. However, the thirty (30) day notice shall not be required
and no overtime shall be incurred in the following instances:

a. The hours of work of covered employees may be
changed to either 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., or 4 p.m. to midnight to
attend training for the discharge of firearm(s) - one full day of
range training before returning to full duty.

-95-
b. The hours of work of covered employees may be
changed to either 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., or 4 p.m. to midnight to
attend training for Glock transition training consisting of three
full days of training at the request of the employee.

c. The hours of work of covered employees may be
changed to either 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., or 4 p.m. to midnight to
attend promotional training, or;

d. The hours of work of covered employees may be
changed to either 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., or 4 p.m. to midnight to
attend emergency training or retraining, which would not
include any training specified in above paragraphs 2a, b, c, d,
e, and f. For the purpose of defining, “emergency training” or
“emergency retraining” in this paragraph, it shall be training
for the immediate safety of the employee(s), the public, or
property that is unforeseen and/or of pressing necessity. This
training shall include but is not limited to biochemical training
and training necessitated by terroristic acts or terroristic
threats.

4. The Department shall examine the court notice schedule
of the affected officers, prior to issuing the notice described
above. Upon the issuance of such notice, the Department
shall cause the affected bargaining unit members to be
blocked from court appearance during the training period.
The exception to this clause will be final listing cases, which
the officer must attend.

5. The Fraternal Order of Police shall place the grievances
listed in schedule “A” attached hereto in suspense and shall
take no action to pursue them to conclusion for so long as the
current 4-2, 5-2, Steady Last Out Schedule remains in effect
for Patrol Districts and Detective Divisions. No liability shall
continue to accrue on said cases during the period of time the
cases are in suspense.

-96-
6. This agreement shall remain in effect only so long as the
current 4-2, 5-2, Steady Last Out Schedule remains in effect
for Patrol Districts and Detective Divisions.

7. This agreement is without precedent or prejudice to the
claims of either party regarding the propriety of schedule
changes for training under the Collective Bargaining Unit and
this agreement will not be used in future litigation in support
of any such claim.

CITY OF PHILADELPHIA

POLICE DEPARTMENT

Signed by the Police Commissioner
Date: 2/14/02

LODGE NO. 5 OF THE

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
Signed by the President of Lodge No. 5
Date: 2/14/02 SCHEDULE “A”

TO THE

AGREEMENT

BY AND BETWEEN

CITY OF PHILADELPHIA POLICE DEPARTMENT
AND.

LODGE NO. 5 OF THE

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

REGARDING TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES,

The grievances referred to Paragraph 5 above are the following:
1. AAA Case No. 14 390 00383 96

2. AAA Case No. 14 390 00669 96
3. AAA Case No. 14 390 00233 99

-97-
APPENDIX C: UNIFORM CHANGE
IN THE MATTER OF:

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE LODGE #5
AND CITY OF PHILADELPHIA

RE: UNIFORM CHANGE RE: FOPGRO8-012
*SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT AND RELEASE

WHEREAS, Fraternal Order of Police Lodge No. 5 (“Lodge 5”)
and the City of Philadelphia (“City”) are parties to an effective
collective bargaining agreement; and,

WHEREAS, The Police Department is changing the color of
uniform shirts for Sergeants from blue to white. The transition
period for this change will be concluded on January 1, 2009.
The Fraternal Order of Police has filed a grievance in this mat-
ter.

WHEREAS, The City and Lodge 5 desire to resolve this matter
without further litigation;

NOW THEREFORE, The City, and Lodge 5 agree as
follows:

1. The City shall issue a purchase order (to the vendor) in
the amount of $175 for current Sergeants to offset the cost of
the above mentioned uniform change. This purchase order
(credit) will be honored at American Uniform Sales Inc. 8348
State Road, Philadelphia, PA 19136. Sergeants will report to
the above vendor, present their identification, and the shirts
will be issued or ordered.

- 98 -
2. This credit plan may only be used to purchase white ser-
geants shirts. This procedure will be available to Sergeants
until January 1, 2009.

3. In consideration for the foregoing, Lodge #5 agrees not
to pursue any further remedies in this case.

4. This credit plan is a “one-time” agreement and shall not
apply to future uniform payments.

5. This agreement shall be without precedent, and without
prejudice to any claims, defenses or arguments, that any party
hereto shall have in any other proceeding between or among
them.

6. By entering into the Agreement, all parties acknowledge
that they have read the Agreement, have had the opportunity
to review its terms and conditions with their respective coun-
sel, understand said terms and conditions enter into this
agreement, and agree to be bound thereby.

WHEREFORE, The City, Lodge 5, intending to be legally
bound hereby, enter into this agreement this day of,
2008.

FOR: The City of Philadelphia
Signed by a Deputy Commissioner
Date: 2/8/08

FOR: FOP Lodge #5

Signed by the President of Lodge #5
Date: 2/8/08

-99-
APPENDIX D: POLICE GOLF SHIRTS

TO: ALL DISTRICTS/UNITS
FROM: D/C ORGANIZATIONAL SUPPORT SERVICES
SUBJECT: POLICE GOLF SHIRTS.

THE POLICE COMMISSIONER HAS APPROVED THE ELBE-
CO GOLF SHIRT AS AN OPTIONAL SUMMER SHIRT FOR,
THE RANKS OF LIEUTENANT AND BELOW, STREET PER-
SONNEL ONLY. THEY ARE AVAILABLE IN BLUE FOR POLICE
OFFICERS STYLE #K5103 AND WHITE FOR LIEUTENANTS,
AND SERGEANTS STYLE #5100.

THE ELBECO SHIRT WITH BADGE TAB MUST BE REQUEST-

ED. BADGE AND NAMEPLATE MUST BE WORN WITH

EITHER STYLE, EMBROIDERING IS NOT ACCEPTABLE.
JOHN J, GAITTENS

P/O WERNER #9795 D/C ORGANIZATIONAL
SUPPORT SERVICES

- 100 -
APPENDIX E: HEALTH CARE REOPENER 2005-2007

HEALTH CARE REOPENER
2005 - 2007 - SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT
BY AND BETWEEN CITY OF PHILADELPHIA AND.
LODGE NO.5 OF THE FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

It is hereby agreed by and between THE CITY OF PHILADEL-
PHIA (“City”) and MICHAEL G. LUTZ LODGE NO. 5 OF THE
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE (“FOP”) as follows:

1. Effective July 1, 2005 through and including June 30,
2006 the City shall contribute $1,039 per member per
month to the Joint Trust on behalf of eligible active and
retired bargaining unit members covered by the City’s
collective bargaining agreements (Police and Sheriff)
with the FOP.

2. Effective July 1, 2006 through and including June 30,
2007 the City shall contribute $1,143 per member per
month to the Joint Trust on behalf of eligible active and
retired bargaining unit members covered by the City’s
collective bargaining agreements (Police and Sheriff)
with the FOP.

3. Effective July 1, 2007 through and including June 30,
2008 the City shall contribute $1,303 per member per
month to the Joint Trust on behalf of eligible active and
retired bargaining unit members covered by the City’s
collective bargaining agreements (Police and Sheriff)
with the FOP.

4. As soon as possible, execution of this Agreement, the
City shall make a payment to the Joint Trust equal to a
lump sum payment of $3,000,000 plus the difference

-101-
between those fixed and additional payments previously
made to the Joint Trust as of July 1, 2005 to the present
and those provided above.

This agreement shall be in full satisfaction of the parties’
obligations under the January 15, 2006 Act 111 Award
between the parties in AAA Case No. 14 L360 0357 04
and under the health insurance reopener provided
between the parties as of July 1, 2007 for the period of
July 1, 2007 to June 30, 2008 in the August 13, 2004
Award in AAA Case No. 14 L360 0357 04 between the
parties.

This agreement shall be without prejudice to the rights of
the parties to pursue to conclusion litigation currently
pending between them in the Commonwealth Court and
in the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board.

Effective July 1, 2007 the collective bargaining agree-
ment between the parties setting forth the wages and
terms and conditions of employment of police officers
shall be modified to provide as follows:

Retired members who elect to defer their retiree med-
ical coverage on or after July 1, 2007 will be entitled
to receive upon request the same months of coverage
that they were entitled to at the time they deferred
their coverage, regardless of the contribution rate in
place at the time of the redemption.

- 102 -
APPENDIX F: MANPOWER IMPROVEMENT INITIATIVE

1. The Manpower Improvement Initiative will be overseen
by a special joint labor management committee (the
“Committee”) with four members appointed by the
President of the FOP and four members appointed by
the Mayor. The Committee will consider and review all
reasonable considerations, consistent with the rights of
both parties under the contract and the law, to maximize
the levels of manpower in service to the public. The
Committee will also review the procedures currently uti-
lized by the parties in the administration of the Heart and
Lung Act process in order to determine if modifications
might be made thereto to expedite the return to service
of recuperated police officers in a manner consistent

with their rights under that process.

2. So as to maximize the full and frank discussion of the
issues confronted by the Committee, neither party here-
to shall rely upon the execution or existence of this

agreement in any future proceeding between them.

3. The goal of the Manpower Improvement Initiative will be
to improve and maintain attendance by a total of 60,000
hours per year, which is the equivalent of thirty (30) full
time sworn police officers, measured by those in atten-
dance as of the completion of the current and future fis-

cal years.

4. The Committee shall meet at least monthly to perform
the functions of this Agreement including to track atten-
dance issues, to identify problem areas, and to consider
suggestions for programs to enhance attendance. Each
six months, the Committee will issue a joint report to the
Mayor and to the President of the FOP on attendance

issues.

- 103 -
Commencing with employees who retire on or after the
date of execution of this Agreement, the existing formu-
la for payment of accumulated sick leave at retirement
set forth in the parties’ collective bargaining agreement
shall be amended as follows:

a. except as provided in paragraph b, employees shall
be compensated at 50% of their accumulated sick
leave at retirement.

b. lifetime attendance achievement — employees who
have accumulated 2,500 or more of sick leave a
retirement shall be compensated at 60% of all such
time in lieu of the payment described in paragraph a.

- 104 -
APPENDIX G: JOINT LABOR-MANAGEMENT
HEALTHCARE EVALUATION COMMITTEE

|. Introduction and Establishment

The City and its Unions (footnote 1) provide City
employees with healthcare through a City controlled health-
care fund for non-union employees and through Union con-
trolled healthcare funds for union employees, with the City
supporting the Union administered funds through per-employ-
ee monthly contributions. The funds individually determine
health benefits, plan terms, and cost allocation for their mem-
ber employees, and control their own finances.

The City believes that the escalating expenses associated
with personnel costs pose serious challenges to the City of
Philadelphia’s finances and threatens the City’s ability to con-
tinue to fund employee healthcare benefits in their current
form while maintaining a balanced five-year plan and making
the necessary investments to ensure the City’s growth. The
Unions, on the other hand, believe that their members are
entitled to receive these quality benefits as a part of their
compensation package from the City and should not suffer
any reduction in those benefits.

As a result, both the City and the Unions are interested
in taking voluntary proactive measures to ensure that City
employees continue to receive both high quality and cost-
effective health benefits. To that end, the City and its Unions
hereby establish the Joint Labor-Management Healthcare
Evaluation Committee (“Committee”).

Il. Guiding Principles

The Committee’s work will be guided by the following
key principles:

- 105 -
Maximizing the quality of health benefits for City
employees at an affordable cost-effective price is a shared
responsibility of the City and the Unions.

All health plans should be administered according to
mutually recognized industry best practices.

Decisions about changes in health plans must consider
the short term and long-term impact on the quality and avail-
ability of employee healthcare benefits, the financial health of
the funds and the financial health of the City, which supports
the funds.

In order to attempt to ensure the quality and cost effec-
tiveness of the healthcare benefits offered by the members of
the Committee, the Committee will be open-minded in its
approach, innovative in its thinking and comprehensive in the
scope of its considerations.

Ill Membership

Within ten (10) days of its execution of the Agreement,
each of the City’s Unions will appoint one (1) member to.
serve as the Union's representative on the Committee.
Should any Union choose not to ‘participate or to cease par-
ticipation, the Committee will proceed without that Union’s
representative. Within fifteen (15) days of each Union’s
appointment of a representative, the City will appoint one
(1) representative for each Union representative appointed,
so that there is an equal number of Union representatives
and City representatives on the Committee. All time limits
may be changed by mutual agreement of the City and the
Unions.

The Committee’s representatives may delegate their
powers to a substitute representative in the event of their

- 106 -
absence from a meeting. Substitute representatives will partic-
ipate fully and vote in the stead of the absent representative.

In addition to voting member(s), the City and each Union
may bring one or more advisors, including experts or attor-
neys, at the party’s own expense to advise the party’s repre-
sentative.

IV. Powers

In implementing the Committee, the City and the Unions
will retain all rights provided by law, regulation, and their
respective collective bargaining agreements or arbitration
awards. Further, the Committee will not have the power,
directly or indirectly, to alter or amend in any fashion the exist-
ing collective bargaining agreements or arbitration awards
between the City and the Unions.

Any discrepancies in language implementing the
Committee between the various Unions participating shall be
resolved by the Committee. Resolution of such disputes shall
be consistent with the immediately preceding paragraph and
shall not delay the Committee from carrying out its duties or
exercising its powers.

The Committee will have the power to issue non-binding
findings regarding the current status of healthcare benefits for
City employees and recommendations for maximizing the
quality and competitiveness of employee healthcare benefits
at an affordable cost.

In furtherance of its power to issue non-binding findings
and recommendations, the Committee will have the power to.
request and receive from the City and Union healthcare funds.
any relevant information including: the plan’s terms and con-
ditions of benefits, other documents regarding plan design

- 107 -
and benefit offerings, vendor agreements, utilization informa-
tion, demographics, plan finances and accounting statements,
valuations, fees, commissions or other forms of compensation
paid directly or Indirectly to health benefit advisors, consult-
ants and other professionals, etc. The City and the Union
agree that the City and Union healthcare funds will promptly
provide all information requested by the Committee, includ-
ing taking all necessary steps to ensure that vendors or bene-
fit providers promptly provide requested information in as
much detail as the Committee requests (recognizing that the
Committee will not request information on individual partici-
pants that has not been redacted to protect the privacy of the
individual).

All information provided shall be subject to the
Confidentiality provision in Section VI. Moreover, any infor-
mation obtained as a result of participation in the activities of
this Committee shall not be used for any purpose in any other
proceeding or for any other purpose other than the activities
of the Committee.

Appropriate arrangements shall be made by the
Committee to insure mutuality of performance in terms of
providing the records and information described herein. No
party hereto shall be required to perform with any greater
promptness or completeness than any other party.

In furtherance of its power to issue non-binding findings
and recommendations, the Committee will have the power to.
spend such monies as are necessary in the advancement of its
purpose. The Committee’s costs thus incurred will be borne
by the City.

In furtherance of its power to issue non-binding findings
and recommendations, the Committee will have the power to.
engage independent professionals such as actuaries, account-

- 108 -
ants, and consultants to assist the Committee in its review of
the current healthcare plans and in considering and crafting
its recommendations

V. Operation

The Committee shall convene its first meeting within fif-
teen (15) days of the City’s appointment of its first represen-
tative, unless a different meeting schedule is set by mutual
agreement of the City and the Unions, but in no event shall
the Committee convene later than September 2, 2008. The
Committee will meet regularly on at least a bi-weekly basis to
conduct its business. The Committee will use all reasonable
efforts to produce its findings and recommendations no later
than November 1, 2008.

The City will appoint a co-chairperson and the Unions
collectively will appoint a co-chairperson for the Committee.
The co-chairs shall alternate leading the meetings of the
Committee.

The Committee will appoint a secretary, who need not
be a member of the Committee, who will be charged with
keeping minutes of the Committee’s meetings, circulating the
minutes to the membership and scheduling Committee meet-
ings.

The Committee will vote on any formal exercise of its
powers. The formal exercise of powers is defined as the
expenditure of funds, the engagement of professional servic-
es, the request for documents and information, and the mak-
ing of nonbinding findings and recommendations as
described in Section IV, Voting requires that a majority of
members (including substitute) be present and that a majori-
ty of the members present vote in favor of the action.

- 109 -
VI. Confidentiality

It is recognized that in order to have the frank and open
discussions that are essential to accomplish the purposes of
this Committee, the absolute confidentiality of all aspects of
the Committee’s activities IS the essence of this Agreement.
More specifically, any and all activities, discussions and delib-
erations of the Committee, including but not limited to any
documents, meeting minutes, drafts, reports and recommen-
dations created by or exchanged within the Committee, shall
be strictly confidential and may not be publicly revealed vol-
untarily for any purpose by any member, party or representa-
tive of the party, nor offered for any purpose into the record
in any interest arbitration proceeding, without the consent of
all the Committee members, It is understood that members of
the Committee will share information on the Committee's dis-
cussions, deliberations, analyses and recommendations with
their respective parties, with the specific expectation that rea-
sonable efforts will be taken by all parties to maintain the con-
fidentiality of that information The City and each of the
Unions participating In the Committee agree that they will not
subpoena any member of the Committee, any representative
or employee thereof or any consultant or advisor hired by the
Committee for the purpose of revealing any activity of the
Committee that would otherwise be subject to this confiden-
tiality provision. If any member of the Committee or party is
subject to subpoena or other legal process initiated by any
third party requiring that member or party to testify or pro-
duce documents related to the activities of the Committee,
the member shall promptly notify the other members of the
Committee.

Vil. Objectives

The objective of the Committee is to fully review how the
City and Union controlled healthcare funds are currently pro-

-110-
viding healthcare benefits to City employees, and to make
nonbinding confidential recommendations on how to maxi-
mize both the quality and cost effectiveness of the healthcare
benefits offered to all City employees. The determination as
to which, if any, of those recommendations may Ultimately be
adopted, in whole or in part, shall be left to the sound and
exclusive discretion of each party hereto.

As an illustrative but by no means exhaustive list, the
Committee is encouraged to consider the effect the following
actions would have on both the quality and the cost of
employee healthcare benefits:

Individual Hearth Management Programs

Individual health management program issues include
evaluation of the cost and benefit of adopting or expanding
upon such employee centric health management programs.
These programs often provide such services as personalized:
health status and health risk assessments, disease and care
advice, management and monitoring, specialized assistance
for smoking cessation or weight loss, personalized nutrition or
exercise programs, and other important health services. These
programs often create “win-win” scenarios, improving the
health and quality of life for employees and reducing costs for
the funds.

  

Plan Administration

Plan administration Issues includes vendor management
practices, such as reviewing the negotiation process utilized
by the funds and their vendors to establish the vendors’ fees
for providing the requested benefits to the funds’ participants,
and comparing the rates and fees offered by various vendors
for similar healthcare benefits. competitive bidding for ven-
dors, and vendor performance audits; investment strategies
such as reviewing the past performance of the funds’ invest-
ments as compared to similar investing entities and market

-111-
performance generally, and analysis of alternative investment
strategies that could yield greater or more consistent returns.
for the funds, potentially offsetting expenses or increasing
reserves; and best practices such as eligibility audits and coor-
dination of benefits.

Change In Plan Design

Plan design changes could include, consistent with the
demographics and particularized needs of the various funds’
membership, benefit changes, tiers for prescription drugs and
mail order drug programs, changing in-network affiliations,
creating an independent network and reassessing the health-
care system to be used as the vehicle for providing and man-
aging the benefits [HMO, PPO, POS, etc.].

Consolidation

Consolidation could involve potential options for the
integration, in whole or in part, of the City administered
healthcare fund and the various Union administered health-
funds into one or more centrally-administered fund(s).
ent plan administration being a significant driver of cost
savings, consolidating City employees into one or more well-
managed unified healthcare plans could provide greater mar-
ket leverage and purchasing power while also diffusing the
risk of catastrophic injuries and high utilization rates.
Consolidation into a well-managed fund also carries the
potential for greater efficiencies and elimination or streamlin-
ing of overlapping and redundant administrative functions.
However, it is recognized that consolidation cannot occur
without the consent of all affected Unions.

   

Plan Funding

Nonbinding plan funding options to be discussed by the
Committee could include changing the funding structure, fully
self-insuring benefits, altering deductibles and co-payments,
or changing coverage maximums. Such modifications need

-112-
not necessarily be negative in nature in order to achieve cost
effectiveness. Further, the Committee could consider the
effectiveness of providing financial incentives to employees
who utilize their benefits more efficiently such as by enrolling
in a more appropriate healthcare system, actively participating
in an individual health management program, utilizing mail-
order prescription services, etc.

The Committee is encouraged to consider, in addition to
the suggestions made above, any other approaches that
might advance the Committee’s goal of maximizing the qual-
ity and competitiveness of employee healthcare benefits at an
affordable cost.

(1)The term “Unions” refers to: AFSCME District Council 33,

AFSCME District Council 47, IAFF Local 22, FOP Lodge No.5,
and the Deputy Sheriffs.

-113-
APPENDIX H: SHIFT CHANGE FOR 5 & 7 PLATOON
Memorandum of Understanding

SHIFT CHANGE FOR ALL 5 & 7 PLATOON TACTICAL
PERSONNEL PATROL BUREAU; ALL HIGHWAY
PATROL PERSONNEL “LINE SQUAD”; ALL STRIKE
FORCE PERSONNEL “LINE SQUAD”

Dated: April 29, 2008

In accordance with the Collective Bargaining Agreement,
specifically, Section IV-H Shift Schedules, the Philadelphia
Police Department and the Fraternal Order of Police Lodge
#5, agree to the following changes effective June 1, 2008:

1. All 5 and 7 platoon tactical personnel in the Patrol
Bureau will have Sunday and Monday as their steady Regular
Days Off.

2. All Highway Patrol “Line Squad” personnel will work
the Patrol Bureau 5 platoon tactical schedule with Sunday and
Monday as their steady Regular Days Off.

3. All Strike Force “Line Squad” personnel will work the
Patrol Bureau 5 platoon tactical schedule with Sunday and
Monday as their steady Regular Days Off.

The Patrol Bureau 5 Platoon Tactical Schedule shall be
defined as follows: a rotating shift of one (1) week day work
shift with a starting time between 8AM and 10AM; followed
by two (2) weeks of evening shift with the starting time
between 4PM and 6PM with steady Sunday and Monday reg-
ular days off.

While the Philadelphia Police Department and the
Fraternal Order of Police Lodge #5 are in agreement on the

-114-
above changes, it is understood that under the provisions of
the current Collective Bargaining Agreement, the City has the
right to change schedules within a recognized work unit with-
out the requirement of a submission to a neutral, provided
that affected bargaining unit members are given at least thirty
(30) days notice of a change in schedule. This MOU shall
serve as the official notice that the above-mentioned bargain-
ing unit members’ shift schedule change will take effect on
June 1, 2008.

All parties agree that the subject matter of this MOU is
not subject to arbitration under the current Collective
Bargaining Agreement between the City of Philadelphia and
the Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 5. This MOU shall be
without precedent, and without prejudice to any claims,
defenses or arguments, that any party hereto shall have in any
other proceeding between or among them.

{This document was signed and dated by:
Charles H. Ramsey, Commissioner,
Philadelphia Police Department

John McNesby, President,

Fraternal Order of Police Lodge

-115-
APPENDIX I: BIDDING PROCESS FOR MIDNIGHT SHIFT
Settlement Agreement and Release

WHEREAS, Fraternal Order of Police Lodge No. 5
(“Lodge 5”) and the City of Philadelphia (“City”) are parties to
an effective collective bargaining agreement; and,

WHEREAS, The police officers are employed by the City
of Philadelphia, and are members of the bargaining unit rep-
resented by Lodge 5, and are covered by the provisions of
said agreement; and, the current contract calls for midnight
shift bidding to take place during the month of January;

WHEREAS, The City and Lodge 5 desire to resolve this
matter without further litigation;

NOW THEREFORE, The City, and Lodge 5 agree as fol
lows:

1. The bidding process for assignment to midnight shift
for 2008 shall take place during the month of October, 2007.
The first Monday of the new pay period in January will be the
transition day for “Last Out.”

2. This allows for all personnel to know their platoon
assignment prior to the Annual Vacation selection process
which must be submitted by December 15th of the preceding
year. The general message for vacation selections will be sent
out 30 days prior to December 15th.

3. In consideration for the foregoing, Lodge 5 agrees
not to pursue any further remedies in this case.

4. By entering into the Agreement, all parties acknowl-
edge that they have read the Agreement, have had the oppor-

-116-
tunity to review its terms and conditions with their respective
counsel, understand said terms and conditions enter into this
agreement, and agree to be bound thereby.

WHEREFORE, The City and Lodge 5, intending to be
legally bound hereby, enter into this agreement this 2nd day
of October, 2007.

For: FOP Lodge 5 - Signature of F.O.P. President
: The City of Philadelphia -

Signature of Police Department's

Deputy Commissioner
{In the Matter of: F.0.P. LODGE 5 AND

THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA.

RE: DESIGNATION OF PERSONNEL

TO THE STEADY 12x8 SHIFT}

 

-117-
APPENDIX J: CATASTROPHIC LEAVE BANK POLICY

Authority

The Agreement establishes a program that permits FOP repre-
sented employees to donate vacation time to a catastrophic
leave bank. The authority is derived from the ACT 111
Arbitration Award.

Administration

The City and the Union shall jointly maintain administration of
the program. The committee will consist of three (3) repre-
sentatives of the Union and three (3) representatives of the
City. The President of the FOP will serve as the chief
spokesperson to the City for issues arising under this program.

Donation Period

January 1 through March 31st of each year, employees may
contribute accrued vacation leave to the leave bank. (For cal-
endar year 2010, this period shall be extended until April 30,
2010).

Donation/Grant Procedure

Employees donating accrued vacation leave must indicate this
voluntary, irrevocable transfer in writing. Employees may con-
tribute from one (1) to five (5) days in whole increments only.
Donations must be verified by the Police Department.

|. Employee Responsibilities) Each participating
employee must submit a signed, dated authorization
form (Authorization to Transfer Vacation Leave) to
the Police Department's Personnel Unit, who then
submits them to the Finance unit. All requests must
be received between January 1 and March 31st of
each calendar year. Employees will receive the
authorization form from the FOP.

-118-
Fiscal Officer’s Responsibility: On receipt of an
authorization form, the Fiscal Officer will:

a.

Verify that each donor employee has a vacation
balance of at least equal to the number of days
being donated. Anticipated vacation days can-
not he donated.

Forward signed and dated approval disapproval
to the employee and the Central Leave Bank in
the Department of Human Resources within
ten days of the determination.

Deduct donated leave from donor employee's
leave balance no later than the next pay period
from the date of verification of available leave
balance or during the period provided by the
payroll system after March 31st, (or April 31st
for calendar year 2010), whichever comes first.

Central Leave Bank Responsibilities-Department of
Human Resources

1.

Maintain a central listing of employees who.
have contributed to the leave bank, along with
number of days donated and the total balance
of days available.

On receipt of an approved authorization form,
notify the President of the FOP, the Police
Department’s Personnel Unit and Leave
Transfer Committee Members monthly of the
names of donor employees, payroll number,
number of days donated, and the total number
of days in the catastrophic leave bank.

Verify, upon receipt of approved leave request

from the President of the FOP that the Central
Bank has sufficient leave to honor a request.

-119-
Notify the President of the FOP and the Police
Department's Personnel Unit of the approval of
each submitted request within ten working days
of the request.

Notify the President of the FOP and the Leave
Transfer Committee members prior to each
committee meeting of the total leave donated,
the total leave granted to donor employees,
and the amount of leave available.

IV. Leave Transfer Committee Responsibilities - The
committee has the sole authoritv to determine eligi-
bility for a grant of leave.

1.

Review written requests from eligible employ-
ees at the appropriate intervals or when need-
ed. Eligible employees are limited to current
FOP represented employees who:

a) Have contributed to the bank in the cur-
rent year.

b) Have presented acceptable documenta-
tion of a catastrophic or life threatening
non-service connected illness or injury as
part of their leave transfer request.

c) Have not been placed on the Excessive
Use of Sick Leave List in the past year.

Approve/disapprove each request in a timely
manner.

Determine the appropriate amount of leave to
transfer to each approved applicant. Grants of
leave shall be limited to a maximum of thirty
(30) leave days. Employees may apply for a
maximum of two (2) grants during the calendar
year.

-120-
4. Notify the Central Leave Bank of action taken
affecting leave bank balances — and
approve/authorize leave amounts to transfer.

Vv. Applicant Employee Responsibilities
Submit to the President of the FOP a written
request for transfer of leave from the Central
Leave Bank. Employees may apply under the
following conditions:

a) Current employee who is represented by
the FOP

b) Has contributed to the bank a minimum of
one (1) vacation day in the last contribu-
tion period. The contribution period is in
the same year in which the donation was
made.

c) Present documentation of a catastrophic
life threatening illness or injury which is
not service connected and approaching
exhaustion of all paid leave. The docu-
mentation shall include certification from a
recognized medical practitioner detailing:
1. date treatment began
2. diagnosis
3. prognosis
4. expected length of absence from work

d) Has not been placed on the Excessive Use
of Sick Leave List in the past year.

Use of Transferred Leave
Leave granted to individual employees is subject to the follow-
ing limitations and rules:

-121-
Leave may only be granted for absences related to
the catastrophic illness or injury detailed in the
employee's application;

Employee’s must comply with the City-Wide Sick
Leave Policy;

Employees who separate from City Service for any
reason shall receive no cash compensation or pay-
ment for unused transferred leave;

Any unused transferred leave shall be restored to the
leave bank upon an employee's separation from
City service, or upon cessation of the catastrophic
illness or injury.

-122-
APPENDIX K: PENSION PLAN 09 SUPPLEMENTAL AWARD

In the matter of Interest Arbitration
Pursuant to 43 P. S. 217.1, ef seq.
Between

CITY OF PHILADELPHIA and

FRATERNAL ORDE OF POLICE,
MICHAEL LUTZ LODGE NO. 5

Board of Arbitration
Thomas W. Jennings, Esq.
Arbitrator for the Lodge

Kenneth M. Jarin, Esq.
Arbitrator for the City

Ralph H. Colfiesh, Jr., Esq.
Neutral Arbitrator and Chair

Supplemental Award

WHEREAS the above named Board of Arbitration issued
an Award in Interest Arbitration pursuant to 43 P. S. 217.1, et
seq. (“Act 111”) on December 18, 2009, governing terms and
conditions of employment for police officers and superior
officers employed by the City of Philadelphia and represent-
ed in collective bargaining by Fraternal Order of Police,
Michael Lutz Lodge No. 5; and,

WHEREAS the said Award at page 18 made certain pro-
visions for pensions for the said employees, including the
adoption of a new pension plan, to be known as Plan 09, in
which officers hired after the effective date of the said Plan
would have the option of enrolling; and,

-123-
WHEREAS the Board deferred ruling on the terms of Plan
09 at the time the Award was issued but agreed to either
reach a unanimous decision on the said terms or have a
majority of the Board rule on those terms by no later than
March 1, 2010; and,

WHEREAS the Board has been unable to reach unanimi-
ty on the terms of Plan 09;

NOW THEREFORE a majority of the Board, including the
Neutral Arbitrator who concurs soely on the ground that Plan
09 is optional, issues this Supplemental Award, to wit:

Plan 09 shall be consistent with the following description:

The terms of Plan 09 referenced in Paragraph 5 of this
Board’s December 18, 2009 Interest Arbitration Award shall
be as follows:

<The new pension plan shall be comprised of two ele-
ments: a defined benefit plan and a voluntary defined
contribution plan (the “DC Plan’).

<The defined benefit plan under Plan 09 shall contain the
same terms as Plan B of the Philadelphia Retirement
Code (also known as Plan 87) as modified by this Award
as follows:

Average final compensation shall be the average of
the employee's five (5) highest annual compensa-
tions calculated for either five (5) calendar years or
five (5) anniversary years.

Service retirement benefits under Section 22-301(3)
of the Philadelphia Retirement Code shall be calcu-
lated at one and three quarters percent (1.75%) of

-124-
average final compensation multiplied by the mem-
ber’s years of credited service for the first twenty
(20) years of credited service.

H_ Employees who elect to participate in Plan 09 shall
make member contributions in the amount of five
and a half percent (5.5%) of compensation.

@ After twenty (20) years of credited service, employ-
ees will no longer earn credited service, will no
longer make contributions to the pension fund and
their average final compensation shall not increase.

The sum of any benefits under Plan ‘09 plus any
benefits to which a member is entitled pursuant to
prior membership in another Plan under the
Philadelphia Retirement Code shall not exceed the
member’s average final compensation. No further
benefits under a member's prior Plan shall accrue
once a member joins Plan ‘09. Credited service
under a member's prior Plan shall not count toward
calculating benefits under Plan ‘09.

Under the DC Plan, employees may make voluntary con-
tributions to their accounts under the City’s 457 Plan. For
each fiscal year, the City shall make a contribution to the
account of each employee equal to fifty percent (50%)
of the employee’s contribution to the 457 Plan for such
year. The City’s contribution will not exceed one-and-a-
half percent (1.5%) of the employee’s annual
Compensation as defined by the Philadelphia Retirement
Code. Employees may continue to contribute to the DC
Plan until retirement, up to the maximum specified by
the Internal Revenue Code, subject to this limitation.
Employees vest in the City-funded portion of the DC Plan
after 5 years of service with the City.

-125-
The terms of Plan 09 set forth in this Award shall be imple-
mented in accordance with the attached suggested ordi-
nance.

- 126-
676£9

€ dais

SL£S79

o8e09

L68¢S

60L8r

z dais

O9€0S
L60br
LETLP

L dais

v0T

£07
Ot
Loz

asury
Aaeyes,

quealas
aalpaj}aq UOANDIasOlg
2B Jueasias a1]0g
4smay a1ydeiy adiod

Je1odio aryjog ¥
Z AANA} UONNDaSOLg

| aANDaIaQ UOANDaso1g

L 429YJO Ad0g

 

INIDBY 19IYJO BDOg

Opt

SASSV1D JALLDILIG NOILNDISOUd GNV JDMOd
SLNNOWV IVANNVY NI SADNVA AVd JO FINGIHDS
VIHd140V1IHd 40 ALID

soz 68759
+07 86679
£07 zzz
zz = 1ZZ7ZE_L864S
Loz

asuey ¢dajg 4 days

Aaeyes,

OLOz ‘L Aint

AFINGAHDS AVd *1 XIGN4ddV

-127-
667

TLE
LLZ

OLZ

607

807

LOE
907

asuey
Aaeyes,

LL£@ZS

PL6Z7L
SOCTLL

97h 86

7L6r6

8eEIs

6£96L
O€rr.

gdas das

8209S

OScSZL
898601

9LE96

$6676

Orsrs

8L6L£
6L£87L

€ das

L68hS PzZ9TS

L6S77L
érSZOl

Seero

SZOL6

OSZ7e

peel
9EELL

z dais

L days

667

TLE
LLZ

OLZ

607

807

LOE
907

asuey
Aaeyes,

BANDA}9Q B!JOd Ja1yD

9anoa1oq
uognsasorg JaiyD Aindaq
y s0}Dadsuy ad1og

Jopadsuy sye1g aD10q
ureyde>

aanoaiaq uonnsasoig
ry ureide> ao1jod

queuaynary
@a2a}9q UOANDASOLd
2B jueUaINA!] aD!0q

am

- 128 -
DIFFERENTIALS BETWEEN PAY RANGE

From Pay To Pay Percent
Range Range Differential
203 204 10%
203 205 14%
205 206 14%
206 208 16%
208 209 10%
208 210 14%
210 211 14%
211 212 14%

-129-
- Notes -

- 130-
- Notes -

-131-
- Notes -

-132-
- Notes -

-133-
- Notes -

-134-
