 

 

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

between

THE BALTIMORE CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT

and the

BALTIMORE CITY LODGE NO. 3,
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, INC.
UNIT IIT

POLICE SERGEANTS and POLICE LIEUTENANTS

FISCAL YEAR 2011

 

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
BALTIMORE CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT and
BALTIMORE CITY LODGE NO. 3, UNIT II

DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLE, POLICIES, AND PURPOSES
ARTICLE 1

RECOGNITION
ARTICLE 2

CHECK-OFF
ARTICLE 3

LODGE SECURITY
ARTICLE 4

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
ARTICLE 5

NON-DISCRIMINATION
ARTICLE 6

GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
ARTICLE 7

LODGE REPRESENTATIVES
ARTICLE 8

VACATIONS, HOLIDAYS, DAYS OFF AND SPECIAL LEAVE
ARTICLE 9

SAFETY
ARTICLE 10

HEALTH AND WELFARE
ARTICLE 11

OVERTIME AND HOURS OF WORK
ARTICLE 12

COMPENSATION
ARTICLE 13

SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT
ARTICLE 14

COURT TIME
ARTICLE 15

PROTECTION AGAINST LIABILITY
ARTICLE 16

DISCIPLINE
ARTICLE 17

UNIFORMS AND CLOTHING

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 i

10

10

13

13

14

16

16

17

21
ARTICLE 18
EDUCATIONAL PAY
ARTICLE 19.
DISABILITY
ARTICLE 20
JOINT LABOR-MANAGEMENT LIAISON COMMITTEE
ARTICLE 21
BULLETIN BOARDS AND COMMUNICATION
ARTICLE 22
ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE FOR LODGE REPRESENTATIVES
ARTICLE 23
NO STRIKE, SECONDARY BOYCOTT OR LOCKOUT
ARTICLE 24
WORKING CONDITIONS
ARTICLE 25
PROMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS
ARTICLE 26
PROPERTY REIMBURSEMENT
ARTICLE 27
MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY
ARTICLE 28
LAYOFFS
ARTICLE 29
PERSONAL PRONOUNS
ARTICLE 30
PRESERVATION OF BENEFITS
ARTICLE 31
PRINTING OF MEMORANDUM
ARTICLE 32
SEVERABILITY
ARTICLE 33
FURLOUGH DAYS
ARTICLE 34
DURATION
ADDENDUM A.
HEALTH & WELFARE BENEFITS
ADDENDUM B.
SALARY SCHEDULE
ADDENDUM C
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 ii

22

22

22

22

23

24

24

27

28

29

34

35

36

36

36

36

36

38

41

42
ADDENDUM D
PERMANENT MIDNIGHT SHIFTS
ADDENDUM E
ADMINISTRATIVELY CLOSED IID CASES
ADDENDUM F
REASONABLE SUSPICION FOR DRUG TESTING
ADDENDUM G
PAYMENT FOR COURT APPEARANCES (Retired Police Officers)
ADDENDUM H
LEAVE FOR LODGE REPRESENTATIVES
ADDENDUM I
BREAKING TIES FOR PROMOTIONS
ADDENDUM J
CHANGING EXISTING HEALTH BENEFITS
ADDENDUM K
NEGOTIATED HEALTH AND WELFARE BENEFITS
ADDENDUM L
WAGE REOPENER
ADDENDUM M
NO LAYOFF CLAUSE
ADDENDUM N

UNIT II OVERTIME PROVISIONS - FLSA SETTLEMENT
ADDENDUM O

FLIGHT PAY FOR AVIATION UNIT COMMANDER

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 iii

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BALTIMORE CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT and
BALTIMORE CITY LODGE NO. 3, FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, UNIT II

DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLE, POLICIES, AND PURPOSES

It is the intent and purpose of the Baltimore City Lodge No. 3, Fraternal Order of
Police, Inc. ("Lodge") and the Baltimore City Police Department ("Employer" or
"Department") to promote and improve the efficiency of the operations of the City of
Baltimore and the Baltimore Police Department. In order to render the most efficient
public service to the citizens of the City, the Lodge and Employer agree that this goal
can best be achieved through an orderly, constructive and harmonious relationship
between them. The parties hereto are in further accord that effective employee
relations in the public service requires a clear statement of wages, hours and working
conditions and of the respective rights and obligations of labor and management and
requires a mechanism for the peaceful and equitable resolution of differences which
may arise. For these purposes the parties enter into this Memorandum of
Understanding ("Memorandum").

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION

Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Employee Relations Ordinance, Article
1, Sections 119-137 of the Baltimore City Code (1983 Replacement Volume, as
amended) and the Code of Public Local Laws of Baltimore City, Section 16-8A, the
Employer recognizes Baltimore City Lodge No. 3, Fraternal Order of Police, Inc. as the
sole and exclusive representative of Unit II, all Sergeants and Lieutenants in the Police
Department, with the exception of those employees determined to be confidential by
the Labor Commissioner in accordance with the Municipal Employees Relations
Ordinance.

ARTICLE 2
CHECK-OFF

The Employer agrees to deduct Lodge dues and service fees from the pay of any
eligible employee whom it is certified to represent and who authorizes such deductions
in writing pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Employee Relations Ordinance.
The Employer shall transmit all such monies withheld to the Lodge within fourteen (14)
days of said deduction. The Employer agrees to supply the Lodge or its designee with a
dues and service fee deduction computer printout on a quarterly basis throughout the
term of this Memorandum. Said printout shall include each individual's name, address,
workplace, annual salary, and amount deducted per pay period. Charges for deducting
the cost of Lodge-sponsored programs, if any, shall be in accordance with city-wide
policies currently in effect.

Such authorization shall be continued from year to year unless revoked in writing
by the employee, thirty (30) days prior to the anniversary date of the authorization.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 1
The Lodge shall indemnify and save the Employer harmless from any and all
claims, grievances, actions, suits or other forms of liability or damages that arise out of
or by reason of the disposition of the funds deducted under this Article as soon as they
have been remitted by the City to the Lodge.

Pursuant to the Municipal Employee Relations Ordinance, no other employee
organization, within the meaning of the first sentence of Section 120 (d) of the
Ordinance, shall be entitled to check off dues and service fees.

ARTICLE 3
LODGE SECURITY

All eligible employees covered by this Memorandum of Understanding (a) who
are employed after July 1, 1984 and elect not to join or remain members of the Lodge
or (b) who were employed prior to July 1, 1984 and had previously executed
membership or dues authorization cards as members of said Lodge, but hereinafter
elect to terminate such membership and/or revoke said dues authorization cards, shall,
as a condition of continued employment, pay a service fee to the Lodge in an amount
not to exceed the then current Lodge dues in order to defray the costs incurred by the
Lodge in the negotiation, administration and implementation of the terms of the
Memorandum, and all modifications and amendments thereto, including related
proceedings before an impasse panel or arbitrators, in the processing of grievances,
and in any and all other proceedings and matters for which the Lodge is the employees'
exclusive representative as a result of its certification.

ARTICLE 4
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Subject to the provisions of this Memorandum, the Employer shall have all of the
rights set forth in Article 1, Section 123 of the Baltimore City Code (1983 Replacement
Volume, as amended), Article II, Section 27 of the Baltimore City Charter (1996 Edition)
and the Code of Public Local Laws of Baltimore City, Subtitle 16, Police Department,
which provisions are incorporated herein by reference.

ARTICLE 5
NON-DISCRIMINATION

The provisions of this Memorandum shall be applied equally to all employees in
the bargaining unit for which the Lodge is the certified representative without
discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race, creed, color, national origin, political
affiliation, disability as defined in the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), or sexual
orientation.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 2
ARTICLE 6
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE

A. Subject to any limitation of existing law, any grievance, defined in the Municipal
Employee Relations Ordinance at Section 120 (f) as a dispute concerning the application
or interpretation of the terms of this Memorandum of Understanding or a claimed
violation, misrepresentation or misapplication of the rules or regulations of the Employer
affecting the terms and conditions of employment, may be settled in the following
manner:

STEP 1:

A grievance may be initially filed orally with the aggrieved employee's immediate
supervisor within thirty (30) calendar days from the event or when the aggrieved
employee should have reasonably known of the grievance. The designated Lodge
Representative may represent the employee in presenting the grievance. The parties
shall attempt to resolve the grievance informally. Consultation with second level
supervision is permissible provided all parties agree.

STEP 2:

If not resolved at Step 1, the grievance shall be filed in writing with the District,
Section, or Unit Commander. (The "Sections” or “Units” referred to in this paragraph
are the Police Commissioner's Staff, Divisions, and Sections; the Staff, Sections, and
Units of the Deputy Commissioners, and the Sections within the Organized Crime,
Criminal Investigation, Patrol, Support Services, Information Technology, and the
Human Resources Divisions. The writing shall state generally the substance of the
grievance and identify the aggrieved employee. The parties shall meet within seven (7)
days of the filing of the grievance at this step to discuss its substance. The District or
Unit Commander shall give his decision in writing within seven (7) working days after
the aforesaid meeting.

STEP 3:

If not resolved at Step 2, the grievance may be presented to the relevant
Division Chief (Patrol, Human Resources, Support Services, Criminal Investigation,
Organized Crime, Information Technology, and Internal Investigation Divisions), who
shall meet with the designated Lodge Representative and the aggrieved party within ten
(10) working days after the grievance has been denied, and shall give his answer in
writing within ten (10) working days of this meeting.

Special Provision - STEP 3:
Within thirty (30) days of an alleged grievance, the Lodge is authorized to

present said grievance at this step if the grievance affects a significant number of
employees in more than one (1) District, Section or Unit. Should this provision be used,

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 3
the affected Division Chief will meet with the Lodge Representative(s) within ten (10)
working days of the filing of said grievance and will provide, in writing, an answer within
fourteen (14) days following the aforementioned meeting.

STEP 4:

If the grievance is not resolved at Step 3, the grievance may be presented to the
Police Commissioner or designee who shall meet with the designated Lodge
Representative(s) within ten (10) working days of the denial and shall give his response
within fourteen (14) working days of the meeting.

STEP 5:

If a grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved at Step 4, the Lodge may,
within ten (10) working days of the completion of Step 4, initiate arbitration by written
notice to the Police Commissioner and the Labor Commissioner of the Lodge's decision
to arbitrate.

1. Within five (5) working days after receipt of the notice, the parties shall
attempt to agree upon an arbitrator. If such attempts fail, within ten (10)
working days after receipt of a panel of seven (7) names obtained from the
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service upon the request of either party, the
parties shall alternately strike names from that panel until one (1) name remains.
That person shall be the arbitrator.

2. Briefs shall be filed only if the arbitrator determines they are necessary.
3. The arbitrator's decision shall be final and binding on all parties.

4. The Employer cannot present a grievance to the arbitration step.

5. The cost of any arbitration proceedings under this Memorandum shall be

equally divided between the Department and the Lodge.

6. Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall not be counted in computing
time limits.
B. The Lodge shall be the exclusive representative in all grievance matters, except

that an employee may represent himself as provided in Section 124 (c) of the Municipal
Employee Relations Ordinance, and except that if a grievance has not been resolved in
Step 1, an aggrieved employee may request, upon notice in writing within five (5)
calendar days after conclusion of Step 1, that the grievance be submitted to the
Personnel Service Board in accordance with the provisions of Section 16 of the Code of
Public Laws of Baltimore City. If the employee makes such a request, he shall be
deemed to have waived his right to have his grievance processed through Steps 2-4
hereof. Section 124 (c) of the Municipal Employee Relations Ordinance shall apply to

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 4
any adjustment of an employee's grievance by the Department or the Personnel Service
Board pursuant to this paragraph.

Cc. All grievances in writing shall be filed on a form developed jointly by both parties.
The grieving party shall retain a copy of the grievance form submitted.

D. It is agreed that the arbitrator is not empowered to hear, reverse, remand, set
aside or in any way modify a judgment in a disciplinary proceeding. Such judgment
shall continue to be appealable only in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights.

ARTICLE 7
LODGE REPRESENTATIVES

A. The Lodge may appoint representatives in the Department as follows:
One (1) in each District
One (1) in the Special Operations Section
One (1) in the Criminal Investigation Division
One (1) in the Human Resources Division
One (1) in the Support Services Division
One (1) in the Information Technology Division
One (1) Member at Large

B. A written list of Lodge Representatives shall be furnished to the Department
immediately after their designation and the Lodge shall notify the Department promptly
of any change of such representatives.

Cc. After appropriate notice to his Commanding Officer, a Lodge Representative shall
be granted reasonable time off during working hours with pay when he is engaged in
processing (investigating and presenting) a grievance under Article 6 of this
Memorandum, and where it will not interfere with the operations of the Department.

ARTICLE 8
VACATIONS, HOLIDAYS, DAYS OFF AND SPECIAL LEAVE
A. Whenever members of the bargaining unit are required to work on any day they
are entitled to observe as a legal holiday as designated by departmental directive, they
shall be granted a day in lieu thereof within sixty (60) days before or after such holiday,
unless provisions of Article 8, Section 1.3 apply.

B. Holiday Leave is not subject to accrual or accumulation.

Cc. The above provisions also apply to members whose regularly scheduled H days
coincide with designated holidays.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 5
D. (1) Effective July 1, 2000 and thereafter, employees who work on the actual
day for Thanksgiving, Christmas and/or New Year's shall be paid an additional four (4)
hours' compensation.

(2) The provisions as set forth in section D(1) herein shall be suspended for
Fiscal Year 2010 only. It is understood that the employees who worked on
Thanksgiving falling on November 26, 2009 have already received the four (4) hours of
additional compensation and that said compensation shall be returned pursuant to two
(2) payroll deductions. Effective July 1, 2010 and thereafter, the provisions contained
in Section D1 herein shall continue without modification.

E. Effective July 1, 1991, all employees shall be granted two (2) Personal Leave
days per annum. Employees hired after July 1, 1991 shall be eligible for the benefit on
the next succeeding July ist subsequent to their being hired. Personal Leave days
must be taken, or else forfeited, within three (3) months after the close of the fiscal
year, unless the Department has denied, for operational reasons, all of an employee's
requests and the employee has made a reasonable number of requests during the
period he or she was eligible to take the leave day(s). In the latter event, the employee
shall be paid for the unused Personal Leave day(s) at straight time.

F DEFINITIONS

Leave, for the purposes of this Article, is defined as:
Vacation Leave (V days)
Holiday Leave (P days)

Personal Leave (PL days)
Regular Scheduled Days Off (H days)

AWN

G. REQUEST FOR LEAVE

1. When members request Vacation Leave at the beginning of the calendar
year, they must also designate H days and request Personal Leave (PL days) and
Holiday Leave (P days) to be taken in conjunction with the planned vacation. All
leave requests (including Vacation Leave requests) shall not unreasonably be
denied. Leave requests submitted prior to February 10 shall be granted on the
basis of seniority within rank. After February 10, leave requests shall be granted
on first come, first served basis. In any event, any leave requests submitted
pursuant to this Section which have not been approved or disapproved as of
February 20" shall be deemed to be approved.

2. A member's request for Vacation, Holiday or Personal Leave, submitted
after February 10 of any year, shall be approved or disapproved within ten (10)
days of submission by the member's immediate supervisor or by the person
filling that position during the supervisor's absence.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 6
H. VACATION LEAVE (V DAYS)

1. Vacation Leave, one or more days, scheduled and approved prior to
February 10 shall be cancelled only in the event of an extreme emergency
declared by the Police Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee or when
otherwise directed by the Police Commissioner.

These criteria shall also be followed for any other type of leave (P, PL, and
H days) which is obviously scheduled in conjunction with Vacation Leave.

2. Regardless of date scheduled and approved, a vacation leave period in a
block of five (5) or more days (consisting of a minimum of three (3) Vacation
days, not more than two (2) P or PL days, and excluding H days used to achieve
said block) shall be cancelled only in the event of an extreme emergency
declared by the Police Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee or when
otherwise directed by the Police Commissioner. This shall also apply to any H
days taken in conjunction with the vacation period.

3. It is not the intent of Section H.2 to preclude a member from making a
vacation period using more than two (2) P or PL days. However, this type of
vacation period would not receive the same protection against cancellation as
that described in Section H.2.

4. The Vacation Leave accumulation bank for collective bargaining unit
members is one-hundred and ninety-two days including any previously accrued K
days through June 30, 2000. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary,
under no circumstances shall any days be accrued beyond 192 for any reason.

I. PERSONAL LEAVE (PL DAYS) AND HOLIDAY LEAVE (P DAYS)

1. Personal Leave (PL days) and Holiday Leave (P days) submitted and
approved and not meeting the criteria set forth in Section H.2 may be cancelled
only for operational reasons after the member has been given a minimum of ten
(10) days' notice.

2. Notice given of less than ten (10) days shall entitle the member to an
additional four (4) hours' compensation at his or her regular rate of pay. In
addition, the member shall receive the day back.

3. If a Holiday Leave day (P day) is cancelled, the member shall be permitted
to utilize this day within the remaining time period, as set forth in Article 8,
Section A, or within forty-five (45) days, whichever period is greater.

4. If a Personal Leave day (PL day) is cancelled, the member shall continue to
enjoy the provisions of Article 8, Section E.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 7
5. In the event two (2) or more members have scheduled and approved
Holiday Leave on the same day and it becomes necessary to cancel said leave,
the last requested leave shall be the first cancelled, unless the members agree
otherwise.

6. When Holiday Leave cannot, for operational reasons, be granted within the
specified period, the District/Unit Commander may, at his discretion, approve
either an exception to the time restriction or authorize payment for the holiday at
the member's specified overtime rate.

J. SCHEDULED DAYS OFF (H DAYS)

1. A member shall be given a minimum of ten (10) days' notice of any change
in his or her Regular Scheduled Days Off (H days) which are not being taken in
conjunction with an approved vacation as provided in Sections G.1 and H.2 of
this Article.

2. Notice given of less than ten (10) days shall entitle the member to an
additional four (4) hours' compensation at his or her regular rate of pay. In
addition, the member shall receive the day back. The member shall schedule the
substitute day off within the same work period, governed by manpower
constraints. If the member is unable to reschedule the substitute day off within
the same work period, he or she shall be compensated at 1.0 times his or her
regular rate of pay for the day forfeited.

3. A member retains the option to request a change in his or her regularly
scheduled H days within the twenty-eight (28) day work period. The request
may be granted by his or her immediate supervisor. In that circumstance, the
above provisions of this Section shall not apply.

K. SCHEDULED DAYS CHANGED OR CANCELLED

A member's scheduled days off or approved leave shall not be changed or
cancelled solely for the purpose of avoiding the payment of overtime, over the objection
of the member. This provision shall not apply if such day is cancelled for operational
reasons.

L. TRANSFERS, REASSIGNMENTS, PROMOTIONS

Changes or cancellation of leave as covered in Sections H, I and J shall not apply
in cases of voluntary transfers, voluntary reassignments, promotions or disciplinary
actions. Involuntary transfers and involuntary reassignments are covered by Sections
H, I and J of this Article. In cases of promotions only, Section H.1 dealing with vacation
leave which has been scheduled and approved prior to February 10, shall apply.

M. LEAVE ORDER OF PRIORITY

When it becomes necessary, for operational reasons, to deprive someone of
previously scheduled and/or approved leave, the following order of priority for

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 8
cancellation shall be adhered to:

PL day - Personal Leave

P day - Holiday Leave

V Day — Vacation Leave

H Day — Regular Scheduled Day Off

AWN

N. BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

An employee shall be granted four (4) consecutive work days of leave of absence
with pay for the death of a member of the employee's immediate family. The
immediate family includes: Mother, Father, Sister, Brother, Spouse, registered domestic
partner (as defined by the Baltimore City Code, provided the name of the domestic
partner is filed on record with the Baltimore City Department of Personnel in advance),
Child, Grandparent, Grandchild, Mother-in-law, Father-in-law, step or half-blood
relatives, or any relative residing in the same household as the employee. These four
(4) days of leave will be granted beginning either on the day of death or the work day
immediately following the day of death, at the employee's request. In the event that
funeral arrangements are delayed because of out-of-town travel or other extenuating
circumstances, the four (4) consecutive work-day requirement shall be waived. The
employee shall also be granted four (4) consecutive work days of leave with pay in the
event of a stillborn birth.

One (1) day's leave of absence will be authorized for the death of the employee's
Aunt or Uncle, or Great Grandparent. This one (1) day leave of absence must be taken
within four (4) calendar days of the date of death.

O. PATERNITY LEAVE

Members of the Unit shall be eligible for leave under the Family and Medical
Leave Act (“FMLA”) for birth of a member’s child. The member shall be permitted to
use any accrued vacation or personal leave days, banked days, P days, VMI days,
compensatory time and five (5) accrued sick leave days up to a maximum of twelve
(12) weeks of FMLA leave. Time off granted in accordance with this provision will be
considered leave days pursuant to the Agency's FMLA leave policy. This leave shall be
granted unless the Police Commissioner shall declare a public emergency requiring the
cancellation of all leave throughout the agency for a stated period of time after which
the affected member(s) shall be returned to paid leave as described herein.

P, DONATION LEAVE
Subject to approval by the member’s Commanding Officer, a member with
banked vacation days may transfer up to two (2) vacation days per calendar year to

another Unit member (donee) who is experiencing a personal hardship, providing the
following conditions are met:

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 9
1. The donee has exhausted all of his/her accrued leave including Vacation,
Personal Leave, K-Days (while applicable) and Medical Incentive Days.

2. The transfer of vacation days pursuant to this program are strictly
donations. Vacation days may not be transferred in exchange for cash or other
remuneration.

3. The donee must be experiencing a hardship for which the transfer of days
provides relief.

4. All days transferred pursuant to this provision are irrevocable transfers.

5. A donee may receive no more than 30 transferred days in any one
calendar year.

6. Use of donated days by members on suspension or termination is not
authorized.

Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Police Commissioner will exercise sole
authority as to the continuance of this program and may terminate this program upon
30 days written notice to the bargaining unit and any affected personnel.

Q. PAYMENT FOR UNUSED LEAVE

Upon resignation, termination of employment or retirement from the
Department, members shall be paid in full for any accumulated vacation and personal
leave at their regular rate of pay.

ARTICLE 9
SAFETY

A. The Employer and the Lodge will cooperate in the enforcement of safety. Any
concerns or suggestions regarding safety may be directed to the Joint Labor-
Management Liaison Committee.

B. The Employer shall replace any bullet proof vest issued to a member of the Unit
immediately upon its mandatory replacement date as determined by the manufacturer
of the vest. Additionally, all radio batteries shall be replaced immediately upon the
expiration date as specified by the manufacturer of the battery and/or the battery is
determined to be defective by a Departmental Supervisor of any rank.

ARTICLE 10
HEALTH AND WELFARE

A. 1. The existing terms and conditions of the health and welfare plans shall
remain in effect through December 31, 2011, with the exception of the changes
made in this Agreement and set forth in this Article 10 and Addendum A. All

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 10
active members shall pay 20% of the premium for the Blue Cross/Blue Shield
health and welfare plans (PPN Plan). The terms of the PPN Plan are set forth in
Addendum A. The amount which members shall pay toward the monthly
premium (ie. 20%) and the co-pays and other provisions set forth in Addendum
A shall remain in effect through December 31, 2010.

2. United Healthcare Point of Service Plan:

a. Effective January 1, 2009, the employee contribution shall be 15%
and the Employer contribution shall be 85% of the total monthly
premium.

b. Effective January 1, 2010, the employee contribution shall be
20%, and the Employer contribution shall be 80% of the total
monthly premium.

3. Effective January 1, 2008, the Employer reserves the right to adjust the
percentage of the retiree’s contribution for those members who retire with less
than twenty (20) years of service on or after January 1, 2008. This provision
shall not apply to any member who receives a disability retirement benefit.

4. Effective December 31, 2008, the Traditional Blue Cross plan will be
discontinued.

B. Employees may elect one of the Health Maintenance Organizations (HMO) which
the City offers as an alternative to the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan. Employees electing
to participate in a HMO, shall pay 10% and the City shall pay 90% of the premium. If
the City adds additional HMO’s or Point of Service Plans, the employee's contribution
shall be 10% for participation in a HMO or 20% in a Point of Service Plan.

Cc During the term of this Memorandum, the Department will continue in effect the
stress management program providing services related thereto at no or nominal cost for
employees and family members affected by the employees' job-related stress problems;
except that if the provider contract is put up for bids, the bid specifications will be
subject to the approval of both the Lodge and the Department prior to their submission
to the Bureau of Purchases or Board of Estimates. In the event the Lodge or the
Department is dissatisfied with the selection of the provider or the content of the
specifications promulgated by the Board of Estimates, the Lodge and the Department
shall jointly appeal to the Board of Estimates.

D. The waiver form will continue to limit the waiver disclosure of the doctor's

opinion and such facts as shall, in his professional judgment, be necessary to comport
with professional standards while protecting the patient's privacy.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 11
E. The face value of the death benefit for active employees shall be equivalent to
the employee's annual salary at time of death. The retiree death benefit is $7,000.

F. WAIVER OF GENERIC DRUG REQUIREMENT

The Employer agrees to provide the Lodge with copies of the proposed bidding
specifications for the City's prescription drug program providers for the Lodge's review
and comment. The parties will meet and confer with a view to reaching an agreement
over a workable provision that would enable participants to obtain proprietary drugs
under the program, when expressly prescribed by the treating physician as medically
necessary.

G. SECTION 125 PLAN

The Employer will continue to administer the Section 125 Plan whereby the
employees’ contributions to health care, vision, and prescription programs would be
excluded from Federal and State taxes.

H. The Employer shall remit an annual payment of $650 (to be paid bi-weekly) to
each employee who, with satisfactory proof of alternative health insurance coverage
received in another plan, elects not to take any coverage under a City Health Care Plan.
If, after waiving coverage under any City Health Care Plan, the employee loses
coverage due to the death of a spouse or other person who is a source of coverage,
divorce, loss of employment or deletion of benefits (or such other qualifying event as
determined by the Employee Benefits Division), the employee may enroll in a City
Health Care Plan and consequently relinquish the waiver payment. The employee must
notify the City's Employee Benefits Division within thirty (30) days after a qualifying
event occurs in order to enroll in a City Health Care Plan. The Employer shall apportion
he payment should an employee either enter or leave a City Health Care Plan within a
calendar year.

1 An employee shall be entitled to a Hospital Bill Audit Gain Sharing payment of
33/79 of an overpayment (or other billing error resulting in an overpayment to the
health care provider), up to a maximum of $500 to the employee for each incident. In
order to qualify for the Gain Sharing payment, the employee must: (a) identify an
overpayment of more than $250 (in the aggregate) in a hospital bill that is presented to
an employee or his or her dependent and (b) notify the City's Employee Benefits
Division of the error within thirty (30) days after receipt of an Explanation of Benefits
rom the Health Plan. Payment shall be due and made only if the error is verified and
he amount overpaid actually is recovered to the City's benefit.

J. The City will provide continued health care coverage at active employee rates for
benefit-eligible survivors (spouses and eligible dependents) of those members who
were enrolled in City health care plans and were killed in the line of duty at any time
prior to or subsequent to January 1, 1995. If survivors or enrolled dependents become
eligible for Medicare, they must enroll in the City retiree health care plan for coverage.

 

 

K. Effective July 1, 1997, unmarried dependents who are full-time students shall be
covered by Baltimore City’s General Prescription Drug and Vision Care Programs until

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 12
the end of the calendar year the dependents reach age 25 or to the end of the year
they cease being full-time students, whichever occurs first. Verification of enrollment
must be provided in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Employee Benefits
Division.

L. Optical Plan

Effective January 1, 1999, optical plan benefits shall apply to current and future
retirees, widows, and dependents. The plan shall include an eye exam every twenty-
four months and prescription glasses, if needed.

ARTICLE 11
OVERTIME AND HOURS OF WORK

A. During the term of this Agreement, the Department shall follow its existing
practice (/.e., the practice in effect as of June 30, 2003) with respect to the payment of
overtime to all Unit II members. The Department shall also comply with the Joint
Motion for Approval of Settlement between the parties which was approved by the
Court and shall retain the right under that agreement to assert exemptions by providing
ninety (90) days notice to the Union.

B. The Employer shall not vary or rearrange a member's scheduled tour of duty
hours to avoid the payment of overtime when hours of overtime are previously worked
unless agreed to at the sole option of the member.

C. Shifts #1 and 2 shall rotate on a twenty-eight (28) day basis. Shift #3 shall be
permanent as reflected in the Memorandum of Understanding for Unit II, Article 24,
Paragraph F.

D. Members of the Bargaining Unit shall not be required to attend roll call
preparation without receiving compensation at their appropriate overtime rate.

ARTICLE 12
COMPENSATION

A. FY 2010 COMPENSATION

1. Effective July 1, 2009, employees shall receive a salary as reflected in
Addendum B (Salary Schedule).

Effective July 1, 2000 and in the subsequent fiscal years respectively,
progression within the rank of Police Sergeant and Police Lieutenant shall be as set out
in Addendum B Salary Schedule. This progressive schedule supersedes all other salary
scales and longevity pay provisions set out in prior agreements. Transition from the
former pay schedule to the new salary schedule shall be in accordance with the
transition rules established by the Department of Personnel.

2. For FY 2011, the pay for each employee shall be reduced by an amount

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 13
equal to five (5) days pay (approximately 1.95%) plus $5.00, the total of which shall be
during the pay periods which fall between the effective date of this pay period June 30,
2011. The five day pay reduction shall not apply to the employees hired on or after
September 15, 2011.

B. PAYMENT DATES

All remuneration due to or elected by an employee shall be based on the date on
which the employee's anniversary date falls within the pay period. In the event that the
employee's anniversary date falls within the first half of the pay period, the employee
shall receive the payment for the entire pay period. If the anniversary date falls within
the second half of the pay period, the payment shall be made as of the next succeeding
pay period. The City agrees that a member’s new salary shall be effective as of the
date of his/her promotion.

Cc. The City will pay all remuneration due to or elected by an employee as provided
in Paragraph C above. The parties agree that the failure to effect a pay adjustment on
time is a violation of this Memorandum, subject to the grievance procedure herein. The
City agrees to rectify the error as soon as possible.

D. SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL

All employees covered by this Memorandum are entitled to pay at their
scheduled rate plus a differential of $.45 per hour if assigned to a tour where the
majority of their work hours occur between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m., or $.40 per hour if
assigned to a tour where the majority of their work hours occur between 2 p.m. and 10
p.m.

ARTICLE 13
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT

A. A member may work in approved secondary employment not to exceed thirty-
two (32) hours per week. No more than twenty (20) of those hours shall be worked in
assignments outside those administered by the Overtime Unit unless the remaining 12
hours of City Secondary are not available, in which case the member may work up to
the 32 hour limit without restriction. The Police Commissioner may authorize other
approved secondary not subject to the twenty (20) hour limit such as hotels, hospitals,
and schools. For FY 2011 only, the hours set forth in the first sentence shall be
increased from 32 to 36 and the hours set forth in the second sentence shall be
changed from twenty (20) to twenty-four (24) and from thirty two (32) to thirty-six
(36).

During a week where the member is off five (5) or more leave days, other than
medical leave, a member shall not work more than forty (40) hours of approved
secondary employment.

B. Members who are required to be armed as a condition of secondary employment
outside Baltimore City and who take enforcement action related to said secondary
employment using a firearm that does not comply with General Order 0-4 shall not be

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 14
considered as acting in the line of duty as Baltimore Police Officers and, therefore, shall
not be disciplined for taking such action.

Cc. A member may be armed with an authorized handgun while engaged in
secondary employment outside Baltimore City. Within Baltimore City, a member may
not be armed with a sidearm other than a handgun authorized by the Department and
shall be authorized to wear the uniform while engaged in secondary employment,
subject to the conditions provided in a letter from the Police Commissioner to the
President of the Lodge dated, March 5, 2010 that appears as Addendum C (Secondary
Employment) to this Memorandum.

D. Consistent with current policy governing conflict of interest and unauthorized
occupational areas, secondary employment will not be prohibited. | Authorized
secondary employment will not be suspended or revoked for disciplinary reasons.

E. The Employer will, to the extent practicable, offer assignments to City secondary
employment and scheduled overtime on a rotating basis and will allocate available
opportunities equitably and fairly among employees in the unit. To that end, when
particular skills are required to perform scheduled overtime on subsidized projects, all
available members who have those skills shall be offered the overtime. In addition,
members who have reached the 25% overtime cap shall not be foreclosed from
working emergency and authorized, scheduled overtime when other volunteers are not
available to perform it.

F. Consistent with current policy governing conflict of interest, lawful secondary
employment outside of Baltimore City shall be allowed, as long as the following
conditions are met:

1. The member is acting as a private citizen, and without exercising the
powers and duties of a Baltimore Police Officer;

2. The member does not present Baltimore Police Credentials as his or her
authority to carry out the duties required of the secondary employment;

3. The member, except when employed in accident reconstruction or arson
investigation, is not acting as a special police officer or private detective; and

4. The member is not operating a private detective, guard and/or watchman
agency.

G. Supervisors shall be offered/allowed to work scheduled overtime assignments
during baseball games, provided that Lieutenants shall only be assigned to fill positions
consistent with the responsibilities of their rank.

H. When a Unit member has an approved and scheduled City secondary
employment assignment and reports to that assignment site on time, in uniform (if
required) and ready to work, said member shall be paid a minimum of two (2) hours at
the member's regular overtime rate in the event that the scheduled City secondary
employment assignment is cancelled upon the member's arrival at the work site.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 15
1 The City agrees to meet with the FOP to discuss guidelines for allowing members
to work in establishments which serve, sell, or dispense alcoholic beverages. This
meeting shall occur within thirty (30) days of the notation of this Memorandum of
Understanding by the Board of Estimates.

ARTICLE 14
COURT TIME

A. | When a member is required to attend two (2) or more courts on the same day,
with a starting time of two (2) or more hours between each court on his regular day off
or during non-regularly scheduled working hours, he shall receive a minimum
compensation of four (4) hours at time and one-half (172). In other respects, present
court time policy shall continue.

B. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in Article 14A above, the FOP and the
City agree to modify paragraph 14A to provide that Unit members shall receive
compensatory time in lieu of cash overtime payments to achieve a savings of $1.25
million during FY 2010 only. Members assigned to testify in Court during non-regularly
scheduled work hours shall be credited with compensatory time at the rate of one and
one-half hours for every hour of such Court time pursuant to the current language in
Article 14A._ Members who have accrued such time shall be permitted to take these
compensatory hours off with pay after July 1, 2010. After a member accrues forty (40)
hours of Court time during non-regularly scheduled hours resulting in the accrual of
sixty (60) hours of compensatory time, the member will begin receiving cash payment
for any Court time during non-regularly scheduled work hours for the remainder of
Fiscal Year 2010.

For example: Member A appears in Court during non-regularly
scheduled work hours at 9:00 a.m. and finishes the Court at 9:15 a.m.
Member A shall be credited with three (3) hours of comp time due to the
two hour minimum as set forth in Article 14 of the current Memorandum
of Understanding. Member A will then have satisfied two hours of the
forty (40) hours required comp time in lieu of paid Court overtime during
non-regularly scheduled hours leaving a balance of thirty-eight hours of
required comp time for court appearances during non-regularly scheduled
work hours in FY 2010.

This provision contained in Paragraph 14B shall expire and be of no further force

and effect upon the City achieving a savings of $1.25 million dollars during FY 2010 for
Court time or June 30, 2010 whichever shall first occur.

ARTICLE 15
PROTECTION AGAINST LIABILITY

Protection against liability shall be in keeping with Section 16-13 of the Code of
Public Local Laws of Baltimore City.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 16
However, legal counsel will be provided in any civil case when the plaintiff
alleges that a member should be held liable for acts alleged to be within the scope of
his employment and/or his official capacity. In the event the current contract for
providing legal services is terminated, the Lodge and the Department agree to make a
joint recommendation to the City Solicitor for specifications for successor counsel.
Subject to the fellow-employee exclusion provision and approval of the Board of
Estimates, indemnification will also be provided to any member of the unit who is made
a defendant in litigation arising out of acts within the scope of his or her employment.

ARTICLE 16
DISCIPLINE
A. Suspension
1. Emergency suspension with or without pay may be imposed by the

Department when it appears that the action is in the best interest of the public
and the law enforcement agency. Any member arrested and charged with a
criminal offense, a serious traffic violation involving death or serious personal
injury, and/or an act alleged or committed by such member of such a nature
that, in the judgment of the appropriate superior officer, the interest and welfare
of the public, the Department, or the individual is best served by such action,
such member shall be immediately suspended from duty with pay. When a
member is charged with a criminal offense, said charge(s) shall be supported at
least in part by the investigative findings of another law enforcement officer.
Any employee suspended from duty with pay shall be given a suspension hearing
not later than the next working day following the suspension from duty, wherein
a determination will be made at that time whether or not the member shall
remain suspended with or without pay and/or be placed on administrative duties.
Suspension without pay may only be imposed in accordance with this Section
and only in the case of a member charged with a felony.

2. Any member who is suspended without pay on the basis of pending
criminal charges and who is found not guilty, or who has the criminal charges
stetted or nol prossed, shall be immediately reinstated to pay status with all
benefits, including but not limited to health, incremental pay raises, and all lost
pay from the effective date of his or her suspension without pay up through the
date of reinstatement to pay status, except in a case where the State has an
appeal pending.

3. Suspensions for Allegations of Domestic Violence

(a) |The Department shall continue to have the right to suspend a
member's police powers (including taking his/her weapon) upon a
complaint of domestic violence. Following such suspension, a hearing shall
be held within three (3) work days from the date of the first
action/suspension.

(b) The hearing shall be conducted as in the past with the

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 17
understanding that the representative of the Department hearing the
matter shall consider all relevant evidence when deciding whether to
continue the suspension, including but not limited to: (1) evidence of
injury; (2) the statement of the complaining party; (3) corroboration of
the allegation by a third-party; (4) any criminal charge, (5) a court order
pertaining to the parties, (6) substantial prior history or pattern of
domestic violence (Substantiated shall mean some actual proof of a prior
incident of domestic violence), and (7) a fitness for duty report or
evaluation with respect to this incident that the Department shall initiate
within 24 hours of the suspension.

(c) _ Following the hearing and based upon the evidence presented, the
Department's representative shall make a decision within twenty-four (24)
hours whether or not to sustain the suspension and set forth a short
written statement of the reasons for that decision. If it is determined that
the suspension is not warranted, the fact that there is an open IID file on
this matter shall not be the sole bar to lifting the suspension.

B. Discipline for Minor Violations

1. Unless otherwise mutually agreed, the Department shall provide to
counsel for an accused member a copy of the IID casebook material (excluding
information that discloses an investigative technique, the identity of confidential
sources, and recommendations as to charges, disposition or punishment) for
Minor Violations Discipline not less than thirty (30) days prior to the member's
one person Departmental Hearing Board at no cost. The same material should
be provided in a timely manner to a bargaining unit member or his counsel on
request whenever the Department offers punishment.

2. For Minor disciplinary matters, where a one person Departmental Hearing
Board is established at the discretion of the Department, such hearing shall be
scheduled no sooner than thirty (30) days from the date that counsel for the
accused receives a copy of the charges and the IID case book material, unless a
shorter period is mutually agreed upon by the Department and Counsel.

3. A unit member shall be entitled to one (1) peremptory challenge of
persons designated as members of a one person Departmental Hearing Board.
No individual assigned to Traffic may sit as a member of the Traffic Accident
Review Board.

4. For purposes of this Paragraph C., Minor Violations are defined as
“Violations in which no more than a 3-day suspension or a $150 fine may be
imposed pursuant to the Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights (LEOBR)
definition of Summary Punishment.

Cc. Discipline for Major Violations

1. Unless otherwise mutually agreed, the Department shall provide to
counsel for an accused member a copy of the IID casebook material (excluding

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 18
information that discloses an investigative technique, the identity of confidential
sources, and recommendations as to charges, disposition or punishment) not less
than forty-five (45) days prior to the member's Departmental Hearing Board at
no cost. The same material should be provided in a timely manner to a
bargaining unit member or his counsel on request whenever the Department
offers punishment.

2. For major disciplinary matters, where a three-person Departmental
Hearing Board is established, such hearing shall not be scheduled any sooner
than forty-five (45) days from the date that counsel for the accused receives a
copy of the charges and the IID case book material, unless a shorter period is
mutually agreed upon by the Department and counsel.

3. A unit member shall have the option of a Departmental Hearing Board
conducted by a panel composed of an Administrative Law Judge (hereinafter
“ALJ”) and three sworn members, one being of equal rank. If the member is
represented by counsel, the counsel shall, with the consent of the member, have
the option of selecting the ALJ process. If the member is unrepresented, the
member shall make the selection. The ALJ will act as the Departmental Hearing
Board Chairperson and make evidentiary and legal rulings but will not be a voting
member of the panel during deliberations on verdict or sentencing. In no event
shall an ALJ be appointed to a Departmental Hearing Board without the consent
of the accused member or his/her counsel of record.

4. If an accused member declines the option of including an ALJ on a
Departmental Hearing Board as defined in Paragraph D.3 herein, the accused
member shall be entitled to four (4) peremptory challenges of persons
designated as members of the Departmental Hearing Board. Only three (3)
peremptory challenges may be used to strike the Hearing Board Chairperson. No
individual assigned to Traffic may sit as a member of the Traffic Accident Review
Board.

5. For purposes of this Paragraph D., Major Violations are defined as
“Violations in which 4-days or more suspensions/loss of leave or more than $150
fine may be imposed.

D. Participation on a Departmental Hearing Board. No civilians other than an
Administrative Law Judge may serve on a Departmental Hearing Board.

E. Upon request, IID will expeditiously complete an investigation that it has initiated
into alleged misconduct by a member.

F. Within ten (10) days after IID’s report of the results of its investigation has been
confirmed, the Department shall advise the affected member of its finding, i.e., whether
sustained, not sustained, unfounded or exonerated. If the investigatory report is to be
referred to the Civilian Review Board (CRB), the Department may advise the member
that the result is subject to revision. It is understood that where an investigation of a
charge encompasses multiple charges growing out of the same incident, advisement
concerning the outcome may be deferred pending completion of the entire

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 19
investigation.

G. If an accident is found to have been non-preventable, all records of the accident
shall be expunged from the member's file. If a member requests expungement of a
formal complaint or other material from any file of the member pursuant to the Law
Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights, the complaint and/or material shall be expunged
within sixty (60) days of the request. The Department agrees promptly to give the
member written notice that the records have been expunged pursuant to his or her
request.

H. In the event that the Department takes disciplinary action against a member on
account of conduct reasonably attributable to a disabling condition, the following shall
apply:
1. No Departmental Hearing shall be conducted provided the member has
expeditiously filed an application with the Retirement Board for a special or
ordinary disability pension under the Fire and Police Employees’ Retirement
System.

2. In the event the member has expeditiously filed an application and the
Retirement Board has not rendered a decision regarding the member's
application within four (4) months from the date the member filed the
application, the Department may proceed with the Departmental Hearing.

3. In the event the member is denied ordinary disability retirement, the
Department may proceed with the Departmental Hearing. | Subsequent
applications for retirement will not impact on the Department's administrative
process.

1 No Departmental Hearing, except a Suspension Hearing, shall be held on any
charges that relate to conduct which is also the subject of a criminal proceeding, until
such time as criminal charges are disposed of prior to any appeal, except an appeal de
novo to a Maryland Circuit Court.

J. Pending IAD investigations into off-duty, non-criminal misconduct shall not bar
consideration for promotion. If a member under investigation for any other reason is
passed over for promotion solely because of a pending investigation and is then
cleared, the Police Commissioner will consider the individual for promotion to the next
available vacancy and will make application to the Civil Service Commission for a waiver
if necessary to make promotion from an expired list. The decision of the Police
Commissioner and the City's Personnel Director is final and not subject to the grievance
procedure.

K. Notice of routine disciplinary actions shall be distributed only to the affected
member, the member's counsel, the Commanding Officer, the Chief of the Division
involved, the Chief of Internal Investigation Division, the Chief of the Human Resources
Division, the Directors of the Personnel, Inspections, and the Equal Employment
Opportunity Compliance Divisions, the Office of Legal Affairs, and the Police
Commissioner. No other publication shall be made, except in unusual circumstances
wherein the Department finds that announcement of the discipline is in the public

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 20
interest.

L. Should the Department require a member to forfeit vacation as punishment for a
sustained offense or violation, the member shall have the option to be suspended for
the same period or to pay an equivalent fine. It is understood that the Department's
policy is to give a priority to vacation forfeiture over mandatory fines or suspensions.

M. The Department shall make every effort to impose suspensions without pay so as
to avoid the cessation of Employer health care benefits due to non-payment of required
Employer/employee contributions. In the event that the Department shall levy a
suspension without pay of sufficient duration to require the member to pay for
continuance of his/her Employer’s sponsored health benefits, the Department agrees to
pay its proportionate share of the cost of health benefits on behalf of the suspended
member for the pay period(s) so affected.

N. Traffic Safety Review Board shall conduct a hearing to determine if a
departmental accident is preventable or non-preventable. If the Board determines the
accident to be preventable it shall recommend disciplinary punishment in accordance
with the Department's traffic accident disciplinary matrix.

O. The Department agrees to establish a protocol for advising members that three
(3) years have elapsed since a finding by the Department or a Hearing Board that a
formal complaint was either not sustained, exonerated, unfounded, or a hearing Board
acquitted the accused member, dismissed the action, or made a finding of not guilty,
and that the member may request expungement of such matter from any file containing
the record of the formal complaint.

P. The Department agrees that members should not be disciplined and shall not be
terminated from employment solely on the basis of being placed on the “witness do not
call list” by the office of the State’s Attorney for Baltimore City.

ARTICLE 17
UNIFORMS AND CLOTHING

A. The Department agrees to consider suggestions from the Lodge regarding the
selection of replacement coats. New coats shall be issued in keeping with established
replacement standards.

B. 1. An annual clothing allowance shall be paid, on a quarterly basis, to
members assigned to plainclothes positions designated by General Order R-5. Effective
July 1, 1990, the clothing allowance shall be $500.

2. The provisions as set forth in Section B(1) shall be modified to eliminate
the remaining two (2) quarterly installments due to eligible members for the remainder
of FY2010. This Section 17B(2) shall expire and be of no further force and effect as of
June 30, 2010.

Cc. The department shall provide up to four boxes of practice ammunition for use by

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 21
members at firing ranges operated by the BPD in each fiscal year as a part of their
annual uniform and equipment allotment. The Quartermaster will issue a paid slip upon
request by member. Upon presentation of the paid slip to the District Range Officer,
the appropriate box of practice ammunition will be provided for use at the BPD range.
No practice ammunition is authorized for use outside the BPD firing range where issued.

D. In addition, the Department will issue each member an approved departmental
flashlight. Such light will be considered a part of the member's standard issued
equipment. Replacements will be issued thereafter consistent with Departmental Policy.
The type of flashlight available shall be determined by the Department, and may
change from time to time as determined by the Police Commissioner.

ARTICLE 18
EDUCATIONAL PAY

It shall be the policy of the Department that during the term of this
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), all police sergeants and lieutenants who have
received or obtains a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university shall
receive an annual salary as reflected in Addendum B, Grade 758 and 759 of this
Memorandum of Understanding.

ARTICLE 19
DISABILITY

The Department and Counsel for the Lodge shall meet and confer for the
purpose of adding additional qualified psychologists and psychiatrists to those the
Department uses to evaluate if a member is fit for duty. No psychologist or psychiatrist
shall be appointed to the panel without the Department's concurrence.

ARTICLE 20
JOINT LABOR-MANAGEMENT LIAISON COMMITTEE

There shall be established within the Department a Joint Labor-Management
Liaison Committee consisting of up to four (4) representatives of the Department
appointed by the Police Commissioner and up to two (2) representatives from Unit I
and up to two (2) representatives from Unit II. The Committee shall meet not less than
quarterly except upon the majority consent of the Committee. It shall consider,
evaluate, and, if in agreement, shall make recommendations to and/or advise the Police
Commissioner and/or his designee with respect to specific matters bearing upon the
economy, efficiency, or other improvement in Departmental operations and/or upon the
welfare of its employees whether or not such matters are negotiable. Lodge
Representatives shall be deemed to be in duty status while attending such meetings.

ARTICLE 21
BULLETIN BOARDS AND COMMUNICATIONS

A. The Department agrees to provide reasonable bulletin board space labeled with

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 22
the FOP logo and name within each District and Division for the purpose of allowing the
Lodge to inform its membership of Lodge business and activities. All such notices shall
be signed by the Lodge President and/or Lodge Secretary. No scurrilous or defamatory
material shall be posted. Any materials posted in violation of this Section shall be
removed by the Department. The space so designated shall be maintained in an
orderly manner, to include periodic removal of outdated material.

B. The Department will permit the Lodge to use the Departmental mail system for
non-bulk communication to select members. All mail must be directed by name and
assignment and will not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the membership of the Lodge
at any one (1) mailing.

Cc. The Department shall permit a designated representative of the Lodge to address
recruit classes for two (2) consecutive class periods of not less than forty-five (45)
minutes each. During the term of this Memorandum a representative of the Lodge,
designated by the President, will be allowed one-half of an hour to address each in-
service training group. Upon prior notification to the Lodge President, the Police
Commissioner reserves the right to revoke this arrangement.

ARTICLE 22
ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE FOR LODGE REPRESENTATIVES

A. During the term of this Memorandum, the President of Baltimore City Lodge No.
3, Fraternal Order of Police, Inc., shall be granted a full-time leave of absence from his
duties for the Police Department, mandated in-service training excepted, but shall
remain on the payroll of the Police Department for the purpose of performing full-time
duties on behalf of the Lodge. During such leave, the President shall continue to
accumulate seniority and shall receive all benefits as if he were fully on duty including,
but not limited to, pension accruals and fringe benefits.

B. A paid leave bank of 300 days per year shall be created for members of the
Lodge to use to attend scheduled conferences, seminars, Board and Committee
meetings and conventions. The bank may be used interchangeably with Unit I. Each
use shall be requested in advance by the President of the Lodge (or his designee) in
writing, specifying the person or persons using such leave, the hours requested, and
he purpose for the leave. The request shall be granted, subject to the needs of the
Department. Each Lodge member permitted to be absent pursuant to this provision
shall be responsible for giving his supervisor advance notice of absence from work for
Lodge business.

Cc. The President of the Lodge and two (2) persons designated by him shall be
permitted to visit Police Districts, Units, and other work locations in connection with
grievance matters. Visits shall be preceded by reasonable notice.

D. The Department shall permit use of its Police Districts and other designated work
locations for the purpose of conducting election voting, which shall be conducted
without interference with regular business operations.

 

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 23
E. The Department shall provide the Lodge with a roster of all new sworn
employees and their addresses.

ARTICLE 23
NO STRIKE, SECONDARY BOYCOTT OR LOCKOUT

A. The Lodge agrees that during the term of this Memorandum it shall not engage
in, initiate, sponsor, support, or direct a strike or secondary boycott or directly or
indirectly picket the Employer or any of its property in furtherance of a strike. The
Employer agrees that there shall be no lockout during the term of this Memorandum.

B. If the Lodge shall violate any of the provisions hereof:

1. Its designation as exclusive representative may be revoked by the
Department;

2. — It may be ineligible to participate in elections or to be certified as exclusive
representative for a period of two (2) years thereafter; and

3. The Department may refrain from making payroll deductions for such
organization's dues for a period of two (2) years thereafter.

Cc. Nothing in this Memorandum shall deprive the Employer of remedies available to
it under applicable law in the event of a strike.

ARTICLE 24
WORKING CONDITIONS

A. VACATION REQUESTS
Special vacation requests that deviate from current policy shall be considered.
B. WORK OUT-OF-TITLE

1. Members shall not be assigned to perform painting or maintenance of
buildings and grounds, except upon mutual agreement.

2. If a bargaining unit member is directed temporarily to assume the
responsibilities and privileges of a higher rank, he or she shall receive additional
compensation. If so designated as acting out-of-title at the start of the member’s
tour of duty, the member shall be paid out-of-title for the entire day unless the
member does not complete the tour of duty for reasons beyond the control of
the Department. The out-of-title compensation a member shall receive shall be
$14.00 per day. No two members may work out-of-title in the same position.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 24
Cc. LOST OR STOLEN PROPERTY

If a member has reimbursed the Department and the lost property is
subsequently recovered without damage, the Department will refund the
reimbursement.

D. FOOTWEAR

Members of the unit may wear military-style black leather boots that retain a
shine, except when the Class A uniform is worn on formal occasions.

E. "DETECTIVE" TITLE

The title "Detective" shall be restored to members in the Applicant Investigation
Unit of the Personnel Division.

F. PERMANENT MIDNIGHT SHIFTS

The present policy pertaining to permanent midnight shifts shall remain in effect
to the extent and under the conditions provided in a letter from the Police
Commissioner to the President of the Lodge dated October 17, 2007 attached as
Addendum D (Permanent Midnight Shifts) to this Memorandum.

G. WORK SCHEDULE

Purpose: The Department and the FOP have agreed that it is in the best
interests of both parties to establish a new work schedule for personnel assigned to the
various police districts throughout the Department.

1. The parties agree that the Department shall implement a new work
schedule in all nine (9) Districts effective January 14, 2010, for members
assigned to the Patrol Division. This schedule shall be based on a seven (7) day
work cycle requiring members to work alternately five (5) days with two (2)
days off or four (4) days with two (2) days off throughout the year.

2. | Members assigned to the Patrol Division who are actually working the 5/2-
4/2 schedule will have their pay reduced by an amount equal to five (5) days
pay in equal installments starting the third pay period in January, 2010, and
ending with the final pay period in FY 2010. This Section 24G.2 shall expire and
be of no further force and effect as of June 30, 2010.

H. Changes to the member’s scheduled work hours with less than forty-eight (48)
hours notice from the start of the originally scheduled shift shall entitle the affected
member to the payment of two (2) additional hours compensation at the member's
regular rate of pay for each shift worked with less than the required forty-eight (48)
hours notice.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 25
1 In the event that a member is detailed to another position, that member's
vacated position will not be permanently filled by another member. Upon the expiration
of the detail, the detailed member will be returned to his/her former position.

J. BODY ART

Members of the bargaining unit who are engaged in any assignment that
requires the member to wear summer Departmental uniform, i.e. short sleeve shirt,
who display any visible body art, except for body art that shall be located on the
member's face, shall be supplied at the Department's sole expense with a sufficient
number of long sleeve tropical shirts and/or cosmetic make-up to cover the displayed
body art. Members who must wear the long sleeve tropical shirts as described herein
shall NOT be required to wear a neck tie while wearing the long sleeve tropical shirt.

K. | MANDATORY OVERTIME ASSIGNMENTS

In the event that the Department shall find it necessary to mandate that Unit
members work in an overtime capacity that is not contiguous with a member's regularly
scheduled shift, the Department shall make every effort to solicit volunteers from within
the member’s unit of assignment to work mandated overtime assignments. In the
event that there are insufficient volunteers, the Department agrees to permit a
reasonable number of members to be exempt from working mandatory overtime on the
basis of exigent circumstances including, but not limited to, family illness, attendance at
educational classes, approved secondary employment, pre-paid social events, etc.

L. | LEAVE GROUPS

All members of the bargaining unit who are reassigned within their patrol sector or
assignment for operational reasons by the Department which results in a change to
their leave group affecting their scheduled “H” days shall be treated as follows:

1. Members shall be involuntarily reassigned to a new leave group in reverse
seniority order (i.e. the least senior to be involuntarily reassigned first).

2. Members who voluntarily request reassignment to a new leave group shall
be reassigned on the basis of seniority (i.e. the most senior member shall be
voluntarily reassigned first). Seniority means total length of Departmental
service. In the event that two or more members of a patrol sector or other unit
have equal seniority, the tie(s) shall be broken on the basis of their last written
performance evaluation, i.e. the most favorable evaluation shall serve as the tie
breaker.

M. The FOP shall be afforded the opportunity to provide meaningful input to the

process of evaluating current post, sector and district boundaries for possible
realignment.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 26
A.

ARTICLE 25
PROMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS

PROMOTIONS

There will be at least sixty (60) days' notice in advance of written examinations

for promotions. All relevant study materials for promotional examinations shall be made
available to members at least sixty (60) days prior to the written examination.

B.

TRANSFERS

1. The Department agrees to post notice for a period of five (5) consecutive
days on appropriate bulletin boards and Departmental E-mail systems of all
vacancies that it intends to fill by permanent transfer to any position other than
patrol and the Commissioner’s Office. Assignments within any Bureau, Division,
Section or Unit will continue to rest with Command. Notice of the posting will be
given at roll call. Members may submit written requests for consideration of the
posted vacancy. Every member who is eligible for consideration will be
interviewed by the appropriate Command. When the vacancy is filled, applicants
shall be notified as to whether they received the position. Requests which were
submitted and interviews conducted shall remain active for sixty (60) days for
any vacancies which may arise. The Department shall also consider new requests
‘or consideration which may be filed for subsequent vacancies. The current
system to accept District-to-District transfer will continue, but requests will have
a one (1) year life and therefore must be renewed on a yearly basis. Seniority,
meaning length of service in rank, shall be considered. The foregoing shall not
apply to transfers of persons determined by the Police Medical Director to be
permanently unable to perform all the duties of a Police Officer, Police Agent,
Flight Officer, Sergeant, or Lieutenant due to disabling conditions but who are
capable of performing the essential functions of a full duty administrative position
as determined by the Police Medical Director. Any member selected in
accordance with the procedure as set forth herein to fill a posted vacancy shall
be permanently assigned to that vacancy immediately upon his/her selection and
may not be detailed to that vacancy.

 

Involuntary Transfers

1. The department shall provide a member with seven (7) days notice in
writing of an involuntary transfer. The notice shall be personally delivered
whenever it is practical to do so and shall state the reason for the transfer. The
member shall have three (3) days to appeal the decision (not including Saturdays
and Sundays) to a committee which shall be referred to as the “Involuntary
Transfer Board.” If the member appeals, the voluntary transfer shall be stayed
until the Board holds its hearing and renders its decision. If the member does not
appeal the transfer, it shall be effective at the end of the seven (7) day notice.

2. The Involuntary Transfer Board shall be comprised of two exempt members
of the department (i.e., Major, Lt. Col., Chief) and one member of equal rank

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 27
with the member being transferred. The parties shall agree on a list of 7-10
members from each rank who shall be used to hear such appeals and who shall
rotate on the Board as appeals arise. No member of the Board shall have
participated in making the decision to involuntarily transfer the member. The
hearing on the appeal shall take place within four (4) working days, not including
Saturday or Sunday, from the date the appeal has been filed by the
member/FOP.

3. At the hearing the Department shall articulate the business reason or
reasons for the involuntary transfer, including but not limited to, any operational
reasons including staffing needs, job performance, experience, seniority, etc. The
member subject to the transfer shall be permitted to have another member of
the FOP act as his/or her advocate at the hearing and question the Department's
representative regarding the articulated reason for the transfer and provide
evidence to show that the reason given was not valid and/or a pretext for the
transfer. The FOP advocate may review employment records, if authorized to do
so by the member, and/or call up to two witnesses to provide testimony in
support of the member’s appeal. The FOP’s advocate shall be permitted
reasonable time off with pay to appear at the hearing. The FOP may provide
evidence which disputes the quality of performance or disciplinary records, the
operational reasons given, or any other aspects of the Department's position.

4. The Board shall consider the evidence presented and then vote on whether
to sustain or rescind the involuntary transfer. The decision shall be based upon
the vote of the majority and shall be rendered no later than 24 hours after the
conclusion of the hearing. Should the transfer be sustained, the Department may
implement the transfer forty-eight (48) hours after the decision.

5. Should the member disagree with the decision of the Board, he/she may
appeal to the Deputy Commissioner within four working days of receiving the
decision from the involuntary transfer board upholding the involuntary transfer.
The Deputy Commissioner or his/her designee shall be required to conduct a
hearing on the appeal no later than seven (7) working days after having received
the same and shall render a decision within three (3) working days of having
heard the appeal. A member may not be involuntary transferred from his/her
current position until such time as a final decision has been rendered by the
Deputy Commissioner.

6. The department shall designate an employee to be the secretary to the
involuntary transfer board who shall receive all written requests for appeals to be
heard by the board.

ARTICLE 26
PROPERTY REIMBURSEMENT

If a member's contact lens(es) is lost or damaged as a direct consequence of the

performance of law enforcement duties, he or she will receive a voucher for a
replacement lens(es) at a provider arranged for by the Department which can replace
the lost or damaged lens(es). This replacement will be available only once per member

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 28
during the term of this Memorandum. During the term of this Memorandum, the
Department will advise the Lodge of the amount expended to replace contact lenses in
each year.

B. The Department's Property Reimbursement Schedule shall be revised to provide
as follows:

Maximum Amount

Sunglasses 33.50
Hearing Aid 150.00
Watch 50.00
Watchband/Watch chain 15.00
Tie 9.00
Shirt 18.00
Trousers 50.00
Jacket 95.00
Sweater 30.00
Suit (Trousers & Jacket) 140.00
Shoes 40.00
Raincoat 55.00
Topcoat 100.00
Pager 50.00
Cellular Telephone 100.00
ARTICLE 27
MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY

PART I

A. POLICY

A. Effective June 25, 1997, new employees of the Police Department shall accrue

medical leave at the rate of one (1) day for each month of completed service.
Employees must be in pay status at any time during the payroll period in which their
anniversary date occurs in order to accrue medical leave. Accrued medical leave may
be used for non-line-of-duty illnesses or injuries. Employees hired after June 25, 1997,
shall be included in the same medical leave program and policy for line-of-duty illnesses
or injuries as those employees hired prior to June 25, 1997. Employees who accrue
medical leave at the rate of one (1) day for each month of completed service shall be
permitted to utilize any accrued medical leave in accordance with the Family and
Medical Leave Act.

B. In the event that a member shall suffer a line-of-duty injury or illness, said
member shall remain in paid status without being charged medical leave until such time
as a decision is made by the Department's designee as to whether or not the injury or
illness shall be classified as line-of-duty or non line-of-duty. If it is determined that the
injury is non-line-of-duty and the member has been paid for days in excess of his
accrued leave days, he shall repay or be docked for such pay. A member may repay any

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 29
amount owed by using medical leave, vacation or P and PL days or by having his pay
docked; provided, however, that in no instance shall the Department dock an employee
more than 25% of any paycheck.

PART II
NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS

A. Any member who is unable to report to work because of medical leave must
contact his or her Unit of assignment not later than one (1) hour prior to the scheduled
‘our of duty unless exigent circumstances exist.

B. A member on medical leave will be required to call in only on the first day of any
absence, indicating the expected date of return, the reason for the absence, and the
address and telephone number where confined if different from that on file with the
Department. In cases where the member does not return to work on the expected
date, a second call shall be made repeating the same information.

Cc. When a member is home and on medical leave, the member must notify his or
her Unit of assignment when leaving home and upon return. A member is to remain at
home, except to go to a medical facility, pharmacy, polling place, place of worship, or
retail outlet which sells primarily food, or in the event of exigent circumstances.
Members may not leave home for any other reason, except with the approval of their
personal physician, their Commanding Officer/designee or the Medical Section. The
basis for the preceding is to allow members who are unable to work because of illness
or injury to leave their home for personal needs which are basic. Abuse of this
procedure constitutes a violation of this Policy and is subject to disciplinary action. In
he event a member receives approval from the Medical Director for unrestricted
medical leave at home, the notification of his or her Unit of assignment when leaving
and returning home shall be waived.

 

PART III
MEDICAL CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS

A. A medical certification is required from all members for all absences of three (3)
or more consecutive days, and must be submitted to the member's Unit of assignment
upon returning to work.

B. A medical certification must contain the following information:
1. Date and time the member was treated;
2. Address and phone number of the doctor or practitioner;
3. Date and doctor's authorized signature;
4. Nature of illness or injury complained of;
5. Diagnosis and treatment; and

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 30
6. Expected date of return to duty.

C. | Any member who is on medical leave shall not be required to report to any
medical facility for the purpose of determining that members fitness for duty between
the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. This provision shall not apply to members in the
medical abuse program.

PART IV
MEDICAL LEAVE ABUSE CONTROL PROGRAM

A. Any member who in a twelve (12) month period utilizes a total of eight (8)
uncertified medical days, or who reports on medical leave on four (4) separate
uncertified occasions, or who utilizes fifteen (15) or more medical days regardless of
certification, may be placed in the Medical Leave Abuse Control Program, hereafter
known as "the Program," by his or her Commanding Officer after consultation with the
Medical Section.

Nothing in this Policy shall be construed to prevent the Police Commissioner from taking
formal disciplinary action for violation of the policies of the Department. First
consideration, however, should be given to the application of the Program.

B. An uncertified medical day or occasion is the use of medical leave, regardless of
duration, for which no doctor's certificate (as outlined in Part II, Section B) is submitted
to the member's immediate supervisor.

Cc. In addition, a member who uses medical leave in a manner described below may
be placed in the Program:

1. Uncertified usage before or after regular days off (three (3) occasions);

2.  Uncertified usage on any specific tour of duty in the case of those members
who rotate shifts (three (3) occasions);

3.  Uncertified usage on a specific day of the week (three (3) occasions); or

4. Usage of medical leave after being denied other leave (two (2) occasions).
D. Commanding Officers will retain the discretionary authority to exempt members
meeting the above criteria, based on mitigating factors. Command will consult the
Medical Section prior to placing any member in the Program.
E. Both the Department and the Lodge recognize that by its very nature police work
carries with it the risk of severe injury. For this reason, any member who sustains a
significant injury in the performance of his or her duties during the twelve (12) month
period will be exempted for that period in all cases where his or her medical record
would not otherwise justify inclusion in the Program.

1. The exemption stated above will expire upon the earlier of:

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 31
a) The passage of twelve (12) months from the date of injury; or

b) The member reaching maximum benefit of medical treatment for
this injury as determined by his or her treating physician and/or the
Medical Director.

2. The Medical Director shall make the determination in these matters.

F. A member shall remain in the Medical Leave Abuse Control Program for one (1)
year from the date of being so designated. Continued absenteeism for medical reasons
may subject the member to an extension in the Program and/or may constitute just
cause for disciplinary action.

G. Upon placement or extension in the Program, the member shall be notified in
writing by his or her Commanding Officer within five (5) working days. This written
notification shall also include the date the member is scheduled to return to normal
status.

H. A member placed in the Program may appeal through the established grievance
procedure. For the purposes of this Program, in Step 4 of the grievance procedure, the
Director of the Personnel Division shall be the Police Commissioner's designee.

1 When a member who has been placed in the Program is home on medical leave,
the member must notify his or her Unit of assignment when leaving home and upon
return. A member is to remain at home except to go to a medical facility, pharmacy,
polling place, place of worship, or retail outlet which sells primarily food, or in the event
of exigent circumstances. Members may not leave home for any other reason, except
with the approval of their Commanding Officer/designee. Should the member be
refused permission to leave home and should the member feel that there is a medical
necessity for this request, said member may appeal the denial to the Medical Director.

J. Any member who utilizes less than eight (8) medical days and less than four (4)
separate occasions during the one (1) year period as designated will automatically
return to normal status.

Commanding Officers will retain the discretionary authority to return a member
to normal status who exceeds the above guidelines in a case where he or she suffers a
clear-cut, bona fide, line-of-duty injury during the time frame in question.

K. The Lodge shall be notified on a quarterly basis of all bargaining unit members
placed into the Medical Leave Abuse Control Program as well as those who have
completed the Program and are returning to regular status.

L. A member who has been placed in the Medical Leave Abuse Control Program
shall be subject to the following sanctions:

1. The member shall be required to obtain a doctor's certificate for all
subsequent uses of medical leave, regardless of duration, while in the Program.
This certificate must be submitted within two (2) working days after the member

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 32
returns to duty.

2. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Memorandum, secondary
employment privileges and participation in other overtime details shall be
suspended while the member is in the Program.

3. No overtime compensation shall be awarded to the member for the purpose
of obtaining medical certification.

PART V
PENALTIES

A. A member accused of violating the provisions of the Medical Leave Abuse Control
Program is entitled to a hearing before any action may be taken as a result of this
Section. After a determination has been made that a member has violated any of the
provisions of the Program, he or she shall in addition to loss of wages for the day(s) not
worked be disciplined in accordance with the following procedures:

1. One (1) day's suspension without pay for the first violation.

2. Suspension without pay for three (3) days and forfeiture of secondary
employment opportunities for an additional twelve (12) months for the second
violation.

3. Trial Board with a view toward termination for the third violation.

B. This provision shall not apply to absences preceding a member's placement in
the Medical Leave Abuse Control Program.

PART VI
INCENTIVE FOR NON-USE OF MEDICAL LEAVE

A. The Department will provide the following incentives for non-use of medical
leave:

1. Effective July 1, 2002 members shall earn three (3) days of paid leave for
each six (6) months when medical leave is not used during each of the periods
from July 1 to December 31 and January 1 to June 30. Any member who
completes an entire fiscal year without medical leave shall receive two (2)
additional paid leave days.

2. This accumulated paid leave will be converted to Vacation Leave the
following fiscal year to be used any time during that fiscal year.

3. The above incentive program shall apply only to those members who
worked in a full duty status, with the exception of those members who have not
reached maximum benefit of medical treatment for line-of-duty injuries and are
in a restricted duty status. The incentive program shall apply to those members

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 33
who are in a restricted status and performing the essential functions of a full-
duty position.

4. Any member who was otherwise qualified to receive the benefits of this
Section, and who suffered an injury while performing his/her official duties, may
appeal to the Medical Director for restoration of those benefits for a period of
one year from the date that member returns to work from his/her line of duty
injury. Final determination in these matters shall rest with the Medical Director.

PART VII
VACATION LEAVE ACCRUAL DURING SICK TIME

A. Effective July 1, 1991, members will not accrue Vacation Leave in any month
during which they were carried on sick leave for the entire period. Similarly, any
member who remains on line-of-duty medical ("A" Time) for a period of six (6) months
will cease to accrue Vacation Leave during subsequent months in which he or she is on
medical ("A" Time) for the entire month. In case of severe line-of-duty injuries and
upon written request, the six (6) month provision shall be waived only upon
recommendation of the Medical Director.

B. If a member and/or the City successfully recovers monies for salary paid while on
medical leave as a result of third-party litigation, those days of medical leave repaid to
the City or Department shall be removed from the member's medical leave totals. This
would apply to line-of-duty and non-line-of-duty injury cases.

In the event that such removal of medical leave days (a) would qualify the
member for the benefits of Part V of this Article and/or (b) would not have resulted in
the non-accrual of Vacation Leave in Section A above, the member shall receive all
incentive days for non-use of medical leave and Vacation Leave days to which he or she
would otherwise have been entitled under this Article.

ARTICLE 28
LAYOFFS

A. NOTICE OF LAYOFF

The Department shall give each affected employee not less than thirty (30) days'
advance notice that he or she will be laid off. The Notice shall advise the employee of
the expected period of layoff, if known, and that the employee's rights in the
circumstances may be found in the Memorandum of Understanding and applicable
provisions of the Civil Service Regulations. The Department agrees to furnish a copy of
each Notice to the Lodge and to meet with Lodge Representatives promptly to resolve
any questions arising under this Memorandum.

B. ORDER OF LAYOFF

There shall be no layoff in any rank so long as unfilled, funded positions are
budgeted and charged to the Department in that rank and approved for fill by the City
Finance Department. The first order of layoff will be those members rated

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 34
"unsatisfactory" or "needs improvement" on their last three (3) consecutive ratings.
Thereafter, members shall be laid off in seniority order, the least senior member being
laid off first, except that if the Department determines that operational reasons require
retention of a member of the unit having an essential skill, such as a helicopter pilot or
a specialty requiring a state license or certification (other than MPTC), he or she may be
retained. Seniority means total length of Departmental service. In the event two (2)
members of the unit have equal seniority, the tie shall be broken on the basis of their
last written performance evaluation. In lieu of layoff, except for those rated
"unsatisfactory" or "needs improvement" on their last three (3) consecutive
performance ratings, a member of the bargaining unit may accept a reduction in rank,
in which event the most junior employee in the lower rank shall be laid off.

Cc. HIRING DURING LAYOFF

No employee may be hired to perform the duties normally performed by a
bargaining unit member while he or she is in layoff status, except to meet operational
needs of the Department for members having an essential skill, as defined in Paragraph
B.

D. RECALL RIGHTS

Laid-off bargaining unit members shall enjoy the right to be reinstated within
eighteen (18) months from the effective date of the layoff to any vacant position for
which they are qualified. Reinstatement shall be in reverse order of layoff or reduction
in rank (i.e., by seniority). When the Department offers reinstatement to a laid-off
member, it shall give him or her notice by registered mail, return receipt requested, and
afford the affected member reasonable time, not to exceed twenty (20) days, within
which to accept reinstatement.

E. BENEFITS

While on layoff, a member of the bargaining unit shall be entitled to maintain
eligibility for COBRA benefits by paying the costs in accordance with the provisions of
COBRA legislation.
F. No Member of the Bargaining Unit shall be subject to layoff from July 1, 2009
through June 30, 2010.

ARTICLE 29
PERSONAL PRONOUNS

In all instances in this Memorandum in which the masculine form of the third
person pronoun is used, such pronoun shall refer to both male and female employees.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 35
ARTICLE 30
PRESERVATION OF BENEFITS

All benefits presently enjoyed by employees covered by this Memorandum of
Understanding which are not specifically provided for or abridged in this Memorandum,
such as but not limited to holidays, uniforms, equipment, etc., are hereby included and
protected by this Memorandum.

ARTICLE 31
PRINTING OF MEMORANDUM

This Memorandum of Understanding shall be printed by the Lodge. The
Department shall reimburse the Lodge for fifty percent (50%) of the cost of such
printing.

ARTICLE 32
SEVERABILITY

If any term or provision of this Memorandum is, at any time during the life of this
Memorandum, determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in conflict with any
applicable law, constitution, statute, or ordinance, such term or provision shall continue
in effect only to the extent permitted by law. If any term or provision is so held to be
invalid or unenforceable (or if the parties agree that it is), such invalidity or
unenforceability shall not affect or impair any other term or provision of this
Memorandum.

ARTICLE 33
FURLOUGH DAYS

No member of the Bargaining Unit shall be subject to unpaid furlough days from
July 1, 2009 through June 30, 2010.

ARTICLE 34
DURATION

This Memorandum of Understanding shall become effective July 1, 2010, and
remain in full force and effect until June 30, 2011. It shall automatically be renewed
from year to year thereafter, unless either party shall give to the other party written
notice of a desire to terminate, modify or amend this Memorandum of Understanding.

Such notice shall be given to the other party in writing by certified mail no later
than January 1 of the year involved.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 36
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands and seals this
day of , 2011 by their officers and agents duly
authorized.

BALTIMORE CITY POLICE
DEPARTMENT/BALTIMORE CITY:
Frederick H. Bealefeld, III
Deborah F. Moore-Carter

Deborah A. Owens

APPROVED FOR LEGAL FORM AND
LEGAL SUFFICIENCY:

Mark Grimes, Chief Solicitor

NOTED BY THE BOARD OF ESTIMATES:

Clerk Date

Page 37 of Memorandum of Understanding (FY 2011) by and between the Baltimore City
Police Department and Baltimore City Lodge No. 3.,FOP, Inc. Unit II
FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 37
ADDENDUM A
HEALTH & WELFARE BENEFITS

Employees covered by this Memorandum shall be eligible for benefits under the Blue
Cross/Blue Shield Preferred Provider (PPN) Plan or under one of the HMO’s offered by
the Employer. The benefits under the aforementioned plans are set forth in the
Summary Plan Description for those plans.

For informational purposes, the parties have set forth below various benefits
provided under the Blue Cross/Blue Shield Plans, including certain benefits which have
been agreed upon during the negotiations for this Memorandum.

A. PPN Plan
1. Major Medical 80% Employer Coverage
After $200 deductible
Private Duty Nursing
Medical Supplies
Ambulance Services
Whole Blood
Orthopedic and Prosthetic Devices
2. Hospital impatient 365 days at 100%
Medical days
3. Routine physicals 00% of allowed benefit
(one every three years) 10 per visit
4. Routine OB/GYN Exam 00% of allowed benefit
(one per year) 15 per office visit
5. Office Medical visit 10 per visit
6. Specialist office visit 15 per visit
7. Well Child care through age 6 10 per visit
Includes immunizations and vaccines
8. One annual physical ages 7-12 75 maximum
10 per office visit

 

9. Out-of-Network Care 70% coverage after deductible

10. — In-vitro fertilization Limit of $12,000

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 38
11. Physical, speech and occupational 100 combined visits per year
Therapy (outpatient/office)
Pre-authorization required
after 10" visit

12. | Emergency room charges due to

medical emergency $35 per visit (effective January
Fee waived if admitted 1, 2009)
$50 per visit (effective January
1, 2010)
13. Diabetic medical supplies 100% of allowed benefit
14. Diagnostic test, x-rays, laboratory 100% of allowed benefit
test

B. Traditional Plan

1. See summary plan description
Cc. Prescription Drug Plan
1. The parties shall continue to administer a generic prescription drug

program. Employees and their dependents shall as a general rule be expected to
have prescriptions filled with generic equivalents when proprietary drugs are
ordered. However, if medically necessary, an employee or dependent may apply
‘or permission to purchase a proprietary drug by name even though a generic
drug may be available on the market. If an employee or dependent secures prior
permission to purchase a proprietary drug in lieu of a generic drug, the employee
shall be subject to the co-pay of a generic drug. In order to qualify for
permission, the employee must first submit satisfactory written medical
documentation for review to the Employee Benefits Division of the Department of
Human Resources. After impartial review by a qualified health care professional,
Employee Benefits Division shall grant, deny or ask for additional information
about the application. Employees or beneficiaries who are approved shall be
expected to purchase the approved proprietary drug from a_ participating
pharmacy. The City shall make every effort to facilitate a process whereby the
employee may obtain the approved drug at a participating pharmacy by paying
he appropriate co-pay only. If this cannot be arranged the employee shall
initially pay the cost of the drug out-of-pocket, and all covered out-of-pocket
expenses shall thereafter be reimbursed by the City.

 

2. The Employer shall continue the Prescription Drug Plan in effect as of the
date of this Memorandum for all members whether they are in an HMO or PPN
plan with the following co-pays:

(a) | The co-pays set by the Employer effective January 1, 2004 for a

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 39
thirty (30) day retail prescription shall be three-tiered, that is, in three
different classifications: $10.00 for a generic drug, $20.00 for a brand
name drug; and $30.00 for a non-preferred drug. The co-pays set by the
Employer effective January 1, 2004 for a ninety (90) day mail order
prescription shall be three tiered, which is in three different
classifications, $15.00 for generic drug; $25.00 for a brand name drug;
and $35.00 for non-preferred drug.

(b) On or before October 1, 2003, the Employer shall provide to the
Union a schedule of the drugs classified as generic, preferred and non-
preferred. The Employer shall not be arbitrary in its assignment of drug to
one co-pay classification as opposed to another.

(c) Effective January 1, 1997, eligible unmarried dependents who are
full-time students shall be covered by Baltimore City’s General Prescription
Drug and Vision Care Programs until the end of the calendar year the
dependents reach age 25 or to the end of the year they cease being full-
time students, whichever occurs first. Verification of enrollment must be
provided in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Employee
Benefits Division.

D. Vision Plan
Employees will be covered by the existing Vision Plan or such new plan as may

be adopted by the City, provided that such new plan’s benefits shall be at substantially
the same or greater level as those benefits currently available.

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 40
ADDENDUM B

City of Baltimore
Baltimore Police Department
Salary Schedules - Unit II

Effective

07/01/2609-2010

Service Sergeant Sergeant EID Lieutenant Lieutenant EID

Step Grade 738 Grade 758 Grade 741 Grade 759

01 60,377 61,407 68,630 69,660
02 63,695 64,725 72,407 73,437
03 66,367 67,397 75,444 76,474
04 66,367 67,397 75,444 76,474
05 66,367 67,397 75,444 76,474
06 66,828 67,858 75,984 77,014
07 67,497 68,527 76,744 77,774
08 68,164 69,194 76,975 78,005
09 68,833 69,863 77,704 78,734
10 69,501 70,531 78,431 79,461
1 70,171 71,201 78,898 79,928
12 70,837 71,867 79,943 80,973
13 70,986 72,016 80,691 81,721
14 71,707 72,737 81,511 82,541
15 72,365 73,395 82,259 83,289
16 72,850 73,880 82,812 83,842
17 73,522 74,552 83,578 84,608
18 74,195 75,225 84,342 85,372
19 74,803 75,833 85,032 86,062
20 75,475 76,505 85,798 86,828
21 76,172 77,202 86,587 87,617
22 76,791 77,821 87,293 88,323
23 77,481 78,511 88,076 89,106
24 78,169 79,199 88,859 89,889
25 78,790 79,820 89,566 90,596
26 79,492 80,522 90,365 91,395

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 4
ADDENDUM C
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT

Detective Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President

Fraternal Order of Police March 5, 2010
Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211

Re: Secondary Employment
Dear President Cherry:

This letter will affirm our agreement in principle, to allow members of FOP, Unit I and Unit II to
engage in secondary employment in uniform and armed with the issued service weapon within
the limits of Baltimore City. The Police Commissioner shall exercise sole authority to determine
whether, in all circumstances, each individual employment in which the uniform is to be worn
should be permitted, based upon, but not limited to, the type of work, the suitability of the
employer, and the number of scheduled hours the members will devote to the employment, in
compliance with department policy and other operational considerations. A member may work in
approved secondary employment not to exceed thirty-two (32) hours per week. No more than
twenty (20) of those hours shall be worked in assignments outside those administered by the
Overtime Unit unless the remaining 12 hours of City Secondary are not available, in which case
the member may work up to the 32 hour limit. The Police Commissioner may authorize other
approved secondary not subject to the twenty (20) hour limit such as hotels, hospitals, and
schools.

During a week where the member is off five (5) or more leave days, other than medical leave, a
member shall not work more than forty (40) hours of approved secondary employment.

The Police Commissioner reserves the right to revoke permission previously granted at any time.
The decision of the Police Commissioner in these matters shall be final and not subject to
grievance procedures set forth in any collective bargaining agreements.

The guidelines set forth in General Order (GO Q-2) shall govern the terms of this policy, based
on recommendations of a committee comprised of my designees and members of the FOP,
Lodge #3.

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police: Sincerely,

Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President Frederick H. Bealefeld, III
Commissioner
FHB/DFMC/IWmcn/FOP2 2010
cc: Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Deborah A. Owens

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 42
ADDENDUM D
PERMANENT MIDNIGHT SHIFTS

Detective Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President March 5, 2010
Fraternal Order of Police

Baltimore City Lodge No. 3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211

Re: Permanent Midnight Shifts
Dear President Cherry:

This will affirm our agreement that the Department will continue the ongoing permanent
midnight shifts within the Patrol Division.

Permanent midnight shifts will be staffed primarily by volunteers (minimum of 50% for
Unit II). This requirement does not apply to trainees while still assigned to the Education and
Training Division. The Department agrees to announce vacancies on these shifts using Teletype
and/or posted notice and, where consistent with operational needs, to permit voluntary transfers
to accommodate volunteers.

Volunteers must be willing to serve for six months on a permanent midnight shift
assignment, to be determined by seniority and approval of the District Commander on a case-by-
case basis. Any involuntary assignment required to make up the midnight shift shall be made on
the basis of seniority, the least senior member being assigned first. In the event of hardship the
determination will be made by the District Commander on a case-by-case basis.

Subject to the conditions stated above, the Police Commissioner will exercise sole
authority as to the full implementation and/or continuance of permanent midnight shifts. At least
thirty days prior to the effective date, any decision to terminate permanent midnight shifts and
the cause therefore will be communicated to the bargaining unit and any affected personnel.

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police: Sincerely,
Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President Frederick H. Bealefeld, III
Commissioner

FHB/DFMC/IWmcen/FOP2 FY2010.doc

cc: Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Deborah A. Owens

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 43
ADDENDUM E
ADMINISTRATIVELY CLOSED I.I.D. CASES

Detective Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President March 5, 2010
Fraternal Order of Police

Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211

Re: Administratively Closed I.A.D. Cases
Dear President Cherry:

Effective July 1, 2003, in instances where the Legal Affairs Division makes a
recommendation to administratively close a sustained case, such case shall be brought before a
Departmental Hearing Board or other administrative process as determined appropriate by the
Police Commissioner, and dismissed as not viable for prosecution. Cases so dismissed will result
in all related charges previously sustained by I.A.D. to revert to a non-sustained finding upon
dismissal. The non-sustained charges would then be subject to the expungement provisions of
the Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights (LEOBR).

Cases so closed within the five year period immediately preceding the effective date of
this Agreement, may be considered for dismissal pursuant to the above procedures provided the
member makes written application on a form provided by the Department. The Department will
consider requests to close cases beyond the five-year period on a case-by-case basis. The Police
Commissioner reserves the right to suspend this review process in the event the process creates
an administrative burden which impedes the effective operation of the Divisions, Sections, or
Units involved. In the event the process is suspended, the parties shall meet and confer to find
a reasonable solution to the administrative issues and resume the process as determined
appropriate by mutual agreement.

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police: Sincerely,
Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President Frederick H. Bealefeld, III
Commissioner

FHB/DFMC//IWmcn FOP2.2010

cc: Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Deborah A. Owens

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 44
ADDENDUM F
REASONABLE SUSPICION FOR DRUG TESTING WHILE INVESTIGATING
CASES OF DEADLY FORCE

Detective Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President March 5, 2010
Fraternal Order of Police

Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211

Re: Reasonable Suspicion for Drug Testing While Investigating Cases Of Deadly
Force

Dear President Cherry:

In the event that a member shall be investigated for an on-duty use of deadly force,
(including but not limited to discharging of a firearm), the member shall not be required to
submit to drug screening and/or alcohol testing unless there is reasonable suspicion to believe
the member acted under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol. Changes to this standard are
reserved to the Police Commissioner and may be changed at his discretion.

Sincerely,

Frederick H. Bealefeld, III
Commissioner
Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President
FHB/DFMC/Iwmcn/FOP2 FY 2010.doc

Cc: Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Deborah A. Owens

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 45
ADDENDUM G
PAYMENT FOR COURT APPEARANCES (Retired Police Officers)

March 5, 2010
Detective Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President
Fraternal Order of Police
Baltimore City Lodge #3
3920 Buena Vista Avenue
Baltimore, Maryland 21211

Re: Payment For Court Appearances (Retired Police Officers)
Dear President Cherry:

When a retired member is summoned by a court, within one (1) year from the member's
retirement date, to appear and give testimony in a matter arising within the scope of his
employment while the retiree was an active Baltimore Police Officer, such retiree shall be paid a
flat rate of $50 as compensation for all time spent. The retiree may be required to present proof
of attendance satisfactory to the Agency prior to payment.

Sincerely,
Frederick H. Bealefeld, III

Commissioner
Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President
FHMC/DFMC/Iwmcn/FOP2 FY20010.doc

cc: Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Deborah A. Owens

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 46
ADDENDUM H
LEAVE FOR LODGE REPRESENTATIVES

Detective Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President March 5, 2010
Fraternal Order of Police

Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211

Re: Leave for Lodge Representatives
Dear President Cherry:

The purpose of this correspondence is to set forth the understanding reached between
the Police Department and the Fraternal Order of Police (FOP) with regard to leave for Lodge
Representatives:

In addition to the provisions of Article 22, two members of Baltimore City Lodge #3
Fraternal Order of Police, Incorporated as designated by the President shall be granted full time
leaves of absence from their duties for the Police Department, mandated in-service training
excepted, but shall remain on the payroll of the Police Department for the purpose of performing
full-time duties on behalf of the Lodge. During such leave, the members shall continue to
accumulate seniority and shall receive all benefits as if they were fully on duty including, but not
limited to, pension accruals and fringe benefits. This memorandum supercedes any other prior
agreements, written or verbal regarding full time leave for Lodge Representatives.

I reserve the right to revoke the release of the two members upon a 30-day written
notice to the Lodge.

Please acknowledge your concurrence with this understanding by signing below and
returning a signed copy to me.

Sincerely,

Frederick H. Bealefeld, III
Commissioner

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President

FHB/DFMC/Iwmcn/FOP2 FY2010.doc

cc: Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Deborah A. Owens

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 47
ADDENDUM I
BREAKING TIES FOR PROMOTIONS

March 5, 2010

Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President
Fraternal Order of Police
Baltimore City Lodge #3
3920 Buena Vista Avenue
Baltimore, Maryland 21211
Re: Breaking Ties for Promotions
Dear President Cherry:

This will affirm our agreement that the Department will support an FOP’s initiative to
change the current system of breaking ties for promotions to a system where ties are resolved in

favor of the candidate with the greatest seniority.

Sincerely,

Frederick H. Bealefeld, III
Commissioner

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President

FHB/DFMC/lwmcn/FOP2. FY2010.doc

cc: Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Deborah A. Owens

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 48
ADDENDUM J
CHANGING EXISTING HEALTH BENEFITS (PPN)

March 5, 2010
Detective Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President
Fraternal Order of Police
Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue
Baltimore, Maryland 21211

Re: Changing Existing Health Benefits (PPN)

Dear President Cherry:

It is agreed that if the City decides to change from the existing Preferred Provider
Network (PPN) provider to a new provider during the term of this Agreement, the plan provided
by new provider will include substantially similar benefits as the existing PPN Plan. In
determining whether the plans are substantially similar, the plans as a whole shall be examined.

Sincerely,

Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Labor Commissioner
Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President
DFMC//Iwmen/FOP2 FY 2010.doc
cc: Frederick H. Bealefeld, IIT

Gladys B. Gaskins
Deborah A. Owens

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 49
ADDENDUM K
NEGOTIATED HEALTH AND WELFARE BENEFITS
(Other Bargaining Units)

Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President March 5, 2010
Fraternal Order of Police

Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211

Re: Negotiated Health and Welfare Benefits (Other Bargaining Units)
Dear President Cherry:

The members of Units I and II of Baltimore City Lodge No. 3, Fraternal Order of Police,
Inc, shall not receive health and welfare benefits that are less favorable than those subsequently
obtained by another bargaining unit in the City of Baltimore. Health and Welfare benefits
include, but are not limited to, terms and conditions of coverage, amount of monthly premium,
deductibles, co-pays, prescription costs and the employee's share of the monthly premiums. If
another bargaining unit obtains more favorable health and welfare benefits as defined herein,
the members of Units I and II will be offered the more favorable health and welfare benefits. If
the monthly premium co-pays, deductibles, prescription costs, and employee's share of the
monthly premium subsequently obtained by another bargaining unit are less than the amounts
paid by members of this bargaining unit for their health and welfare plan, then in that event, the
members of this bargaining unit shall pay the equivalent lesser amount.

Sincerely,

Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Labor Commissioner
Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President
DFMC/Iwmcn/FOP 2 2010.doc

cc: Frederick H. Bealefeld, IIT
Gladys B. Gaskins

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 50
ADDENDUM L
WAGE REOPENER

March 5, 2010

Detective Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President
Fraternal Order of Police
Baltimore City Lodge #3
3920 Buena Vista Avenue
Baltimore, Maryland 21211
Re: Wage Reopener
Dear President Cherry:

In the event that the Employer shall fail to pay any of the negotiated pay raises due the
members of Units I and II effective July 1, 2009, the Memorandum of Understanding covering
Units I and II will be reopened for the sole purpose of negotiating wage increases.

Sincerely,

Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Labor Commissioner
Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:
Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President
DFMC/Iwmcn/FOP2 FY20010.doc

cc: Frederick H. Bealefeld, IIT

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 51
ADDENDUM M
NO LAYOFF CLAUSE

March 5, 2010

Detective Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President
Fraternal Order of Police
Baltimore City Lodge #3
3920 Buena Vista Avenue
Baltimore, Maryland 21211
Re: No Layoff Clause
Dear President Cherry:

Notwithstanding the language in Article 28, Layoffs, paragraph F of the Memorandum of
Understanding, the Police Commissioner reserves the right to utilize the special provisions in
accordance with the Baltimore City Code, Article 22, Sec. 34(K)(2).

Sincerely,

Frederick H. Bealefeld, III
Commissioner
Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President

DFMC/Iwmcn/FOP 2 FY 2010.doc

cc: Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Deborah A. Owens

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 52
ADDENDUM N
UNIT II OVERTIME PROVISIONS — FLSA SETTLEMENT

Detective Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President March 5, 2010
Fraternal Order of Police

Baltimore City Lodge #3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, Maryland 21211

Re: Unit II Overtime Provisions — FLSA Settlement

Dear President Cherry:

This will affirm the Department's commitment to make the Department’s overtime policy
conform with the terms reached in the settlement of the FLSA litigation.

The Department will amend its policies regarding overtime payment for Sergeants and
Lieutenants in a manner consistent with the terms and conditions of the settlement above
referenced lawsuit.

Sincerely,
Frederick H. Bealefeld, III

Commissioner
Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President
FHB/DFMC/Iwmcn/FOP2 FY 2010.doc

Cc: Deborah F. Moore-Carter
Deborah A. Owens

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 53
ADDENDUM O
FLIGHT PAY FOR AVIATION UNIT COMMANDER

Detective Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President March 5, 2010
Fraternal Order of Police

Baltimore City Lodge No. 3

3920 Buena Vista Avenue

Baltimore, MD 21211

Re: Flight Pay for Aviation Unit Commander

Dear President Cherry:

In the event that the Commander of the Aviation Unit shall be licensed and certified to
operate aircraft assigned to the Unit, he/she shall receive flight pay equivalent to 13% of his/her
current yearly salary. The yearly amount of flight pay shall be added to the Commander’s gross
yearly salary payable in twenty-six (26) equal installments.

Sincerely,

Frederick H. Bealefeld, III
Commissioner

Accepted for the Fraternal Order of Police:

Robert F. Cherry, Jr., President

FHB/DFMClwmcn/FOP 2 FY 2010.doc

Cc: Deborah F. Moore-Carter

FOP Unit 2 FY 2011 54
