COMPOSITE SUMMARY MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE CITY OF DALY CITY
AND
DALY CITY POLICE MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION

July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

The adjustments to wages, hours and conditions of employment that are set forth in this
Memorandum have been discussed by and between the staff representatives of the City of Daly
City (hereinafter called "City") and the representatives of the Daly City Police Management
Association (hereinafter called "Association) and shall apply to all employees in the
classification of Police Sergeant, Police Lieutenant, and Police Captain who are members of the
Association.

The adjustments to wages, hours and conditions of employment that are set forth in the
Memorandum have been discussed in good faith and agreed upon as being an equitable
adjustment of present wages, hours and conditions of employment, ‘between the staff
representatives of the City and the representatives of the Association. Fhe Association
Negotiating committee represents that a majority of the members of the Association have
approved all of the salary and fringe benefit adjustments as set forth herein; and the staff
representatives of the City agree to recommend to the City Council that all of the adjustments as
set forth herein be adopted in full by the City Council in the manner and procedure prescribed by
law.

ARTICLE I- SALARIES
A. There will be no increase in salary during the term of this agreement.

B. 3.7% Total Compensation Reduction

A 3.7% on-going total compensation reduction shall be implemented as an employee
payment of a portion of the employer contribution to CalPERS for the optional retirement
benefit of 3%@55. This equates to an on-going 5.13% of all compensation subject to PERS
(salary, longevity, education, specialty, uniform allowance and any future pay which may be
subject to PERS). However, this is reduced to 4.40% when spread over the 28 month term of
this agreement. The City will pay the .73% (approximate) contribution to PERS that is owed
by employees beginning July 1, 2014 and to sunset on June 30, 2015, in order to continue
“smoothing” the previously negotiated concession (3.7% total compensation concession
which equates to a 5.13% PERS contribution.) Effective June 30, 2015, the bargaining unit
contribution to the employer PERS contribution rate shall adjust to 5.13%.

C. Temporary Assignment Compensation
The City agrees to recommend to the City of Daly City Personnel Board revision to the Rules
and Regulations of the Classified Service, Rule XII Transfers, section 6c “A sworn Police
Sergeant, Police Lieutenant, or Police Captain temporarily assigned the duties of a higher
rank, not vacant, in excess of 5 working days, whether or not consecutive, shall then receive
his/ her permanent salary or the salary of the temporary assignment, whichever is greater.
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding

City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 2

D. Section IRC 414(h)(2)
The City will continue to apply the Section IRC 414(h)(2) to employee retirement
contributions . Eligibility to participate and the irrevocable conditions of one-time only-
election continue tobe pursuant to the regulations as set forth by the Internal Revenue
Service.

ARTICLE I —- RETIREMENT

A. Pursuant to the Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS) contract with the City of Daly
City, the following provisions are provided for affected employees:

Classic Employees: For classic employees as defined by California Public Employees
Retirement System (PERS) and California Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013,
the contract with the Public Employees' Retirement System will provide the following:

. Section 21363.1 — 3% at Age 55 Benefit Formula

. Section 20042 - One-Year Final Compensation

. Section 21329 - Annual Cost-of-Living Allowance Increase (up to 2%)

= Section 21548 - Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2W Death Benefits

. Section 21573 - Third level of 1959 Survivor Benefit

. Section 21024 - Military Service Credit as Public Service

= Section 21023.5 - Public Service Credit for Peace Corps...

‘ Section 21551 — Pre Retirement Death Benefits to continue after remarriage of
survivor

: Section 21620 - $500 Retired Death Benefit

New Employees: For new employees hired on or after January 1, 2013, as defined by
California Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS) and California Public Employees’
Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA) the contract with the Public Employees’ Retirement
System will provide the following:

. Section 21363.1 — 2.7% at Age 57 Benefit Formula

. Section 20037 - Three-Year Average Final Compensation

. Section 21329 - Annual Cost-of-Living Allowance Increase (up to 2%)

. Section 21548 - Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2W Death Benefits

* Section 21573 - Third level of 1959 Survivor Benefit

: Section 21024 - Military Service Credit as Public Service

“ Section 21023.5 - Public Service Credit for Peace Corps...

. Section 21551 — Pre Retirement Death Benefits to continue after remarriage of
survivor

. Section 21620 - $500 Retired Death Benefit

B. Retiree Medical
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding
City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 3

The City’s contribution to retiree health for qualifying annuitants will be increased
annually as required under PEMHCA. For calendar year 2010, the City’s monthly
contribution to qualifying annuitants will be:

Employee Only $357.44
Employee + 1 $357.44
Family $357.44

This amount will be increased in subsequent years, pursuant to Government Code section
22892(c), until such time as the contribution for annuitants described under Article II(C) is
equal to the contribution to employees described in Article III (A).

Effective on Council adoption of Agreement, for those employees retiring with at least
twenty (20) years of full time, regular service with the City of Daly City; the maximum city
contribution to retirees’ PERS health insurance premiums shall be:

Employee Only: $357.44
Employee + 1: $415.00
Family: $435.00

ARTICLE HI —- BENEFITS

. Health and Welfare

The City will contribute toward the City sponsored benefit plans during the life of this
Memorandum of Understanding as follows:

1.

Medical Insurance: The City’s monthly contribution to CalPERS for each eligible active
employee for the purchase of medical insurance will be

Employee Only $357.44
Employee +1 $357.44
Family $357.44

Cafeteria Plan Allowance: The City will maintain a Cafeteria Plan, pursuant to Section
125 of the Internal Revenue Code, for the purpose of providing employees with access to
various health and welfare benefits. Benefits available through the Cafeteria Plan
include, but are not limited to, medical insurance, flexible spending accounts for out-of-
pocket medical expenses and dependent care, dental insurance and life insurance benefits.
The City agrees to provide a Cafeteria Plan Allowance to all employees eligible to
participate in City-sponsored health benefits under Section A of this Article. Any tax
consequences resulting from City contributions to the Cafeteria Plan are the sole
responsibility of the employee.

The City provides each eligible employee with a monthly Cafeteria Plan Allowance of:
No coverage $575.00
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding
City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 4
Employee Only $267.56
Employee +1 $957.56
Employee + Family $957.56

The City will increase monthly Cafeteria Allowance by $50.00 per month to all eligible
employees beginning July 1, 2014 and this $50.00 increase will sunset on June 30, 2015. For

July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015 the cafeteria allowance shall be:

No coverage $625.00
Employee Only $317.56
Employee +1 $1007.56
Employee + Family $1007.56

A 1.27% one-time salary adjustment will go toward monthly Cafeteria amounts for all

members effective July 1, 2014 and will sunset on June 30, 2015. The monthly amounts to

be paid during this period are as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

e Sergeant $219.56
e Lieutenant $261.46
¢ Captain $289.00
The total monthly cafeteria allowance beginning July 1, 2014 and to sunset on June 30, 2015
will be as follows:
Police Sergeant Police Lieutenant Police Captain
Total Café Total Café Total Café
Allowance Allowance Allowance
No coverage 844.56 No coverage 886.46 No coverage 914.00
Employee Only 537.12 Employee Only 579.02 Employee Only 606.56
Employee + 1 1227.12 Employee + 1 1269.02 Employee +1 1296.56
Employee + Employee + Employee +
Family 1227.12 Family 1269.02 Family 1296.56

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

From the Cafeteria Plan Allowance, active employees must purchase the following
qualified benefits:

© City-sponsored dental/orthodontic insurance

e City-sponsored life insurance

e Police Officer Association-sponsored LTD insurance

°
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding

City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 5

The City agrees to allow affected employees who are paying into the POA-sponsored
Long Term Disability insurance coverage to “freeze” any accrued sick leave after
meeting the 60-day waiting period as required by POA-sponsored Long Term Disability
insurance.

Employees may purchase City-sponsored medical insurance from their cafeteria amount.
In the event that additional money is needed to pay for such insurance, the employee shall
pay such additional amount through payroll deduction.

Employees who opt out of participating in the group medical plans sponsored by the City,
and who provide proof of other medical coverage in a group plan, will receive the total
monthly Cafeteria Plan Allowance listed above between July 1, 2014 and sunset on June
30, 2015.

Remaining amounts of Wage Supplements, if any, not used to purchase qualified benefits
shall be added to employee wages. Any such amount of Wage Supplements added to
wages is not compensation for retirement purposes as defined by the California Public
Employees’ Retirement System.

B. Uniform Allowance
Effective January 1, 2009, the uniform allowance is $900.00. Uniform allowance is paid
twice a year on February 1“ and on August 1“. In the event that the City requires any new
article of clothing or equipment to be worn or used by bargaining unit members, then the
City shall provide said article or equipment at no original cost to the employee. Maintenance
or replacement of said article or equipment shall be the responsibility of the employee,
except for safety equipment.

In addition to the safety equipment provided by the City as of December 31, 1986, the City
agrees to furnish at no cost to the employee, flashlights, rain gear and, for personnel assigned
to motorcycles, the following motorcycle equipment: boots, pants, leather jacket, gloves and
protective eye wear. Said equipment shall remain the property of the City.

 

 

 

 

 

 

C. Holidays
Holidays* for affected classifications shall be observed on the following days:
New Year's Day, January | Veteran’s Day (Celebrated)
Martin Luther King Birthday (Celebrated)** Thanksgiving Day (Actual)
President's Birthday (Celebrated) Day after Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day (Celebrated) Christmas Eve, December 24 (four hours)
Independence Day, July 4 Christmas Day, December 25
Labor Day (Celebrated) New Year’s Eve, December 31 (four hours)

 

 

 

 

* Holiday shall mean eight (8) hours
** Day designated by City as Celebrated

 
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding

City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 6

D. Two Hour Personal Leave
City agrees to provide affected employees two (2) hours of personal leave to be taken at any
time during the calendar year that is agreeable to the employee and the employee's
department head in lieu of the employee taking two (2) hours of holiday time off on the
Friday before Easter. Said two (2) hours personal leave shall be taken each year pursuant to
the above conditions and shall not accrue from year to year.

Effective with the 2009 accrual an employee shall not accrue Personal Leave; however the
employee’s Personal Leave accrual shall be transferred to the Association Release Time
Bank.

E. Vacation
Affected classifications shall be eligible to accrue paid leave as vacation at a rate in
accordance with the following schedule:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Completed Years of Employment _| Vacation Schedule

1 through 4 14 days — 112 hours
5 through 12 18 days — 144 hours
13 through 20 23 days — 184 hours
21 or more 28 days — 224 hours

 

 

 

F. Bereavement Leave
A maximum of 5 working days may be taken for Bereavement leave.

G. Court Time

Effective June 23, 2008 affected classifications represented by Police Management
Association who are required to be present in court during their off duty hours for criminal
and traffic cases arising from the performance of their duties, shall be compensated at time
and one-half for the actual hours present in court and, that for appearances when the actual
time is three hours or less, the compensation will be three hours at time and one-half. Upon
adoption, the City agrees to provide up to a maximum of three (3) hours pay at straight time
to off-duty Police Management Association who “stand by” to appear in court in
performance of their duties for criminal and traffic cases at the direction of the District
Attorney’s Office. If an off-duty Police Officer is required to actually be present, the
provision for the three (3) hour minimum pay at time and one-half will replace the Standby
Time in full as described above.

July 1, 2000 is the effective date from which applicable accruals will be calculated for one-
time only qualification. The practice of receiving one (1) hour of straight time compensation
for each working day served in a temporary assignment during a yearly qualifying period will
end no later than the effective date of ratification of the Memorandum of Understanding.
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding

City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 7

ARTICLE IV - EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE PROGRAM

The maximum educational incentive for affected classifications shall be 7%.

A. The incentive pay for Police Captain shall be:

1. Bachelor's Degree from an accredited college or university:
and
2. Master's Degree from an accredited college or university:

B. The incentive pay for Police Lieutenant shall be:

1. POST Management Certificate:
and
2. Associate Degree from an accredited college or university:
or
Bachelor's Degree from an accredited college or university:
or
Master’s Degree from an accredited college or university:

MAXIMUM:
C. The incentive pay for Sergeant shall be:

1, POST Advanced Certificate:

or
2. POST Supervisory Certificate:
and
3. Associate Degree from an accredited college or university:
or

4. Master’s Degree from an accredited college or university:

MAXIMUM:

5% above base salary,

2% above base salary

2% above base salary
2% above base salary
5% above base salary
2% above base salary

7% above base salary

2% above base salary
4% above base salary
3% above base salary
2% above base salary

7% above base salary

ARTICLE V - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

A. Administrative Leave Time:
Captains — one hundred two (102) hours per year
Lieutenants - ninety-two (92) hours per year
Sergeants - eighty-two (82) hours per year

B. For Police Officers promoted to Police Sergeant, the approximate 5% increase will be
calculated on the Police Officer’s current biweekly salary step; the current biweekly flat
dollar difference between the Police Officer Cafeteria Flexible Benefits amount and the

 
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding

City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 8

Police Management Cafeteria Flexible Benefits amount will then be added to determine the
applicable promotional salary step. This will account for Police Management Association’s
conversion of flexible benefit flat dollar amounts to salary in 2000 and 2001.

C. Grievance Procedure

DEFINITION

A grievance is defined as a condition that exists as a result of an unsatisfactory adjustment or
failure to adjust a claim or dispute by an employee or employees relative to the application or
interpretation of The Rules and Regulations of the Classified Service, Departmental Rules
and Regulations, Memorandum of Understanding, established procedures and policies of the
City or Department (whether written or oral) or omissions as to the facts pertaining to a
disciplinary matter.

The following shall not be considered a grievance: the means, manner, method or merit of
any service or activity provided by law or executive order, collective issues of salary, fringe
benefits or working conditions subject to meeting and conferring; and disciplinary action.

No matter shall be considered a grievance until it is first taken up verbally by the employee
and/or a representative of his/her choice with his/her immediate supervisor. (In those
situations where the nature of the problem involves the immediate supervisor or higher, the
problem will be discussed with a supervisor in the next higher rank.)

All grievances shall proceed in accordance with the following:

Step A -An employee who believes that he/she has a grievance shall take up such grievance
with his/her immediate supervisor within 24 calendar days of the occurrence of
knowledge of the alleged grievance. If the employee fails to do so within such time
limit, the alleged grievance may not thereafter be taken up.

The supervisor with whom the problem is discussed shall give a reply within five (5)
calendar days. If the aggrieved is not satisfied with the decision, the following step
will be taken.

Step B -The grievance may be reduced to writing and submitted to the next higher level of
command. The supervisor that receives a grievance will make every possible effort to
resolve the problem through discussion with the aggrieved and/or his or her
representative, other persons involved, investigation of all the facts, etc., and shall
submit a written decision to the aggrieved within five (5) calendar days of receipt of
the written grievance. If upon the receipt of the written decision, the aggrieved takes
no further action within five (5) calendar days, the grievance will be assumed to be
settled. If the aggrieved feels that the decision does not resolve the problem, he or she
may proceed to Step C.

 
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding
City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 9

Step C -The aggrieved shall submit a copy of the written grievance along with a copy of the

written decision and/or other pertinent facts, to the next higher level of command.
The same procedures as outlined in Step B, including the five (5) calendar-day limit,
will be followed at this level of appeal. If the problem is not resolved, Step C,
including the five (5) calendar-day time limit, may be repeated up each succeeding
step in the chain of command until the Chief of Police receives the grievance. The
Chief of Police will render a written decision on the grievance within five (5)
calendar days. If at this point the aggrieved feels that the grievance has not be
resolved, the aggrieved may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police to the City
Manager as outlined in The Rules and Regulations of the Classified Service and/or
Memorandum of Understanding.

Step D -Within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the grievance by the City Manager,

there shall be a meeting between the aggrieved employee and/or the Union Business
Representative and the City Manager or his/her representative, in an attempt to settle
the matter. Within five (5) working days following such meeting, the City Manager
shall make a written reply to the grievant.

Step E -If the grievance has not been settled by the procedure described, the grievance may

within seven (7) calendar days be submitted to the Daly City Personnel Board, if
eligible under The Rules and Regulations of the Classified Service then in effect and
in accordance with paragraph F below, or to advisory arbitration in accordance with
paragraph G below. The grievant has the right to select the Personnel Board process
or advisory arbitration for the appeal, but may not do both.

Step F -The City Council shall act upon the recommendation of the Personnel Board within

thirty (30) calendar days following the date of their receipt of the recommendation.

Step G — Advisory Arbitration. If the grievant is dissatisfied with the decision of the City

Manager in Step D, the grievant may appeal the grievance to advisory arbitration.

The request for advisory arbitration must be given in writing to the City Manager
by the grievant within ten (10) working days from the date of the Step D answer.

An arbitrator may be selected by mutual agreement between the grievant’s
representative and the City’s representative. Should the representatives fail to
mutually agree on a arbitrator, they shall make a joint request to the California State
Conciliation and Mediation Service, the American Arbitration Association, or some
other source mutually agreed upon, for a list of five (5) qualified arbitrators. The
parties shall each strike two (2) names from the list and the remaining person shall
be accepted as the arbitrator. The first party to strike shall be determined by the flip
of a coin.

 
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding

City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 10

The jurisdiction and authority of the arbitrator so selected and the opinions the
arbitrator expresses will be confined exclusively to the interpretation of the express
provision or provisions of the MOU or Rules and Regulations of the Classified
Service at issue between the parties. The arbitrator shall have no authority to add to,
subtract from, alter, amend, or modify any provisions of the MOU or Rules and
Regulations of the Classified Service or impose any limitations or obligations not
specifically provided for under the terms of the MOU or Rules and Regulations of
the Classified Service.

The arbitrator shall be without power or authority to recommend any decision that
would require the City or the administration to do an act prohibited by law.

The fees of the arbitrator will be born equally by the employee or employee
association and the City. However, the City will reimburse up to $15,000 towards the
Police Management Association cost of arbitration in cases where the City Council
goes against the advisory recommendation to the detriment of the employee or
Association.

ARTICLE VI - GENERAL PROVISIONS

A. Composite Summary MOU

The City agrees to bring forward language from prior MOU's between the Association and
the City into a Composite Summary MOU subject to the following:

1. Language that provides for the City to recommend revisions of the Rules and Regulations
to the Personnel Board shall not be retained from year to year once the revision has been
made.

2. Language, which describes matters that are no longer current terms and conditions of
employment, shall not be incluin the Composite Summary MOU.

3. Provisions, which have subsequently been modified by agreement of the parties, shall be
set forth in their current form only.

B. Compensatory Time Pay-Out Practice
The "Request for Pay Form", attached as Appendix B, which reflects the pay-out practice
currently being followed in the Police Department, will continue to be used during the
duration of this Memorandum of Understanding.

C. Sick Leave Accrual
Sick leave accrual maximum shall not apply to sworn police personnel. Effective on
ratification of the July 1, 2005 MOU, the maximum pay out of 50% accumulated, unused
sick leave at the time of retirement, death or abolishment of position remains at a cash value
not to exceed nine hundred (900) hours of pay.
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding

City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 11

D. Retiree Health Savings
Effective July 1, 2008, a retiring employee shall place 100% of eligible Sick Leave Cash Out
(in accordance with Rule XVII, Section 6 of the Rules and Regulations of the Classified
Service) into the City-sponsored Retiree Health Savings Account.

E. Advanced Education Committee
Within twelve (12) months of the adoption of this agreement, representatives from the City
and the Association will form a committee to discuss the advanced educational needs of the
Daly City Police Department. The committee will recommend its findings to the City
Manager.

F. Labor/ Management Committee :

1. The City and the Union will designate a subcommittee to meet and confer on changes to
the Personnel Rules that are within the scope of bargaining and are non-economic.
Nothing would be changed of an economic nature (mandatory economic subject of
bargaining) without mutual agreement of the parties.

2. The parties expressly agree to participate in the formulation/agreement of a Drug Testing
Policy.

ARTICLE VII — HISTORICAL ACTIONS

A. Effective July 1, 1972, the contract with the Public Employees’ Retirement System provided
for the California Highway Patrol pension option (2% at 50) for the Daly City Police
Department.

B. Effective July 1, 1981, longevity pay for Police Captains and Police Lieutenants was
discontinued.

C. Effective July 1, 1982, the contract with the Public Employees' Retirement System provided
Section 20024.2 (one year highest compensation) to the classifications represented by the
Association.

D. Effective July 1 of 1985, the educational incentive amounts for Police Captain and Police
Lieutenant were adjusted. However, for any Lieutenant or Captain who did not qualify for
educational incentive pay on July 1, 1985, equivalent to that received as of June 30, 1985,
he/she continued to receive that percentage of incentive pay until such time as he/she
qualified for the higher rate of incentive pay provided above.

E. Effective July | of 1987, the educational incentive amounts for Police Sergeant were
adjusted. For any Sergeant who did not qualify for educational incentive pay on January 1,
1987, equivalent to that received as of December 31, 1986, he/she continued to receive that
percentage of incentive pay until such time as he/she qualified for the higher rate of incentive
pay provided above.

 
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding

City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 12

F. Effective December 1, 1989 the City contracted with the Health Benefits Division of the
California Public Employee Retirement System (CALPERS) to administer health insurance
programs for its active employees under the stipulations of Government Code Section 22825,
22825.6 and 22857. The City contributes to PERS medical insurance programs for its retired
employees as well as its active employees following the formula for contributions to retirees
who have CALPERS medical insurance programs:

“|... the monthly contribution for annuitants shall be annually increased by an amount not
less than 5 percent of the monthly contribution for employees, until such time as the amounts
are equal; ...”

Current amounts for single-party, two-party and family contributions for eligible annuitants
are available in Human Resources.

G. Effective January 1, 1993, the contract with the Public Employees’ Retirement System
Section 21382.4, provided the third level of 1959 Survivor Benefit, for affected employees.

H. Effective in the first pay period that began after April 25, 1994, affected classifications began
accruing vacation at a rate reflecting three (3) additional days per scheduled year. This
additional vacation accrual was in exchange for eliminating the Admission Day, Columbus
Day, and Birthday holidays.

I. Effective September 1, 1995, the On-Call Lunch Premium (one-half of one percent of base
salary) was eliminated for affected employees. In recognition of the elimination of the On-
Call Lunch Premium, the City agreed to provide one-half of one percent (0.5%) to affected
employees’ base salary.

J. Effective September 1, 1995, the Association and the City agreed to eliminate the minimum
rank differential between top step Police Officer and top step Police Sergeant as referenced in
the MOU between the City and the Association for the period April 1, 1994 through May 31,
1995.

Effective January 1, 2000, the Association and the City agreed that the $550 per month provided
as Cafeteria/Flexible Benefits would be reduced by $100 per month and that $100 per month
would be converted to biweekly salary for all classifications represented by the Police
Management Association. Effective January 1, 2001, the Cafeteria/Flexible Benefits amount
was reduced by an additional $100 per month which was converted to biweekly salary for all
classifications represented by the Police Management Association.

ARTICLE VIII —- DURATION

A. Except as specifically provided, the effective date of this Memorandum of Understanding is
upon ratification by both parties.
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding

City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 13

B. The term of this Memorandum of Understanding shall be from July 1, 2014 through June 30,
2015.

ARTICLE IX - COOPERATION BETWEEN PARTIES

A. The Association and its members agree to continue to actively pursue and jointly
cooperate with the City to increase performance and productivity on the job and to bring
the Department's equipment to acceptable modern standards.

B. Agree to continue to cooperate with the Chief in the development of a cohesive
management team.

Gs Continue to take affirmative actions to encourage individual safety practices by members,
particularly as regards vehicular operations, and jointly cooperates with the City in any
improved safety programs addressing the reduction of injuries or vehicular accidents on
the job.

D. It is hereby agreed by the parties that this Memorandum of Understanding provides for
the amicable adjustment of wages, hours and conditions of employment. Each party
hereby gives full faith and recognition to The Rules and Regulations of the Classified
Service, the Municipal Code of the City of Daly City, and the laws of the State of
California (including equal employment and fair employment statutes), and shall fully
respect the rights, obligations and privileges reserved to the other by such rules,
regulations and laws. The Association agrees that during the term of this Memorandum of
Understanding, there shall be no strike, no picketing, stoppages of work for any cause, no
work slowdowns, interruption of the normal conduct of the City's business, or any other
job action by any of its members. The City agrees that during the term of this
Memorandum of Understanding it will not engage in any lockout of its employees.
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding

City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 14

ARTICLE X — SIGNATORIES

Signatories to the Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Daly City and the Daly
City Police Management Association for July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015.

STAFF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CITY REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DALY CITY
OF DALY CITY POLICE MANAGEMENT
ASSOCIATION

 

Ss altbie

 
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding
City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 15
APPENDIX A - BIWEEKLY SALARY SCHEDULE
POLICE MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
March 1, 2012
RANGE & POSITION STEP 1 STEP2 STEP3 STEP4
235A POLICE SERGEANT $3,754 $3,942 $4,139 $4,346
POST Advanced Certificate (2%) $75 $79 $83 $87
OR

POST Supervisory Certificate (4%) $150 $158 $166 $174
PLUS

Associate Degree (3%) $113 $118 $124 $130
OR

Master’s Degree (2%) $75 $79 $83 $87
240A POLICE LIEUTENANT $4,337 $4,553 $4,781 $5,020
POST Management Certificate (2%) $87 $91 $96 $100
AND

Associate Degree (2%) $87 $91 $96 $100
OR

Bachelor's Degree (5%) $217 $228 $239 $251
OR

Master’s Degree (2%) $87 $91 $96 $100
245A POLICE CAPTAIN $5,011 $5,262 $5,525 $5,801
Bachelor's Degree (5%) $251 $263 $276 $290
AND

Master's Degree (2%) $ 100 $105 $111 $116

STEP 5

$4,563

$91
$183
$137

$91

$5,271

$105
$105
$264

$ 105

$6,091

$305

$122
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding

City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 16

APPENDIX B - REQUEST FOR PAY FORM

To: CITY MANAGER Date
City of Daly City

Re: Request for cash payment for accumulated time:
A. I request to be paid for hours of "other" accumulated time presently due me.
Name:

Signed:

Approved - Department Head

Approved - City Manager

Distribution after approved by City Manager:

Oc: Payroll

Ce: Chief’s Office

Distributed on
DCPD — 39
Revised 01-14

 
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding
City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 17

APPENDIX C - DISCIPLINARY APPEAL PROCEDURE

The City’s disciplinary’ appeal procedure provides for an evidentiary hearing before the
Personnel Board. The Board has the authority to make an advisory recommendation to the City
Council. The City Council has final authority.

A. Personnel Board Appeal Hearing

L.

If, within the five (5) day appeal period, the employee involved does not file an
appeal, unless good cause for failure is shown, the action of the City Manager or
Department Head shall be considered final and binding.

If, within the five (5) day appeal period the employee files an appeal as specified in
the Letter of Disciplinary Action by sending a letter to the City Manager and copy to
the Director of Human Resources, the City Manager shall instruct the Director of
Human Resources to request the Personnel Board set an appeal hearing.

At its next regular or special meeting, the Personnel Board shall set a hearing date
which shall not be more than sixty (60) days from the date of the filing of the
employee’s appeal. All interested parties shall be notified in writing of the date, time
and place of the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.

All hearings shall be open unless the employee requests a closed hearing.

The Chairperson of the Personnel Board shall issue subpoenas at the request of
either the City or the appealing employee prior to the commencement of the hearing.
Subpoenas must be served at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time
attendance is compelled.

The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence
and witnesses, except hereinafter provided. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted
if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in
the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or
statutory rules which might make improper the admission of the evidence over
objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of
supplementing or explaining other evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to
support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The
rules of privilege shall be effective to the extent that they are otherwise required by
statute to be recognized at the hearing, and irrelevant and unduly repetitious
evidence shall be excluded.

The Chairperson of the Personnel Board shall rule on the admission or exclusion of
evidence.

Each party shall have these rights:

a) To be represented by legal counsel or other person of the party’s choice
b) To call and examine witnesses

 
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding
City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 18

c) To introduce evidence

d) To cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues

e) To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to
testify

f) To rebut the evidence against them

9. Oral evidence shall be taken only under Oath.

10. The hearing shall proceed in the following order unless the Chairperson, for special
reason, otherwise directs:

a) The City shall be permitted to make an opening statement.

b) The employee shall be permitted to make an opening statement.

c) The City shall present its case in chief.

d) The employee may then present a defense and offer evidence in support.

e) The parties may then, in order respectively, offer rebutting evidence, unless the
Chairperson of the Board for good reason permits them to offer evidence upon
their original case

f) Closing arguments or briefs shall be permitted at the discretion of the
Chairperson of the Personnel Board.

11. The Personnel Board shall determine the relevance, weight and credibility of
testimony and evidence and shall base their findings on the preponderance of
evidence.

12. The Personnel Board shall render its “Findings, Recommendations and Conclusions”
as soon as possible after the conclusion of the hearing and no later then ten (10) days
after conducting the hearing unless otherwise stipulated by the parties. The Board’s
Decision shall set forth the recommendations as to each of the charges and the
reasons therefore.

13. The Personnel Board may recommend to the City Council the sustaining or rejecting
of any or all of the charges filed against the employee. The Board may recommend
sustaining, rejecting, or modifying the disciplinary action invoked against the
employee.

City Council Appeal Hearing

The decision of the Personnel Board is advisory only. The proposed decision shall be
filed with City Council and served on the employee. If a suspension, dismissal or
demotion is not sustained by the City Council, they shall set forth the recommended
effective date the employee is to be reinstated, which may be any time on or after the date
the disciplinary action went into effect. If the Council does not sustain or modifies a
suspension, they shall set forth the effective dates of the modification, which may be any
time on or after the date the suspension went into effect.

The matter is set before City Council at the next scheduled meeting that falls more than
five days from the filing of the proposed decision. The City Council hearing shall be open

 
Composite Summary Memorandum of Understanding
City of Daly City and Daly City Police Management Association
July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015

Page 19

unless the employee requests a closed hearing. The hearing shall consist of summary
arguments by the City’s representative and the employee’s representative.

The City Council may recess to Closed Session to deliberate after the presentation of the
summary arguments. The City Council announces in Public Session its determination; it
may affirm, deny, or modify the Personnel Board’s recommendation. The determination
of the City Council is final and binding.

 

 
