ony AF UF WwW NY PB

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

RESOLUTION NO. _ 16-15
RESOLUTION OF THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHICO APPROVING
“MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE CITY OF CHICO AND THE
CHICO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION (CPOA) REGARDING PAY, HOURS, AND

OTHER TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT FOR THE PERIOD OF JANUARY
1, 2015 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2017" (2015 MOU-CPOA)"

WHEREAS, the Council has previously recognized the Chico Police Officers’ Association
(“CPOA”) as the exclusive representative of sworn Police Department employees of the City of
Chico (“City”); and

WHEREAS, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 3500 et. seq. and
Chapter 2R.72 of the Chico Municipal Code (“Personnel and Employee Representation Rules”),
authorized representatives of CPOA and of City have met and conferred in good faith concerning
matters within the scope of representation; and

WHEREAS, City and CPOA have memorialized their agreement regarding matters within
the scope of representation pursuant to the above referenced code provisions in the
“MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE CITY OF CHICO AND THE
CHICO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION (CPOA) REGARDING PAY, HOURS, AND
OTHER TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT FOR THE PERIOD OF JANUARY
1, 2015 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2017" (2015 MOU-CPOA);” and

WHEREAS, all current negotiated items have been incorporated into the 2015
MOU-CPOA; and

WHEREAS, City and CPOA have executed the 2015 MOU-CPOA and the City Clerk has
made copies of the 2015 MOU-CPOA available to this Council for its consideration; and

WHEREAS, this Council has reviewed the 2015 MOU-CPOA and finds that it should be
approved.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Council of the City of Chico as follows:

1. The 2015 MOU-CPOA is hereby approved and supersedes in all respects any and
all terms and provisions of all prior memorandums of understanding between City and employees
tepresented by CPOA, except to the extent that any term or provision of this 2015 MOU-CPOA

expressly provides otherwise.

HR Page 1 of 2 L-AGR-12-4-2

SAMOUS\CPOA\2015 MOU\CPOA 2015 MOU RESOLUTION.DOCK
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

22

23

24
25
26
27
28

 

 

2. The City Manager is hereby authorized to make appropriate adjustments to the

current and 2014-15 Annual Budgets, to City’s Administrative Procedure and Policy Manual, and

such other rules and regulations of City as may apply, and to perform all other acts necessary to

implement the terms and conditions set forth in the 2015 MOU-CPOA.
THE FOREGOING RESOLUTION WAS ADOPTED by the Council of the City of Chico

at its meeting held on April 7, 2015, by the following vote:

AYES: Coolidge, Fillmer, Schwab, Morgan, Sorensen

NOES: Stone
ABSENT: Ritter
ABSTAIN; Non&
DISQUALIFIED; None

hy

rah R. Presson, City Clerk

ATTEST:

   

  

AR

SAMOUSICPOAWOIS MOUNCPOA 2015 MOU RESOLUTION.DOCX

APPROVED AS TO FORM & CONTENT;

 

Page 2 of 2 L-AGR-12-4-2

 
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN
THE CITY OF CHICO
AND
THE CHICO POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION (CPOA)
REGARDING PAY, HOURS, AND OTHER TERMS AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT FOR THE PERIOD OF
JANUARY 1, 2015 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2017
(2015 MOU - CPOA)

Pursuant to California Government Code Section 3500 et seq., the City of Chico, through its
designated representative, (“City”) and the Chico Police Officers’ Association (“CPOA”) have met and
conferred in good faith regarding various items relating to pay, hours, and other terms and conditions of
employment for the employee unit represented by CPOA.

As a result of the aforementioned meetings, City and CPOA have reached agreement as provided
in this Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) pursuant to California Government Code Section
3505.1.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 1 of 57
TABLE OF CONTENTS Page Number

1,1 DEFINITIONS ...cccescessessessessecsesesssssessesesseesnesnscersosssessessssensusensessnsensanssessessesuesutesscsasenesnesneenaneenesse 9

 

 

C. Structure of MOU

 
 

1,2. (BRRECTHOR MOU ssssssssscsssseassexasonsasussesnewovnsesassasezeonavesesssrasanesanensancenansnaannsanwntmnnnne eresmmnencereeess 10
A, Annual Budget(s) and: AR KP wsssssssssesvessvcenssenswvasvesnsevesoswnsssaasasvansenssenassanarunrdvivvverccaureeamesveayanee 10
B. City, State, or Federal Laws, Rules, or Regulations ...........c..scssssessssssessssssessersessesssesssereeensssene 10

VB — TERM estcsvirsecentennttitiontteisinssaastsesienoten tdi get50UbediHtsasonnesarsnenonneraeensennnennnengonnnsQisaslSEsU0U 06300200598 10
A, TO vcsssessessssssseseesssensessscssessnseansessesnsanenssssssssnssenvessnssaecansescssessnessssesessusssnesaneeecsavesneesseesnasseeenseaees 10
B. Renewal or Termination ............2.:ccccsssssssssesssessessssscssssnsencavesseneeneasesssseesesseseesecsenseenseenseneeneeessces 10

1.4 WAIVER OF MEET AND CONFER OBLIGATION DURING TERM OF MOU .........0:000 11
i, “WIN EE csscsssvesvseccessesesvcarsersesssverevesuessensutecvessavsveuvsedttevotissettsvucibsuwavuketasvesusstasseeisveuansenensastannessess 11
B. Matters Not Covered by this MOU.... wal]

T.5 LIMITED: REOPENERS wisssssissssesovssesscsevvvievevssnssvssssesssssassvursasarvansvisiissscsnestnsnsesessonavitessouanseiesvens ll

1.6 LETTER AGREEMENT FOR VARIATION OF PROVISIONS ........csscsssssssssesseessesesesereenes 11

LZ AMENDMENTS scccssssenavcoxsssyenvesoreonsonosonncceniensonnveoneranssssenneaaueursoanscen oosansansnnsanonunensersessssenenssveres 11

1.8 NON-DISGRIMINATION ssssesssansassnesuescisaareornnenenseyneeerreeneeemeeeimeevacemnneueeceuey eucanamsaneneoanennns 12
A, GPOA Membership isninsnsanmncvennmmananmnnaceneamnenmanvanimamenmennenmummanramaeTE 12
B. Protected Group: Statue esicccisssieaccanssss aca ssrersnreenueunenanseremnnceansanemuenenareneuen 12

1.9 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY PLAN .0.....csseesessssssesssssessscseescssssnssvesssasseseenaneess 12

1.10 SEVERABILITY

 

1.11 EXHIBITS INCORPORATED ..

ARTICLE TWO: SPECIAL PROVISIONS - CPOA.....cssssssssseesssersnessececsssesssnssensennessnsensesssnnessnsesanesees 12
2.1 RECOGNITION ......escssesssssecsssessnsesseessssensseseessnsessessssseesnessssesssnerantessnsessneesonessneavessnansegesensestages 12
22 CPOA- MEMBERSHIP.....sscsssersssssssvssssvesseersessvovssnossroserssusnusetnsonsonsvessuensossssesunsrsovesvonveseessenssesten 13

2015 MOU-CPOA. L-AGR-12-4.2

Page 2 of 57
2.3. CPOA DUES OR SERVICE FEE. ......ccssssssessesssssessssnsssssccsncesesssecasensessecsecssessessncssnecnsecascenseesnaees 13

Agency Shop Agreement .........esesesseseseessesesseeseesseersseesussseseesesssenssesseeaeenceneesssecatentssetsessneeseass 13
Dues or Service Fee Deduction...........ccccesssssssesseesesessesssessssnessssessssesseeacsatssssesseeassersseeseeseseanees 13
Dues or Service Fee Deduction Discrepancies ..0.0.........sssesesssesesessesssesereesteassensereucensseessnssneeneen 13
Conscientious Objector Status... esseesessseeeetesssesosseesseusesssecssseseenssessessesessessussessessisenecneees 14

2.4 NOSTRIKE PLEDGE...

 
 

2.5 CPOA TIME BANK 15
A,  Maximunt Houtsisnccosnonsnnimcanisaminmnunanmnemenmmmnmmnsa ennncamnnmenss 15

B. Employee Contribution ssssissavsscsssssccsnenszasenanansasnviancanascnsrscosssmarvarsenemeanarsacaroccasesnianmnaicearennetans 15

C. Scheduling and Chief of Police Approval Of Use......csessssscesseseseesesesssesseserseceseatsseeseeniessesee 15

D.  CPOA Approval Of Use ..........cscsesstcsssssssssessessscssseesseesossessosneenesnseosanensascesasequmtsasessssetsaneseeseannsesn 15
ARTICLE THREE: SPECIAL PROVISIONS - EMPLOYEE ...........sesssscsssesssssersrsesecsnsseoreesnescesssenseneenes 16
3.1 ATTENDANCE AT GRIEVANCE HEARINGS wcsecsscssssssscssssesstssresscssessssssssnseaneenessseessses 16
3.2  WRITTENCRESPONSES ....s0sessessvsvvisrsssossessaseverornnevevuscsossvevesvestssturssscnssevesveseuberenecoueserecaversiees 16

A. Performance Evaluations

  

 
 

B. Written Reprimands. 16

©, Chiefof Police Response tesisccscscpesccanc sss cneenear veces rapingygeerepeanapnennioncesaemueanraeuerseavewnusenarnvescvensseeets 16
ARTICLE FOUR: SPECIAL PROVISIONS =. CITY ssciisssssissseresstosnsnssncsrsseesecesversersscsaversvesedsesteerevennen 16
4.1 ADA ACCOMMODATION opensuse sane eenaneanemenmr enema maaan 16
ARTICLE FIVES PAY. vsssscspvscsnoxaesvccanesssesoneevenssxavsnrensnenavevavensvonvsauaesanovensavavencavaneceasosansnsnanenniseacsscaasssseasens 17
5. BASIC PAY sssssccsrsccruserascesesrsves sess cevecessseussestsvorseny sour vetevsnsasesr ctr eonreaaveversavsccrsenreer ainemeeeneonteere 17
Ay Established sccsscssvsxeaucenescresssavesrenvecrreasarieaunsvavanrsrarean sone anroaser ae nearer emcee eco mre neon 17

B. Pay Range Increases ...........sscsscssssssssesnesensenssnsesnnsssnessessneensensscsssesnsesseavsvessauessaraesternesesneenesenasieess 17

C. Fourteen Step Pay Range for New Hires... 18

D. Regular Pay... 18

E. — Pay Step Progression.........ssssessessessesesssssssscessesssssesseeesssacssesusessessssesencenseessesesenseseasecsnesnnserseeesse 18

F. Promotions - Effect on Basic Pay .......ssssssssssessesssssesseecsscsssnssasssesessusescassassceseeeneseeeeseeneeneseeeseesae 19

G. Computation of Pay ......c.ecssssesssssssssescssssnssessessessesssesnssnessnssetsessesussessesaseneasenesesesessnesneeaeanesensne 19
2015 MOU-CPOA. L-AGR-12-4-2

Page 3 of 57
wv

$ : wn wa wa ‘
Of PY BPR OPP eB DA DP eH DO De BOO wes

w

wn

OVERTIME PAY sccnsssvsiscssvussssersinssevveasustvevesiseneseiisstinsssucasesnssvisbeseneetsssavessonnesonstbeanntesetesttinists 19

Method of Earning Overtime sssssessavssessssasssssaapagsesensccssnssscsersvssssnecvesnueiitansanmeinas oenepeseessecrcnenece 19
Method: of Compensation ssssccssvesvecsssssscresesnasupsasnicnesnenaneesevesnveavasnsseaqunssssegrsuanianseusenstinerenserenesen 20
Employees Working in Management Positions............scsssesessssesssessesetsesesetssnssntesssseneseesetseeenee 20
FLSA Work: Period Defined jssvssscissssuvoisnsasussavvsseasesscsurscussnsssarvagsecusventastenuasavencesoavasnnananaaavossnnss 20

COMPENSATORY TIME OFF IN LIEU OF OVERTIME PAYMENT ..

 
 

 
 

Accrual.. 20
Utilization .....cesesssesssessesscsteenecsecsssssnessessecssscsseseucsssessccencesessseeesssssessneeaseceessnesseesessstesessueeseseeceeuense 21
Payment for Unused CTO........:sssssssssessessecssssesesesssesesssssessssssssesaessessuesecsesassessesseserareseeseenssossaaee 21
City Manager Authority ......cscsssssssscsecsssssenccnssessessesesssssetsnssessseensssesnsaceassseensseesesasscassncensensene 21
Bi-Annual Budget CTO Payment Limitations...........ccssssssesseesssesneeesessessneeseeseesneeneeseesneenseesee 21
SELECTIVE TIME OFF IN LIEU OF OVERTIME PAYMENT.......::.csssssssssssssessesenssssssessose 21
AGGr Mal os scceccsssevncasssieecesuvonsscvenesovessunanssusevonnatusnysoysccar acces scousenuctsncsrdevsvseteneepbonpestoaddensnseaeurestens 21
Utilization issescsssssssusssasncvessesasvesanwsensvnstesoassossnvessvsiesaseccsuseusaserssesavvsepuveuuensasavssuvanwsarbsjensoyaaucicasectee 21
Conversion of STO When Employees Leave Patrol Division... wei
Payment for Unused STO... 22
City Manager’ Authority sssssssissssicsosssassavasssasaseanccecaraasiicveanoestpsscsenmancinaniaessneseosenmmestaa meee 22
CALLBACK, BAY vccsscssssssrasssssaseccosssssencosscaseesonsectsvscics tesssstua tenses ctu sesstnesvansetaseaececasarsentesdheabve 22

 

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2

Page 4 of 57
@

s a
hm oop pe Oo

an

 

Overtime Pay oo... eseeessessesesesceseansnentsnseeeneneenssessenssesasseessaesesatseessacsisassnsueseesenensensagseareneaseraeesee 25.
ON-CALL PAY .....sescssssescsessssessessassscessesseeassenessserssessnssauecuecesessacassosessessascaiesssssecsssansenecsncnsensnse 25
Gemerally..ccecesceessescscsssssesssssessesssssesstsssesssssssensossuegassesssetsesssessussaesennesisensssatsntaneesnesnesseee 25
Assignment to On-Call Status....cesecsesscssssessesssseesseseecsesteesseeserserssesneensetececrsenssuecessesnseuesseanens 26
Compensation .......cecccssscsssssesseescescesessesssessosessuscseseonssscereceserssecessscsseseeetsncenccseenssessosessenecaneenass 26
DIFFERENTIAL PAYS...

Shift Differential Pay vss cccsnsesscssanveesssnn mcm mnsaunnieremveer emma 26
CANINE CARE. AND: MAINTENANCE PAY ssssssssscsscccssassvssnoosssssicenensoseansasvataccnsaseasssononssianey 27
Established osississssaseesvsssessoxesvesimavesscvacavoscsssnenvewvestusaarvesvsacncaevsoviacscisnyeevsstuasrbuervegnristauweteap tines 27
Assignment, Hours, and Damage Limitations .............csscssssssesssssesscesencssessseseneessecessseeeasenene 27
Compensation sscscccsswwivescisncsessasesasssieess e.t.t0tt Dba cecercncesnenessnceensarsacaeetenesseatassersenssendbennelilenctnecnsernes: 27
POST CERTIFICATION PAY visssecsssessessssesesseocsssesssnccssetersneesrutesneeessnnecsscesarscsnesseassnessonsenerseses 28
Established .........c:ccscessessessessscsvsnseascevsossesacencassavsssssaessestessesseesssseessunescesscsecseeneeasevaseaneesesesessaeanees 28

 
 

 

Determination of Eligibility for POST Certification Pay ................04
Compensation ... 28
ARTICLE SIX! EMPEOYEE. BENEFITS sosovsvsvecessnascisuveovsssensacorsssveusecttvostansevononeanssevserouscvsvvenvetunviesiseos 29
HOEIDAYS | vossssessrvesssssiseruennserivessensacencivciuestnseissinuencinngengennnay oer cgunrpareneiansrnaeercennunnanieeNappiges 29
Establighed .s4jsnsssvssssasvszensansasarensnsusunrsarerssvsrsaninrasworsaneysensusesannaseranasvonnweentssenntavanmsecnsrennsnanmvese 29
Holidays = Observed swrasvssssssessssssesnenencnercunsarcea maar seenmnonanrnesn amnesia eer nmnaeene 29
Emergency Call Bato. ccsswarsssx csussneraconaseener ncnesesrecaan enna sna arerernmnenn narnia 29
HOEIDAY. TIME: BANK. sssssassvvssssccaceneopsvsnvancsussearexonencuasguanenanssusvauop numa esaeuceowepeaesswivseseen 29
Acernal, - Generally scavceressossmnsccvecwseuxssccessevasscn assy ieavessaswsswh cou eweuses NON TUSAGDNAASTI NNT LETRN VE EAOR ERNE OTNA 29
UB Zab On ssscscssssssencesvessuccevsssavassiasbusasassaseyUsiCiasasINUNES hoennesteroaoneenbenssansratonncenneons USHUAIA TE Bones 30
Newly Hired Employees Accrual ...
Holiday Time Bank Balance Upon Termination ..........csccsssssssseeseerssecerenssscesssssnsensesseesnsensasenean 30
Proration for Unpaid Leave wo... cessesssssscessessesssscossscossesesessecsseenssnsessscossesseacsessecasarensneanseasenennens 30
INSURANCES ..ssssssssssssessessssnsessnenssneesseecnssssnecssssesssssensuesssnecsssessasecsssesssssssvesesensessnansssessssssanesse 31
2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2

Page 5 of 57
a an

an
PX OD pH OD Pe MDB OO Dw D

Medical and Dental Insurance ........ccscssseessessessestsssessesessssersessussssstsscsssscsessassnsanesseenseassnsssesseeee 31

Insurance Advisory Committee ...c.ccsscessesseesssssessessssessessessssncsnsssesssscssesssnsensssssseenssassaeesseasees 31
Approval of Future Plan Changes... ..sscsscssesesssssssesasssssssssssssssssssssseravsseseeessessesessesssnesenaes 31
Thifie Ing ura eiacccisccc avec ssnnvsvesnuesscuveveveconisnnsnvscevsserssussanteseovssentetsenvensenatesasseseussunstsssuertesseseansesets 32
Long-Term, Disability: Insurance ssecscssscesessesvnesesansoxeseeesee sawsscnveccnspesncnstevassercecevitevsetessvensanveavsensnss 32

  

Vision Insurance ... 33
LEAVE... 33
Sick Leave evcsscccsescscrscassessssancessusvsnerivncaicarsneuassatcactsnssvcsassasavawoan sanssnvenaneurasexccanvesannsnisninunuenneseeeents 33
Leave of Absence With Pay - Birth or Adoption of Child ....c.csessssesesceeesessessestssessnesessennee 35
Leave of Absence Without Pay........cscsssssssesssessssssssseessessssnessnssnssssecsnecnscansssssseessesnseessecssesaeests 36
VACATION QV... cscccccsseesctesssescasseasscscsnscssaccnssensesssensaasssessesenensvanentorsersssnsneesscesessauseasecosnensenseceneneene 36
Accrual - Generally... csssccssesssesscseescssseessssesessessessessaneseeeossorsssensseseassssestsssrenneenssenseceeses 36
DHRTZELIGT....scscresvevessivesnesosoasnvitovtavsensvversenstnversvestevysuvrensenssystshecesvrenronnctersaseseesnsas enseevanersseavenses 37
Effect of Termination of Employment.........c.sscsssesssssesessesesscenseersessscsarsnsesesesvssesseensesessassansensee 37

RETIREMENT PLAN.

 

Established and City Contribution - Employees Hired Before January 1, 2013 or Classic

  

Monitors ccssnsscacpucaversscnsenssriacessscescossceussusessasecscrwacsussesstuceeroveniwascassesasarouensossaayaneueneseeasenmmanean ves 37

B. Employees Hired On or After January 1, 2013.2... sssssssssessssesssscsssssssessssssenesersssesseseeseseeseees 37
C, City Contribution sisi csssessearssecvcasercesevennesnsrsersneawnsosecaneveniesswesaniasvaeevovavenepeaassancasimecnamanswesennnsy 37
D. Employee Cost Sharing of Additional Benefits............0...cscsssesssssssssssssssesesssssneosseeaneeneenseneaness 38
E. Old Age and Survivors Disability Insurance Program ........ssssssesssssscssssssssssssesreresesesseeesesseseseeee 38
F. Deferred Compensation Plan ...........cs.esssecssceseesseestseeessesscseeatsnsensssusscensncacacanesesssecesnenseasessosens 38
G. Consistency with PEPRA .0.....c.eccsccsesssessseestestessesstsensssessesevesasssancesccsuesensanssaseasseessassnsssneeaessnes 39
6.7 RETIREE MEDICAL EXPENSE AND HEALTH INSURANCE TRUST... 39
A. Established . 39
B. PUndiing ooo. esescescssesseeseseesessnesscssssesnesssssesseesssnessessnssssnssnssssassnessesseesssesensersauestsessenusenereesaseeataense 39
C. Purpose and Restrictions ...........ceecsessessessesseensesesssensstssesseressessssseestenssnssnesnensseesosseenssessuessesessee 39
D. Continued Participation for Promoted Employee ..........s.sscsssessessssssesssssesnesessssseeensesssesnsennees 40
2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2

Page 6 of 57
 

  

 
 

6.8 VARIOUS BENEFITS ........cescsssessssesssssseserssssesessssessesssssassesesssssseessssnsssessassessscessensssessessnesaniess 40
A. Employee Assistance Programm .......esscssssssssessessesseessssesessassneescaressssecseaneesencesseessesneeneeseeseenesaneese 40
B. Defense of Employee from Civil Actions or Proceedings...........ssssssssssessssssesesernessesssesseeessne 40
Cy Section 125 Plan wo... ceeceeseeseeceesssesssseessessueestssssssumessssusenesssssessueenucssssnensessaeeevessneanegqeatsessaessnee 40
DDL, “WRTASETES, «vcrinerscsesusesvounvesvatnvets sussennonuarsisavecststah inivevesseveve este esLve eens ravine nUsevsaTis¥seKsueecsEveverveseNs 40

E. Protective Clothing and Equipment..

F. Cleaning Service Accommodation ...
G. Federal Insurance Contributions Act - Medicare Contribution ..........ccs:ccsssssessessessessesseseeneessse 41
H, ‘Health.and Fitness: Facilities: ccssccssssscvssesarsscessssssvansssorevepsearsonnssrvaneecneanepssanvenensrenrssceansianasnenaeay 42
ARTICLE:SEVEN: WORKING CONDITIONS scisssssssasccassassssssssssssvsssvavsrsasssaesiscanosessasaseniavcssnssessasecesis 42
7.1 HOURS AND SHIFTS ......ccssssssessessneesessessseesscsesssnvsnnesanecssssnssssessssanssscessseseesessanecesessessncanseanenens 42
Av Gemerallyieccccccessecsscssosssesteseessssesesseesssseseenseersoesseeseeseencsessssstessessatsessecseeeesueeseeesaeeneesesneeneets 42
B. Work and Meal Breaks ....c.sscssesssssssssessescesssrsssesssssesssnissscsocsseesscsorsssnsescesnesacssssdicenesseesenesseeniats 43
C. Specific Hours and Shifts... essesecsesssesseseenssesssessessessseseesesnsneseesensansassenseeeecsnsseseersesaeeeeseneene 43
D. Hours and Shift Modification . 46
7.2. SAFETY... 47
A, Safety Rules:ccccncgpenpeesenmnscn reer nueermener mann eeena emer 47
B, ‘Work Stations; Equipment, and Tool s'.ais:ss.osscannssesovsssxsceanssaconsssnseansneewssiiioesvenesessresriccosauneanscs 48
73 JOINT LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE ose: ssecssssevsrcessosavavensnssusuenspuresnssssnascrncuessecavesace 48
ARTICLE EIGHT: BINDING ARBITRATION csisissscarssvssencssuvvessnsaassvavecousnsovenvassausensanenceeasssennevsvenssaecesss 48
8.1 AGREEMENT TO BINDING ARBITRATION wessssiionrenusnrnmaccmmmnmncmmmanianamanmsraa 48
8.2 PROGRESSION TO BINDING ARBITRATION ....ssessssesssecssstessersceetessnssserecsseesnessseeesseseaveces 48
8.3 REVIEW BY CITY MANAGER.........ssscsscsscssssseessssessssssensanessonsssensssecsussssssassnsaveneaceessensnneneeseess 49
8.4 SELECTION OF ARBITRATOR. we AD
8.5 AUTHORITY OF ARBITRATOR... 2 49
8.6 COST OF ARBITRATION .........scsscscsssssesssersesssessssesscssessnesensensssessaessassassasessesasennensscenseneeeseesss 49
EXHIBIT “A” = SCHEDULE OF JOB TITLES ....cssssessssssseesesssostssrsseassarvssnsenvecssrteusbsnntorsasoucstastetensearsesse 51
EXHIBIT “B” - SCHEDULE OF BASIC HOURLY PAY RATES Wu... csssssssessssssessssssesesssesssesesesssesnaese 52
2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2

Page 7 of 57
EXHIBIT “C” - HEALTH INSURANCE CARRIERS AND CONTRIBUTIONS
EXHIBIT “D” - VACATION ACCRUAL SCHEDULE...........s-ssssssssssssssessssssessones
EXHIBIT “E” - PATROL SECTION SHIFT SCHEDULE.............sesssesssssesssssssesees

2015 MOU-CPOA

L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 8 of S7
ARTICLE ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS

11 DEFINITIONS

A. Generally. Except as otherwise provided herein, all words and phrases used in this
MOU shall have the meanings as set forth in the Charter of the City of Chico (“Charter”), the Chico
Municipal Code (“CMC”), the City of Chico Personnel and Employee Relations Rules (“PERRs”), the
City of Chico Administrative Procedure and Policy Manual (“AP &P”), and in California Government
Code Section 3500 et seq. entitled, the “Meyers-Milias-Brown Act” (“MMBA”).

B. Specific Definitions. The following words or phrases shall have the meanings as set

forth below, unless the context in which any word or phrase is used requires another meaning:

1. “Chief of Police” shall mean the Chief of Police of the Chico Police Department
or a designated representative.
2. “City” shall mean either the City of Chico, or the City Manager, or any

Department Head thereof acting on behalf of the City of Chico or the City Manager, with regard to the
provisions of this MOU.

3. “Compensatory Time Off” (“CTO”) shall mean compensating time off which is
granted in lieu of pay for overtime hours worked.

4. “Council” shall mean the City Council of the City of Chico.

5. “Employee” shall mean permanent and probationary full-time employees of City
who ate represented by CPOA and covered by this MOU, as set forth in Exhibit “A,” entitled “Schedule
of Job Titles.”

6. Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”) shall mean the Fair Labor Standards Act
of 1938, as amended and as implemented, through Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

1 “Pay” shall include the term “wages” as used in MMBA.

8. Public Employees Retirement System (“PERS”) shall mean the California
Public Employee Retirement System.

9. “Registered Domestic Partner” shall have the same meaning as provided in the
Califomia Family Code Section 297.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 9 of 57
Cc Structure of MOU. This MOU is structured with Articles, Subarticles, Sections,
Subsections, Paragraphs, and Subparagraphs. As an example, the description of voluntary shift changes
is found in Article Seven - Working Conditions, Subarticle 7.1 - Hours and Shifts, Section C. — Specific
Hours and Shifts, Subsection 2 - Shift Rotation, and Paragraph c — voluntary shift changes. This would
be specifically cited as 7.1.C.2.c.

12 EFFECT OF MOU

A. Annual Budget(s) and AP&P. If any provisions of the current City Annual Budget and
any AP&P are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this MOU, the provisions of this MOU shall
prevail and shall, upon approval by Council, supersede any such inconsistent provisions.

B. City, State, or Federal Laws, Rules, or Regulations. Unless otherwise specifically
provided for herein, this MOU shall not affect or supersede the Charter, the CMC, the PERRs, or any
other rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. Further, this MOU shall not affect any Federal or State
statutes, or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder.

13 TERM

A. Term. Unless otherwise specifically provided for herein, all of the terms, conditions, and
provisions of this MOU shall be effective for the period of January 1, 2015, through December 31, 2017.
Such term shall remain in full force and effect; however, such terms, conditions, and provisions shall
only be applicable to those Employees who are employed on and after the date that this MOU is
approved by Council. This MOU supersedes and replaces in all respects the terms, conditions, and
provisions established in all prior MOUs.

B. Renewal or Termination. This MOU shali be renewed automatically from year to year
after the term set forth in 1.3.A unless either party shall give to the other party written notice of its desire
to terminate this MOU, or unless either party gives written notice of its desire to modify or amend this
MOU, in which case the terms, conditions, and provisions of this MOU shall continue in effect until
such time as such modifications or amendments are approved by Council. Written notice shall be given
to the other party on or before August 1 of any year during the term of this MOU in which the MOU
expires at the end of the calendar year, and negotiations over a successor MOU shall begin no later than
September 30th of that year, unless otherwise agreed between City and CPOA. CPOA shall have thirty

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 10 of 57
(30) days to review memorandum of understanding language, with no penalty to CPOA, prior to signing
a memorandum of understanding, unless otherwise agreed between City and CPOA.
14 WAIVER OF MEET AND CONFER OBLIGATION DURING TERM OF MOU

A. Waiver. City and CPOA acknowledge that, during the negotiations which resulted in
this MOU, City and CPOA had the unlimited right and opportunity to make proposals regarding any
matter not removed by law from the meet and confer or consultation arena, and that understandings and
agreements arrived at by City and CPOA after the exercise of such right and opportunity are set forth in
this MOU. Therefore, City and CPOA, for the duration of this MOU and subject to the exceptions
contained herein, each waives the right, and each agrees that the other shall not be obligated, to meet and
confer with respect to any subject or matter referred to or covered in this MOU.

B. Matters Not Covered by this MOU. If, during the term of this MOU, City or CPOA.
desires to meet and confer or consult in good faith with respect to any matter not specifically referred to
or covered in this MOU, City and CPOA agree to abide by MMBA regarding the obligation to meet and
confer in good faith.

15 LIMITED REOPENERS

During the term of this MOU, either City or CPOA may request to reopen the MOU to discuss the topic
of Mandatory Overtime.

16 LETTER AGREEMENT FOR VARIATION OF PROVISIONS

It is recognized that occasions may arise during the term of this MOU when it is to the mutual benefit of
City and CPOA to vary from the strict adherence to the provisions of this MOU. On such occasions,
said provisions may be temporarily changed, modified, suspended, or otherwise varied from upon the
voluntary and mutual agreement of the parties hereto as evidenced by a letter agreement signed by City
Manager, on behalf of City, and by CPOA President, on behalf of Employees. Each such letter
agreement shall temporarily modify this MOU as to its term, conditions, provisions, and requirements,
for the stated purpose(s) and duration as set forth in the letter agreement.

17 AMENDMENTS

This MOU represents the entire understanding of City and CPOA as to those matters contained herein.

No prior written understanding shall be of any force or effect with respect to those matters covered in

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 11 of 57
this MOU. This MOU may not be modified or altered except by written amendment appropriately
designated, signed, and dated by City and CPOA. Any such amendment shall, unless otherwise
provided, be considered as a part of this MOU from the effective date of this MOU.

18 NON-DISCRIMINATION

A, CPOA Membership. City and CPOA mutually agree to respect Employee rights as set
forth in the PERRs, which includes the right to membership in an employee organization without
discrimination on the part of City.

B. Protected Group Status. City and CPOA agree not to discriminate against Employees
regarding any protected group referenced in the California Government Code Section 12940, as
amended, and as set forth in California Government Code Section 3506, as amended.

19 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY PLAN

CPOA agrees to abide by City’s Equal Employment Opportunity Plan as set forth in Chapter 2R.76 of
the CMC.

1.10 SEVERABILITY

If any provision of this MOU is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall have no effect on the validity of the remaining provisions of this MOU, and such
provisions shal! continue to remain in full force and effect.

1.11 EXHIBITS INCORPORATED

All Exhibits referred to in and attached to this MOU are hereby incorporated in this MOU by this
reference.

ARTICLE TWO: SPECIAL PROVISIONS - CPOA

2.1. RECOGNITION
City recognizes CPOA as the exclusive representative of Employees holding job titles as set forth in
Exhibit “A” pursuant and subject to the decertification provisions of the PERRs. This supersedes any

previous recognition.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 12 of 57
2.2 CPOA MEMBERSHIP

Employees who elect to become dues-paying CPOA members shall commit to paying their dues until
the following May 1. Each year Employees shall have the right to withdraw from CPOA membership
and their dues-paying obligation during the last full pay period prior to May 1. New Employees, or
Employees who had not previously been CPOA members, will be allowed to become CPOA members at
any time, and Employees’ commitment to membership shall extend only to the following May 1.

2.3. CPOA DUES OR SERVICE FEE

A. Agency Shop Agreement. All permanent and probationary Employees holding the job
titles set forth in Exhibit “A” shall, as a condition of employment, be dues-paying members of CPOA or
shall pay a service fee to CPOA which shall not exceed the regular membership dues.

B. Dues or Service Fee Deduction. City agrees to deduct CPOA dues or service fee from
Employees’ pay twice per month in accordance with the PERRs and AP&P No. 13-11 entitled, “Payroll
Deduction Authorization/Withdrawal Procedures and Policy.” The amount of CPOA dues and service
fees will be determined by CPOA, and City will be notified of any change in those amounts no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the change. Employees who work any part of a pay period
shall be subject to the full CPOA dues or service fee deduction for that pay period. Employees who are
on unpaid leave for the full pay period shall not be subject to CPOA dues or service fee deductions for
that pay period. In accordance with the PERRs, City will pay such dues monthly to CPOA on or before
the fifteenth (15th) day of the month immediately following the month in which the dues were deducted.
If it is not technically possible to forward dues and service fees as provided for herein, City will provide
CPOA notice of reason for delay and anticipated payment date.

Cc Dues or Service Fee Deduction Discrepancies. CPOA agrees to indemnify, defend, and
hold City harmless against any claims made and any suits filed against City resulting from the deduction
of CPOA dues or service fees. In addition, CPOA agrees to refund forthwith to City any amounts paid
to CPOA in error upon presentation of supporting evidence. Finally, City shall not be held responsible
to either Employees or to CPOA for errors made in collecting dues or service fees, or for the collection

of dues or service fees from Employees, or former Employees, who may be declining payment of same.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 13 of 57
However, City agrees to collect dues or service fees in the event that such fees were not properly
deducted by City from Employees upon presentation of supporting evidence by CPOA.

D. Conscientious Objector Status. Any Employee who is a member of a bonafide religion,
body, or sect which has historically held conscientious objection to joining or financially supporting
public employee organizations shall not be required to join or financially support CPOA through dues or
service fee deduction as a condition of employment. In lieu of such deduction Employee shall be
required to make a payment in an amount equal to the service fee to a non-religious, non-labor,
charitable organization exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code Section 501 (c) (3) and
provide verification pursuant to Government Code Section 3502.5(a). Payments made under this
Section shall only be authorized for such organizations which have been approved by City in accordance
with Government Code Section 3502.5(a).

Any person requesting exemption from payment of the service fee under this provision
shall file a claim for religious exemption with City’s Human Resources and Risk Management Office.
City’s Human Resources and Risk Management Office shall review the claim for religious exemption
promptly and notify Employee and CPOA of approval or denial of the claim within thirty (30) days.
During the period of such review, no CPOA dues or service fees will be deducted from the pay check of
Employee who has made such claim for exemption. Should it be determined that Employee is not
exempt from dues or service fee payment, such Employee shall be liable for retroactive payment of such
dues or service fees for the period of review.

24 NO STRIKE PLEDGE

CPOA hereby agrees that neither it nor any of its members will cause, instigate, encourage, condone, or
engage in a strike or work stoppage which threatens the public health or safety. As used herein, “strike
or work stoppage” means the concerted failure to report for duty, the unexcused absence from one’s
position; the stoppage of work, or the abstinence in whole or in part from the full, faithful performance
of the duties of employment for the purpose of inducing, influencing, or coercing a change in the
conditions of compensation, or the rights, privileges, or obligations of employment; or observing other
employee organization picket lines against City. If CPOA or any of its members engages in such a
strike or work stoppage, City Manager may pursue all remedies or disciplinary actions authorized by

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 14 of 57
law, including but not limited to, a court order to enjoin such strike or work stoppage. In addition, City
may prohibit the use of City facilities and may prohibit access to Employee work or duty stations by
CPOA. City agrees not to prohibit any Employees from entering Employees’ job sites for the purpose of
performing Employees’ duties in accordance with City rules and regulations.

2.5. CPOA TIME BANK

The CPOA Time Bank is established for use by CPOA Employees for the sole purpose of performing or
conducting CPOA business without loss of pay, subject to the following conditions:

A. Maximum Hours. The maximum number of hours which may be contributed and
utilized in any calendar year shall be a total of 300 hours. Any hours remaining in CPOA’s Time Bank
on December 31 shall be carried over into the next calendar year and credited toward the 300-hour
maximum. CPOA Time Bank hours carried over from the previous year shall reduce Employees’
contributions commensurately for such year.

B. Employee Contribution. During the first full pay period of each calendar year, City
shall determine the number of hours remaining in CPOA’s Time Bank. That number shall be subtracted
from the 300-hour maximum number. The difference between the actual number of hours and the 300-
hour maximum will be divided by the number of dues-paying CPOA Employees on the date of the
calculation, and the resulting number of hours will be subtracted from each dues-paying Employees’
vacation balance and placed in CPOA’s Time Bank. Dues-paying Employees who have insufficient
vacation available for such deduction shail have the deduction made from Employee’s CTO, and if
Employees have insufficient CTO, the deduction shall be taken from Employee’s Holiday Time Bank.

Cy Scheduling and Chief of Police Approval of Use. CPOA agrees to give City as much
advance notice as is practicable requesting use of CPOA’s Time Bank hours. CPOA’s Time Bank hours
shall not be used by any Employee without prior written approval of Chief of Police, or designee, and
only if such use does not unduly disrupt Police Department operations.

D. CPOA Approval of Use. CPOA’s Time Bank hours shall not be utilized without prior
written approval of CPOA’s designated representatives.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 15 of 57
ARTICLE THREE: SPECIAL PROVISIONS - EMPLOYEE

3.1 ATTENDANCE AT GRIEVANCE HEARINGS
City agrees that an Employee who is a grievant pursuant to PERRs Section 2R.72.240, who is required
to attend a grievance hearing pursuant to said Section, or an arbitration hearing pursuant to Article Eight,
which is scheduled during such Employee’s normal work hours or shift shall be considered to be
actively at work for compensation purposes and shall not be required to use vacation time, CTO, or
leave without pay for such attendance. Employees required to attend a grievance or arbitration hearing
which is scheduled outside of Employees’ normal work hours or shift shall not be eligible to receive
compensation of any kind or character for such attendance.
3.2. WRITTEN RESPONSES

A. Performance Evaluations. City agrees that Employees shall have the right to attach a
written response or rebuttal to any probationary, annual, quarterly, or special “Employee Performance
Report” to be placed in Employees’ personnel files maintained by City’s Human Resources and Risk
Management Office pursuant to PERRs Section 2R.72.060.

B. Written Reprimands. In accordance with PERRs Section 2R.72.150.I and Government
Code Section 3306, Employees shall have the right to attach a written response or rebuttal to any written
reprimand for placement in Employees’ personnel files.

c. Chief of Police Response. Chief of Police shall have the right to attach a written
tesponse or rebuttal to written responses or rebuttals submitted by an Employee in accordance with
Sections A and B, above.

ARTICLE FOUR: SPECIAL PROVISIONS - CITY

41 ADA ACCOMMODATION
Recognizing that City is required under the Americans with Disabilities Act (“ADA”), as amended, to
provide reasonable accommodation to all disabled applicants and City employees, and because these

accommodations must be determined on an individual, case-by-case basis, CPOA agrees that the

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 16 of 57
provisions of this MOU may be modified by City in cases where it is necessary for City to meet its
obligations under ADA. City agrees to provide written notice to CPOA and allow CPOA the
opportunity to discuss options regarding proposed exemptions to MOU provisions which are required to
accomplish reasonable accommodation to disabled applicants or City employees, as is required by ADA.
Any accommodation provided to an applicant or City employee protected by ADA shall not establish a

past practice, nor may it be cited or used as evidence of a past practice in the grievance procedure.

ARTICLE FIVE: PAY

5.1 BASIC PAY
A. Established. Basic Pay shall be defined as the Pay Ranges assigned to each applicable
job title. A Pay Range for employees hired before the City Council approves the ratified MOU shall be
defined as up to seven (7) Pay Steps. Each of the steps shall have an hourly Basic Pay rate and shall be
titled as Steps A-G, respectively. Employees shall be assigned to hourly Basic Pay rates within the Pay
Ranges by applicable job title in accordance with Exhibit “B” entitled, “Schedule of Basic Hourly Pay
Rates.” For the purpose of this Article Five, “Anniversary Date” shall mean the date that Employee is
eligible for the next step increase or one year after the date of employment or promotion.
B. Pay Range Increases.
1. Year 1. Effective beginning the first pay period after approval by the City
Council of the Union ratified MOU, all employees shall receive a five percent (5%) general salary
increase.
2. Year 2. Effective the pay period including January 1, 2016, the City will add
Step H, at a two-and-a-half percent (2.5%) increase from Step G, to the pay range for all employees
hired before the date City Council approves the ratified MOU and advance all employees to this Step H
who were at Step G for one year or more as of January 1, 2015. All employees hired before the date
City Council approves the ratified MOU who were at Step F or below, or have been at Step G for less
than one year, will continue to progress through the pay range on their anniversary date.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 17 of 57
3. Year 3. Effective the pay period including January 1, 2017, the City will add
Step I, at a two-and-a-half percent (2.5%) increase from Step H, to the pay range for all employees hired
before the date City Council approves the ratified MOU and advance all employees to this Step I who
were at Step H for one year or more. All employees hired before the date City Council approves the
ratified MOU who were at Step G or below, or have been at Step H for less than one year, will continue
to progress through the pay range on their anniversary date.

Cc. Fourteen Step Pay Range for New Hires. Effective the first pay period after approval
by the City Council of the Union ratified MOU, the City shall implement a fourteen step pay range
based on the existing pay range, after the five percent (5%) general salary increase under section
5.1.B.1. is implemented, but with increments between pay steps lowered from five percent (5%) to two-
and-a-half percent (2.5%), as set forth on Exhibit “B” entitled, “Schedule of Basic Hourly Pay Rates.”
This fourteen step pay range shall apply to all employees hired on or after the date the City Council
approves the Union ratified MOU and provides the City the ability to offer new lateral hires an initial
salary at a step higher than Step A.

Effective the pay period including January 1, 2016, the City will add Step M, at a two-and-a-half
percent (2.5%) increase from Step L, to the pay range for all employees hired on or after the date the
City Council approves the ratified MOU. Effective the pay period including January 1, 2017, the City
will add Step N, at a two-and-a-half percent (2.5%) increase from Step M, to the pay range for all
employees hired on or after the date the City Council approves the ratified MOU.

D. Regular Pay. Regular Pay shall be defined as Basic Pay plus any of the following
additional pays: POST Certification Pay, Alternative Assignment Pay, and Bilingual Differential Pay.

E Pay Step Progression.

1. Conditioned Upon Performance. Progression through Pay Steps for job titles
listed in Exhibit “A” shail be subject to and conditioned upon Employee achieving a “Fulfills Job
Requirements” or above as the Summary Performance Rating on Employee’s “Employee Performance
Report” for each of the time periods required to progress in each Pay Step, in accordance with the
required period of service for progression set forth in Subsection 2, below.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 18 of 57
2. Period of Service for Progression. Periods of service for progression through
Pay Steps are applicable to job titles listed in Exhibit “A.” Progression from Pay Step “A” to Pay Step
“B” shall require a six (6) month period of service in Pay Step “A.” Progression through all other Pay
Steps shall require a twelve (12) month period of service in the prior Pay Step. City may hire an
individual in a Pay Step other than Pay Step “A” in which case the abovementioned progression through
Pay Steps shall apply.

3. Period of Service for Progression - Exception. The period of service for
progression for an Employee whose probationary period has been extended for any reason shall be
extended to match the extension of probation.

4. Effective Date of Progression. Employees meeting the satisfactory completion
requirements herein above shall be advanced to the next applicable Pay Step effective on the first day of
the bi-weekly pay period which includes such Employee’s Anniversary Date.

F. Promotions - Effect on Basic Pay. Employees, unless otherwise specified herein, who
are promoted from one job title in the competitive service to another job title assigned to a higher Pay
Range shall be assigned to a Pay Step within the Pay Range assigned to the promotional job title that
provides Employee with an increase in pay that is closest to five percent (5%), but no less than four-and-
one-half percent (4.5%).

G. Computation of Pay. Employees who commence or terminate employment other than at
the end or beginning of a pay period shall only be compensated for the actual hours worked during such
pay period.

5.2 OVERTIME PAY

A. Method of Earning Overtime. Except as otherwise provided herein, only Employees
performing work in excess of their normally assigned work shift or on their regularly scheduled day off
shall be eligible for overtime pay. Overtime shall be granted in accordance with the following schedule:

Overtime Worked Overtime Earned
Less than 8 minutes None

8 min. but less than 45 min. % hour

45 min. but less than 1 hour 1 hour

2015 MOU-CPOA

L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 19 of S7
1 hour or more hour-for-hour basis subject to fractional

increments as set forth above.

B. Method of Compensation.

1. Rate. Except as otherwise provided herein, all overtime worked by Employees
shall be compensated by City by payment at one-and-one-half (1-1/2) times the Employees’ Regular
Pay.

2. Payment During Pay Period. All overtime pay earned by Employees within a
pay period shall be paid at the same time as payment is made for Basic Pay earned within said pay
period.

3: Payment at Termination. An Employee terminating from City service for any
reason shall be paid for accrued overtime at the rate set forth in Subsection 1, above. Such payment
shall be made in conjunction with and included in Employee’s final paycheck.

c. Employees Working in Management Positions. Employees who are either temporarily
promoted to a management position or are assigned to work out of class in a management position shall
be excluded from receiving overtime payment and in lieu thereof shall receive a prorated amount of
management leave pursuant to the Management Pay and Benefit Resolution, MOU, or Annual Budget
approved by resolution of Council.

D. FLSA Work Period Defined. The City has elected a twenty-eight (28) consecutive day
work period for law enforcement employees under the 7(k) exemption contained in the Fair Labor
Standards Act; this FLSA work period does not affect the calculation of MOU overtime pay as set forth
in Section 5.2.A through 5.2.C above.

5.3 COMPENSATORY TIME OFF IN LIEU OF OVERTIME PAYMENT
Employees working overtime may accrue CTO in lieu of overtime payment, and may utilize such CTO,
in accordance with the following conditions and provisions:

A. Accrual. CTO shall be accrued at the rate of one-and-one-half (114) hours for each hour
of overtime worked. The maximum amount of CTO that may be accrued and utilized at any time shall
be limited to two hundred (200) hours. Employees may choose to leave CTO in place into the following

calendar year.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 20 of 57
B. Utilization. CTO shall be utilized on a straight time basis. Approval for use of CTO
shall be given by Chief of Police, or designee, subject to the same process established for scheduling
vacation and in a manner consistent with requirements of FLSA.

Cc. Payment for Unused CTO. In the first full pay period of July 2015, Employees may
request payment of up to a maximum of forty (40) hours of unused CTO. Effective January 1, 2016, in
the first full pay period in January of each calendar year, Employees may request payment for up to a
maximum of eighty (80) hours of unused CTO. When requested, such payment shall be made by a
check other than Employee’s regular paycheck prior to the end of January. Payment for such hours will
be made at the Regular Pay rate in effect at the time of payment.

D. City Manager Authority. Notwithstanding anything above to the contrary, City
Manager shall have the authority to determine and order that CTO be paid or taken as time off.

E. Bi-Annual Budget CTO Payment Limitations. Payment of CTO pursuant to Section
C, above, shall be limited to a total maximum amount of $60,000 each calendar year. For the period of
January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2017, the total maximum amount shall be increased to $80,000
each calendar year. Effective December 31, 2017, this amount will return to a total maximum amount of
$60,000 each calendar year. If the requests submitted by Employees exceed the amount available for
payout during any payout period, the actual payout for each Employee shall be prorated so that the total
of all payouts does not exceed $60,000 per calendar year, or $80,000 per calendar year for the period of
January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2017.

5.4 SELECTIVE TIME OFF IN LIEU OF OVERTIME PAYMENT

Employees assigned to the Patrol Division who work overtime may accrue Selective Time Off (STO) in
lieu of overtime payment or CTO, and may utilize such STO in accordance with the following
conditions and provisions.

A Accrual. STO shall be accrued at the rate of two (2) hours for each hour of overtime
worked. The maximum amount of STO that may be accrued and utilized at any time shall be limited to
eighty (80) hours.

B. Utilization. STO shall only be utilized when staffing levels on Employee’s assigned

work shift are at a level that Employee’s absence will have little or no impact on other Employees

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 21 of 57
remaining on duty, will not require backfilling on overtime, and no other Employees on such shift are
working overtime. Examples of occasions when STO use may be appropriate are: when weather
conditions appear to have a limiting effect on criminal activity and service calls are reduced; when
Employee training is scheduled and an Employee desiring to use STO has previously completed such
training; when, in the discretion of the Watch Commander, sufficient staffing on a particular work shift
exists due to shift overlap or reduced calls for service. Approval for use of STO shall be determined by
the Chief of Police or a designee, subject to the same process established for scheduling vacation and in
a manner consistent with requirements of FLSA.

Cc. Conversion of STO When Employees Leave Patrol Division. Upon transfer from the
Patrol Division, for whatever reason, STO hours may be converted, in entirety, at the Employee’s
written request, to CTO in accordance with the formula set forth in Section D, below. Once converted,
CTO can not be converted back to STO.

D. Payment for Unused STO. There shall be no payment made for unused STO. Upon
separation from City service for whatever reason, or for payout during an approved leave of absence,
STO hours shall be converted to CTO in accordance with the formula set forth below, and Employee
shall be compensated pursuant to Subarticle 5.3, entitled “Compensatory Time Off In Lieu of Overtime
Payment.” The conversion formula shall be as follows: Number of STO hours divided by 2, multiplied
by 1.5, equals CTO hours. Any payouts under this section shall be limited by the payment limitations
set forth in Section 5.3.E, above.

E. City Manager Authority. Notwithstanding anything above to the contrary, City
Manager shall have the authority to determine and order that STO be converted to CTO and paid or
taken as time off.

5.5 CALL-BACK PAY

A. Generally. Employees who are called back to work from off-duty status shall receive a
minimum of three (3) hours of overtime credit to be compensated in accordance with Subarticle 5.2.,
Section B., above. Should the necessary job tasks require more than three (3) hours of call-back time,
Employee shall be compensated for the actual time worked. Call-back time shall begin at the time
Employee reaches the job site, as may be appropriate for performing the required job duties, and shall

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 22 of 57
end at such time as Employee completes the required job duties and leaves the job site to return to off-
duty status.

B. Call-Back Pay for Court Appearances. For Court Call-Back, the Police Department
Facility will be considered the job site and travel time between such Facility and the court will be
included in call-back time worked. Only one minimum three (3) hour call-back will be credited per any
court business day, except and unless Employee is required to make an appearance on two or more
different cases and there is a minimum of three (3) hours between the end of the appearance for one case
and the beginning of the proceedings of another case, in which instance Employee shall be credited with
a minimum three (3) hour call-back for each different case.

1. Telephone Stand-By. Employees placed on telephone stand-by by the court, the
District Attorney, the City Attorney, or the defense attorney in lieu of reporting to or waiting in the
courthouse shall receive three (3) hours call-back credit for telephone stand-by. Employees on
telephone stand-by who subsequently are required to make a court appearance shall not be eligible to
receive call-back pay for a court appearance pursuant to Section B, above. Only one minimum three (3)
hours for telephone stand-by shall be credited per any court business day. Employees who appear
pursuant to Section B, above, and are placed on telephone stand-by for a period of less than three (3)
hours after such appearance shall not be eligible to receive call-back pay for telephone stand-by but shall
only receive call-back credit.

2. Cancellation of Court Appearance. Employees who are scheduled for a court
appearance at a time outside of Employees’ scheduled work hours, which court appearance is
subsequently canceled after being confirmed to Employees by the Police Department, shall receive three
(3) hours of overtime pay. However, to be eligible for overtime pay, Employees must confirm such
court appearance with the Police Department pursuant to the procedure established by Chief of Police
between 4:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. on the court business day prior to such court appearance.

Cc. Reporting and Verification. All of the above shall be subject to the reporting and

verification requirements set forth in the General Orders.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 23 of 57
5.6 OUT-OF-CLASS PAY

A. Qualification. To qualify for Out-of-Class Pay, Employee must be assigned by Chief of
Police to the higher job classification.

B. Compensation. City agrees to compensate Employees for those times that said
Employees are assigned to perform the regular duties of a higher job title than Employee normally
fulfills, Employees so assigned shall be compensated at the Pay Step within the Pay Range assigned to
the higher paid job title which is closest to five percent (5%) more than Employee's Regular Pay, but not
less than four-and-one-half percent (4.5%).

5.7 ALTERNATIVE ASSIGNMENT PAY

A. Established. The Alternative Assignments of Crime Scene Investigator, Detective-
Police Officer, Detective-Sergeant, Field Training Officer, Gang Officer, Professional Standards
Sergeant, School Resources Officer, Special Operations Section (“SOS”) Officer and Sergeant and
TARGET Sergeant are hereby recognized and continued for the term of this MOU.

B. Assignment. Assignment to any Alternative Assignments shall be made by Chief of
Police from among those Employees who have two (2) or more years experience with City and whose
“Summary Evaluation” on their most recent Employee Performance Report has been rated at “Fulfills
Job Requirements” or above, after notice is given to Employees regarding the availability of such
assignment and adequate time is allowed for Employees to apply. Should no applications be received
within the allowed time period, Chief of Police may make such assignment to any Employee. The
duration of Alternative Assignments shall be at the discretion of Chief of Police, who may terminate
such assignment at any time for any reason.

G Shift Assignment. The shift assignment for all Alternative Assignments shall be
determined by Chief of Police based on the needs of the Police Department. Shift assignments for
Crime Scene Investigator and Field Training Officer will be determined in accordance with normal shift
scheduling; however, in order to achieve an appropriate distribution of Employees in these assignments,
Chief of Police may re-assign Employees holding such assignments to a shift schedule different from
Employees’ normal shift schedule. It is the intent of City to maintain at least one Employee on each

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 24 of 57
established work shift who is qualified as Crime Scene Investigator. Alternative Assignments for these
positions may require agreement by Employees to accept a specific shift assignment.

D. Compensation. Employees assigned to Alternative Assignments listed above shall
receive additional compensation over and above Employee’s Basic Pay rate during the term of such
assignment. Additional compensation for Alternative Assignments shall be defined as a percentage of

Employee’s Basic Pay rate as follows:

Crime Scene Investigator 5%

Detective 10%
Detective-Sergeant 10%
Field Training Officer 5%

Professional Standards Sergeant 10%
School Resources Officer 10%
Traffic Officer 10%
Special Operations Officer* 10%
Special Operations Sergeant* 10%

* Special Operations shall include Gang, Street Crimes, and TARGET assignments.

E. Overtime Pay. An Employee who is assigned to Alternative Assignments of Detective,
Detective-Sergeant, Professional Standards Sergeant, School Resources Officer, Special Operations
Officer, or Special Operations Sergeant shall receive overtime payment for work performed in excess of
a forty (40) hour work week. An Employee who is assigned to Alternative Assignments of Field
Training Officer or Crime Scene Investigator shall receive overtime as is provided for in Subarticle 5.2,
above. Employees assigned to Alternative Assignments may work shift overtime when approved by
Chief of Police.

5.8 ON-CALL PAY

A. Generally. The On-Call system was developed to improve the after-hours response of

the Detective Bureau and the Crime Scene Investigation Unit without limiting the ability of affected

Employees to make use of Employees’ off-duty time for Employees’ own purposes. The system assures

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 25 of 57
that, should the need arise, Employees are available to be contacted and return to duty within a period of
time which is determined by Chief of Police to be reasonable.

B, Assignment to On-Call Status. Assignment of Employees to On-Call status under this
system shall be made by Chief of Police, with sole discretion, from among Employees assigned to either
the Detective Bureau or the Crime Scene Investigation Unit, in a manner that best meets the needs of the
Police Department. Up to two (2) Employees in each assignment may be assigned to On-Call status at
any time, with an identified primary and secondary assignment. Chief of Police shall have the discretion
to determine the periods of such assignment based on the needs of the Police Department.

c. Compensation. In recognition of the On-Call Employees’ commitment to remain
available for possible call back, Employees so assigned will be paid an additional $100 per week for
each week Employees are so assigned or may choose to receive CTO equivalent to $100 divided by
Employees’ Basic Pay rate, including the Alternative Assignment compensation. Should Employee be
assigned to On-Call status for a period less than a full week, a prorated amount will be paid. On-Call
Pay shall be paid as part of the regular City payroll.

5.9 DIFFERENTIAL PAYS

A. Shift Differential Pay. Employees whose regular work shift is scheduled to begin
between noon and 6:59 p.m. (swing shift) shall be eligible to receive a Shift Differential Pay of three
percent (3%), and Employees whose regular work shift is scheduled to begin between 7:00 p.m. and
5:00 a.m. (graveyard shift) shall be eligible to receive a Shift Differential Pay of six percent (6%), above
Employees’ Basic Pay rates for all hours worked. Hours that meet the requirements of Shift Differential
Pay shall be reported as such and shall be paid during the regular pay period.

1. Limitations. Employees’ work shifts that do not begin between noon and 5:00
a.m., but are extended, or are held over, shall be eligible for Shift Differential Pay only for those hours
which fall outside their regular shift and within the noon to 5:00 a.m. shift differential period.
Employees called in to begin a shift earlier than scheduled, shall only be eligible for Shift Differential
Pay if the shift begins between noon and 5:00 a.m. Employees scheduled to work a full shift and use
paid leave (such as sick leave or CTO) for some part of that shift shall continue to be eligible for Shift
Differential Pay for hours worked.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2,
Page 26 of 57
5.10 CANINE CARE AND MAINTENANCE PAY

A. Established. Designated Canine Officers shall be eligible for Canine Care and
Maintenance Pay for time they work feeding, grooming, and exercising the dog, as well as for hours
worked cleaning kennels and performing other duties related to care of the assigned dog. The
establishment of Canine Care and Maintenance Pay for these distinct duties shall constitute
establishment of a separate job with a separate pay rate as is provided for in 29 C.F.R. §778.419, which
establishes regulations for implementation of FLSA.

Designated Canine Officers shall continue to receive their Regular Pay and overtime pay
for non-canine care and maintenance hours worked. Separate hours worked related to the canine care
and maintenance duties shall not create eligibility for overtime for non-canine work hours. Designated
Canine Officers’ primary assignment will remain as Police Officer or Police Sergeant, and those work
hours shail constitute Designated Canine Officers’ first forty (40) hours per week.

B. Assignment, Hours, and Damage Limitations. Only those Designated Canine Officers
assigned by Chief of Police and in an active work status performing those duties shall be eligible for
Canine Care and Maintenance Pay. Designated Canine Officers who are on leaves which exceed two
calendar weeks shall not be eligible to continue in such assignment without special approval from the
Chief of Police. Canine Care and Maintenance Pay shall terminate as soon as the dog is removed from
Designated Canine Officer’s care. Total hours worked providing care and maintenance and related work
under this provision shall not exceed forty (40) minutes (2/3 hour) per day without specific approval of
Designated Canine Officer’s supervisor. Such work shall typically be performed at Designated Canine
Officer’s home. There shall be no compensation for any other hours of incidental contact, travel time, or
for damage the dog may cause at Designated Canine Officer’s home.

G Compensation, Pay for Canine Care and Maintenance work shall be at the rate of $9.88
per hour. Effective January 1, 2016, pay for such work shall be at the rate of $10.00 per hour. Should
the federal or state minimum wage increase to a level above the established Canine Care and
Maintenance Pay, City and CPOA agree to reopen and negotiate regarding the rate of pay. Designated
Canine Officers will typically be paid at the overtime rate of one-and-one-half times the applicable base

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 27 of 57
Canine Care and Maintenance pay rate under this Section, for such hours worked performing Canine
Care and Maintenance duties.
5.11 POST CERTIFICATION PAY

A. Established. In recognition of the additional education, training, and experience that is
demonstrated through certification of Employees at either an Intermediate or Advanced level by the
California Peace Officers Standards and Training Commission (“POST”), POST Certification Pay is
hereby authorized.

B. Determination of Eligibility for POST Certification Pay. Employees who have met
the certification requirements for either Intermediate or Advanced Certification from POST shall be
eligible to receive POST Certification Pay upon application therefor and approval by City’s Human
Resources and Risk Management Director. Employees must submit a request for POST Certification
Pay on a form to be provided by City’s Human Resources and Risk Management Office. A copy of the
completed application to POST for certification, approved by the Police Department which verifies
Employee’s eligibility must accompany that application. The effective date of the pay shall be the first
day of the pay period following Human Resources and Risk Management Director approval of the
request for POST Certification Pay. Should POST reject the Employee’s application for certification,
City will recover the POST pay the employee received and was not eligible for over the same time
period it was paid, or in lump sum at the discretion of the Employee.

Cc Compensation. Employees who possess certification from POST at the Intermediate
Officer level shall be eligible for POST Certification Pay of an additional two-and-a-half percent (2.5%)
of Employees’ Basic Pay rate. Employees who possess certification from POST at the Advanced Officer
level shall be eligible for POST Certification Pay of an additional five percent (5%) of Employees’
Basic Pay rate. The Basic Pay rate on which POST Certification pay is calculated shall exclude
Alternative Assignment, Bilingual, On-Call, Shift Differential, Overtime, Canine Care and Maintenance,
and any other pays. Employees shall be eligible only for Intermediate or Advanced POST Certification
Pay, not both, for a maximum of five percent (5%) POST Certification Pay.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 28 of 57
ARTICLE SIX: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS

6.1 HOLIDAYS

A. Established. For the purposes of this MOU, City shall provide eight (8) hours of
Holiday Time Bank pay for the following established holidays: January 1, third Monday in January,
third Monday in February, last Monday in May, July 4, first Monday in September, November 11,
Thanksgiving Day, the day after Thanksgiving, December 24, December 25, and such other days as may
be proclaimed by Council as public holidays. These holidays currently constitute the entire and
exclusive list of legal holidays observed by City.

B. Holidays - Observed.

1. Holiday - Sunday. When a holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday
shall be observed. However, should Christmas Eve fall on a Sunday, such holiday shall be observed on
Employee’s last regular work day prior thereto.

2. Holiday - Saturday. If a holiday falls on a Saturday, time off or pay shall be
granted at the discretion of City Manager. If time off is granted for Christmas Eve, the holiday shall be
observed on Employee’s last regular work day prior thereto.

3. Holiday - Regular Days Off. If Employee’s regular days off are other than
Saturday or Sunday and the holiday falls on such day, time off or pay shall be granted at the discretion
of City Manager. If time off is granted for Christmas Eve, the holiday shall be observed on Employee’s
last regular work day prior thereto.

Cc. Emergency Call-Back. Employees who have been granted time off in observance of a
holiday and who are subsequently required to work as the result of an emergency shall be compensated
on an hour-for-hour (straight time) basis at Employee’s Regular Pay, and no deduction will be made
from Employee’s Holiday Time Bank accrual.

6.2 HOLIDAY TIME BANK

A. Accrual - Generally. Employee’s Holiday Time Bank shail be credited with ninety-six
(96) hours on each January 1. The Holiday Time Bank accrual includes eight (8) hours for each holiday
of the calendar year, plus eight (8) hours of additional Holiday Time Bank accrual.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 29 of 57
B. Utilization. All Employees who are scheduled to work and who are not required to be on
duty on designated City holidays may take time off, charging such time against Employees’ Holiday
Time Bank. If Employees have previously exhausted their Holiday Time Bank accrual, time off on a
holiday would be charged to Employees’ CTO balance, or to Employees’ vacation balance if they do not
have CTO. Upon the request of Employee, and upon the approval of Chief of Police, Employees may
use vacation for holidays even if they do have CTO available. Employees who are required to be on
duty on designated City holidays may use Employees’ Holiday Time Bank accrual for time off on other
days that Employees select and which are approved by Chief of Police. Such time off shall be treated as
vacation for request and approval purposes. Any Holiday Time Bank hours not taken by December 31
of any calendar year shall be removed, without compensation, from the Employee’s payroll records.

Cc. Newly Hired Employees Accrual. At the time of hire, new Employees shall accrue an
amount of Holiday Time Bank accrual equal to eight (8) hours times the number of full-day designated
City holidays remaining in the calendar year in which Employees are hired. If Employees’ hire date
falls prior to July 1, Employees shall also receive an additional eight (8) hours Holiday Time Bank
accrual, As an example, a new Employee hired on November 15 would be credited 32 hours of Holiday
Time Bank accrual (8 hours each for Thanksgiving, the day after Thanksgiving, December 24, and
December 25). A new Employee hired on May 1 would be credited seventy-two hours of Holiday Time
Bank accrual (8 hours for each holiday after May 1 and 8 additional hours because the hire date is prior
to July 1).

D. Holiday Time Bank Balance Upon Termination. If Employees do not have an
adequate Holiday Time Bank balance to offset previously taken holidays, Employees’ CTO or vacation.
will be reduced accordingly. Any remaining holiday hours which cannot be deducted from Holiday
Time Bank, CTO, or vacation accrual will be deducted from Employees’ final pay.

E, Proration for Unpaid Leave. Employees on unpaid leave will have Employees”
Holiday Time Bank balance reduced by eight (8) hours times the number of full-day holidays which
actually fall during Employees’ period of unpaid leave. The provisions relating to the terminating
Employees’ Holiday Time Bank or excess use of Holiday Time Bank shall apply to Employees on

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 30 of 57
unpaid leave when calculating Holiday Time Bank balance and/or final pay when Employees are no
longer on unpaid leave.
6.3 INSURANCES

A. Medical and Dental Insurance. Employees shall receive the maximum contribution per
month toward the monthly premium rate for City's employee group medical and dental insurance plans,
as set forth in Exhibit “C.” In the event that the actual monthly premium is less than the maximum
contribution set forth in Exhibit “C,” City's contribution shall be the actual monthly premium amount
and Employees shall not be required to make a contribution.

B. Insurance Advisory Committee. City agrees to the continuance of the previously
established Health Insurance Review Committee consisting of a designee from the Human Resources
and Risk Management Office, who shall coordinate the Committee, and two representatives from each
City employee group. The purpose of the Committee is the ongoing review of the City's medical, dental
and vision plans and the making of recommendations to the City Council, City Manager and the
Tespective employee groups regarding plan providers, benefit levels, and plan services. Committee
members shall establish guidelines for conducting meetings, frequency of meetings and the Committee
work program. The primary responsibility of the Committee is to select plan providers who offer the
best plan, when considering collectively, plan services, benefit levels and plan premiums. The payment
of plan premiums is not a responsibility of the Insurance Review Committee. Determination of who
pays plan premiums will be handled during the MOU negotiation process with each represented and
unrepresented bargaining unit. Employee representatives shall not be charged vacation or other leave
time if such meetings are held during the employee's normal work hours nor shall such employees
receive overtime or call-back pay for service on the Committee. The Committee shall have access to
such non-confidential information necessary to carry out its purpose.

Cc. Approval of Future Plan Changes.

1. Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection to the contrary, CPOA agrees
that future changes from the established medical and dental insurance plan or premium structure to a
different plan or premium structure shall be approved by a majority of those City employees covered by

the plan who vote on such changes.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 31 of 57
2. The Health Insurance Review Committee established herein above shall review
and recommend to the City Council those proposed changes to the plan or premium structure to be voted
upon by the employees pursuant to this paragraph. The proposed changes reviewed by the Committee
may be initiated by the Committee, by City employee organizations or groups, or by the City, by and
through the City Manager. After review and acceptance of Committee recommendations by the City
Council, the City Clerk shall, within fifteen (15) calendar days, conduct a secret ballot election of
covered employees. The City Clerk shall then report the results of the election to the Committee and the
City Council.

Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, should the Committee decline to recommend a
City proposal for submittal to a vote of the covered employees, CPOA agrees to meet and confer with
City, upon City's request, concerning any such proposal. If, after a reasonable period of negotiations,
including implementation of established impasse procedures, no agreement has been reached on the
City's proposal, City may submit the proposal to a vote of all covered employees, in which case the
results of the election shall be final.

D. Life Insurance.

1. City Contribution. City agrees to provide Employees with term life insurance in
the amount of one times the annual base salary, rounded to the next multiple of $1,000 and the spouse,
registered domestic partner and minor children of such Employees with term life insurance in the
amount of $1,500, the full cost of the premium for which shall be paid for by City.

E. Long-Term Disability Insurance.

1. City Contribution. City agrees to establish long-term disability insurance
benefits for all eligible employees through the Police Officers Research Association of California
(“PORAC”) Insurance and Benefits Trust, and to pay a premium of $21.50 per month to PORAC for
each eligible Employee for such coverage. In no case shall City’s obligation exceed the actual premium
cost of the plan.

2. Computation and Payment of Premium for Tax Purposes. In order to
establish the long-term disability insurance premium as a post-tax Employee contribution so that
benefits which might be received by Employees would be treated as such for tax purposes, the actual

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 32 of 57
amount of the premium to be paid by City as provided for above, shall be withheld from Employee
taxable earnings. In turn, City will pay a bonus to Employees equal to the amount of Employees’
premium contribution during the period in which the premium deduction is paid. Such bonus shall not
be considered part of Employees’ Basic Pay for calculation of Overtime Pay, retirement, life insurance,
or any other salary-based benefit, but shall serve only as a mechanism to establish the long-term
disability insurance benefit as Employee-paid benefit for tax purposes.

F. Vision Insurance.

1. City Contribution. City agrees to provide Employees with a vision insurance
plan which provides vision care benefits, to Employee only, the full cost of the premium for which shall
be paid by City.

2. Access for Employee Paid Dependent Coverage. City further agrees that
Employees may purchase vision insurance coverage for Employees’ dependent spouse, registered
domestic partner and children, at Employees’ sole cost and expense, through bi-weekly payroll
deduction of the additional premium amount.

6.4 LEAVE
A. Sick Leave.

1. Accrual - Generally. Sick leave credit, which commences upon employment of
Employee and may be accumulated without limitation, shall be granted to all Employees for non-job
related illness or injury. However, except as otherwise provided herein below, upon termination of
Employee’s service with City, no compensation for accrued sick leave either in time off or pay shall be
granted. It is recognized that sick leave utilization is not considered as a right which may be used at
Employee’s discretion, but shall be allowed only in case of necessity for actual personal sickness of or
injury to Employee or approved family member, and for medical, dental, and vision care appointments.

2. Accrual Rate. Employees shall accrue sick leave in the amount of eight (8)
hours per month.

3. Lateral Hires. Effective the first pay period after the City Council approves this
ratified MOU, all lateral hires employed by the City after this date will receive fifty percent (50%) of

their accrued sick leave up to fifty (50) hours from their place of employment as a sworn police officer

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 33 of 57
immediately preceding their City employment. To be eligible for this benefit, the lateral hire must
verify their prior accrual balance from the pay stub on their last check within fifteen (15) calendar days
of being hired by the City.

4. Utilization Rate. Sick leave shall be deducted from an Employee's total amount
of accrued sick leave on an hour-for-hour basis. In the event that an Employee utilizes all of
Employee’s accrued sick leave and is still unable to return to work due to illness or injury, such
Employee shall automatically be placed on leave without pay, in accordance with Section C, below,
unless Employee advises City’s Human Resources and Risk Management Office to charge the additional
sick time off against Employee’s accrued vacation balance, if any.

5. Notification Procedures. An Employee who will be off work on sick leave shall
notify Employee’s immediate supervisor in accordance with Police Department General Orders and
AP&P No. 13-21 entitled, “Sick Leave Utilization.”

6. Job-Related Illness or Disability. An Employee who is off work as a result of a
proven job-related illness or disability shall not have such time off charged against such Employee’s
accumulated sick leave.

7. Use of Accrued Sick Leave Prior to Effective Date of Ordinary Disability
Retirement. Notwithstanding, anything herein above to the contrary, Employees who are eligible to
retire on an ordinary disability retirement pursuant to the contract with PERS due to a non-job related
illness or injury shall be entitled to utilize any or all of their accrued sick leave prior to the effective date
of such retirement from City employment. However, except as provided Subsection 9, below, no
compensation of any kind or character shall be made for any accrued sick leave which may remain
credited to Employee on or after such effective date.

8. Upon Service Retirement. Upon service retirement, accumulated sick leave
shall be credited to Employee’s retirement account in accordance with the provisions of the retirement
plan referenced in Subarticle 6.6, provided, however, should an Employee elect to convert any of such
sick leave to cash pursuant to Subsection 9, below, Employee's retirement sick leave credit shall be

reduced commensurately.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 34 of 57
9. Sick Leave Conversion Upon Termination. Upon retirement or termination in
good standing, Employees may convert accrued sick leave to cash in accordance with the following
schedule:

CITY SERVICE YEARS MAX. CONVERSION %/MAX. $ AMOUNT

0-5 Years 0

5-10 Years 10% / $1,000
10-15 Years 25% / $2,000
Over 15 Years 50% / $3,000

10. Sick Leave Incentive Pay. Employees who use no sick leave for their own or
family sick leave, either for illness or medical or other appointments, in the course of a semi-annual
period beginning either January 1 or July 1 of each year shall receive payment for eight (8) hours of Sick
Leave Incentive Pay at the end of the period (either June 30 or December 31 as appropriate). Transfer of
sick leave for illness of other City employees shall not be considered use of sick leave by the donating
Employee for purposes of the Sick Leave Incentive Pay. Such Sick Leave Incentive Pay shall be
calculated by multiplying Employee’s Regular Pay, which was in effect during the last full pay period of
the semi-annual period (either June 30 or December 31 depending on the period) times eight (8).

Special pays, such as Shift Differential Pay, overtime, out of class, or any other pay shall not be part of
the basis for this calculation. Payment shall be made by a separate check from pay for regular hours and
be made in conjunction with payment for CTO. Such check will be issued prior to the end of the month
following the end of the semi-annual period.

B. Leave of Absence With Pay - Birth or Adoption of Child.

1. Amount; When Taken. In the event of the birth of an Employee’s or
Employee’s registered domestic partner’s child, or the adoption of a child by an Employee or
Employee’s registered domestic partner, such Employee shall be entitled to a leave of absence with pay
for a period of three (3) consecutive work days or shifts. Such leave shall only be taken within fourteen
(14) days after the date of such birth or adoption. An Employee shall be eligible for a single leave
period for the event of a birth or adoption, without regard to the number of children involved. The birth

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 35 of 57
or adoption of multiple children at one time shall not create eligibility for more than one birth or
adoption leave period.

2. Notification Procedure. Employees shall notify Chief of Police as soon as
possible after such birth or adoption date as to which days Employee will be on birth or adoption leave.

Cc. Leave of Absence Without Pay. Employees may apply to take a leave of absence
without pay in conformance with the provisions of Administrative Procedure and Policy 13-24, entitled
“Leaves of Absence,” as is in effect at the time the request is made.

6.5 VACATION

A. Accrual - Generally. Employees who have served City for a period of six (6) months or
more shall be entitled to an annual vacation leave with pay. Such vacation leave shall be earned by
Employee in accordance with the schedule set forth herein below provided that an Employee, after
satisfactorily completing six (6) months of service, shall be credited with vacation leave equal to the
amount they would have accrued during a six-month period.

1. Rate of Accrual. Employees shall accrue vacation credit in accordance with the
schedule in Exhibit “D” entitled, “Vacation Accrual Schedule.” Employees may accrue annual vacation
credits to an amount not to exceed the Maximum Accrued Balance as set forth in Exhibit “D.”

2. Termination of Additional Accrual. Employees shall cease to accrue additional
vacation when their accumulated vacation leave balance is equal to the Maximum Accrued Balance
identified for their accrual rate, as set forth in Exhibit “D.” Accrual shall commence again when the
balance drops below the maximum. Employee shall receive written notice from City prior to the
anticipated date of such termination of additional accrual. If an Employee is unable to utilize accrued
vacation by reason of illness or disability or because the Police Department has canceled previously
approved vacation or refused to schedule vacation requests by Employee, City Manager shall approve a
limited-time waiver of the termination of additional vacation accrual provisions in Subsection 1, above,
based on the written request of Employee.

3. Lateral Hires. Effective the first pay period after the City Council approves this
ratified MOU, all lateral hires employed by the City after this date will receive fifty percent (50%) of

their accrued vacation leave up to fifty (50) hours from their place of employment as a sworn police

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 36 of 57
officer immediately preceding their City employment. To be eligible for this benefit, the lateral hire
must verify their prior accrual balance from the pay stub on their last check within fifteen (15) calendar
days of being hired by the City.

B. Utilization. Employees may utilize their accrued vacation as it is earned, at a time that
shall be determined by Chief of Police in accordance with the needs of City and with due regard for the
wishes of Employee.

Cc. Effect of Termination of Employment. Employees who terminate employment, or who
are terminated, and who have completed satisfactorily at least six (6) months of service, shall be paid in
lump sum for all accrued vacation earned prior to the effective date of their termination. Said payment
shall be determined by multiplying Employee’s Regular Pay times the number of hours of accrued
vacation credited to Employee at the time of termination. Employees with less than six (6) months of
service shall not be paid for any accrued vacation.

6.6 RETIREMENT PLAN

A. Established and City Contribution - Employees Hired Before January 1, 2013 or
Classic Members. Employees hired before January 1, 2013 or those Classic Members, as defined by
CalPERS, shall receive the 3% at age 50 retirement benefit formula. Employees covered by this section
6.6.A. shall contribute the employee contribution amount established by CalPERS for the 3% @ 50
Pension Formula. The required employee contribution as of the date of this MOU was nine percent
(9%). The City shall not pay any portion of the required employee contribution.

B. Employees Hired On or After January 1, 2013. Employees hired on or after January
1, 2013, shall receive the 2.7% at age 57 retirement benefit formula. Employees covered by this section
6.6.B. shall contribute the employee contribution rate of fifty percent (50%) of normal costs as
established by CalPERS. The City shall not pay any employee contribution. Employees covered by this
section 6.6.B. who are classic members as defined by CalPERS may be eligible for a different pension
formula.

Cc. City Contribution. Except as provided in section 6.6.D., City agrees to pay the benefit
employer contribution as established by that certain "Contract Between the Board of Administration,
Public Employees’ Retirement System and the City Council of the City of Chico" which was in effect as

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 37 of 57
of June 30, 2002, and to abide by all terms and conditions as established by such Contract so long as the
contract exists between City and PERS.

D. Employee Cost Sharing of Additional Benefits. Effective the first pay day in
September of 2015, all employees shall pay, through payroll deduction, 100% of the required employee
contribution plus an additional three percent (3%) of PERSable compensation toward the normal cost of
pension benefits as permitted by Government Code Section 20516. The parties acknowledge that
CalPERS mandates an election of unit members, separate from ratification of this MOU, to provide for
this cost sharing pursuant to Government Code Section 20516. As soon as practicable after ratification
and approval by the City Council of this MOU, City will initiate the contract amendment process. Upon
approval and agreement from the bargaining unit and completion of City’s amendment to the CalPERS
contract, employee contributions will be made pursuant to Government Code Section 20516, Employee
Cost Sharing of Additional Benefits. Notwithstanding the above, until the contract amendment is
complete, the three percent (3%) cost sharing described in this section shall be implemented outside of a
CalPERS contract amendment as authorized by Government Code Section 20516(f), and shall extend
beyond the expiration of this MOU. CPOA and City will take all actions necessary to implement the
pension cost sharing agreement described in this section 6.6.D.

E Old Age and Survivors Disability Insurance Program. If, during the term of this
MOU, the Federal Government mandates public agencies and public employees to participate in the Old
Age and Survivors Disability Insurance Program (i.e., Social Security), CPOA and City agree to
automatically reopen negotiations within thirty (30) days of City's receipt of such notice from the
Federal Government. Such negotiations shall be for the purpose of determining the impact of such
mandate on the implementation or continuation of the current retirement plans and any measures which
can be taken to mitigate such impact.

F. Deferred Compensation Plan. City has established a Deferred Compensation Plan in
accordance with Internal Revenue Code (IRC) 457. City agrees to match ten percent (10%) of
Employee contributions. However, the ten percent (10%) City match shall not be applicable to

Employee catch-up contributions.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 38 of 57
G. Consistency with PEPRA. It is the intent of the Parties that the terms set forth herein be
consistent with the provisions of PEPRA, as it may be amended from time to time. In the event of any
inconsistency, the provisions set forth in PEPRA shall prevail.

6.7. RETIREE MEDICAL EXPENSE AND HEALTH INSURANCE TRUST

A. Established. The Retiree Medical Expense and Health Insurance Trust ("Trust")
administered and managed by CPOA. The Trust shall be in conformance with those applicable Internal
Revenue Code requirements that allow for City contributions to be made on a tax-free basis.

B. Funding. The Trust will be partially funded by monthly contributions made by the City
to the party designated to receive such contributions by CPOA. The CPOA President shall be
responsible for informing City of changes to the party designated to receive such contributions. The
following table establishes the negotiated monthly City contributions, per Employee in active status for

the prior month:
Effective Date City Contribution
December 23, 2007 $200/mo
January 1, 2009 $250/mo
January 1, 2010 $300/mo
March 1, 2014 $100/mo

Cc. Purpose and Restrictions. CPOA shall be responsible for payment of all costs
associated with the maintenance of the Trust. The sole purpose of the Trust is to provide funding for
medical expenses and health insurance costs for eligible retirees, or qualified family members of eligible
Tetirees as established by the Trust.

If at any time, the Trust is deemed by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to not have tax-
free status, in relation to City contributions, the City shall hold all further contributions to the Trust in an
escrow account until such time that CPOA can re-establish a tax-free contribution Trust that meets the
intended purposes outlined above. City makes no guarantee, either direct or implied, that payments for
medical expenses and health insurance for eligible retirees, or qualified family members of eligible

retirees as established by the Trust, would exist or continue beyond the financial resources of the Trust.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 39 of 57
D. Continued Participation for Promoted Employees. Employees who promote out of
the CPOA bargaining unit to a Chico Police Department management position shall continue to be
eligible for participation in the Trust.

6.8 VARIOUS BENEFITS

A. Employee Assistance Program. City agrees to provide counseling services to
Employees at City’s cost, in accordance with the provisions of AP&P No. 13-15 entitled, “Employee
Counseling.” City retains the right to annually select the counseling service provider for the ensuing
year in accordance with City’s purchasing system.

B. Defense of Employee from Civil Actions or Proceedings. City agrees to defend
Employees from civil actions or proceedings in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Government Code.

Cc. Section 125 Plan. City’s Section 125 Plan was established pursuant to Sections 105,
125, and 129 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Such Plan allows Employees who
make a contribution for medical, dental, and vision insurance coverage to make that contribution on a
pre-tax basis through the Plan. City shall pay the costs to maintain the Section 125 plan, however, if
Employees wish to access other benefits, such as Dependent Care Plan or Medical Flexible Spending
Account Plan, Employees shall be responsible for any additional fees related to those benefits.

D. Uniforms.

1. Authorized Items. Authorized Items will be identified in the Department’s
General Order No 430.01, entitled “Uniform Regulations” (Uniform GO). City agrees to provide
Employees a Uniform Allowance, as set forth below, for purchase of the Authorized Items in
accordance with Federal, State and Local laws and regulations, as amended. Employees will only
purchase Authorized Items that are required for their regular, special, or collateral assignments.

2. Initial Uniform Items Purchased by City. City agrees to provide newly hired
Employees with the initial uniform items identified in the Uniform GO. Newly hired Employees will
receive a pro-rated Uniform Allowance after successful completion of probation. The Uniform
Allowance will be pro-rated beginning the first of the month after successful completion of probation
through June 30 of the same fiscal year.

2015 MOU-CPOA. L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 40 of 57
3. Uniform Allowance. City agrees to appropriate funding for the Uniform
Allowance in the Annual Budget, in the amount of $900 per employee, per fiscal year.

4. Essential Items. Essential items will be specifically identified on the list of
Authorized Items. City and CPOA agree that an essential item will not be added or removed from the
list of Authorized Items in the Uniform GO without meeting and conferring prior to the addition or
removal.

E. Protective Clothing and Equipment. City agrees to provide Employees Authorized
Safety Clothing and Equipment pursuant to Federal, State and Local laws, rules, and regulations.
Authorized Safety Clothing and Equipment will be identified in the Uniform GO. Employees will
receive Authorized Safety Clothing and Equipment as required for their regular, special, or collateral
assignments.

F. Cleaning Service Accommodation. Chief of Police will make arrangements with a
private dry cleaning vendor to accommodate Employee drop-off and pickup of uniform items at Police
Department. The cost for cleaning will remain the responsibility of Employee who will pay the vendor
directly. City takes no responsibility for the quality of the service provided by the vendor, but will
endeavor to obtain the lowest rates possible for quality services, which Employee has an option of
purchasing. City will have no responsibility for payment to vendor, and vendor will be clearly notified
of such. City will not handle any funds or perform any record keeping for Employees or vendor.

G. Federal Insurance Contributions Act - Medicare Contribution.

1. Applicability. The Federal Insurance Contributions Act (“FICA”) mandates that
Employees hired after April 1, 1986 be covered by and make payroll contributions for the Medicare
portion of FICA at a rate of 1.45% of salary. City is also required to contribute 1.45% of salary.

2. Employee Contribution. Employees are required to contribute 1.45% of their
salary to the FICA - Medicare program.

3. Future Changes. Notwithstanding anything herein above to the contrary, if in
the future the Federal Government mandates that all City employees shall be covered by and make
payroll contributions for the Medicare portion of FICA, Employees covered by this MOU shall be

required to make such contributions.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2,
Page 41 of 57
H. Health and Fitness Facilities.

1. City Reimbursement. City agrees to reimburse Employees up to the single
person rate or $50.00 per month, whichever is less, for the cost of health and fitness facilities to assist
Employees in attaining and maintaining overall wellness and physical fitness goals.

2. Selection of Facility and Reimbursement Procedure. Employees shall have the
Tight to select a qualified health and fitness center based on the following.

a. “Qualified health and fitness centers” shall mean privately operated
physical fitness businesses which provide at least the following: weight training equipment, aerobic
apparatus and equipment, and aerobic exercise classes;

b. Employees shall be responsible for the payment of any initiation fee;

c. City’s maximum obligation for payment of Employee’s monthly
membership fee shall not exceed $50.00. CPOA agrees that Employees who select health/fitness centers
with membership fees exceeding City’s maximum payment amounts shall be responsible for the
payment of such additional fee amounts;

d. City shall reimburse Employees for monthly membership fees up to the
maximum City payment amount set forth above upon submittal by such Employees of the appropriate
City claim form and evidence of payment of such fees. Such claim must be submitted within ninety (90)

days following the end of the covered period to be eligible for reimbursement.

ARTICLE SEVEN: WORKING CONDITIONS

7.1_|| HOURS AND SHIFTS

A, Generally. City shall retain the right, in its sole discretion, to assign Employees to
appropriate and necessary work shifts. City shall also retain the right to adjust or change the work hours
and starting times of Employees to meet the needs of the Police Department. However, City agrees,
whenever possible, to give affected Employees seven (7) calendar days advance notice of such
adjustments or changes. City further agrees that it will not act arbitrarily in adjusting or changing

Employee work hours and starting times.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 42 of 57
B. Work and Meal Breaks.

1. Shift Employees. During each work shift, Employees shall be entitled to take
two (2) fifteen (15) minute breaks and a half (4) hour meal break. However, Patrol Division Employees
assigned to the three (3) 12 % hour (3-12) shift schedule shall receive a 45-minute meal break instead of
the half (4) hour meal break. Such breaks shall be taken at such times and at such locations as are
determined or not prohibited by Chief of Police. However, it is recognized that the time of such breaks
may vary because of emergencies, training periods, or unusual circumstances and that during such
occurrences, the exact time of the meal break will be determined by the shift supervisor. It is further
recognized and agreed that should the needs of City, emergencies, or other unusual circumstances cause
Employees not to be able to take a work break, Employees shall not be entitled to accumulate and/or
save such lost work break for use at another time.

2. Administrative and Alternative Assignment Employees (Non-Shift Basis).
Administrative Employees and Employees working on alternative assignments on a non-shift basis shall
be entitled to take two (2) fifteen (15) minute work breaks and a one (1) hour lunch break to be taken at
such times and at such locations as are determined by Chief of Police. However, it is recognized that the
time of such breaks may vary because of emergencies, training periods or unusual circumstances and
that during such occurrences, the exact time of the lunch break will be determined by Employee’s
supervisor. It is further recognized and agreed that should the needs of City, emergencies, or other
unusual circumstances cause Employees not to be able to take a work break, Employees shall not be
entitled to accumulate and/or save such lost work break for use at another time.

CG Specific Hours and Shifts.

1. Patrol Division Shift Assignments. Police Officers and Sergeants, regularly
assigned to the Patrol Division of the Police Department shall work a shift schedule consisting of a
combination of three (3) 12.5 hour (3-12) and four (4) 10 hour (4-10) shift schedules, subject to the
provisions of Subsection D, below. Police Officers and Sergeants who may be assigned on a non-
regular or occasional basis to the Patrol Division on an overtime basis may be assigned to a different

shift schedule than the 3-12 or 4-10 shift schedule. Overtime pay for Officers and Sergeants assigned to

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 43 of 57
these shifts, when applicable, shall be calculated as set forth in Section 5.2, entitled “Overtime Pay” of
this MOU, and Employees shall continue to be paid on a bi-weekly basis.

2 Shift Rotation. The shift rotation system set forth in Exhibit “E” entitled, “Patrol
Division Shift Schedule,” shall be established by the Chief of Police in his or her sole discretion and
shall continue subject to the following provisions and conditions:

a Seniority. Assignment of shift hours and Employee days off within each
shift shall be made based on seniority, with Employee having the longest period of employment as a
Police Officer in the case of Police Officer shifts, and as a Police Sergeant in the case of Police Sergeant
shifts, being given preference in the selection of such hours and days off.

b. Chief of Police - Modification. Chief of Police shall have the right to
modify the schedule when it is in the best interests of the Police Department in order to ensure a
reasonable level of experienced officers and a uniform distribution of Field Training Officers, Crime
Scene Investigators, and Canine Officers on all shifts.

c. Voluntary Shift Changes. After consideration of the needs of City and
the desires of Employee, voluntary shift schedule changes (“trades”) between Employees may be
approved by Chief of Police. Requests for shift trade approval shall be made for good cause and shall be
in writing.

3. Donning and Doffing.

a. Effective December 23, 2007, the Chico Police Department will allow ten
(10) minutes at the beginning of a shift in order to provide all affected CPOA members time to don their
police uniforms and protective gear, and will allow ten (10) minutes prior to the end of a shift in order to
provide all affected CPOA members time to doff their police uniforms and protective gear. For the
purposes of this section regarding donning & doffing at the start and end of work shifts, the terms “don”
or “donning” and “doff’ or “doffing” are intended to cover putting on and taking off uniforms and
protective gear, as well as all associated time for preparing, maintaining, storing, and otherwise
associated with required uniforms and protective gear. Also for the purposes of this section, existing
start and end times for scheduled work shifts are not being changed; rather, the ten (10) minutes being
allowed for donning at the start of shifts will begin at the start of the scheduled shift, and this ten (10)

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 44 of 57
minute period will end at the start of briefing (or ‘roll call’), such that briefing will not start until ten
(10) minutes after the beginning of the scheduled work shifts.

Similarly, the ten (10) minutes being allowed at the end of shifts will
begin ten (10) minutes prior to the end of the scheduled shifts, such that employees covered by this
provision are allowed to enter their respective locker/dressing rooms ten (10) minutes prior to the
scheduled end of their shifts.

b. CPOA agrees that, for the duration of this MOU and as long as the ten
(10) minutes at the start of shifts and the ten minutes at the end of shifts are provided by the Police
Department for donning & doffing, CPOA will not approve, file or process any grievance concerning or
related to donning & doffing, nor will CPOA encourage, support, or fund any lawsuit or lawsuits
regarding donning & doffing by past or present CPOA members. CPOA also represents that as of
December 23, 2007, CPOA has not approved or funded and is not participating in any grievances or
lawsuits regarding donning & doffing for its past or present members.

c As documented in the separate, stand-alone Waiver and Release form
maintained by the Human Resources and Risk Management Office, Employees receive the ten (10)
minutes at the beginning of work shifts and the ten (10) minutes at the end of work shifts for donning &
doffing if and only if such CPOA member has signed the Waiver and Release form agreeing to waive,
relinquish, release, acquit and discharge City from any and all actions, claims, or demands regarding
donning & doffing, as described on such Waiver and Release forms.

d, City and CPOA agree that this section effectively resolves the dispute over
donning & doffing time incurred by past and present CPOA members, and the appropriate compensation
for such time, for the duration of this MOU and as long as the ten (10) minute periods described herein
are provided by the Police Department to all affected CPOA members.

e This section regarding donning & doffing, and the associated separate
Waiver and Release form, represent the entire understanding of City and CPOA as to the donning &
doffing of uniforms and protective gear at the Chico Police Department. No prior written understanding
shall be of any force or effect with respect to donning & doffing. This section of the agreement for
donning & doffing may not be modified or altered except by written amendment appropriately

2015 MOU-CPOA. L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 45 of 57
designated, signed, and dated by City and CPOA. Any such amendment shall, unless otherwise
provided, be considered as a part of this section from the effective date of this MOU.

4. Other Divisional Shift Assignments. All Employees assigned to other
Departmental bureaus, divisions, or units shall work a shift assignment as determined by Chief of Police
subject to the provisions of Subsection D, below.

D. Hours and Shift Modification.

1, Shift Modification - Emergencies. City may, in its sole discretion and upon
determination of Chief of Police, determine that emergency conditions exist which threaten the public
health and safety and modify the shift schedules herein established in any manner deemed necessary by
Chief of Police to meet the requirements of said emergency. The term “emergency conditions” shall
include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following conditions, singularly or in combination: Civil
unrest, strikes, riot, natural disasters, major criminal situations, unexpected, substantial and protracted
reductions in manpower and such other similar conditions as may be reasonably determined by Chief of
Police to require reallocation of departmental resources by modification of the existing shift assignments
to ameliorate such circumstances. City shall not, however, unreasonably, arbitrarily, or capriciously
make a determination of emergency conditions. Further, City agrees that when the need for such shift
modification arises, it will attempt to notify the Employee(s) whose shift(s) will be affected, as early as
is practical, in advance of the effective dates of said shift change.

2. Shift Modification - Staffing Shortages. Chief of Police may modify the shift
schedules herein established to a five (5) day, eight (8) hour shift schedule to meet the needs of the
Police Department in the event that the number of uniformed Police Officers and Sergeants regularly
assigned to patrol duties in the Patrol Division, fall twenty percent (20%) or more below the number of
positions regularly assigned to such Division by the Police Department. Only personnel vacancies
resulting from workers’ compensation leave, leave without pay, illness or other medical condition, light
duty assignments, and retirement or other terminations shall be counted in determining such twenty
percent (20%) amount. In determining the number of Police Officers and Sergeants regularly assigned.
to the Patrol Division, newly appointed Employees who are in the field training program shall be
excluded. Further, City agrees that when the need for such shift modification arises, it will notify

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 46 of 57
Employee(s) whose shift(s) will be affected, as early as is practical, in advance of the effective dates of
said shift change. Shift modifications between a five (5) day, eight (8) hour shift schedule, 3-12 shift
schedule, and a 4-10 shift schedule, shall be made effective at 01:00 Sunday moming, the first day of an
established pay period.

3. Dispute - Modification for Emergencies and Staffing Shortages. In the event
of a dispute regarding the existence of an emergency or the. need to implement emergency or staffing
shortage shift modifications, Employees shall have the right to request a hearing before a hearing
officer, which hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions relating thereto
as set forth in PERRs Section 2R.72.240. Further, the parties hereto agree that all other grievance
procedures provided in the cited PERRs Section preceding said hearing procedure are hereby waived in
this regard, and that the binding arbitration provisions of Article Eight shall not apply hereto.

4, Shift Modification - Minimum Off-Duty Time Period - Court Call-Back. In
the event that an Employee is required to make a court appearance during said Employee’s off-duty time
between work shifts, Chief of Police, upon proper notification, shall rearrange the beginning time of
such Employee’s subsequent work shift schedule so as to provide Employee with a minimum rest period
of eight (8) hours before or after such court appearance, subject to the provisions of Subsections 1, 2,
and 3, above.

5. Shift Modification - Minimum Off-Duty Time Period - Shift Rotation. When
shift rotation occurs, Chief of Police shall make every reasonable effort to modify the beginning time of
an Employee's new shift, if necessary, to ensure that Employee has a minimum rest period of eight (8)
hours between the end of one shift and the beginning of the next shift, subject to the provisions of
Subsections 1, 2 and 3, above.

12 SAFETY

A. Safety Rules. CPOA agrees that Employees shall abide by adopted rules and regulations
regarding the usage of safety equipment and the utilization of safe working operations and procedures.
Any such Employee in violation of such safety rules and regulations shall be disciplined in accordance
with the appropriate provisions of the PERRs.

2015 MOU-CPOA. L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 47 of 57
B. Work Stations, Equipment, and Tools. City recognizes its responsibility to and will
provide safe work stations, equipment, and tools.
13 JOINT LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
The City and CPOA agree to meet at least biannually during the term of the MOU to discuss issues of
mutual interest involving staffing levels, retention, recruitment and training. All meeting dates will be
set at mutually agreeable times. The parties understand that these meetings do not constitute meet and
confer as those terms are used under the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act. Any agreements to modify the
terms of the MOU as a result of these meetings will be achieved through side letters based on mutual

agreement of the parties.

ARTICLE EIGHT: BINDING ARBITRATION

8.1 | AGREEMENT TO BINDING ARBITRATION
City agrees to a process of third-party binding arbitration, as set forth herein, which only shall be used
for grievances arising out of the interpretation of the provisions of this MOU. AP&Ps on the following
subjects are also subject to the grievance procedure:

a. Medical Suitability for Employment

b. Transfer of Sick Leave for Illness of Other City Employees

c. Bereavement Leave

d. Military Training Leave

e. Educational Reimbursement

f. Damage Reimbursement — Personal Clothing and Property

g. Department Safety Committees
8.2 PROGRESSION TO BINDING ARBITRATION
Tf requested by the grievant, the binding arbitration request replaces the hearing request in the formal
grievance procedure set forth in PERRs Section 2R.72.240.A.5.b(5). However, the fifteen (15) working
day time limit set forth in such PERRs Section shall be applicable to such binding arbitration request.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 48 of 57
8.3 REVIEW BY CITY MANAGER

At the option of the grievant, a fourth level of review, consisting of a review by City Manager, may be
utilized prior to implementation of the binding arbitration process. However, the request for such review
shall be made within ten (10) working days after receipt of the written decision of the third level of
review. City agrees that City Manager shall review the matter and render a written decision within
fifteen (15) working days. Should Employee still feel aggrieved, or should City Manager not render a
decision within fifteen (15) days, Employee shall have ten (10) working days to initiate the Binding
Arbitration process.

8.4 SELECTION OF ARBITRATOR

Arbitrator selection and the arbitration process shall proceed in accordance with the “Expedited Labor
Arbitration Rules” of the American Arbitration Association (“CAAA”) provided, however, that arbitrator
selection and the arbitration process may proceed under the “Voluntary Labor Arbitration Rules” of the
AAA upon mutual agreement between City and CPOA.

85 AUTHORITY OF ARBITRATOR

The authority of the arbitrator shall be limited to making determinations regarding the violation,
misapplication, or misinterpretation of the provisions of this MOU. The arbitrator shall not have the
authority to add to or delete from such provisions nor make decisions which involve direct changes or
modifications to the scheduled pay or benefit provisions contained herein. In the event that there exists
between the parties hereto a dispute as to whether a matter is subject to the arbitration process set forth
herein, the arbitrator shall consider and determine whether the matter is subject to arbitration prior to
hearing and considering the merits of the grievance issue.

8.6 COST OF ARBITRATION

The cost of the arbitration process assessed by the AAA shall be shared equally between City and
CPOA. City and CPOA shall each be responsible for their own costs in securing witnesses for legal or

other representation and for presentation of material.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 49 of 57
Signed and dated as follows:
For the Chico Police Officers’ Association: For the City of Chico:

- Mou

Peter D ) Mark Orme* (Date)
President City Manager

* Authorized pursuant to Chico
Municipal Code 2R.04.060

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

 

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 50 of 57
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN
THE CITY OF CHICO
AND
THE CHICO POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION (CPOA)
REGARDING PAY, HOURS, AND OTHER TERMS AND

CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT FOR THE PERIOD OF

JANUARY 1, 2015 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2017

(2015 MOU - CPOA)

EXHIBIT “A” - SCHEDULE OF JOB TITLES

The following job titles shall be covered by the provisions of this MOU:

Police Officer
Police Sergeant

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 51 of 57
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN
THE CITY OF CHICO
AND
THE CHICO POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION (CPOA)
REGARDING PAY, HOURS, AND OTHER TERMS AND

CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT FOR THE PERIOD OF

JANUARY 1, 2015 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2017

(2015 MOU - CPOA)

EMPLOYEES HIRED PRIOR TO DATE CITY COUNCIL APPROVES THE RATIFIED MOU

EFFECTIVE: Date of Adoption (5% Increase)

A B c D E F G
Police Officer 26.83 28.17 2958 31.06 32.61 3424 35.95
Police Sergeant - = - 41.71 43.79 45.98 48.28
EFFECTIVE: 01/01/2016 (H Step Addition)

A B é D E F G H
Police Officer 26.83 08.17 29.58 31.06 32.61 34.24 35.95 36.85
Police Sergeant : . - 471 43.79 45.98 48.28 49.49
EFFECTIVE: 01/01/2017 (I Step Addition)

A B c D E F G H I
Police Officer 26.83 28.17 29.58 31.06 32.61 34.24 35.95 36.85 37.77
Police Sergeant “ - - 41.71 43.79 45.98 48.28 49.49 50.73

EMPLOYEES HIRED AFTER DATE CITY COUNCIL APPROVES THE RATIFIED MOU

EFFECTIVE: Date of Adoption (14 step schedule)

1 2 A B Cc D E F G H I J K L
Police Officer 26.08 26.73 27.40 28.08 28.78 29.50 30,24 31.00 31.78 32.57 33.38 34.21 35.07 35.95
Police Sergeant 7 = = - = 40.61 41.63 42.67 43.74 44.83 45.95 47.10 48.28

EFFECTIVE: 01/01/2016

 

 

 

2 A B Cc D E F G H I J K L M
Police Officer 26.73 27.40 28.08 28.78 29.50 30.24 31.00 31.78 32.57 33.38 34.21 35.07 35.95 36.85

= - 40.61 41.63 42.67 43,74 44.83 45.95 47.10 48.28 49.49

Police Sergeant ‘ :

EFFECTIVE: 01/01/2017

 
     
 

36.85 37.77

Police Sergeant - - - 40.61 41.63 42.67 43.74 44,83 45.95 47.10 48.28 49.49 50.73

 

LAGR-12-42
Page 52 of 57
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN
THE CITY OF CHICO
AND
THE CHICO POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION (CPOA)
REGARDING PAY, HOURS, AND OTHER TERMS AND

CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT FOR THE PERIOD OF

JANUARY 1, 2015 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2017

(2015 MOU - CPOA)

EXHIBIT “C” - HEALTH INSURANCE CARRIERS AND CONTRIBUTIONS

L CARRIERS
Employees shall be covered by the medical and dental insurance carriers on file with the Human

Resources and Risk Management Office.

IL CITY CONTRIBUTIONS
City shall make the following maximum contribution per month toward the monthly premium
tate for City's employee group medical and dental insurance plans, as defined herein. The
amount of the Employee's contribution shall vary based on the medical plan selected by the
Employee. In the event that the actual monthly premium is less than the maximum contribution
set forth below, City's contribution shall be the actual monthly premium amount and Employees
shall not be required to make a contribution. Any premium costs in excess of City’s contribution
shall be paid by Employee.

Effective January 30, 2011, Employees shall be responsible for payment of the dental insurance
premium, up to a maximum of $74.09 per month. If the dental insurance premium increases
above $74.09 during the term of this MOU, City agrees to pay such increases.

Effective January 1, 2015
MEDICAL

[| EPO | PRO S00 | PPO 80/20 HDHP

348.74 395.47 3
1,151.76 738.24 839.92 85

1,090.82

 

PPO 90/10 PPO 80/20
269.26 174.53
576.76 372.08

472.18

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2015 MOU-CPOA. L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 53 of S7
 

 

 

 

Single 74.09 0.00
Double 74.09 4.66
Family 74.09 10.24

 

 

 

Future Premium Increases.

Future medical premium increases shall be shared proportionately between the City and CPOA based on
the percent of total premium cost used for 2015 premium contributions/deductions.

fl. EMPLOYEES NOT REQUIRED TO PARTICIPATE IN CITY’S INSURANCE PLAN.
Employees who have alternative group medical insurance coverage are not required to
participate in City’s medical insurance plan. Employees are required to provide verification of
such alternative coverage to the Human Resources and Risk Management Office during the open
enrollment period. Employees shall continue to provide verification during the open enrollment
period in all subsequent years that Employees choose to opt out of City’s medical insurance plan.
Employees who opt out of City’s medical insurance plan shall receive a payment of $100.00 per

month:

A. Into Employee’s Medical Flexible Spending Account established with the City’s Section 125

Plan; or

B. Into Employee’s City deferred compensation account.

Employees who lose their alternative coverage shall be required to immediately enroll in City’s

medical insurance plan, and shall no longer receive the $100.00 per month payment.

2015 MQU-CPOA.

L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 54 of 57
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN
THE CITY OF CHICO
AND
THE CHICO POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION (CPOA)
REGARDING PAY, HOURS, AND OTHER TERMS AND

CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT FOR THE PERIOD OF

JANUARY 1, 2015 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2017

(2015 MOU - CPOA)

EXHIBIT “D” - VACATION ACCRUAL SCHEDULE

Hours

 

Bi-weekly Annual Accrual Max Accrual

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Length of Service Accrual Rate Rate Balance
7th month through 36th month 3.08 80.08 320
37th month through 96th month 4.62 120.12 320
97th month through 108th month 4.93 128.18 320
109th month through 120th month 5.23 135.98 340
121st month through 132nd month 5.54 144.04 360
133rd month through 144th month 5.85 152.10 380
145th month through 156th month 6.16 160.16 400
157th month through 168th month 6.47 168.22 420
169th month through 180th month 6.78 176.28 440
181st month through 192nd month 7.09 184.34 460
193rd month and forward - 7.39 192.14 480
2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2

Page 55 of 57
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN
CITY OF CHICO
AND
CHICO PUBLIC OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION (CPOA)
REGARDING PAY, HOURS AND OTHER TERMS AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT FOR THE PERIOD OF
JANUARY 1, 2015 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2017
(2015 MOU - CPOA)

EXHIBIT “E” - PATROL SECTION SHIFT SCHEDULE

The shift schedule set forth on Exhibit E-1 shall apply to Employees assigned to the Police Department’s
Patrol Section.

2015 MOU-CPOA L-AGR-12-4-2
Page 56 of 57
(3/12.5 & 4/10 COMBINATION STAFFING P
[Sun [Mon [tues Wed thor eri Sat Son Mon [Tues [Wed Thor Fi sat

feree700 0700-1700 [0700-1700 [0700-1700 0700-1700 rep }

|-days*** 1200-2200 1200-2200
A 1/2 team M-Th and 1/2 team Tu-F 1/2 team M-Th and 1/2 team Tu-F

z : PL
j2200-0800 [2200-0800 [2200-0800 [2100-0700 2200-0800 ee [2100-0700
[3000-1830 0
(0600-1830

10900-2130 0900-2130
B *Vacant *Vacant
*Vacant

‘Swing’ 11600-0450
1600-0
1960-0730

 

 

(0900-2130 16900-2130
*Vacant Vacant
1600-0430 1600-0430
B
1600-0430
1900-0730

4
-

1600-0430 [1600-0430 _|1600-0430

1900-0730 1900-0730,

 

600-
P|

** 3-12 1/2 br teams require a 10 hour payback day every 28 day cycle. The payback day may be astigned to satisfy the needs of the Department pursuant to 7.1.C. of this MOU,
+++ Training days for the 4-10 teams may require alternate shift hours, usually 0700-1700.

LAGR-124.2
Page 57 of 57
