MEMORANDUM OF
UNDERSTANDING

between the
CITY OF CYPRESS

and the

CYPRESS POLICE
OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

 

JULY 1, 2013 to JUNE 30, 2016
ARTICLE I.

ARTICLE Il.

ARTICLE Ill.

ARTICLE Iv.

CYPRESS POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2013 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2016

TABLE OF CONTENTS

RECOGNITION

Section 1.

Section 2.

NON-DISCRIMINATION

Section 1.

Section 2.

Section 3. Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA and
California Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA)

COMPENSATION PLAN

Section 1. Basic Compensation Plan

Section 2. Anniversary Dates

Section 3. Advancement Within Salary Ranges

Section 4. Salary Increases Following Promotion

Section 5. Salary Decreases Following Demotion

Section 6. Salary Following Transfer

Section 7. Adjustment of Salary Ranges

Section 8. Salary and Benefits on Suspension

Section 9. Salary Adjustments During Term of
Memorandum of Understanding

HOURS OF WORK

Section 1, Modified Work Schedules

Page No.
ARTICLE V.

ARTICLE VI.

ARTICLE Vil.

ARTICLE VIII.

OVERTIME COMPENSATION

Section 1. Paid Time Off

Section 2. FLSA 7(k) Exemption
Section 3. Compensation for Overtime
Section 4. Compensatory Time Off
Section 5. Overtime Reporting

Section 6. Authorization

SPECIAL PAY PROVISIONS

Section 1. Court Time

Section 2. Call-Back

Section 3. Stand-By Pay

Section 4. Training Programs

Section 5. Educational Incentive Pay
Section 6. Uniform Allowance and Safety Equipment
Section 7. Temporary Assignment Pay
Section 8. Special Services Overtime
Section 9. Bilingual Pay

Section 10. Special Assignment Pay
HOLIDAYS

Section 1. Recognized Holidays
Section 2. Employees Required to Work on Holidays

Section 3. Holidays Falling During Approved Leaves of
Absence Without Regular Pay

PROBATIONARY PERIODS
Section 1. Regular Appointments Following Probationary Period
Section 2, Objective of Probationary Period

Section 3. Rejection of Probationary Employee

9-10
10-11

1

1

11
ARTICLE IX.

ARTICLE X.

ARTICLE XI.

ARTICLE XIl.

ARTICLE XiIll.

VACATION

Section 1. Eligibility

Section 2. Vacation Accrual

Section 3. Maximum Accrual

Section 4. Use of Vacation

Section 5. Vacation Payment at Termination

Section 6. Holidays Falling During Vacation

Section 7. Vacation Earned During Leave of Absence
Section 8. Prohibition Against Working for City During Vacation
LEAVES OF ABSENCE

Section 1. Authorized Leave of Absence Without Regular Pay
Section 2. Bereavement Leave

Section 3. Military Leave of Absence

Section 4. Unauthorized Leave of Absence

JURY DUTY

Section 1. Compensation for Jury Duty
TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT AND APPOINTMENT
Section 1.

SICK LEAVE

Section 1. General Sick Leave Provisions

Section 2. Eligibility

Section 3. Accrual

Section 4. Accumulation and Payment Plan

Section 5. Use

Section 6. Sick Leave During Vacation

12
12
12
13
13
13
13

13-14
14
14

14

14

15

15
15
15
16-17
17

17
ARTICLE XIV.

ARTICLE XV.

ARTICLE XVI.

ARTICLE XVII.

ARTICLE XVIII.

ARTICLE XIX.

ARTICLE Xx.

Section 7. Extended Sick Leave
Section 8. Continuation of Health Coverage During Sick Leave

Section 9. Federal Medical Leave Act and the California
Family Rights Act

Section 10. On-The-Job Injury

Section 11. Off-The-Job Injury

Section 12. California Labor Code Section 233
FRINGE BENEFIT ADMINISTRATION

Section 1. Administration

Section 2. Selection and Funding

Section 3. Changes

HEALTH, LIFE, DENTAL, DISABILITY AND VISION INSURANCE

Section 1. Health Insurance Plan
Section 2. Dental Insurance Plan
Section 3. Disability Insurance Plan
Section 4. Vision Plan

Section 5. Life Insurance Plan
RETIREMENT

Sections 1-3

EMPLOYEE TRAINING AND EDUCATION PROGRAMS
Section 1. Tuition Reimbursement Plan
SAFETY AND HEALTH

LAYOFF PROCEDURES

Section 1. Policy

REINSTATEMENT
Section 1. Policy

18

18
18
18
18

19
19

19

19
21
21
22

22

22

22

23

23

23
ARTICLE XX!.

ARTICLE Xxil.

ARTICLE XxXiil.

ARTICLE XxIv.

ARTICLE XXV.

ARTICLE XXVvI.

ARTICLE XXvII.

ARTICLE XXVIII.

ARTICLE XXiX.
ARTICLE XXX.
ARTICLE XXxXI.
EXHIBIT A
EXHIBIT B

EXHIBIT C

TRANSFER, PROMOTION AND DEMOTION
Section 1. Transfer
Section 2. Promotion

Section 3. Demotion

24

24

25

EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONAL RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Section 1. Dues Deduction
Section 2. Indemnification
NO STRIKE-NO LOCKOUT
Section 1. Prohibited Conduct

Section 2. Association Responsibility

NO SMOKING POLICY
ENTIRE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Sections 1-3

WAIVER OF BARGAINING DURING TERM OF
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

CITY RIGHTS

Section 1

Section 2

EMERGENCY WAIVER PROVISION
SEPARABILITY

TERM OF MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
RATIFICATION

Salary Schedules

10 Plan

12 Plan

25
25

25
25

25

26

26

26
27

27

28
28
29
30 -— 32

33 - 37
EXHIBIT D

Sick Leave Accrual Balances as of 9/30/2013

38
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE CITY OF CYPRESS
AND THE
CYPRESS POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

ARTICLE | - RECOGNITION

Section 1. Pursuant to the provisions of the Employer-Employee Relations Resolution No. 970,
as amended, the City of Cypress (hereinafter called the “City” and/or “Employer” interchangeably) has
recognized, for the purpose of this Memorandum of Understanding, the Cypress Police Officers
Association as the majority representative of the employees in the bargaining unit, which includes
Police Department employees in the classifications and assignments of Police Sergeant, and Police
Officer.

Section 2. The City recognizes the Association as the representative of the employees in the
classifications and assignments set forth in Section 1. above for the purpose of meeting its
obligations under this Memorandum of Understanding, the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act, Government
Code Section 3500 et seq., when City Rules, Regulations, or laws affecting wages, hours, and/or
other terms and conditions of employment are amended or changed.

ARTICLE II - NON-DISCRIMINATION

Section 1. The City and the Association agree that they shall not discriminate against any
employee because of any legally protected classification, including but not limited to: race, color, sex,
age, disability, national origin, political or religious opinions or affiliations. The City and the
Association shall reopen any provision of this Memorandum of Understanding for the purpose of
complying with any final order of the federal or state agency or court of competent jurisdiction
requiring a modification or change in any provision or provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding in compliance with state or federal anti-discrimination laws.

Section 2, Whenever the masculine gender is used in this Memorandum of Understanding, it
shall be understood to include the feminine gender.

Section 3. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and California Fair Employment and Housing
Act (FEHA)

A. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and California Fair Employment and Housing Act
(FEHA) requires reasonable accommodations for individuals protected under the Acts, and because
these reasonable accommodations must be determined on an individual, case-by-case basis,
exceptions to the provisions of this Agreement may be required for the City to avoid discrimination in
the hiring, promotion, granting of permanency, transfer, layoff, reassignment, termination, rehire,
rates of pay, job and duty classification, seniority, leaves, fringe benefits, training opportunities, hours
of work or other terms and privileges of employment.

B. Any accommodation provided to an individual protected by the ADA/FEHA shall not
establish a past practice, nor shall it be cited or be used as evidence of a past practice in the
grievance, discipline, or other legal procedure.

MOU ~ POA 2013 — 2016 Page 1 of 36
ARTICLE Ill - COMPENSATION PLAN
Section 1. Basic Compensation Plan

A. All employees covered by this Memorandum of Understanding shall be included under the
Basic Compensation Plan. Every classification under this Plan shall be assigned a salary range
adopted by the City Council. The salary schedule shall consist of seven (7) steps within each range.

B. The first step (Step 0) is a minimum rate and is normally the hiring rate for the classification.
An employee may be assigned, upon appointment, to other than the normal entering salary step
upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police and the approval of the City Manager when it is
decided that such action is in the best interest of the City.

C. The second step, A step, is a merit adjustment which may be given at the end of six (6)
months of employment subject to the recommendation of the Chief of Police and approval of the City
Manager.

D. The third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh steps are merit adjustments to encourage an
employee to improve his work and to recognize seniority and increased skill on the job. Employees
are normally eligible for these adjustments at any time after the completion of one (1) year of service
at the preceding step. Each adjustment shall be made only if recommended by the Chief of Police
and approved by the City Manager.

Section 2. Anniversary dates shall be established as follows:

A. Employees appointed, promoted, or reinstated on or between the first and the fifteenth day
of the month inclusive shall, for the purpose of eligibility for consideration of future compensation
increases, have the first day of that same month as their anniversary date.

B. Employees appointed, promoted, or reinstated on or between the sixteenth and the last day
of the month inclusive shall, for the purpose of eligibility for consideration of future compensation
increases, have the first day of that month immediately following as their anniversary date.

C. Anniversary dates shall change upon promotion or reclassification. Anniversary dates shall
not change following demotions or transfers.

Section 3. Advancement Within Salary Ranges

A. In order to properly compensate an employee, advancement in salary shall be based on
merit.

B. Advancement in salary shall not be automatic, but shall depend upon the results of an
employee’s performance evaluation completed by his immediate supervisor.

C. The Chief of Police and/or the employee's immediate supervisor shall be responsible to
evaluate employees fairly in an unbiased fashion for the determination of job performance.
Advancement shall be made only upon recommendation of the Chief of Police with approval of the
City Manager or his designee.

MOU — POA 2013 - 2016 Page 2 of 36
D. An employee's job performance must be evaluated prior to the completion of six (6) months
of service from the date of appointment. Thereafter, an employee’s job performance must be
evaluated at least once every twelve (12) months from the effective date of his last merit step
increase, special performance advancement or promotion. Nothing contained herein shall restrict the
Chief of Police from denying the increase after evaluation, nor shall it prevent him/her from
recommending a special performance advancement in salary at any time when unusual or
outstanding achievement has been demonstrated.

E. It shall be the responsibility of each supervisor to establish realistic achievement levels for
each step increase within a salary range. Achievement levels may be formal or informal and shall be
reviewed by the Chief of Police for the purpose of maintaining uniformity of standards throughout the
department.

Section 4. Salary Increases Following Promotion

When an employee is promoted to a position with a higher salary range, such employee shall be
entitled to the lowest step in the higher salary range that would represent a salary increase of at least
5%, but not to exceed the “B” step of the higher salary range, over the base salary received
immediately prior to promotion.

Section 5. Salary Decreases Following Demotion

In the cases of a demotion of any employee in the department to a classification with a lower
maximum salary, such employee shail be assigned to the appropriate salary step in the new
classification as recommended by the Chief of Police and approved by the City Manager. The
employee shall retain his previous anniversary date.

Section 6. Salary Following Transfer

In the case of the transfer of any employee from one classification to another to which the same
salary range is applicable, the employee shall remain at the same pay step and shall retain his same
anniversary date.

Section 7. Adjustment of Salary Ranges

When a salary range for a given classification is revised upward or downward, the incumbents of
classifications affected shall have their existing salary adjusted to the same relative step in the new
salary range, and their anniversary date shall not be changed.

Section 8. Salary and Benefits on Suspension

During suspension from the City service for disciplinary cause, an employee shall forfeit all
rights, privileges and salary, except he shall not forfeit his medical health plan, dental insurance plan,
vision plan, retirement plan, disability insurance, or life insurance plan, unless specific exclusions
prevent such coverage continuation. Should such suspension be later modified or revoked, the
employee shall be entitled to receive payment for loss of income during the period of suspension.
Any disruption in coverage continuation shall be reinstated upon return to active duty in accordance
with policy eligibility requirements.

MOU — POA 2013 ~ 2016 Page 3 of 36
Section 9. Salary Adjustments During Term of Memorandum of Understanding

A. Attached hereto and incorporated herein is Exhibit "A". Said Exhibit effects base salary
adjustments for represented classifications.

B. Salary increases for all represented classes will be implemented at the beginning of the pay
period as follows:

Effective September 27, 2013, a 2.868% range adjustment for the classifications of Police
Officer and Police Sergeant.

Effective July 4, 2014, based upon the May CPI-U Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County,
minimum 2% to a maximum 3% for the classifications of Police Officer and Police Sergeant.

Effective July 3, 2015, based upon the May CPI-U Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County,
minimum 2% to a maximum 3% for the classifications of Police Officer and Police Sergeant.

ARTICLE IV - HOURS OF WORK

Section 1. Modified Work Schedules

A. The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, may designate up to three (3) patrol positions (one
[1] of which may be a Sergeant) and excluding Field Training Officers and their trainees, to be
assigned to a “4/10 Work Schedule” (as defined in Exhibit B attached hereto). In the event the Chief
of Police, or his/her designee, or the Association desire to assign more than three (3) patrol positions
to the “4/10 Work Schedule,” the parties hereto agree to meet and confer in good faith regarding
such additional patrol positions; provided, however, that the Chief of Police, or his/her designee,
retains the right to make any final scheduling decisions related to additions to or deletions of patrol
officers to the “4/10 Work Schedule.”

1. EXHIBIT B - “4/10 Work Schedule” - Employee works four (4) ten (10) hour shifts in a
seven (7) day work period.

Classifications subject to this work schedule include: Detectives and Personnel and
Training staff.

2. EXHIBIT C - “3/12.5 Work Schedule” - Employee works three (3) twelve and one-half (12.5)
hour shifts with four (4) consecutive days off in each seven (7) day work cycle of a twenty-eight (28)
day work period, except that the employee must work one additional twelve and one-half (12.5) hour
shift during the work period.

Classifications assigned to the Patrol Division who are subject to this work schedule
include: Police Officer and Police Sergeant.

B. The continuation of modified work schedules is subject to the operational needs of the
Department. If Management determines that schedule changes are necessary, the meet and confer
process may be reopened on the proposed changes only.

C. Any employee's work schedule may be temporarily changed to accommodate training
assignments which are eight (8) or more hours in duration.

MOU — POA 2013 - 2016 Page 4 of 36
D. All employees of the department regardless of assigned work schedule are subject to be
called to work at any time to meet any and all operational needs, emergencies or unusual conditions
which in the opinion of the Chief of Police or designee in charge of the department at the time, may
require such service from any of said officers and employees.

ARTICLE V - OVERTIME COMPENSATION
Section 1. Paid Time Off

For purposes of computing overtime, paid time off, excluding sick leave, shall be considered as time
worked.

Section 2. FLSA 7(k) Exemption

For sworn law enforcement employees, Section 7(k) of the FLSA allows flexibility of the seven
(7) day/forty (40) hour work week to be extended to a maximum of one hundred and seventy-one
(171) hours in a twenty-eight (28) day work period. As per designated modified work schedules,
overtime may be defined as approved by management.

Section 3. Compensation for Overtime

Authorized overtime shall be compensated in pay or compensatory time off (CTO) at the rate of
one-and-one-haif (1-1/2) times the straight time hourly equivalent of the base monthly salary.

Section 4. Compensatory Time Off

A. Employees may elect to receive compensatory time off in lieu of pay for overtime subject to
paragraphs “B” and “C” below.

B. Employees shall be permitted to accumulate hours of compensatory time off provided that
all unused accumulated compensatory time off hours in excess of eighty (80) hours shall be paid in
December of each year. Employees shall be permitted to carry over to the following payroll year a
maximum of eighty (80) hours from the previous year's accumulation of compensatory time off, or at
the option of the employee, be paid for said eighty (80) hours in December of each year. An
employee may request payment of compensatory time off hours at any time provided the request is
submitted in writing to the Personnel Office. Should an employee desire to take leave hours as
compensatory time off, he shall file a written request with the Chief of Police who shall grant time off
unless it unduly disrupts the normal operation staffing of the police department.

C. Upon receiving a promotional increase in pay, an adjustment shall be made to an
employee's bank of accumulated compensatory time off (CTO) hours in order to maintain the value of
the hours earned prior to the promotional pay increase.

Section 5. Overtime Reporting
In order for an employee to earn compensation for overtime, advance approval to work overtime
hours must be authorized by the immediate supervisor or the Chief of Police. Overtime worked to

meet an emergency situation does not require advance approval, but shall be certified by the Chief of
Police before being credited to the employee's record.

MOU — POA 2013 — 2016 Page 5 of 36
Section 6. Authorization

It is the policy of the City to avoid the necessity for overtime work. However, when overtime
work is necessary and consistent with the efficient operation of the City, such overtime shall be
authorized by the Chief of Police, but shall be kept at a minimum.

ARTICLE VI - SPECIAL PAY PROVISIONS

 

Section 1. Court Time

An employee called back for a subpoenaed court appearance which arises out of the course of
his employment and which is not within two (2) hours of the commencement or termination of his
regular shift shall be compensated for a minimum of two (2) hours on all such subpoenaed court
appearances at the rate of one-and-one-half (1-1/2) times the employee's regular hourly rate of pay.
Court appearance time shall begin when the employee departs from the department building to go
directly to Court. All employees agree to comply with the "on-call" policies administered by the
department. Should an officer who is subpoenaed to Court in the course of his employment be
required to be in Court on off-duty hours in excess of the minimum of two (2) hours, he shall receive
pay at time-and-one-half (1-1/2) his regular hourly rate of pay for the actual hours the employee is in
Court. The lunch period as designated by the Court shall not be included in the computation of hours
worked as overtime hours and shall be deducted from hours worked as Court time.

Section 2. Call-Back

Employees who are called back to duty after having completed a normal shift or work day
assignment and departing from the work premises shall be paid a minimum of two hours of overtime
at one-and-one-half (1-1/2) times the employee's regular rate of pay, except where the call-back is
due to the employee's failure to reasonably complete his or her duties prior to the end of work (i.e.,
failing to have reports approved, leaving with keys to a unit, etc.). Any hours worked in excess of two
hours shall be treated as regular overtime hours. Call-back time shall commence from the time the
employee reports to Police Headquarters or the scene of the incident.

Section 3. Stand-By Pay

Employees in the Detective Bureau who are assigned by the Chief of Police to "stand-by" status
shall be paid $1.00 per hour for each hour of stand-by.

Section 4. Training Programs

A. When an employee is sent by the City to a training program, the employee shall receive
eight (8) hours pay for each full day of training and such eight (8) hours pay shall be credited towards
the computation of overtime.

B. The City shall pay reasonable expenses incurred by employees attending approved training
programs. Covered expenses include registration fees and the costs of purchasing required course
materials, travel to and from the training course, meals and lodging. Reimbursement for lodging
expenses shall only apply to training courses which require an overnight stay (s). If the program is
not P.O.S.T approved, the employee must provide receipts verifying expenses for which
reimbursement is being requested.

MOU — POA 2013 - 2016 Page 6 of 36
C. Employees attending City approved P.O.S.T training programs requiring an overnight
stay(s) will receive a per diem as approved by the Chief of Police in accordance with P.O.S.T.
guidelines and submitted to the Finance Department. Receipt of the per diem is contingent upon the
employee's submittal of such receipts as may be required by P.O.S.T.; presently, receipts for lodging
expenses are required. If the employee incurs expenses in excess of the per diem, a request for
reimbursement including receipts for all incurred expenses, may be submitted to the City.

Section 5. Educational Incentive Pay

A. Employees hired before 9/3/2013 as a Police Officer or Police Sergeant are eligible for
Education Incentive Pay as outlined below:

1. Eligible employees shall receive compensation in the amount of two and one half percent
(2%%) over the base salary for achievement of a P.O.S.T. intermediate certificate, and five percent
(5%) over the base salary for achievement of a P.O.S.T. Advanced certificate.

2. Eligible employees obtaining an Associate or Bachelor's degree fram accredited colleges or
universities shall be compensated by the following schedule: Associate degree — five percent (5%);
Bachelor’s degree — seven and one half percent (72%).

3. Payment to eligible employees shall be based on the highest achievement level only; i.e.,
employees with an Associate’s degree and Bachelor’s degree will receive compensation for the
Bachelor's degree only. Employees with a P.O.S.T. Advanced Certificate and an Associate’s degree
will receive pay of five percent (5%).

4. All payments under this Section are subject to verification approval by the Personnel
Officer.

5. Employees serving an original probationary period shall be ineligible to receive Educational
Incentive Pay.

B. Effective 2/28/2016, Educational Incentive Pay will be capped at the dollar amount attained
by eligible employees. No further increases to Educational Incentive Pay amounts shall occur, even
in the event of an employee obtaining additional certification(s).

C. Employees hired after 9/3/2013 are not eligible for Educational Incentive Pay.

Section 6. Uniform Allowance and Safety Equipment

A. Designated departmental employees who are required to wear a uniform and/or possess
and maintain specific utility equipment, including firearm, shall receive a biannual uniform allowance
in accordance with the following:

Sworn Personnet $500.00

B. All uniforms and non-safety equipment shall be purchased by the employee with the
uniform allowance.

C. The City shall provide or reimburse the cost of required uniform items incident to duty to an
employee assigned as a motor officer. Such items include, but are not limited to: jacket, two pair of

MOU — POA 2013 - 2016 Page 7 of 36
trousers, boots, eye protection, and gloves. The City shall provide or reimburse the cost of one
replacement pair of boots to an employee assigned as a motor officer during the length of the
assignment. This is effective for all incumbents as of March 1, 2004, and future employees assigned
as a motor officer. In the event that boots are significantly damaged due to an on-duty accident, the
City shall provide or reimburse the cost of one replacement pair of boots if the initial pair of boots has
already been replaced.

D. The City shall continue to provide bullet-proof vests, safety heimets, Oleoresin Capsicum
{OC), and such other safety equipment as required by law or that the Chief of Police deems
necessary.

Section 7. Temporary Assignment Pay

Field Training Officer - Each police officer performing duties of a Field Training Officer shall
receive an additional five percent (5%) compensation over base salary. Field Training Officers and
their trainees may be assigned to a “4/10” Work Schedule as determined by the Chief of Police,
subject to the meet and confer provision of Article IV, Section 1(A) above; provided, however, the
parties acknowledge and agree that such assignment shall be made only for operational needs of the
Police Department and based on exceptional circumstances.

Section 8. Special Services Overtime

An officer assigned as a canine handler or motor officer shall work an average of three (3) hours
per pay period in caring for special equipment required in said assignments. This time shall be paid
in accordance with provisions governing the computation and payment of overtime.

A. Prior to 2006, representative of the City and the Association agreed by means of the meet
and confer process, that the above three (3) hours per City’s payroll period are reasonably
necessary to provide for the care and maintenance of the assigned canine and of the
motorcycle and that these additional “hours worked” are intended to compensate unit
members assigned to canine and motorcycle duty for all off duty hours spent caring for and
maintaining their assigned canine/motorcycles in compliance with the FLSA and interpretive
cases and rulings.

The FLSA, which governs the entitlement to compensation for canine/motorcycle care and
maintenance, entitle the parties to agree to a reasonable number of hours per month for the
performance of off duty care and maintenance duties. The hours derived at this and in pre-
2005 agreements were determined after an actual inquiry of the officers assigned to canine
and motor duty, as addressed by Leever v. City of Carson City, 360 F. 3d 1014 ig" Cir,
2004). It is the intent of the parties through the provisions of this section to fully comply with
the requirements of the FLSA. In addition, the City believes that this section of the MOU
does comply with the requirements of the FLSA.

Upon the submittal of appropriate proof of purchase, employees shall be reimbursed for the cost
of materials and supplies used in maintaining the special equipment.

Section 9. Bilingual Pay

A. Subject to the conditions of this Section, employee(s) who, in the course of their regular job
duties, may be required to speak and understand another approved language besides English or

MOU — POA 2013 - 2016 Page 8 of 36
translate such language to English on a regular basis, will be compensated $100.00 per month.

B. An employee may apply for bilingual pay at any time and will be responsible for initiating a
written request to the Personnel Officer. All requests shall be subject to the Police Chief's approval
and only those classifications and assignments that are determined to reasonably utilize bilingual
skills on a regular basis, shall be considered.

C. The Personnel Officer shall administer competency testing to certify the employee as
eligible for bilingual pay based on the employee's basic bilingual skills proficiency. Such certification
shall be a condition to qualify for bilingual pay.

D. Anemployee who becomes certified to receive bilingual pay shall be compensated with said
pay effective the beginning of the first pay period immediately following certification. The Personnel
Officer shall be responsible for processing appropriate forms for additional pay.

E. In the event an employee is not successful in passing such competency testing to qualify
for bilingual pay, said employee may re-apply for eligibility at least three (3) months after the testing.

F. If it is determined that the employee is no longer utilizing bilingual skills on a regular basis
due to disability (more than one month), extended leave of absence, or other similar circumstance
prohibiting utilization of such bilingual skills, bilingual pay will cease at the beginning of the payroll
period immediately following said date. Such determinations shall be made by the Personnel Officer.

G. Retroactivity: The only retroactive payment of bilingual pay shall be no earlier than the
beginning of the pay period at least ten (10) working days after submittal of the employee's initial
written request for said pay.

H. Any consideration for adding and/or eliminating language(s) to this provision shall be made
by the Chief of Police. Such considerations shall be made based on department needs and
neighboring cities' ethnic population.

Section 10. Special Assignment Pay

Employees in the classifications of Police Officer and Police Sergeant assigned to the detective
bureau or the special enforcement unit shall be paid, per 28-day cycle, three (3) hours of overtime at
one-and one half (11%) times the employee’s regular rate of pay. Employees shall not be eligible for
special assignment pay until they have served in the assignment for at least six (6) months. Special
assignment pay shall be paid only for the length of time the employee is assigned to either the
detective bureau or special enforcement unit.

Employees “re-assigned” to the detective bureau or special enforcement unit who have
previously served at least six (6) months in the same assignment shall not be required to serve an
additional six (6) months prior to receiving special assignment pay.

ARTICLE Vil - HOLIDAYS
Section 1. Recognized Holidays
A. For pay purposes, the following holidays are recognized as municipal holidays. Employees

shall have these off with pay: New Year's Day, Presidents’ Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day, the Friday following Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve

MOU — POA 2013 — 2016 Page 9 of 36
Day, and Christmas Day.

B. Beginning the first pay period of the payroll year, current employees shall be credited with
twenty (20) working hours of floating holiday leave. Employees hired after the beginning of the
payroll year but before September 1 of the payroll year will be credited with twenty (20) working hours
of floating holiday leave.

C. Effective with the payroll year beginning December 15, 2006, employees shall annually
receive additional floating holiday hours at the beginning of the payroll year intended for (but not
restricted solely for) the use of “backfilling” hours to complete a full shift on required training days of
less than the employee's full shift (typically an 8-hour training day). Additional floating holiday hours
shall be provided based upon the employee’s assignment/work schedule at the beginning of the
payroll year. Employees on the “3/12.5" work schedule shall receive thirteen and one-half (13.5)
additional floating holiday hours and employees on the “4/10” work schedule shall receive six (6)
additional floating holiday hours at the beginning of the payroll year. Employees hired after January 1
of the payroll year will receive additional floating haliday hours on a pro-rated basis.

D. Floating holidays may be taken subject to the approval of the Chief of Police after
consideration of the department workload and other staffing considerations such as, but not limited
to, leave schedules of other employees already approved, sick leave, and position vacancies.

E. Floating holidays must be taken as paid time off in the payroll year of crediting. If, because
of administrative requirements, an employee is unable to use the floating holidays, the employee may
receive a cash payment for unused floating holiday(s) subject to approval of the Chief of Police and
the City Manager. Payment shall be made on or before the last payroll period of a payroll year.

F. When any holiday, recognized by the City as a holiday, falls on a Sunday, the following
Monday shall be considered the holiday; when any day, recognized by the City as a holiday falls on a
Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be considered the holiday.

G. Request for a religious holiday shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police. If approved,
such time shall be charged against accumulated compensatory time off or vacation or floating holiday
leave.

H. An employee who separates from the City who has taken credited, but unearned holiday
hours is responsible for reimbursing the City for the time taken at the rate of pay in effect on the date
the time was taken. Whenever possible, the City will make the appropriate deduction from the
employee's final paycheck.

Section 2, Employees Required to Work on Holidays

A. Unless otherwise specified in the provisions of an assigned modified work schedule, any
employee eligible for holiday pay, who is required to work on a day designated as a holiday, shall be
paid at the straight time rate for the normal work hours on said day and, in addition, shall receive pay
equal to and in lieu of time off for said holiday. Hours worked in excess of the normal work hours on
such holidays shall be considered as overtime hours and shall be compensated for under the
appropriate overtime pay provision. When a holiday falls on a normally assigned day off for an
employee who is eligible to receive holiday pay, that employee shall receive additional pay equal to
and in lieu of time off for said holiday. Said additional pay shall be eight (8) hours pay at the
employee's regular straight time hourly rate of pay.

MOU = POA 2013 - 2016 Page 10 of 36
B. Unless otherwise specified in the provisions of an assigned modified work schedule, when
an employee eligible for holiday pay, is required to work on a day designated as a holiday becomes ill
and is unable to report for work on that day, the employee shall be paid at the straight time rate for
the sick leave hours scheduled to work on said day and, in addition, will receive pay equal to and in
lieu of time off for said holiday.

Section 3. Holidays Falling During Approved Leaves of Absence Without Regular Pay

Unless otherwise specified in the provisions of an assigned modified work schedule, any
employee on an approved leave of absence without regular pay, having the holiday fall during the
period of such leave of absence without regular pay, shall be eligible for such holiday pay only in
those instances where said employee has worked either the day before or the day immediately
following said holiday.

ARTICLE Vili - PROBATIONARY PERIODS
Section 1, Regular Appointments Following Probationary Period

A. The original appointment of employees shall be tentative and subject to a probationary period
of eighteen (18) months of actual and continuous service. Sworn ‘lateral’ hires shall serve a
probationary period of twelve (12) months of actual and continuous service.

B. Promotional employees shall serve a probationary period of twelve (12) months of actual and
continuous service.

C. When unusual circumstances merit the extension of the probationary period, the department
head shall request, in writing, approval of the Personnel Officer. Said extension shall not exceed
ninety (90) days.

D. If the service of a probationary employee has been satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall file
with the Personnel Officer a statement, in writing, to such effect stating that the retention of such
employee in the service is desired. No actions changing an employee's status from probationary to
regular full-time shall be made or become effective until approved by the Personnel Officer.

Section 2. Objective of Probationary Period

The probationary period shall be regarded as a part of the testing process and shall be utilized
for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new
employee to his position, and for rejecting any probationary employee whose performance does not
meet the required standards of work.

Section 3. Rejection of Probationary Employee

A. During the probationary period an employee may be suspended, demoted, or rejected
anytime by the Chief of Police, with approval of the City Manager or his designee, without cause and
without right of appeal. Notification of rejection, in writing, shall be served on the probationary
employee and a copy filed with the Personnel Officer. A termination interview may be conducted with
each rejected probationer.

MOU — POA 2013 — 2016 Pege 11 of 36
ARTICLE IX - VACATION
Section 1. Eligibility

All full-time employees having completed one (1) year of continuous service with the department
and annually thereafter, shall be eligible for a paid vacation at their then current rate of Pay.
Recognizing that it is preferred that the full vacation be taken at one time, the employee may,
nevertheless, request a modification of this preference. Upon recommendation of the Chief of Police
and approval of the City Manager, appropriate modifications may be allowed.

Section 2. Vacation Accrual

Each regular full-time and probationary employee shall accrue vacation leave by the following
formula:

Hours/Month Year of Employment Annual Amount

1. 6.6670 hrs. during the: 1st year (80 hours).

2. 7.3334 2nd year (88 hours).

3. 8.0000 3rd year (96 hours).

4. 8.6667 4th year (104 hours).
5. 9.3334 5th year (112 hours).
6. 10.0000 6th year (120 hours).
7. 10.6667 7th year (128 hours).
8. 11.3334 8th year (136 hours).
9. 12.0000 9th year (144 hours).
10. 12.6667 10th year (152 hours).
11. 13.3334 11th year (160 hours) and each month thereafter.

Section 3. Maximum Accrual

A. An employee may accumulate unused vacation to a maximum of the amount accrued in the
twenty-four (24) months immediately preceding the employee's anniversary date of employment
provided that if the needs of the service require that a sworn employee be denied the use of accrued
vacation time and such denial is anticipated to result in a cessation of accrual, the employee may
request that his maximum accrual be increased to an amount not to exceed the amount accrued in
the preceding thirty-six (36) month period. Such request must be submitted to the Chief of Police
prior to a cessation of accrual and is subject to the approval of the Chief of Police and the City
Manager.

B. Subject to Section C below, the accrual of vacation shall cease when an employee's
accumulated vacation is at the maximum provided in this Section. Additional vacation shall begin
accruing when the employee's vacation balance falls below the maximum.

C. In the event that an employee has achieved maximum accrual, as defined in Section A
above, and in the further event an employee desires to utilize such vacation accrual time, and in the
further event an employee is denied time off duty due to operational demands of the Police
Department, then, at the election of the City, an employee shall either be compensated for vacation
accrual above the maximum or be allowed additional vacation accrual beyond the maximum for a
reasonable period of time (not to exceed three [3] months) to allow scheduling of vacation time off for
accrued vacation above the maximum accrual.

MOU - POA 2013 - 2016 Page 12 of 36
Section 4. Use of Vacation

A. The time at which an employee's vacation is to occur shall be determined by the Chief of
Police with due regard for the wishes of the employee and particular regard for the needs of the
service.

B. An employee who has completed five (5) years or more of continuous service and who has
taken forty (40) cumulative hours of vacation in his current anniversary year may elect to be paid for
up to a maximum of forty (40) hours of accrued vacation. Request for payment shall be made in
writing to the Personnel Office at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the employee's anniversary
date of employment.

Section 5. Vacation Payment at Termination

A. Employees terminating employment shall be paid in a lump sum for all accrued vacation
leave.

Section 6. Holidays Falling During Vacation

In the event one or more municipal holidays fall within vacation leave, such holiday shall not be
charged as vacation leave and the vacation leave shall be extended accordingly.

Section 7. Vacation Earned During Leave of Absence

No vacation leave shall be earned during any leave of absence without regular pay for each
thirty (30) day period of such leave.

Section 8. Prohibition Against Working for City During Vacation

Employees shail not work for the City during their vacation and, thereby, receive double
compensation from the City.

ARTICLE X - LEAVES OF ABSENCE

 

Section 1. Authorized Leave of Absence Without Regular Pay

A. Excluding leave which may fall under the Federal Medical Leave Act or the California Rights
Act, upon the Chief of Police’s recommendation and approval of the City Manager, an employee may
be granted a non-medical leave of absence without regular pay in cases of emergency or where such
absence would not be contrary to the best interest of the City, for a period up to one (1) year.

B. At the expiration of the approved leave, within a reasonable period of time and after notice
from the Chief of Police to return to duty, the employee shall be reinstated to the position held at the
time leave was granted. Failure on the part of ihe employee on leave to report promptly at such
leave's expiration shall be cause for discharge.

C. During any authorized leave of absence without regular pay, an employee shall not be
eligible to accumulate or receive fringe benefits coverage except as specifically provided for in this
Memorandum of Understanding or insurance eligibility requirements, provided that the City shall
contribute to an employee's medical health plan, dental insurance plan, disability insurance plan, life

MOU — POA 2013 — 2016 Page 13 of 36
insurance plan, vision plan, and retirement plan for the first thirty (30) days of the leave of absence.
During such leave, an employee shall remain responsible for contributing his cost for dependent
coverage as applicable to medical and dental insurance coverage. An employee who receives
approval for such leave that is greater than thirty (30) days, shall be subject to the Consolidated
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) provisions for the continuation of coverage for medical,
dental and vision insurance for himself and if applicable, for his dependent(s). Employees on unpaid
leave of absence do not accrue vacation or sick leave and are not eligible for any other paid leave.

Section 2. Bereavement Leave

 

Employees may be granted a bereavement leave of absence by reason of a death in their
immediate family which shall be restricted and limited to father, mother, brother, sister, spouse, child,
grandmother, grandfather, mother-in-law, or father-in-law. Upon approval of said leave, the
employee shall be allowed a maximum of forty (40) hours.

Section 3. Military Leave of Absence

A. Military leave shall be granted in accordance with the provisions of applicable law. All
employees entitled to military leave shall give the Chief of Police an opportunity within the limits of
military regulations to determine when such leave shall be taken. Whenever possible, the employee
involved shall notify the Chief of Police of such leave request ten (10) working days in advance of the
beginning of such leave.

B. In addition to provisions of applicable law, the City shall continue to provide to eligible
employees on military leave the current health benefits (medical, dental, disability and life insurance
and retirement) subject to insurance eligibility requirements, for the first six (6) months of military
leave. During said period, the employee shall be required to pay to the City the same contribution
amounts for dependent coverage a required of other employees. After the first six (6) months of
military leave, the employee may continue said health benefits as they apply to him, at his cost, and
subject to the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) provisions for medical,
dental and vision insurance continuation for him and his covered dependent{s).

Section 4. Unauthorized Leave of Absence

An unauthorized leave of absence is days, or portions of days, wherein an employee is absent
from work without City approval. Unless subsequently approved, such absence will result in a
deduction from the employee's pay of an amount equivalent to the time absent. Employees taking
unauthorized leaves of absence may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination
of employment.

ARTICLE XI - JURY DUTY

 

Section 1. Compensation for Jury Duty

A. Employees required to report for jury duty shall be granted leave of absence for such
purpose, upon presentation of jury notice to the Chief of Police. Said employees shall receive full
payment for the time served on jury duty, provided the employee remits any fees received for such
jury service, excluding payment for mileage, to the City's Finance and Administrative Services
Department. Compensation for mileage, subsistence or similar auxiliary allowances shall not be
considered as a fee and shall be returned to the employee by the Finance and Administrative
Services Department.

MOU — POA 2013 - 2016 Page 14 of 36
B. If the sum of the employee's jury duty responsibilities is less than a full work day, the
employee shall contact his supervisor as to the feasibility of returning to work that day.

C. The employee shall not receive regular pay for work and pay for jury service which shall be
in excess of their regular scheduled work day.

ARTICLE XII - TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT AND APPOINTMENT

 

Section 1. When in the best interest of the City, the City Manager may approve a temporary
assignment of an employee to a higher-level classification. In such temporary assignments lasting
thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or more, the employee shall be entitled to be compensated at a
step of the salary range that is closest to providing a 5% salary increase. Such assignment shall not
exceed one (1) year. However, where the temporary assignment is a replacement of an employee on
vacation or leave of absence, no compensation increase for the temporary assignment shall be
provided.

ARTICLE XIll - SICK LEAVE

 

Section 1. General Sick Leave Provisions

A. xcept as provided elsewhere in this Memorandum of Understanding, sick leave shall be
used only in cases of actual personal sickness or disability, medical or dental treatment, or as
authorized by the Personnel Officer under the provisions of the Federal Family Medical Leave Act
and/or the California Family Rights Act, or California Labor Code Section 233 (use of sick leave).
The employee requesting sick leave shall notify his immediate supervisor or Chief of Police prior to
the time set for reporting to work. Sick leave with or without pay shall not be used by employees as a
form of illegal strike activity against the City. Sick leave with pay shall not be allowed unless the
employee has met and complied with the provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding, and the
Chief of Police or the Personnel Officer has approved such payment.

B. The Chief of Police or the Personnel Officer may require a written statement from the
employee's attending physician or dentist to whom the Chief of Police or the Personnel Officer has
required the employee to report and be examined by for the purpose of establishing that the
employee is or was incapacitated and unable to perform his duties.

C. The Chief of Police or the Personnel Officer may require a written statement from the
employee's attending physician or dentist or from a physician or dentist to whom the Chief of Police
or the Personnel Officer has required the employee to report and be examined by, that the employee
is capable of and released to return to the performance of all the duties of his position.

Section 2. Eligibility

All employees covered by this Memorandum of Understanding shall be eligible to accrue sick
leave.

Section 3. Accrual

Sick leave shall be accrued at the rate of eight (8) hours per calendar month for each calendar
month that the employee has worked regularly scheduled hours and/or has been on authorized leave
which provides for full regular pay, for at least fifteen (15) working days in that month.

MOU — POA 2013 — 2016 Page 15 of 36
Section 4. Accumulation and Payment Plan

A. There is no limit on the amount of sick leave that an employee may accumulate. However,
upon his request, an employee may be paid for unused sick leave pursuant to the following:

4. An employee with a minimum sick leave accumulation of one hundred twenty (120) hours
as of December 1, will be paid for one-half of the unused sick leave credited during the following
twelve (12) month period at a rate of fifty percent (50%) of his current salary.

2. An employee with a minimum sick leave accumulation of two hundred forty (240) hours as
of December 1, will be paid for one-half of the unused sick leave credited during the following twelve
(12) month period at a rate of one hundred percent (100%) of his current salary.

3. Payment will be made in December of the year immediately following the December in
which the above noted minimum accumulations are recorded.

4. Employees electing payment must submit their request to the Personnel Office at least
thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled payment date.

5. Sick leave for which payment is not received under this Section will be retained in the
employee's sick leave account.

B. The City will issue separate checks for the annual unused sick leave payoff.

C. Upon the death, service retirement, non-service retirement, separation, or termination of an
employee having a minimum of four hundred eighty (480) hours of sick leave accumulation, said
employee or his beneficiary is entitled to receive fifty percent (50%) compensation for his
accumulated sick leave.

D. Upon the death, service retirement, non-service retirement, separation, or termination of an
employee having a minimum of five (5) years of service and with between two hundred forty (240)
hours and four hundred eighty (480) hours of sick leave accumulation, said employee is entitled to
receive payment for the difference between his/her accumulated sick leave and two hundred forty
(240) hours at fifty percent (50%) compensation.

E. Upon the service retirement of employees hired prior to 6/30/2013 and listed on Exhibit D,
said employee is entitled to receive payment for fifty percent (50%) of their hours of sick leave
accumulation upon separation from the City. After the City receives official “Notice of Placement on
Retirement Roll’ from CalPERS, the said employee will be entitled to receive an additional payment of
sick leave accumulation not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of said employee’s sick leave hours
accumulation as of 9/30/13 and listed on Exhibit D.

Example 1: If an employee was hired in 1995 and had 1200 sick leave hours as of 9/30/2013 and
service retired on 12/31/2018 with 1600 hours — this employee would be entitled to be paid for 800
hours (50% of 1600 hours accumulated as of 12/31/2018) and 600 hours (up to a maximum of 50%
of 1200 hours accumulated as of 9/30/2013) — for a total of 1400 hours.

Example 2: If an employee was hired in 1995 and had 1200 sick leave hours as of 9/30/2013 and
service retired on 12/31/2018 with 400 hours — this employee would be entitled to be paid for 200
hours (50% of 400 hours accumulated as of 12/31/2018) and 200 hours (up to a maximum of 50% of
1200 hours accumulated as of 9/30/2013) — for a total of 400 hours.

MOU - POA 2013 - 2016 Page 16 of 36
An employee's eligibility for such payment shall apply to employee’s who service retire, which is not
surrounded by discipline, and has maintained an acceptable job performance record during his years
of service with the City. Payment shall be made by the City when the City receives “Notice of
Placement on Retirement Roll’ from the retirement system confirming a service retirement.

Section 5. Use

A. Sick leave may be requested and used as approved by the Chief of Police or the Personnel
Officer. Payment for approved sick leave shall be authorized until the employee's accumulated total
of sick leave hours has been exhausted and at such time the employee shall receive no further
payment for sick leave. An employee shall have his accumulated sick leave balance reduced by an
amount equal to the number of hours of sick leave for which he receives payment.

B. Unless otherwise approved by the Personnel Officer, sick leave shall not be granted for
disability arising from any sickness or injury purposely self-inflicted or caused by an employee's own
willful misconduct or for work-related illnesses or injuries.

C. Effective upon City Councit adoption of this document, the singular exception to the
prohibition in 5(B) above regarding use of sick leave for work related illnesses or injuries, is as
follows. In the event that an employee suffers a work-related injury or illness and is authorized by the
watch commander to be treated for said injury or illness during the actual scheduled hours of
work/shift during which time the injury actually occurred, the time spent traveling to/from the
Department or scene of injury and the medical treatment facility and at the medical treatment facility
during these scheduled hours of work, shall be compensable hours worked. In the case of such
illness or injury that is treated all or in part outside of scheduled hours of work, but contiguous with
the actual scheduled hours of work/shift during which time the injury actually occurred, accumulated
sick leave may be cashed out for each hour or part of an hour of treatment (including related travel
time to/from the Department/scene of injury and the medical treatment facility) but in an amount not
to exceed 4 hours of sick leave. All hours that are cashed out under this provision will be credited
back to the employee’s sick leave bank, resulting in no net impact to the employee's sick leave bank.
Treatment received outside of regular scheduled hours and not contiguous will not be paid hours.

Section 6. Sick Leave During Vacation

An employee who becomes ill while on vacation may have such period of illness charged to his
accumuiated sick leave provided that:

4. Immediately upon return to duty, the employee submits to his department head a written
request for sick leave and a written statement signed by his physician verifying the medical disability
and dates of illness.

2. The department head recommends and the City Manager or his designee approves the
granting of such sick leave.

Section 7. Extended Sick Leave
In the event of an employee's continuing illness which results in depletion of sick leave
accumulation and/or is not subject to the Federal Medical Leave Act, the employee may request in

writing to his department head and City Manager, a leave of absence without regular pay for the
purpose of recovering from the illness, provided:

MOU — POA 2013 — 2016 Page 17 of 36
1. The employee has used all of his accumulated sick leave.

2. The employee presents to his department head for referral to and consideration by the
Personnel Officer, a written request for leave and an estimate of the time needed for recovery signed
by the employee's physician.

3. Prior to resuming his duties, the employee may be required to take a medical examination
at City expense and provide a medical release to return to work from the employee's physician as
prescribed by the Personnel Officer. The employment record and the results of such examination
shall be considered by the Personnel Officer in determining the employee's fitness to return to work.

Section 8. Continuation of Health Coverage During Sick Leave

For the duration of temporary disability, the City shall continue to pay for the employee’s medical,
dental, vision, retirement, and disability and life insurance coverage subject to insurance eligibility
requirements. During said period of temporary disability, the employee shall be required to pay to the
City the same contribution amounts for dependent coverage as required of other employees. City
paid coverage shall continue for the first thirty (30) days and may be extended up to one (1) year
subject to City Council approval. City Council may grant such approval in increments of ninety (90)
calendar days.

Section 9. Federal Medical Leave Act and the California Family Rights Act
The City shall comply with State and Federal Family and Medical Leave Acts.

Section 10. On-The-Job-Injury

A. Sworn employees who are disabled by injury or illness arising out of and in the course of
their duties as employees of the City, shall be entitled to the benefits and privileges of California
Labor Code Section 4850 as the Section now exists or is hereinafter amended. Any payments made
pursuant to this Section shall not be charged as sick leave. Sick leave and vacation benefits shall
accrue during the period of disability pursuant to the provision of California Labor Code Section 4850.

Section 11. Off-The-Job-Injury

A. An employee injured outside of his service with the City may request paid leave subject to
Article VIII. Sick Leave and may apply for benefits under the disability insurance plan provided by the
City in the event of extended medical disability.

B. Continuation of health insurance coverage shall apply as specified in Article X. Leaves of
Absence, Section D.

Section 12. California Labor Code Section 233

A. Pursuant to California Labor Code Section 233, effective January 1, 2000, employees may
use a total of forty-eight (48) hours annually of their accrued and available sick leave to attend to the
illness of their child, parent, spouse or domestic partner.

MOU — POA 2013 - 2016 Page 18 of 36
ARTICLE XIV - FRINGE BENEFIT ADMINISTRATION

 

Section 1. Administration

The City reserves the right to select the insurance carrier or administer any fringe benefit
programs that now exist or may exist in the future during the term of this Memorandum of
Understanding.

Section 2. Selection and Funding

In the administration of the fringe benefit programs, the City shall have the right to select any
insurance carrier or other method of providing coverage to fund the benefits included under the terms
of the Memorandum of Understanding, provided that the benefits of the employees shall be no less
than those in existence as of implementation of this Memorandum of Understanding.

Section 3. Changes

If, during the term of this Memorandum of Understanding, any changes of insurance carrier or
method of funding for any benefit provided hereunder occurs, the City shall notify the Association
prior to any change of insurance carrier or method of funding the coverage.

ARTICLE XV - HEALTH, LIFE, DENTAL, DISABILITY AND VISION INSURANCE

ARICLE AV - HEALTH, bee eeeeeeee_eE__EeE—Ee eee ee eee ees

Section 1. Health Insurance Plan

A. Flexible Benefit Plan: The City shall maintain a benefit plan which will allow employees to
utilize pre-tax dollars for health contributions and will provide additional contributions above the
"PERS Health Coverage" for health insurance as noted below.

Pursuant to Government Code Section 22892, the City shall continue to pay the minimum
monthly payment to PERS for all those employees and retirees choosing the PERS Heaith Plan, and
shall pay any adjustment to this amount pursuant to PERS law. An employee and retiree may choose
any plan offered by PERS that said employee or retiree is eligible to receive.

Employees eligible for this plan may choose, depending on their family status (single, one
dependent or more), any medical plan offered by PERS (as eligible) and the following monthly City
maximum contribution and employee minimum contribution benefit shall apply:

The following monthly City maximum contribution and employee minimum contribution benefit
shall apply for the duration of the current MOU contract, through June 30, 2016:

 

*City *Employee
Status Maximum
Employee Only $1050.00 $0
Employee + 1 $1050.00 $5
Employee + Family $1050.00 $10

*The City will only pay up to the maximum contribution (City Maximum) or the premium of the

MOU — POA 2013 - 2016 Page 19 of 36
health plan selected by the employee, whichever is lower. The employee must pay either the cost of
the premium not covered by the City Maximum or the minimum contribution (Employee Minimum) as
stated above, whichever is higher.

PERS Health Plan Deletion: An employee cannot be enrolled in the PERS health plan if a
spouse is enrolled in the same agency or enrolled in an agency with PERS health, unless the
employee (or the spouse) is enrolled without being covered as a family member. Additionally, an
employee may choose to not be enrolled in the PERS health plan. If an employee chooses to delete
the health plan coverage, the City, after determining that a minimum amount of health coverage is
provided to the employee (by their spouse or other coverage), shall pay a cash allowance of $125.00
per month or pay to the employee's deferred compensation plan (a plan administered by the City)
$125.00 per month. [The same concept is applied to Dental at $5.00 per month]. If the employee
wants to have all or a portion of the deferred compensation payment credited towards the dependent
coverage cost, then the remaining balance, if any, shall be credited to the employee's deferred
compensation account. To be eligible for this "deletion" payment, the employee must provide proof,
as determined by the Personnel Officer, that comparable medical insurance is in full force and effect.
In the event the employee loses eligibility (with documentation) then the employee may re-enroll in
the plan pursuant to the PERS health plan rules.

B. Retiree Health Savings Plan (RHS)
The RHS Plan is an employer sponsored health benefit savings vehicle that allows the employee to
accumulate assets to pay for medical expenses in retirement on a tax free basis.

Plan Details:

1. EMPLOYEES HIRED BEFORE 7/1/2013 but after 7/1/1993: Employees are required to
notify the City, in writing, by 12/1/2013 of their decision to either grandfather into the Supplemental
Health Care Benefit Program OR participate in the RHS Plan. If the employee elects to participate in
the RHS Plan, the City will contribute $75.00 per month into the employee's individual account. If an
employee fails to notify the City by 12/1/2013 of their decision, said employee will be automatically
enrolled in the RHS Plan.

2. EMPLOYEES HIRED BEFORE 7/1/1993: Employees are required to notify the City, in
writing, by 12/1/2013 of their decision to either grandfather into the Supplemental Health Care
Benefit Program OR participate in the RHS Plan. If the employee elects to participate in the RHS

Plan, the City will contribute $300.00 per month into the employee’s individual account. If an
employee fails to notify the City by 12/1/2013 of their decision, said employee will be automatically
enrolled in the RHS Plan.

3. EMPLOYEES HIRED AFTER 7/1/2013:
a. Participation in the RHS plan is mandatory.
b. The City will contribute $75.00 per month into the employee's individual account.

C. Supplemental Health Care Benefit - Eligible Retirees
1. Benefit applies to employees active on 6/30/2013, who made the election to be
grandfathered in to the Supplemental Health Care Benefit. If an employee hired prior to 7/1/2013

elects to participate in the RHS plan, said employee is not eligible to participate in the Supplemental
Health Care Benefit Program.

MOU — POA 2013 — 2016 Page 20 of 36
2. Employees who retire from the City under a PERS service retirement, with at least ten (10)
years of continuous service may be eligible for supplemental health care benefits effective on the
date of retirement. The employee's service retirement date must immediately follow the employment
separation date for the employee to be eligible to receive the supplemental health care benefit.

3. The retiree may receive a payment for this benefit pursuant to the following schedule:

 

Years Of Continuous Service City Payment
10 $100/month
15 $150/month
20 $300/month

4. The monthly payment amount set forth in C.3. above, can be used by the retiree to either
continue his/her health care benefits as may be available through the PERS Health Plan or uss the
monthly payment amount to purchase alternative health care benefits. This monthly payment shall be
sent to the eligible retiree on a separate City check (and may be paid quarterly or as mutually
agreed).

5. If the retiree chooses to participate in a plan other than the PERS Health plan, the retiree
must provide the City with verification, as determined by the Personnel Officer, that the City payment
is being used to secure alternative health care benefits.

6. The above City payment will terminate on the date that the retiree reaches age 65 or on the
date that the retiree becomes eligible for Medicare, whichever comes first.

7. This provision does not relate to the minimum payment to PERS for employees and retirees
selecting the PERS Health Plan. Therefore, if a retiree eligible for the above supplemental health
care benefit selects the PERS Health Plan coverage, then the retiree would be eligible for the above
City payment and the minimum payment to PERS by the City.

Section 2. Dental Insurance Plan

A. The City shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the "employee only" premium to a dental
insurance plan for the employee.

B. Payment for dependent coverage in the dental insurance plan shall be the responsibility of
the employee.

C. The City will pick up the cost of the employee's share of rate increases that occur within the
Dental Plan for the duration of the current MOU contract, through 6/30/2016.

Section 3. Disability Insurance Plan
The City shall provide a short-term and long-term disability insurance plan for all employees
covered by this Memorandum of Understanding. The City shalt pay one hundred percent (100%) of

the premium for the employee's coverage under the plan(s). Modifications to the plan shall be made
only after the City has met and consulted with the Association.

MOU — POA 2013 - 2016 Page 21 of 36
Section 4. Vision Plan

A. The City shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the premium for a vision insurance plan
covering both employees and their dependents.

B. The City will pick up the cost of rate increases that occur within the Vision Plan for the
duration of the current MOU contract, through 6/30/2016.

Section 5. Life Insurance Plan

A. The City shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the premium for a term life insurance
policy for each eligible employee which shall be based upon a formula of one times the employee's
annual salary rounded up to the nearest thousand dollars up to a maximum City paid coverage of
$50,000, i.e., an employee who earns $20,100.00 would receive $21,000.00.

B. The City will pick up the cost of rate increases that occur within the Life Insurance Plan for
the duration of the current MOU contract, through 6/30/2016.

ARTICLE XVI - RETIREMENT

Section 1. The City shall continue to make contributions for public safety personnel to the
PERS plan known as three percent (3%) at fifty (50) with the PERS retirement survivor continuance
option (Section 21263 and 21263.1), 1959 Survivors Benefit (Level 4), and one year highest
compensation (Section 20024.2).

Section 2. The City shall pay the employees’ contribution to their retirement plan subject to
Section 3, and place it in the employees' individual PERS retirement accounts.

Section 3.

A. For the period between 7/1/2013 through 9/26/2013, employees will pay CalPERS
contributions in accordance with the terms of the previous MOU dated 7/1/2009 — 6/30/2013.

B. Effective 9/27/2013, employees hired prior to 12/31/2012, or are hired subsequent to that
date and are determined to be classic CalPERS members, shall pay nine percent (9%) towards their
retirement benefits with CalPERS.

C. Employees hired after January 1, 2013 and are new to the California Public Employees
Retirement System (CalPERS), or have had a 6 month or more break in service, are subject to all
laws, statutes, rules and regulations of the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act (PEPRA).

ARTICLE XVII - EMPLOYEE TRAINING AND EDUCATION PROGRAMS

Section 1. Tuition Reimbursement Plan

Employees who secure at least a passing grade, "C", shall receive up to one thousand three

hundred and twenty dollars ($1,320) per school year reimbursement for the cost of tuition, mandatory

fees, and required textbooks to attend accredited college courses pursuant to the employee training
and education programs.

MOU - POA 2013 - 2016 Page 22 of 36
ARTICLE XVIli - SAFETY AND HEALTH

The City and employees of the City agree to comply with all applicable federal and state laws
which relate to health and safety.

ARTICLE XIX - LAYOFF PROCEDURES

 

Section 1. Policy

A. Whenever there shall be need for layoff, employees within the classification(s) of position(s)
involved shall be terminated in the following order: emergency, temporary, provisional, probationary,
regular. The order of layoff of regular employees shall be based on the recommendation of the Chief
of Police. The Chief of Police shall take into consideration such things as tenure and job
performance. Regular employees, subsequently laid off, shall be given ten (10) working days notice
and written notice for the reasons for such action. Regular employees in good standing (those
deemed to have produced satisfactory service) shall be placed on appropriate employment lists and
will have precedence for employment over persons whose names appear on employment lists for the
same classification of position.

B. An employee may be terminated by the Chief of Police when deemed necessary, as a
result of substantial changes in duties or organization; abolition of position; shortages of work funds;
or completion of work for which employment was made. Such termination shall not be subject to
appeal. Regular employees not certified as having provided satisfactory service may interpret such
layoff action as discharge and may request appeal proceedings as provided for in the Personnel
Rules and Regulations and this Memorandum of Understanding.

ARTICLE XX - REINSTATEMENT
Section 1. Policy

A. Regular employees who have been laid off shall be entitled to reinstatement to positions in
the same classification from which they were laid off if those positions are to be refilled during the
period of their eligibility on the layoff employment list. Any employee so reinstated shall retain all
benefits accrued in prior service with the City.

B. Any regular employee who has resigned from the City service in good standing may, upon
his written request and approval of the Chief of Police, be reinstated to a position in the same or
similar classification in the classified service within two (2) years of such termination. Such
reinstatement may be made without benefit of additional examination, and may take precedence over
employment lists; but in no way shall it be mandatory for the Chief of Police to reappoint a former
employee. Appointment shall otherwise be made in the manner as for original employment.

C. Upon reinstatement, any employee so appointed shall be considered a new appointee and

shall have no vested interest in or be entitled to any benefits accrued during any previous
employment with the City.

MOU - POA 2013 — 2016 Page 23 of 36
ARTICLE XXi - TRANSFER, PROMOTION AND DEMOTION

Section 1. Transfer

A. An employee may be transferred at any time from one position to another position in the
same or comparable classification having the same salary range and reasonably similar
qualifications. Transfers involving a change from one department to another will require the consent
of both department heads unless the City Manager orders the transfer. Transfers shall not be used
to effectuate a promotion, demotion, advancement or reduction, each of which may be accomplished
only as provided in this Memorandum of Understanding. No person may be transferred to a position
for which he does not possess the minimum qualifications.

B. For purposes of this Memorandum of Understanding, a transfer shall not include the
reassignment of personnel within the internal operation of the department as may be made from time
to time by the Chief of Police.

Section 2. Promotion

A. Insofar as practicable and consistent with the best interests of the service, all vacancies in
the competitive service shall be filled by promotion from within the competitive service, after a
promotional examination has been given and a promotional list established.

B. If, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, a vacancy in the department could be filled better by
an open, competitive examination, then the Chief of Police may instruct the Personnel Officer to call
for applications for the vacancy and arrange for an open, competitive examination and for the
preparation and certification of an employment list. Regular employees who meet the requirements
of the position will be considered eligible to compete in the open competitive examination.

Section 3. Demotion

A. The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Manager, may demote an employee for
disciplinary reasons set forth in Chapter 4.19 of the Rules and Regulations of the City of Cypress,
and applicable sections of the City of Cypress Police Manual.

B. No employee shall be demoted to a classification for which he does not possess the
minimum qualifications. Written notice shall be given to an employee at least three (3) working days
before the effective date of the demotion and complete information regarding such change shall be
reported to the Personnel Officer.

C. In the event of a demotion, the employee shall be afforded procedural due process rights
conferred by Section 3300, et seq., of the California Government Code, relevant case law and the
City of Cypress Personnel Rules and Regulations.

ARTICLE XXII - EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONAL RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Section 1. Dues Deduction
The City shall deduct twice monthly the amount of Association regular and periodic dues and

insurance premiums as may be specified by the Association on an authorization card furnished by the
Association and signed by the employee.

MOU — POA 2013 — 2016 Page 24 of 36
Section 2. Indemnification

The Association agrees to hold the City harmless and indemnify the City against any claims,
causes of actions, or lawsuits arising out of the deductions or transmittal of such funds to the
Association, except the intentional failure of the City to transmit to the Association monies deducted
from the employees pursuant to this Article.

ARTICLE XxXiil - NO STRIKE--NO LOCKOUT
Section 1. Prohibited Conduct

A. The Association, its officers, agents, representatives, and/or members agree that they will
respect relevant law and judicial decisions regarding the withholding or diminishment of services to
influence negotiations conducted under Section 3500. et.seq. of the California Government Code.

B. The City agrees that it shall not lock out its employees during the term of this Memorandum
of Understanding. The term “lockout" is hereby defined so as not to include the discharge,
suspension, termination, layoff, failure to recall, or failure to return to work of employees of the City in
the exercise of rights as set forth in any of the provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding or
applicable ordinance or law.

Cc. Any employee who participates in any conduct prohibited in subparagraph A. above may be
subject to appropriate discipline up to and including termination by the City.

D. In addition to any other lawful remedies or disciplinary actions available to the City, if the
Association fails, in good faith, to perform all responsibilities listed in Section 2. below, Association
Responsibility, the City may suspend certain rights and privileges accorded to the Association under
the Employee Relations Resolution or by this Memorandum of Understanding including, but not
limited to, access to the grievance procedure, right of access check-off, and the use of the City's
bulletin boards and facilities.

Section 2. Association Responsibility

In the event that the Association, its officers, agents, representatives or members engage in any
of the conduct prohibited in Section 1. above, Prohibited Conduct, the Association or its duly
authorized representatives shall immediately instruct any persons engaging in such conduct that their
conduct is in violation of this Memorandum of Understanding and unlawful, and they should
immediately cease engaging in conduct prohibited in Section 1, above, Prohibited Conduct, and
return to work.

ARTICLE XXIV —- NO SMOKING POLICY

Section 1. Employees hired after October 8, 2001, shall not smoke or use tobacco products at
any time while on duty. Employees hired prior to October 8, 2001, shall not smoke or use tobacco
products in public view while on duty.

Section 2. Pursuant to California Government Code § 7596-7597, employees shall not smoke
any tobacco product inside a public building, or in an outdoor area within 20 feet of a main exit,
entrance, or operable window of a public building, or in a passenger vehicle, as defined by Vehicle Code
§ 465, owned by the state.

MOU — POA 2013 — 2016 Page 25 of 36
Section 3. Violation of this Article may result in appropriate disciplinary action.

ARTICLE XXV - ENTIRE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

 

Section 1. It is the intent of the parties hereto that the provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding shall supersede all prior agreements and memoranda of agreement, or memoranda of
understanding, or contrary salary and/or personnel resolutions or administrative codes, provisions of
the City, oral or written, expressed or implied, between the parties, and shall govern the entire
relationship, and shall be the sole source of any and all rights which may be asserted hereunder.
This Memorandum of Understanding is not intended to conflict with federal or state law.

Section 2. Notwithstanding the provision of Section 1., there exists within the City certain
personnel rules and regulations and police department rules and regulations. To the extent that this
Memorandum of Understanding does not specifically contradict these personnel rules and regulations
or police department rules and regulations or City ordinances, they shall continue subject to being
changed by the City in accordance with the exercise of City rights under this Memorandum of
Understanding and applicable state law.

Section 3. Provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding relating to the salaries, wages and
working conditions of employees will continue in effect unless changed in subsequent MOU's.

ARTICLE _XXVi_- WAIVER OF BARGAINING DURING TERM OF MEMORANDUM _ OF
UNDERSTANDING

A. Except where required by any Article of this Memorandum of Understanding, including
Article XXVIII, Section B., during the term of this Memorandum of Understanding, the parties mutually
agree that they will not seek to meet and confer with regard to wages, hours and terms and
conditions of employment, whether or not covered by this Memorandum of Understanding or in the
negotiations leading thereto, and irrespective of whether or not such matters were discussed or were
even within the contemplation of the parties hereto during the negotiations leading to this
Memorandum of Understanding.

ARTICLE XXvVil - CITY RIGHTS

Section 1. The City reserves, retains and is vested with, solely and exclusively, all rights of
Management which have not been expressly abridged by specific provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding or by law to manage the City, as such rights existed prior to the execution of this
Memorandum of Understanding. The sole and exclusive rights of management, not abridged by this
Memorandum of Understanding or by law, shall include, but not be limited to, the following rights:

A. To manage the City generally and to determine the issues of policy.

B. To determine the necessity and organization of any service or activity conducted by the City
and expand or diminish services.

C. To determine the nature, manner, means and technology and extent of services to be
provided to the public.

D. Methods of financing.
E. Types of equipment or technology to be used.

MOU - POA 2013 - 2016 Page 26 of 36
F. To determine and/or change the facilities, methods, technology, means and size of the work
force by which the City operations are to be conducted.

G. To determine and change the number of locations, relocations and types of operations,
processes and maierials to be used in carrying out all City functions including, but not limited to, the
right to contract for or subcontract any work or operation.

H. To assign work to and schedule employees in accordance with requirements as determined
by the City, and to establish and change work schedules and assignments.

|. | To relieve employees from duties for lack of work or similar non-disciplinary reasons.

J. To establish and modify productivity and performance programs and standards.

K. To discharge, suspend, demote or otherwise discipline employees for proper cause in
accordance with the provisions and procedures set forth in departmental disciplinary procedure.

L. To determine job classifications and to reclassify employees.

M. To hire, transfer, promote and demote employees for non-disciplinary reasons in
accordance with this Memorandum of Understanding.

N. To determine policies, procedures and standards for selection, training and promotion of
employees.

©. To establish employee performance standards including, but not limited to, quality and
quantity standards, and to require compliance therewith.

P. To maintain order and efficiency in its facilities and operations.

Q. To establish and promulgate and/or modify rules and regulations to maintain order and
safety in the City which are not in contravention with this Memorandum of Understanding.

R. To take any and all necessary action to carry out the mission of the City in emergencies.

Section 2. Except in emergencies, or where the City is required to make changes in its
operations because of the requirements of law, whenever the contemplated exercise of City rights
shall impact the wages, hours and others terms and conditions of employment of the bargaining unit,
the City agrees to meet and confer in good faith with representatives of the Association regarding the
impact of the contemplated exercise of such rights prior to exercising such rights, unless the matter of
the exercise of such rights is provided elsewhere in this Memorandum of Understanding.

ARTICLE XXVIII - EMERGENCY WAIVER PROVISION

 

In the event of circumstances beyond the control of the City, such as acts of God, fire, flood,
insurrection, civil disorder, national emergency, or similar circumstances, provisions of this
Memorandum of Understanding or the personnel rules and regulations of the City, which prevent the
City's ability to respond to these emergencies, shall be suspended for the duration of such
emergency. After the emergency is over, the Assaciation shall have the right to meet and confer with
the City regarding the impact on employees of the suspension of these provisions in the
Memorandum of Understanding and any personnel rules and regulations.

MOU - POA 2013 — 2016 Page 27 of 36
ARTICLE XXIX - SEPARABILITY

Should any provision of this Memorandum of Understanding be found to be inoperative, void or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding
shall remain in full force and effect for the duration of this Memorandum of Understanding.
ARTICLE XXX - TERM OF MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

The terms of the Memorandum of Understanding shall commence on July 1, 2013, and shall
continue in fuil force and effect through June 30, 2016.

ARTICLE XXXI - RATIFICATION
The City and the Association acknowledge that this Memorandum of Understanding shall not be
in full force and effect until ratified by the Association and adopted by the City Council of the City of

Cypress. Subject to the foregoing, this Memorandum of Understanding is hereby executed by the
authorized representative of the City and the Association.

CITY OF CYPRESS wr POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
te wit By: ht Desa lad ome 10-7-(3

Toe a
si sha r of Finance & sn) oh on Ze (Mae POA President
i: Yi By: Date:

 

   
  

Bi
By. B a pS Menger obert Cal crop TY surer
Bys pa Date: 10- 3613 By? pS Date: 77 -<7 Fv 3
Catt ane man Resources Manager James Olgon, CPOA Secretary

BAA il -7-17

MOU -- POA 2013 — 2016 Page 28 of 36
CYPRESS POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION - (EXHIBIT A - Updated)

Cypress Police Officers’ Association
Effective Pay Period Beginning 9/27/13

|CLASSIFICATION SALARY RANGES (Per Hr*)

A B Cc D E
Police Sergeant $ $44.0423 $46.2404 $48.5596 $50.9827 $53.5385

0 A B Cc D E
Police Officer $33.5827 $34.4192 $36.1442 $37.9442 $39.8481 $41.8385

Cypress Police Officers’ Association
Effective Pay Period Beginning 7/4/14

|CLASSIFICATION SALARY RANGES (Per Hr*)

A B Cc D E
Police Sergeant $ $44.9231 $47.1652 $49.5308 $52.0024 $54.6093

0 A B Cc D E
Police Officer $34.2544 $35.1076 $36.8671 $38.7031 $40.6451 $42.6753

 

The May CPI-U for Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County was 1.7%, therefore the schedule above reflects a 2% pay rate increase.
Cypress Police Officers’ Association
Effective Pay Period Beginning 7/3/15

|CLASSIFICATION SALARY RANGES (Per Hr*)

A B Cc D E F

Police Sergeant $ $45.8216 $48.1085 $50.5214 $53.0424 $55.7015 $58.4925

0 A B Cc D E F
Police Officer $34.9395 $35.8098 $37.6044 $39.4772 $41.4580 $43.5288 $45.7015

 

The May CPI-U for Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County was 1.1%, therefore the schedule above reflects a 2% pay rate increase.

“The current work schedules for Sergeants and Police Officers provides for 2112.50 hours annually. Based upon this, the
annual salary ranges are as follows:

FY 2013 - 2014
Police Sergeant $93,039 - $118,767
Police Officer $70,943 - $92,796

FY 2014 - 2015
Police Sergeant $94,900 - $121,143
Police Officer $72,362 - $94,651

Fy 2015 - 2016

Police Sergeant $96,798 - $123,565
Police Officer $73,810 - $96,544

Page 29 of 36
EXHIBIT B
City of Cypress
10 Plan (Applicable to Designated Sworn Personnel)

Pursuant to the MOU between the City and the Cypress Police Officers Association (CPOA), Article
IV, Hours of Work, this document shall be considered the “mutual agreement between management
and the Association” to modify the current work schedule and applicable leave rules, practices and/or
procedures. This plan, implemented January 13, 1995 for swom personnel as assigned, is known as
the “10 Plan.” This 10 Plan is designed to be in compliance with the requirements of the Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA). In the event that there is a conflict with the current rules, practices and/or
procedures regarding work schedules and leave plans, then the rules listed below shall govern. This
410 Plan may apply to sworn employees as assigned by police management.

The provisions listed below shall modify existing rules, as follows:

10 PLAN WORK SCHEDULE DEFINED - This schedule can be briefly defined as 16 - 10 hour work
days plus an additional 2.5 hours in a 28 day period.

A. 28 Day Pay Cycle - The pay cycle for sworn personnel starts Friday 12:00 A.M. and
continues for 28 days until Friday 12:00 A.M.

B. Emergencies - All employees on the 10 Plan are subject to be called to work at any time to
meet any and all emergencies or unusual conditions which, in the opinion of the Police Chief or
designee in charge of the department, may require such service from any of said employees.

OVERTIME DEFINED

1. All sworn employees under the 10 Plan shall earn overtime after 162.5 hours of time
worked in a 28 day pay cycle, as allowed under the FLSA (7k Exemption). Authorized overtime hours
shall be compensated in pay or compensatory time off at the rate of one and one-half (1 %) times the
hourly straight time rate. Any paid leave, with the exception of sick leave hours taken during a pay
cycle, shall be counted as regular hours worked for the computation of overtime.

2. Straight Time Overtime - Time worked above the regular work schedule, as applicable
above, when sick leave hours are used shall be paid at the empioyee’s hourly straight time rate (e.g.,
if an employee uses 8 hours of sick leave and works 12 hours of overtime, then the first 8 hours of
overtime is at straight time overtime). When there is a combination of overtime and CTO
accumulation, CTO shall be used first for this calculation. Straight time overtime can be paid or
accumulated as CTO.

3. Compensatory Time Off (CTO) - Applicable as stated in the MOU.

4. Overtime Reporting/Authorization - Applicable as stated in the MOU.

MOU — POA 2013 — 2016 Page 30 of 36
OTHER PAY PROVISIONS

A. Court Time - Applicable as stated in the MOU, as applicable above, and any employee
working over 16 hours in a 24 hour period must be off duty for a minimum of 8 hours, excluding
emergencies.

B. Call Back - Applicable as stated in the MOU, and as applicable above.

C. Leaves Without Pay - If an employee is on leave without pay for whatever reason (AWOL,
suspension, or short-term leave of absence) during the pay cycle, the employee earns overtime after
40 hours in a work week for non-sworn employees and after 162.5 hours of time worked in a 28 day
pay cycle for sworn employees.

D. Stand By Pay - Continues to be applicable for sworn employees, as stated in the MOU.
LEAVE BENEFITS

CHARGING OF LEAVE (Rate of Usage) - When an employee is off on a scheduled work day under
the 10 Plan, then 10 hours of leave per work day shall be charged. All leaves shall continue under
the current accrual, eligibility, request and approval requirements, except as noted herein.

HOLIDAY LEAVE -

A. Regular Holidays - For the following recognized municipal holidays, 8 hours are earned for
each holiday (totaling 80 hours): New Year's Day, Presidents’ Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving Day, the Friday following Thanksgiving Day, Christmas
Eve Day, and Christmas Day. For an employee on the 10 Plan to charge holiday leave on a
scheduled holiday, he must use 8 hours earned per holiday and charge an additional 2 hours from
another leave account as specified above noted as “Charging of Leave.”

B. Other Uses of Holiday Leave - Effective the payroll year beginning December 15, 2006,
12:00 P.M., the total amount of holiday and floating holiday leave shall be 100 hours (not including
additional floating holiday hours intended for “backfilling” training days). For those employees who
are scheduled to work on a holiday or the holiday falls on their scheduled day off, the holiday leave
may be used during the payroll year; or, the holiday may be paid as holiday overtime at the straight
time rate as each holiday occurs within the pay period (no retroactive payments). There shall be no
carry-over of unused holiday hours into the following payroll year.

©. Deduction of Holiday Hours - During Approved Leaves of Absence Without Pay - An
employee on an approved leave of absence without pay, having the holiday fall during the period of
such leave of absence without pay, shall be eligible for such holiday pay only in those instances
where said employee has worked the regular scheduled work day before and the regular scheduled
work day immediately following said holiday. In cases of said loss of holiday hours, the applicable
amount of holiday hours shall be deducted from the employee's holiday leave account at the rate of 8
hours per holiday.

D. Holidays on Saturday or Sunday - When any recognized municipal holiday falls on a

Sunday, the following Monday shall be considered as a holiday. When any holiday falls on a
Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be considered the holiday.

MOU - POA 2013 — 2016 Page 31 of 36
E. Religious Holidays - Those holidays requested off for religious purposes shall be done so
in writing to the Chief of Police and if approved, shall be charged against the employee’s accumulated
CTO, Sick Leave, Vacation or Floating Holiday leave as desired by the employee. The employee
shall also have the option to take approved leave without pay for the time off.

VACATION LEAVE - Applicable as stated in the MOU.

SICK LEAVE - Same as MOU, except in reference to the use of approved sick leave on a scheduled
work day designated as a holiday (Article VII, Section 2), any combination of holiday and/or sick leave
may be used as paid leave, not to exceed the reguiar work day hours.

BEREAVEMENT LEAVE - Employees may be granted a bereavement leave of absence by reason of
a death in their immediate family, which shall be restricted and limited to father, mother, brother,
sister, spouse, child, grandmother, grandfather, mother-in-law, or father-in-law. The employee may
be approved leave time up to 40 hours of bereavement leave.

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

TRAINING TIME - When an employee is assigned to a training session which is normally 8 hours per
day, at the conclusion, the employee must do one of the following: 1) return to the work site to
perform his regular work assignment; 2) have their schedule temporarily modified so that not to incur
automatic overtime during the pay cycle; 3) use floating holiday hours intended for “backfilling”
training days; 4) use other eligible leave hours. An alternative police management option may be to
not schedule the employee to work the additional hours remaining in the regular work day. No training
session may be scheduled or assigned without establishment of work hours for the duration of the
training session.

Employees shall receive additional floating holiday hours at the beginning of the payroll year intended
for (but not restricted solely for) the use of “backfilling” hours to complete a full shift on required
training days of less than the employee's full shift (typically an 8-hour training day). Additional floating
holiday hours shall be provided based upon the employee’s assignment/work schedule at the
beginning of the payroll year. Employees on the “4/10” work schedule shall receive six (6) additional
floating holiday hours at the beginning of the payroll year. Employees hired after January 1 of the
payroll year will receive additional floating holiday hours on a pro-rated basis.

Other provisions of the MOU continue to apply (Article VI. Special Pay Provisions, Section 3.
Training Programs.)

MOU — POA 2013 - 2016 Page 32 of 36
EXHIBIT C
City of Cypress
12 Plan (Applicable to Sworn Personnel)

Pursuant to the MOU between the City and the Cypress Police Officers Association (CPOA), Article
IV, Hours of Work, this document shall be considered the “mutual agreement between management
and the Association” to modify the work schedule and applicable leave rules, practices and/or
procedures. This new plan shall be known as the "12 PLAN." This 12 PLAN, implemented at the
start of the pay period on January 13, 1995, is designed to be in compliance with the requirements of
the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). In the event that there is a conflict with the current rules,
practices and/or procedures regarding work schedules and leave plans, then the rules listed below
shall govern. This 12 PLAN shall only apply to the employees in the CPOA bargaining unit and only
applies to sworn employees working in patrol, as designated by police management.

The provisions listed below shall modify existing rules, as follows:
12 PLAN WORK SCHEDULE DEFINED - This schedule can be briefly defined as follows:

A. 28 Day Cycle - Working twelve 12.5 hour days and one 12.5 hour swing day during a 28
day cycle. The total number of regular work hours are 162.5. Work hours above 162.5 hours are
considered overtime and paid at time and one half. All paid leaves are considered time worked, with
the exception of sick leave. There will be two pay days for the 28 day cycle. The first pay day will
include payment of 81.25 hours. The second payday will include payment of 81.25 hours and all
overtime hours worked (both straight time O.T. and time and one half O.T.) during the 28 day cycle.
These cycles will begin with shifts starting Friday and ending with shifts starting on Thursday. See
the example attached.

Special notations:

Team 1A - 0530 to 1800, Monday - Wednesday
Team 1B - 1730 to 0600, " "

Team 2A - 0530 to 1800, Thursday - Saturday
Team 2B - 1730 ta 0600, " "

Swing days are usually Sunday and may be other days based on organizational needs. Other
schedules may also be assigned to meet staffing requirements (i.e. Friday - Sunday). Motor Officers
and Canine Handlers will work shift configurations, schedules, and duty assignments as deemed
appropriate by Police Management. Staffing of teams will be based on organizational needs as
designated by police management.

B. Emergencies - All employees on the 12 PLAN are subject to be called to work at any time
to meet any and all emergencies or unusual conditions which, in the opinion of the Police Chief or
designee in charge of the department, may require such service from any of said employees.
OVERTIME DEFINED

1. All sworn employees under the 12 PLAN shall earn overtime after the first 162.5 hours of

MOU - POA 2013 — 2016 Page 33 of 36
time worked in a 28 day cycle, as allowed under the FLSA (7K exemption). Authorized overtime
hours shail be compensated in pay or compensatory time off at the rate of one and one half (1%)
times the hourly straight time rate. Any paid leave, with the exception of sick leave hours taken
during a 28 day cycle, shall be counted as regular hours worked for the computation of overtime.

2. Straight Time Overtime - Time worked above the regular work schedule, as applicable
above, when sick leave hours are used shall be paid at the employee's hourly straight time rate (e.g.,
if an employee uses 8 hours of sick leave and works 12 hours of overtime, then the first 8 hours of
overtime is at straight time overtime). When there is a combination of overtime and CTO
accumulation, CTO shall be used first for this calculation. Straight time overtime can be paid or
accumulated as CTO.

3. Compensatory Time Off (CTQ) - Applicable as stated in the MOU.
4. Overtime Reporting/Authorization - Applicable as stated in the MOU.

OTHER PAY PROVISIONS

A. Court Time - Applicable as stated in the MOU, as applicable above, and any employee
working over sixteen (16) hours in a twenty-four (24) hour period must be off duty for a minimum of
eight (8) hours (excluding emergencies) as determined by Police Management.

B. Call-back - Applicable as stated in the MOU, and as applicable above.

C. Leaves Without Pay - If an employee is on a leave without pay for whatever reason
(AWOL, suspension, or short term leave of absence) during the pay cycle, the employee earns
overtime after 162.5 hours of work in a 28 day cycle.

LEAVE BENEFITS

CHARGING OF LEAVE (Rate of Usage) - When an employee is off on a scheduled work day under
the 12 PLAN, then 12.5 hours of leave per work day shall be charged. All leaves shall continue under
the current accrual, eligibility, request and approval requirements, except as noted herein.

HOLIDAY LEAVE -

A. Regular Holidays - For the following recognized municipal holidays, 8 hours are earned for
each holiday (totaling 80 hours): New Year's Day, Presidents’ Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day, the Friday following Thanksgiving Day, Christmas
Eve Day, and Christmas Day. For an employee on the 12 PLAN to charge holiday leave on a
scheduled holiday, he/she must use 8 hours earned per holiday and charge an additional 4.5 hours
from another earned leave account as specified above noted as "Charging of Leave."

B. Other Uses of Holiday Leave - Effective the payroll year beginning December 15, 2006,
12:00 A.M., the total amount of holiday and floating holiday leave shall total 100 hours (not including
additional floating holiday hours intended for “backfilling” training days). For those employees who
are scheduled to work on a holiday or the holiday falls on their scheduled day off, the holiday leave
may be used during the payroll year; or, the holiday may be paid as holiday overtime at the straight
time rate as each holiday occurs within the pay period (no retroactive payments). There shall be no
carry-over of unused holiday hours into the following payroll year.

MOU — POA 2013 - 2016 Page 34 of 36
C. Deduction of Holiday Hours - During Approved Leaves Of Absence Without Pay - An
employee on an approved leave of absence without pay, having the holiday fall during the period of
such leave of absence without pay, shall be eligible for such holiday pay only in those instances
where said employee has worked the regular scheduled work day before and the regular scheduled
work day immediately following said holiday. In cases of said loss of holiday hours, the applicable
amount of holiday hours shall be deducted from the employee’s holiday leave account at the rate of 8
hours per holiday.

D. Holidays on Saturday or Sunday - When any recognized municipal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the following Monday shall be considered as a holiday; when any holiday falls on a Saturday,
the preceding Friday shall be considered the holiday.

E. Religious Holidays - Those holidays requested off for religious purposes shall be done so
in writing to the Chief of Police and if approved, shall be charged against the employee's accumulated
CTO, Sick Leave, Vacation, or Floating Holiday leave as desired by the employee. The employee
shall also have the option to take approved leave without pay for the time off.

VACATION LEAVE - Applicable as stated in the MOU.

SICK LEAVE - Same as MOU, except in reference to the use of approved sick leave on a scheduled
work day designated as a holiday (Article VII, Section 2A), any combination of holiday and/or sick
leave may be used as paid leave, not to exceed the regular work day hours.

BEREAVEMENT LEAVE - Employees may be granted a bereavement leave of absence by reason of
a death in their immediate family, which shall be restricted and limited to father, mother, brother,
sister, spouse, child, grandmother, grandfather, mother-in-law, or father-in-law. The employee may
be approved leave time up to 40 hours of bereavement leave.

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

TRAINING TIME - When an employee is assigned to a training session which is normally 8 hours per
day, at the conclusion, the employee must do one of the following: 1) retum to the work site to
perform his/her regular work assignment; 2) have their schedule temporarily modified so that not to
incur automatic overtime during the pay cycle; 3) use floating holiday hours intended for “backfilling”
training days; 4) use other eligible leave hours. An alternative police management option may be to
not schedule the employee to work the additional hours remaining in the regular work day. No
training session may be scheduled or assigned without establishment of work hours for the duration
of the training session.

Employees shall receive additional floating holiday hours at the beginning of the payroll year intended
for (but not restricted solely for) the use of “backfilling” hours to complete a full shift on required
training days of less than the employee’s full shift (typically an 8-hour training day). Additional floating
holiday hours shall be provided based upon the employee’s assignmenthwork schedule at the
beginning of the payroll year. Employees on the “3/12.5” work schedule shall receive thirteen and
one-half (13.5) additional floating holiday hours at the beginning of the payroll year. Employees hired
after January 1 of the payroll year will receive additional floating holiday hours on a pro-rated basis.

Other provisions of the MOU continue to apply (Article VI, Special Pay Provisions, Section 3, Training
Programs).

MOU — POA 2013 - 2016 Page 35 of 36
EXHIBIT D

SICK LEAVE ACCRUAL BALANCES AS OF 9/30/2013 (report as of 10/2/13)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EMPLOYEE SICK LEAVE BALANCE AS Maximum Sick Leave Hours
OF 9/30/2013 Payable in accordance with
Article 13, Section 4E
Alvis, Deanna 219.00 109.50
Ausmus, Scott 715.50 357.75
Ayres, Richard 1226.00 613.00
Baldwin, Darrell 464.75 227.38
Brewer, James 743.00 371.50
Carlson, Erik 608.00 304,00
Carrillo, Juan 774.75 387.38
Charland, Matthew 33.50 16.75
Clemons, Mark 698.75 349.38
Cote, Robert 978.50 489.25
DeYoung, Rodney 713,25 356.63
Diaz, Darrell 446.50 223.25
Faessel, Gregory 676.50 338.25
Foster, Scott 1502.50 751.25
Healy, Brian 835.00 417.50
Krok, Johnathan 379.50 189.75
Lassalle, Ismael 997.00 498.50
Lee, Christopher 207.50 103.75
Marshall, Brook 320.50 160.25
Mathias, Rebecca 375.50 187.75
McBain, Michael 589.75 294.88
McShane, Christopher 893.50 446.75
Mellana, Thomas . 286.00 143.00
Miller, Cassie 287.00 143.50
Morales, Paulo 1302.00 651.00
Mori, Kyle 731.50 365.75
Mount, Eric 612.00 306.00
Olson, James 1659.50 829.75
Patopoff, Christopher 329.50 164.75
Paul, Brock 302.00 151.00
Pinvidic, Dean 769.75 384.88
Ramsey, Kenneth 915.25 457.63
Rand, Timothy 876.25 438.13
Rodriguez, Robert 419.25 209.63
Ruiz, Paul 961.25 480.63
Sanchez, Andrew 370,50 185.25
Shaheen, Shaheen 112.00 56.00
Striek, Leona 161.25 80.63
Swift, Jeffrey 8.50 4.25

Taveras, Rafael 351.00 175.50
Timney, Matthew 1449.50 724.75
Tran, Thuan 73.50 36.75
Ward, Matthew i 388.50 194.25
Wintersole, Michael 849.75 424.88

 

 

 

MOU — POA 2013 — 2016 Page 36 of 36
