 

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
(BEVERLY HILLS POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION)

The Beverly Hills Police Officers’ Association, (hereinafter “Association”) a formally recognized
employee organization, representing ail Police Sergeants and Police Officers (hereinafter “police
personnel”), and duly authorized representatives of the management of the City of Beverly Hills
(hereinafter "City"), have met and conferred in good faith; freely exchanging information,
opinions and proposals, and have reached the following understanding on matters within the
scope of representation;

Now, therefore, the parties agree and mutually recommend to the City Council of the City of
Beverly Hills (hereinafter "City Council") the following for its determination:

A. Integration This document embodies a written memorandum of the entire understanding
and mutual agreement of the parties as required by Government Code Section 3505.1 and
supersedes all prior Memoranda of Understanding and verbal agreements between the
parties hereto.

The City recognizes that certain past practices may be identified during the term of this
agreement which should have been included in this document but, due to inadvertent
omission, are not set forth herein. Mutual agreement between the parties shall be
necessary to implement change to such past practices. All other practices, policies and
procedures affecting wages, hours and working conditions may be changed only after a
meet and confer process has been conducted between the parties. However, the parties
agree neither party may compel the other party to negotiate regarding proposed changes to
any matter within the lawful scope of bargaining (wages, hours and other terms and
conditions of employment) during the term of this Agreement. This is known as a
“zipper clause.”

This Memorandum of Understanding is subject to a determination and implementation by
the City Council pursuant to Government Code Section 3505.1. Upon determination by
the City Council pursuant to Government Code Section 3505.1, the provisions of the City
Compensation Plan for police personnel (the "Plan") which are referred to herein shall be
modified as set forth herein.

B. Term. Unless otherwise specified herein, this Memorandum of Understanding shall be
effective beginning October 8, 2011 and shall expire October 6, 2016.

1. SALARIES.
Effective January 1, 2014, police personnel shall receive a one percent (1%) base salary increase.
Effective January 1, 2015, police personnel shall receive a two percent (2%) base salary increase.

Effective January 1, 2016, police personnel shall receive a two percent (2%) base salary increase.
A.

2, APPOINTMENT AND ADVANCEMENT

Movement Through Range

The City Manager may make appointments to or advancements within the prescribed
ranges of specific positions upon evaluation of employee qualifications and performance.
Normally, employees shall be appointed at the first step and shall be eligible to advance
through the five (5) steps for Police Officer and six (6) steps for Police Sergeant in their

allocated schedules as follows:
1. Probationary Employment

Unless otherwise provided, every probationary employee shall receive a salary step
increase to the next highest step in the prescribed schedule at the completion of the
first six (6) months of service.

Probationary Period

The probationary period for newly hired police officers, excluding laterally
transferred personnel or promoted personnel, shall be eighteen (18) months.

Pre-Service Entry Level Employment

Each newly hired entry level Police Officer (excluding individuals hired as lateral
Police Officers) shall serve as a non-sworn civilian employee until such time as
he/she successfully graduates from the Police Academy and is sworn in as a Police
Officer. These Pre-Service employees shall receive similar benefits as a sworn
Police Officer with the exception of retirement and workers’ compensation benefits.
Because Pre-Service employees are not sworn, they are considered miscellaneous
employees under the Public Employees’ Retirement Law and are not eligible for
workers’ compensation benefits pursuant to Labor Code section 4850.

The probationary period for Pre-Service entry level Police Officers shall be 18
months from date of hire as a Pre-Service entry level employee.

Permanent Employee Advancement

Unless otherwise provided, every permanent employee shall receive step
advancements in the following manner:

a, Each year on his or her anniversary date in position, an employee shall be
eligible for salary step increases for Salary Range P39 Steps I-IV, provided said
employee has met the standards as provided through the Employee Evaluation
Program.
b. Such an increase is recommended by the employee's supervisor and the
Appointing Authority and is approved by the Assistant Director of
Administrative Services/ Human Resources and City Manager, where applicable.

In the event an individual is appointed or promoted to any sworn police position at
step 3, he/she shall not be eligible for a salary increase after 6 months of service, but
shall be eligible for a salary step increase upon the completion of one year of service,
provided said employee has met the standards as provided through the Employee
Evaluation Program.

5. Temporary Appointment

Temporary appointment to a position in any authorized classification shall be made
at the first step of the appropriate salary schedule. In the event an appointment is
made at other than Step 1, the procedure relative to permanent appointments shail be
followed.

Persons occupying temporary positions shall not accrue any paid benefits, leave
rights, or rights to permanent appointment. If a temporary employee attains
probationary status or if exempt from permanent status, he/she shall not be eligible
for any retroactive payment of benefits.

B. Effective Date Of Increase

Approved salary step increases shall be on the first day of the pay period that begins
closest to the satisfactory completion of the probation period and on every subsequent
anniversary date.

C. Employment At Other Than The First Step

Every original appointment shall be at the first step of the schedule prescribed for the
classification unless, upon the recommendation of the Assistant Director of
Administrative Services/Human Resources, the City Manager authorizes hiring at a
higher step. Such authorization shall be kept to a minimum and based upon proven
inability to recruit at the first step, or upon ascertained special talent and ability of the
prospective employee.

D. Special Merit Advancement

The City Manager may authorize the advancement of an employee to any step within the
prescribed schedule for that position, upon written recommendation of the Appointing
Authority, as submitted to the Assistant Director of Administrative Services/Human
Resources. Such salary increases shall be effective on the first day of the pay period
following the approval of the City Manager if not otherwise specified by the City
Manager. When a special merit increase advancement is granted, the City Manager shall
indicate what the employee's new anniversary date shall be.
E. Superior-Subordinate Relationships

For the purpose of this section, a superior-subordinate relationship is defined as a
relationship in which a classification has the responsibility for the direct supervision of
another classification on a permanent basis,

In such a relationship, a superior shall be paid a monthly salary rate above his/her
subordinates. When a subordinate's monthly base salary rate is equal to or exceeds that
which is being paid to his/her superior, the superior shall receive a special adjustment in
an amount which is at least 2.75% above that received by his/her subordinates.

At any time the superior's base salary (excluding this salary adjustment) exceeds the base
salary of his/her subordinates, the salary adjustment granted to him/her by this section
shall be eliminated.

Monthly salary is defined as the base monthly salary paid to a position. Excluded from
salary computations for this provision are any bonuses paid, shift differentials, overtime
payments, or any additional payment paid to a position.

F. Acting Time

Police Personnel temporarily assigned to a classification higher than his/her regularly
assigned classification shall receive acting time compensation while so assigned to the
higher position.

This amount shall be 5.5% above his/her present base monthly salary, provided that this
additional amount shall not exceed the fifth step nor be lower than the first step of the
higher classification. The Assistant Director of Administrative Services/Human
Resources and the City Manager shall approve acting time requests.

To be eligible for acting pay, the employee has to meet the criteria for the higher
classification and be capable of performing those specific tasks that he/she will be
performing during this acting time and which differentiates it from the lower
classifications.

Police Personnel assigned to a higher position and receiving acting pay shall not acquire
status or credit for service in the higher classification and may be returned to their regular
position at any time.

The superior-subordinate relationship salary adjustment shall not be affected as a result of
the application of acting time pay.

3. BONUSES

No special salary adjustments authorized by this section shall become effective until an official
personnel transaction form authorizing the adjustment is approved by the Assistant Director of

4
Administrative Services/Human Resources. Education and Assignment bonuses will be added to
base pay for calculation of overtime (to be paid at the regular rate of pay as described by the Fair
Labor Standards Act) and for termination payoffs as described in Article 21 of this MOU.

Travel expense or per diem will not be reimbursed for educational courses taken by an employee
where that employee will subsequently receive an education bonus for such education, unless and
to the extent such expenses are reimbursed by P.O.S.T. Applications for reimbursement shall be
submitted and processed in accordance with the Education and Training Administrative
Regulation 3A.2.

A. Assignment Bonus

The attached Base Salary and Assignment Bonuses Salary Matrix (Exhibit A to this MOU)
includes base salary plus assignment bonuses. Employees (either Police Officers or Police
Sergeants) will be placed on the salary matrix at the first range for their rank — which is 39 for
Police Officer and 46 for Police Sergeant if they have not earned any assignment bonuses. If
they have earned a 2.75% assignment bonus, they will be placed at the second range for their
tank which is 40 for Police Officer and 47 for Police Sergeant. If they have earned a 5.5%
assignment bonus, they will be placed at the third range for their rank which is 41 for Police
Officer and 48 for Police Sergeant. If they have earned a 8.25% assignment bonus, they will be
placed at the fourth range (which is the last range) for their rank which is 42 for Police Officer
and 49 for Police Sergeant. The fourth range at each rank (representing one or a combination of
bonuses of 8.25%) is the highest range that an employee can placed at. Employees cannot earn
more than 8.25% in assignment bonuses as set forth below. The following are the available
assignment bonuses.

1. Special Tactics Unit

Four (4) Police Officers and one (1) Sergeant comprise the Special Tactics Unit
and shall receive a bonus of 5.5% of their base salary.

2. Detective Assignment

Police Officers and Sergeants when formally assigned to the Detective Bureau
shall receive a bonus of 8.25% of their base salary.

3. Field Training Officer

There shall be a maximum of 9 Field Training Officers. When assigned to said
position, a Police Officer shall receive a bonus of 5.5% of his or her base salary.

4, Motor Bonus

A. Police Officers and Sergeant(s) assigned to the motor detail shall receive a
bonus of 8.25% of their base salary. In addition, police personnel assigned
to the motor detail shall receive 4 hours of compensatory time per month
for off-duty time spent maintaining the assigned motorcycle.

5
B. D.U.L. - Police Officers assigned to the Traffic Bureau - DUI Team shall
receive a bonus of 5.5% of his/her base salary.

Personnel & Training Bureau

The Sergeant(s) assigned to the Personnel Training Bureau shall receive a 5.5%
bonus of their base salary. Police Officers assigned as Background Investigators
shall receive a bonus of 5.5% of his/her base salary. The Police Officers assigned
to the Personnel & Training Bureau as the Administrative Training Officer shall
receive a bonus of 5.5% of his/her base salary.

Office of the Chief

A. Professional Standards Unit — The Sergeant assigned to the Professional
Standards Unit shall receive a bonus of 8.25% of his/her base salary.

B. Intelligence Unit — The Sergeant assigned to the Intelligence Unit shall
receive a bonus of 8.25% of his/her base salary.

Traffic/Accident Investigation

The Officers assigned to the traffic and accident investigation function shall
receive a 5.5% bonus of their base salary. The Sergeants assigned to the traffic
and accident investigation function shall receive an 8.25% bonus of their base

salary.
Canine Handiers

Police Officers assigned in the canine special assignment shall receive the
following compensation, in addition to their regular base pay:

A 5.5% of monthly base salary per month
B. 5.5 hours of compensatory time off per 28 day work period.

The City and Officers understand and agree that this additional compensation is
intended to compensate canine officers for all off duty hours spent caring,
grooming, feeding and otherwise maintaining their canine unit, in compliance
with the FLSA and interpretive cases and rulings.

The parties acknowledge that the FLSA, which governs the entitlement to
compensation for canine duties, entitles the parties to agree to a reasonable
number of hours per month for the performance of off duty canine duties. The
hours derived at in this agreement were determined after an actual inquiry of the
Officers assigned in the canine special assignment as addressed by Leever v. City
of Carson City, 360 F.3d 1014 om Cir. 2004). It is the intent of the parties
through the provisions of this section to fully comply with the requirements of the

6
FLSA In addition, both parties believe that this section of the MOU does comply
with the requirements of the FLSA.

9. Desk Officers

Until June 29, 2016, Police Officers assigned as Desk Officers shall receive a
bonus of 5.5% of their base salary. Effective June 30, 2016, the bonus shall be
converted to a dollar amount equal to 5.5% of the base salary of a police officer at
top step, as of that date.

10. Crime Suppression Unit

Until June 29, 2016, Police Officer(s) and Sergeant(s) assigned to the Crime
Suppression Unit shall receive a bonus of 5.5% of his/her base salary. Effective
June 30, 2016, the bonus shail be converted to a dollar amount equal to 5.5% of
the base salary of a police officer at top step, as of that date.

11. Special Projects Detail

Police Officer{s) assigned to the Special Projects Detail shall receive a bonus of
5.5% of his/her base salary.

12, Crime tion Bureau

The Police Sergeant assigned to Crime Prevention shall receive a bonus of 5.5%
of his/her base salary. Police Officers assigned as a School Resource Officer or
Crime Prevention Officer shall receive a bonus of 5.5% of their base salary.
Effective June 30, 2016, the bonus provided to Police Officers assigned as a
School Resource Officer shall be converted to a dollar amount equal to 5.5% of
the base salary of a police officer at top step, as of that date.

13. Red Light Photo Enforcement Officer

Until June 29, 2016, Police Officers assigned as the Red Light Photo Enforcement
Officer shall receive a bonus of 5.5% of their base salary. Effective June 30,
2016, the bonus shall be converted to a dollar amount equal to 5.5% of the base
salary of a police officer at top step, as of that date. However, the employees in
the assignment as of December 1, 2011 are grandfathered from this change in the
value of the bonus. Thus, with respect to employees who were receiving this
bonus on December 1, 2011 and are continuously still in the assignment through
June 30, 2016, their bonus will continue to be an amount equal to 5.5% of their
base salary whereas the bonus for any employee who enters or re-enters this
assignment after December 1, 2011 will be the dollar amount described above.

As an example as to how to calculate education and assignment bonuses the parties refer to the
following: Ifa Range 39, Step 5 Police Officer’s base salary is $90,340.94, and this Police
Officer receives a 5.5% assignment bonus, his/her combined total of Base Salary Plus

7
assignment bonuses is $90,340.94 (P39, Step 5) + $4,968.75 (5.5% of $90,340.94) = $95,309.69
(P-41, Step 5). If that employee has the maximum education bonus of 13.75%, the education
bonus is $13,105.08, which is 13.75% of $95,309.69 and which is reflected separately on the
employee’s pay stub.

B. Education Bonus

Education bonuses as described and calculated below will be paid to employees as a
separate amount and not included on the salary matrix as additional ranges. Employee
pay stubs will reflect the education bonus separately from the other forms of pay.

Education bonuses shall not be paid to new police personnel until such personnel are
appointed to a permanent sworn safety position.

Police Personnel who have earned an Advanced P.O.S.T. Certificate shall receive a bonus
each pay period equal to 2.75% of an amount equal to the employee’s base salary plus any
assignment bonuses he/she has earned. The parties’ Base Salary and Assignment
Bonuses Salary Matrix (attached hereto as Exhibit A) has each employee’s range of Base
Salary and Assignment Bonuses, The 2.75% shall be multiplied by the combined amount
of base salary plus the employee’s earned assignment bonuses, if applicable. Also, Police
Personnel who earn a Bachelor’s Degree that results from satisfactorily completing a
prescribed course of study which can include on-line curriculum from an accredited
college or university recognized by Council for Higher Education Accreditation and/or its
regional accrediting organizations, or any other college or university approved in advance
by the Police Chief and Assistant Director of Administrative Services/Human Resources
shall receive a separate bonus each pay period equa! to 5.5% of an amount equal to the
employee’s base salary plus any assignment bonuses he/she has earned as described
above.

In addition to the bonuses described above, police personnel who have either (a) each
fiscal year complete eighty hours of pre-approved course work, (b) qualify for the
education bonus for six years or (c) earn a Master’s Degree shall receive an additional
bonus each pay period of 5.5% of an amount equal to the employee’s base salary plus any
assignment bonuses he/she has earned as described above. To qualify, a Masters’ Degree
must be issued by an accredited college or university recognized by Council for Higher
Education Accreditation and/or its regional accrediting organizations or any other college
or university approved in advance by the Police Chief and Assistant Director of
Administrative Services/Human Resources.

For example, police personnel who have earned an Advanced P.O.S.T. Certificate will
receive a bonus of 2.75% of an amount equal to the employee’s base salary plus
assignment bonuses he/she has earned as described above. If that same employee has
eared a Bachelor’s Degree in addition to his/her Advanced P.O.S.T. Certificate, he/she is
entitled to an additional bonus of 5.5% of an amount equal to the employee’s base salary
plus assignment bonuses he/she has earned as described above. Furthermore, he/she can
earn an additional bonus each pay period of 5.5% of the employee’s base salary plus
assignment bonuses he/she has earned as described above if he/she (1) earns a Master’s

8
Degree in a field having relevance to police work; (2) has successfully completed 80
hours of pre-approved course work during off-duty hours in the previous year; or (3) has
qualified for the continuing education program for six years. Successful completion
constitutes a grade C or higher for all courses, not just on an averaging basis. To the
extent possible, this qualification period shall be continuous. There may be
circumstances which arise precluding an employee from going to school for six
continuous years. In the event the employee has to stop his/her education, the employee
shall submit the information to the Chief of Police and the Assistant Director of
Administrative Services/Human Resources for consideration. Each case will be reviewed
individually. While the City intends to apply reasonable standards to these requests, it is
also cognizant of the intent of this provision and wants to preclude abuse. Upon the
attainment of a Master’s Degree or completing six years of qualifying education, the
continuing education bonus will become permanent and no further course work is
required to keep that bonus. Therefore, the maximum total of the above bonuses (for
education) that an employee is capable of receiving is 13.75% of an amount equal to the
employee’s base salary plus assignment bonuses he/she has earned as described above,
computed as follows:

(a) (2.75% for the Advanced P.O.S.T. Certificate

(b) 5.5% for earning a Bachelor's Degree.

(c) 5.5% for earning a Master’s Degree, completing 80 hours of pre-approved course
work in the previous year, or satisfying the qualifying continuation education
requirement for six years.

With each of the examples, the particular percentage (for education bonus) will be
multiplied by the sum of base salary and whatever assignment bonuses
he/she has earned as described above.
The City and Association agree to develop criteria to be used in the City’s Education &
Tuition Reimbursement Administration Regulation to allow for on-line classes and insure
that these courses meet acceptable standards.
4, RECLASSIFICATION, PROMOTION & Y-RATING

Reclassification

When a position is reclassified upward, the incumbent, i.e., the employee in the position,
may be appointed to that position, providing that:

1. The incumbent has held the position which was reclassified for a minimum of ninety
(90) days prior to the reclassification, and

2. Said employee meets the qualifications established for the position.
If the incumbent does not meet both of the above criteria, the positions shall be filled

through a recruitment process. Employees shall serve a probation period unless the
reclassified position is exempt.
B. Y Rating

In the event an employee in a position is Y-rated the employee's monthly base salary shall
not be increased until the monthly base salary of the position held by that employee meets
or exceeds the monthly salary paid to that employee.

C. Promotion

Every employee who is promoted shall serve a probation period as defined in the
Personnel System Rules & Regulations. An employee who is promoted or who is in a
position which is reclassified upward shall be appointed to the first step of the salary
schedule of the new classification or at least 5.5% above the step and schedule of his/her
previous classification. Benefits and leave rights shall be available to employees on
probation as a result of accepting a promotion.

5. MEDICAL INSURANCE

The City contracts with the Public Employees’ Retirement System (“P.E.R.S.”) for
medical insurance. Insurance coverage is effective the first day of the month following the 30 day
waiting period. For the period of October 8, 2011 through and including December 31, 2012, the
City shall provide medical insurance benefits in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
previous Memorandum of Understanding between the parties covering the term between
September 29, 2007 and October 7, 2011, the contents of which are incorporated by reference as
though set forth in full.

A. Health Welfare Benefits Effective January 1, 2013

The City shall continue to contract with P.E.R.S for medical insurance coverage of
eligible employees and retirees. Eligible new hires are covered under the program on the first
day of the month following a 30-day waiting period that begins on the hire date.

Effective January 1, 2013, the City will continue to contribute the PERS statutory
minimum ($112.00 for 2012, and yet still undetermined for 2013-2016) on behalf of each
participant in the program. A participant is defined as any of the following individuals: (1) a
covered employee, (2) a covered retiree, and (3) a covered surviving annuitant of a deceased
retiree. In addition to the statutory minimum, the City will provide current employees with
flexible benefits through a cafeteria plan as provided below.

B Benefits provided through Cafeteria Plan

10
Effective January 1, 2013, the following insurance benefits described in this Article will
be provided to employees and eligible dependents through a cafeteria plan adopted in
accordance with the provisions of Internal Revenue Code § 125: medical insurance, dental
insurance, and optical insurance.

1, The Purchase of Optional Benefits Through the Cafeteria Plan:

The cafeteria plan offers employees the opportunity to purchase the following optional
benefits: medical insurance, dental insurance and optical insurance.

Effective January 1, 2013, each month the City will contribute to the cafeteria plan an
amount (which includes the CalPERS statutory minimum) equal to the total of the monthly
premiums for (a) the employee plus family category of the PORAC medical insurance plan
available through PERS, (b) the employee plus family category of the “Safety Standard”
Guardian dental plan and (c) the employee plus family category of the “Safety Standard” optical
VSP to purchase the optional benefits of medical insurance, dental insurance and optical
insurance.

Each calendar year during the term of this MOU, starting on January 1, 2013, the City
will increase its monthly contribution by an amount equal to 80% of the total net increase over
the previous year, if any, in the monthly premium, as of January 1 of each year, attendant to the
three designated insurance plans described in the paragraph above. For contributions effective
January 1, 2013, the City will look at the cost of those benefits in 2012 to determine how much
of the increase (if any) will be paid by the City and the employee.

Thus, for example, the items in the cafeteria plan for 2012, as described above, equal
$1,551.00. If, for 2013, the premiums for the three designated insurance benefits increase by
$114 (for a total of $1,165), the City’s contribution to the cafeteria plan shall increase by
$91.20, which equals 80% of that premium increase. Thus, the 2013 cafeteria contribution
would be $1,642.20. The same formula to determine increases in the City’s cafeteria plan
contribution would apply on a year-to-year basis throughout the term of the MOU, ice.,
comparing 2014 costs to 2013 costs. For example, if the monthly premiums for the three
designated insurance plans increase by an additional $100 in 2014, the City’s monthly cafeteria
plan contribution would increase by $80, for a total of $1,722.20. If the premiums for the plans
and coverage selected by the employee exceed the amount of the cafeteria plan contribution,
those excess premiums shall be the responsibility of the employee as described below.

2. Medical Insurance

Eligible employees may select any of the following medical insurance plans offered by
CalPERS:

HMO Plans PPO Plans
1) Kaiser; 1) PERS Care;

2) Blue Shield Access +; or 2) PERS Choice; or
3) Blue Shield Net Value 3) PERS Select
4) PORAC

11
If CalPERS changes any of the medical insurance plans by either adding to or deleting the
plan options described above, employees will be limited to those plan options offered by
CalPERS.

For each of the foregoing plans, employees will also be able to choose the benefit for the
employee category, employee + 1 category or employee + family category, except that, an
employee may elect not to participate if he/she provides the City with proof that he/she has
comparable medical insurance from another source.

3. Dental Insurance

Employees shall also have the ability to select from two levels of dental insurance from
the City’s dental insurance provider, Guardian. The City reserves the right to change dental
insurance providers if necessary. If it does, employees will be provided with similar benefits
with the new provider and, if the amount of the new monthly premium for family coverage shall
exceed that due under the former plan, the City’s monthly cafeteria plan contribution shall be
increased by the amount of the premium increase. Employees will have the options of
participating in the employee category, the employee + spouse category, the employee +
child(ren) category or the employee + family category. Employees do not have to choose any
dental insurance and need not provide proof of dental insurance from another source in order to
make that choice.

4. Optical Insurance

Employees shall also have the ability to select from two levels of optical insurance from
the City’s optical insurance provider, Vision Service Plan (VSP). The City reserves the right to
change optical insurance providers if necessary. If it does, employees will be provided with
similar benefits with the new provider and, if the amount of the new monthly premium for
family coverage shall exceed that due under the former plan, the City’s monthly cafeteria plan
contribution shall be increased by the amount of the premium increase. As with medical
insurance, employees have the options of participating in the employee category, the employee +
1 category or the employee + family category. Employees do not have to choose any optical
insurance and need not provide proof of optical insurance from another source in order to make
that choice.

5. Employee Contributions for Benefit Options

If an employee chooses optional benefits whose aggregate cost exceeds the total City
contribution to the Cafeteria Plan, the City will automatically deduct the excess amount on a
pre-tax basis from the employee’s bi-weekly payroll.

6. The Receipt of Cash Through the Cafeteria Plan

If they choose optional benefits whose premiums do not equal the City’s cafeteria plan
contributions, employees will be eligible to receive cash (subject to taxation as wages) through
the cafeteria plan if they either opt out of receiving one of the optional benefits provided through
the plan or if they choose optional benefits that do not cost as much as the maximum dollar
amount they receive through the plan as follows:

12
7 Receipt of Cash for Opting Out of the Optional Benefits

Employees who elect not to be covered by one or more of the three optional benefits
provided through the cafeteria plan, and meet the opt out requirements, if any, shall receive the
following monthly amount as cash wages for each benefit for which the employee opts out:

1) medical insurance $450.00
2) dental insurance $100.00
3) optical insurance $15.00

8. Maximum Receipt of Cash If Optional Benefits Chosen Result in the
Employee Still Having Cafeteria Plan Contributions Available

The cafeteria plan offers employees the ability to purchase each of the three optional
benefits with the City’s contribution to the cafeteria plan. Employees may choose to purchase
benefits that cost less than the City’s contribution to the cafeteria plan and choose to receive cash
wages with their remaining City contribution. Any such employee shall be eligible to receive in
cash the difference between the City’s monthly cafeteria plan contribution and the total of the
monthly premiums selected by the employees, not to exceed $475, as cash wages:

As an example, assume that the City’s monthly cafeteria plan contribution is $1,551.00. If
an employee opts out of dental insurance and purchases medical and optical insurance with
premiums which add up to $1,363.00, he/she would receive $100.00 (the maximum amount) for
opting out of dental insurance. However, if the premiums added up to $1,500,00 (and the
maximum amount was $1,551.00) the employee would only receive $51 for opting out of dental
insurance, not the $100 because the $51 would cause the employee to reach the cafeteria plan
contribution maximum.

9. Flexible Spending Accounts

The cafeteria plan will also offer employees the opportunity to participate in both a health
care and dependent care flexible spending account (each an FSA) whereby employees will be
able to defer up to $2,500 per year (for the health care FSA) and up to $5,000 per year (for the
dependent care FSA) to pay for any eligible out of pocket expenses related to health care or
dependent care on a pre-tax basis, The provisions of both of these FSA’s will be provided in a
plan document. The plan document will be available to each eligible employee upon request.
Essentially, before January 1 of every year, employees will be able to elect to have their
compensation (up to the aforementioned limits) for the upcoming year deducted biweekly and
contributed on a pre-tax basis to the FSA. During the year (and for a short grace period
thereafter), an employee can receive reimbursements under the FSA for covered expenses
incurred during the year, up to the amount of the employee’s contributions for the year. The FSA
deductions will be withheld from employees’ regular payroll. Any amount allocated but not used
within the prescribed time limits shall be forfeited

13
10. Supplemental Term Life Insurance:

Employees may also purchase supplemental term life insurance, if available, with
deductions from their bi-weekly compensation as designated by each employee. Employees
cannot allocate cash contributions made to the cafeteria plan to pay the premiums for this
supplemental term life insurance. However, they may, on a post-tax basis, allocate any cash back
they receive from the cafeteria plan for that purpose. It must be a deduction from their paycheck.

Ul. Deferred Compensation

Any cash that an employee may receive through the cafeteria plan may not be deferred to
the employee’s accounts under the City’s deferred compensation plans. The employee may,
however, be able to elect to increase his/her deferrals to the City’s deferred compensation plans
from his/her regular wages.

Cc. Retiree Medical Insurance

1) For employees hired prior to July 1, 2012 retiring (service retirement only) after July
1, 1989, through age 70, the City shall pay the difference between the PERS statutory
minimum and the actual cost of medical insurance premium up to two-party rate of
the PORAC Plan under PERS.

2) For retirees who retired between July 1, 1978 and July 1, 1989, the City shall pay
$211/month, through age 65.

3) Employees hired by the City on or after July 1, 2012 who retire from the City
will receive the PERS statutory minimum paid by the City. In addition, for
employees hired into the unit as new employees on or after July 1, 2012, in lieu of
additional retiree medical insurance benefits, the City shall, while the employees are
working for the City, contribute the sum of $275.00 per month ($126.92 per pay
period) to a retirement account on behalf of such employees. For employees who
promote into the unit after July 1, 2012 who were City employees as of June 30,
2012, they will receive retiree medical benefits in accordance with the benefits of
this MOU as though they were a member of the bargaining unit prior to July 1, 2012.

4) Retired sworn police personnel who receive a disability retirement on or after July 1,
1987, will be eligible for the PERS health plan (subject to the eligibility requirements
of plan) if said employee has 20 years of service with the Beverly Hills Police
Department or is over 45 years of age at the time of his or her retirement.

D. Alternative Retiree Medical Plan
The parties agree that the City may offer an Alternative Retiree Medical Plan (ARMP) to

the members of the POA. The ARMP is a voluntary plan which each member can decide
whether to accept or not.

14
Police personnel shall be entitled to a $50,000 term life insurance policy under the City's life
insurance program. The full premium for such policy shall be paid for by the City under a life
insurance program of its choosing. Such policy shall take the place of any other policies existing
prior to the adoption of this provision. Each such employee shall have the option te individually

6, LIFE INSURANCE

purchase additional life insurance at the City's unit cost, if available.

A. The City shall contribute $320.00 per month on behalf of police officers to the City's
deferred compensation program.

B,

7. DEFERRED COMPENSATION

The City shall contribute $475.00 per month on behalf of police sergeants to the City's
deferred compensation program.

Holidays

All probationary and permanent police personnel employees shall be entitled to the
following paid holidays if said employee worked the regularly assigned work period the
day before and the day after the holiday or was absent on authorized paid leave during
said period. Employees assigned to patrol or otherwise on a 3/12 schedule shall receive
nine 12 % hour holidays, non-patrol employees on a 4/10 schedule shall receive ten 10-

hour holidays.

PATROL

New Year's Day

Martin Luther King Jr. Day
President's Day

Memorial Day
Independence Day

Labor Day

Veteran's Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day

NON-PATROL (4/10 schedule)

New Year's Day

Martin Luther King Jr. Day
President's Day

Memorial Day
Independence Day

Labor Day

8. HOLIDAYS

15

January 1

Third Monday in January
Third Monday in February
Last Monday in May

July 4

First Monday in September
November 11

Fourth Thursday in November
December 25

January 1

Third Monday in January
Third Monday in February
Last Monday in May

July 4

First Monday in September
Veteran's Day November 11

Thanksgiving Day Fourth Thursday in November
Day after Thanksgiving Fourth Friday in November
Christmas Day December 25

B. Personal Holiday

Police personnel shall be entitled to one personal paid holiday each fiscal year, for
employees assigned to patrol or otherwise on a 3/12 schedule this shall be a 12 % hour
holiday, for all employees on a 4/10 schedule it shall be a 10 hour holiday. This holiday
may be taken at the employee's discretion subject to his/her supervisor's and Appointing
Authority's approval. The employee shal] request this holiday in writing. This holiday is
non-accruable and shall not be paid for if not taken.

9, VACATION

A. Authorization For Taking Vacation

Upon completion of 12 months of service and approval of the Appointing Authority or
designee, employees may take accrued vacation leave.

An employee entitled to vacation leave shall make written application therefore in the
manner and within the time directed by the Appointing Authority. Every Appointing
Authority shall establish a vacation schedule for each calendar year based as much as
possible upon application and seniority of the employees concerned and subject to the
Appointing Authority's right to plan work under his/her control. He/she shall notify every
employee within a reasonable time whether his/her application is approved.

B. Holidays During Vacations

When a holiday falls within an employee's vacation leave, the leave shall be extended by
the amount of the holiday time.

C. Vacation Accumulation

Vacation credit shall be accrued bi-weekly to employees at the following rates:

FIRST 4 YEARS AFTER 4 YEARS AFTER 14 YEARS
OF SERVICE OF SERVICE OF SERVICE

3.07 Hours 5.54/Hours 7.39 Hours
Bi-weekly Bi-weekly Bi-weekly

80 Hours 144 Hours 192 Hours

Year Year Year

16
Police Personnel with more than four but not more than fourteen years of service may not
accumulate more than 432 hours of vacation. Employees with 432 hours of vacation on
the books will not continue to accrue vacation until their balance falls below 432 hours

Police Personnel with more than fourteen years of service whose vacation accumulation
at the beginning of a calendar year is less than 432 hours may accumulate annual vacation
which will result in their balance being above 432 hours. However, if at the end of any
calendar year the vacation accumulation is above 432 hours, they will not continue to
accrue vacation until the balance falls below 432 hours, whereupon they will then
continue to accrue vacation during that calendar year.

D. Briefing Preparation Time

Each calendar year Sergeants will receive prebriefing preparation time. Employees who
are at the rank of Sergeant at the beginning of the year shall receive 50 hours of
prebriefing preparation time. Employees first entering the classification of Sergeant shall
receive (in the year he/she enters the classification) 50 hours of prebriefing preparation
time if entering the classification prior to July 1 and 25 hours of prebriefing preparation
time if entering the classification after June 30. The 50 hours of leave per calendar year is
intended to compensate the Sergeants in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act.
The parties acknowledge that keeping track of pre-briefing hours is difficult and this
agreement to pay 50 hours for briefing preparation time each calendar year is intended to
comply with 29 CFR section 785.23 of the Department of Labor regulations
implementing the FLSA.

10. SICK LEAVE

Except as is otherwise provided, police personnel shall accrue, use and be compensated for sick
leave as follows:

A. Accrual. Police personnel shall accrue sick leave at the rate of 3.68 hours for each
complete biweekly period of employment. Payroll division records are the final authority
for settling disputes regarding accrued sick leave and vacation.

B. New Employment. No sick leave may be used by any new employee until he/she has
completed six (6) months of employment with the City.

C. Use. Accumulated sick leave may be used by an employee during any period of illness of
the employee, spouse, child or registered domestic partner if the illness requires the
presence of the employee.

D. Sick Leave Incentive. Police Personnel who accrue 72 hours or more of unused sick
leave during any payroll year shall have the option of being paid in January of the
succeeding year for up to 24 hours of the accumulated unused sick leave. Such hours not
paid for or taken may be accumulated to be used or taken as needed in the future, or paid
upon separation as provided for in paragraph 21A.

7
11. BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

Bereavement leave is an absence occasioned by the death of a family member, herein defined as
a spouse, parent, brother, sister, child, step-child, grandparent, in-law or registered domestic
partner of the employee

Forty (40) hours of bereavement leave, per calendar year, may be used in the event of the death
of a family member. In the event an employee needs additional time off for this leave, he/she
may use up to 40 hours of sick leave per calendar year.

Requests for bereavement leave shall be made in writing, when feasible and shall be approved by
the appointing authority and the Assistant Director of Administrative Services/Human Resources.

12. WITNESS LEAVE

Police personnel who are required to serve as a witness pursuant to a lawful subpoena in any
judicial or quasi-judicial proceeding in a matter other than one to which the employee is a party,
or who are required to serve as a juror, shall be allowed time off without loss of pay to perform
such duties. All fees to which the employee is entitled by law for such service shall be paid (less
transportation allowance, if any) to the City. This Section is not applicable to those employees
participating in judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings that are within the scope of their
employment.

13. LEAVE WITHOUT PAY

Requests for leaves of absence without pay must be submitted through the chain of command and
approved by the Chief of Police or designee and shall be used only if all appropriate accrued
leaves have been exhausted. Police Personnel on leaves of absence without pay shall not accrue
vacation, leave rights, nor shall the City pay for any fringe benefits. Decisions whether to grant
such a leave will be made based on operational needs of the Department.

14, UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

A. The City shall furnish the initial uniform and necessary equipment to each sworn Police
employee and replace uniform items which are no longer serviceable. The administration
of this program is contained in Administrative Regulation 3.B.7.

B. Annual Uniform Allowance — The City shall provide for the payment of $700 per year for
uniformed personnel who have successfully completed their initial probation and $800
per year for nonuniformed personnel who have successfully completed their initial
probation as a uniform and equipment allowance. The allowance shall be paid annually
in January of each fiscal year, except that employees who successfully complete their
initial probation during the course of a calendar year shall thereupon receive a pro-rata
share of the annual allowance for that year. For example, an employee who successfully

18
completes entry level probation on October 1, and is entitled to the $700 per year
allowance shall then receive a $175 allowance for that year and an additional $700
allowance for the next year.

15. OVERTIME

Police personnel shall be paid overtime when required to work holidays, normally scheduled
days off, in excess of their normal daily work hours, or in excess of their prescribed work period
as specified in Section 17; however, whether extra compensation shall be paid or compensating
time off shall be allowed for overtime shall be determined by the Appointing Authority. The
maximum amount of compensatory time a swom police employee can accumulate is 160 hours.

All overtime shall be paid at the regular rate of pay, as defined in the FLSA, which includes all
non-discretionary bonuses.

A. Court Time

Police personnel called to appear in court shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours of
overtime compensation calculated at the rate of one and one half times their regular rate
of pay (hereinafter referred to as time and one half); except, that if the court appearance
time is contiguous either before or after, to the employee's assigned shift, the employee
will be paid at time and one half for a minimum of one (1) hour or for the actual time
spent in court, whichever is greater.

B. Call Back

Police Personnel who are called back to work shall receive a minimum of four hours paid
at straight time even if the call back is less than four hours. Police Personnel called back
for more than four hours will be paid at time and one half for all hours worked beyond
four hours

C. Standby Pay

When, because of anticipated emergency manpower needs, an officer is required to be on
call or to stand by, the officer shall receive an amount equal to three hours compensation
per day of ordered standby. The hourly rate shall be computed by using the officer's base
rate of pay.

If the Officer elects not to remain at home when the officer is ordered to standby or
ordered to remain on call, the officer shall provide the department with a telephone
number at the location where the officer can be contacted including a cell phone number.
Such location shall approximate the response time the officer would have used to travel
from home to the department. An officer while on call or on standby shall remain fit for
duty.

D. Special Assignments

19
A.

An employee working a special assignment, as administered by Sections 4/275.05 —
4275.35 of the Beverly Hills Police Department Manual, shall receive a minimum of four
(4) hours of pay at time and one half.

16. RETIREMENT

Retirement (PERS%)

1.

Until December 31, 2015, the City shall pay an amount equal to nine percent (9%) of
the individual gross salaries of police personnel to the California Public Employees’
Retirement System (P.E.R.S.) on behalf of such personnel members in lieu of their
individual retirement contribution obligation. Effective January 1, 2016, employees
shall pay one percent (1%) of their gross salary towards the member contribution to
P.E.R.S.. Thus, effective January 1, 2016, the City shall pay an amount equal to
eight percent (8%) of the individual gross salaries of police personnel to P.E.R.S. on
behalf of such personnel members in lieu of their individual retirement contribution
obligation. The City shall “pick up” pursuant to Intemal Revenue Code Section
414(h)(2) the amount of the employee-paid member contribution to enable the
employee’s taxable income to be reduced by the amount of the employee-paid
contribution. Although the parties believe that the pick up of the employee paid
retirement contribution is pre-tax, the parties agree that the City is not responsible for
the tax treatment of that contribution and the Association holds the City harmless
from any liability related to a determination that such contributions is not a pre-tax
contribution.

For purposes of this Section, "gross salaries" shall mean "compensation earnable" as
defined in Section 20636 of the California Government Code.

Effective January 1, 2014, in accordance with Section 20156(f) of the California
Government Code, employees shall pay to CalPERS on a pre-tax basis pursuant to a
cost-sharing arrangement to fund the retirement formulas described herein an amount
equal to one percent (1%) of their gross salaries. Effective January 1, 2015, the
employees’ contribution shall be increased by an additional two percent of gross
salaries, for a total of three percent (3%)of their gross salaries. Although the parties
believe that the cost sharing contribution is pre-tax, the parties agree that the City is
not responsible for the tax treatment of that contribution and the Association holds
the City harmless from any liability related to a determination that such contributions
is not a pre-tax contribution.

Survivor’s Continuance

The City’s contract with the Public Employees’ Retirement System provides for the

Survivor’s Continuance for sworn police personnel.

3% at 50 Formula

20
The City’s contract with P.E.R.S provides for the 3% at 50 retirement formula set forth in
California Government Code Section 21362.2 for all current sworn police personnel hired
prior to July 1, 2012.

3% at 55 Formula — Fi lo ired On Or After July 1, 2012

The City will amend its contract with P.E.R.S. to provide for the 3% at 55 retirement
formula set forth in California Government Code section 21363.1 for employees hired on
or after July 1, 2012.

PERS Benefit Provided by Government Code section 20636(c)(4)

Pursuant to Government Code section 20636(c)(4), the City shall pay (as already
provided by subdivision A of this article) and report to P.E.R.S. as compensation earnable
the monetary value of contributions paid by the City on behalf of each employee (as
described in subparagraph Al above and known as “employer-paid member
contribution”) covered by this MOU. For purposes of this agreement this benefit shall be
known as “PERS on PERS”.

Single Highest Year

The City's contract with the Public Employees’ Retirement System provides for the
"Single Highest Year" retirement benefit for current swom police personnel hired prior to
July 1, 2012 pursuant to California Govemment Code Section 20042.

Highest Average Annual Compensation During Three Consecutive Years of Employment
For Employees Hired on or After July 1, 2012

The City will amend its contract with P.E.R.S. to provide for retirement benefits based on
the highest annual average compensation earnable during the three consecutive years of
employment immediately preceding the effective date of his or her retirement or as
designated by the employee in accordance with Government Code Section 20037 for
employees hired on or after July 1, 2012.

Military Buy-Back
The City's contract with the Public Employees’ Retirement System provides for the
military buy back option to a maximum of four (4) years buy back time. The entire cost

of this buy back program, including any cost burden on the City, shall be bome by those
police personnel taking advantage of this buy back option.

1959 Survivor's Benefit
The City provides Level 4 coverage under the 1959 Survivors Benefit.

Reopener:
21
If, at any time during the term of the MOU, there is legislation, a regulation issued in the
California Code of Regulations or case law, that requires employees to pay (during the
term of the MOU) additional contributions to their P.E.R.S. retirement or reduces
employee cost sharing (during the term of the MOU), the City or the Association may
demand to reopen the MOU to address the impact of the legislation, regulation or case
law. This reopener will not be triggered if the aforementioned changes in the law provide
that modifications to employee or employer retirement contributions are subject to
collective bargaining or if such modifications would not go into effect during the term of
the MOU.

17. WORK SCHEDULE
Current Work Schedules

Every sworn police safety employee is required to work a minimum forty (40) hour week, unless
otherwise provided herein. Those employees assigned to the Patrol Division shall work the 3/12
work schedule, except those employees assigned to Motors, who shall work a 4/10 work
schedule. Those employees assigned to a 4/10 work schedule shall work 4 days per week, 10
hours per day.

Flexible scheduling on the use of two-man patrol vehicles in the early morning hours shall be the
decision of the Watch Commander. There shall be no automatic doubling up of personnel and
such assignments may be made based upon available personnel and the ability to provide
adequate patrol coverage throughout the City.

For those employees assigned to the 3/12 work schedule, overtime shall be defined as all time
worked and/or regarded as having been worked because of a paid leave of absence in excess of
the scheduled daily work shift and/or 160 hours in a 28-day work period. For those employees
assigned to a 4/10 work schedule, overtime shall be defined as all time worked and/or regarded
as having been worked because of a paid leave of absence in excess of the regularly scheduled
work day or 40 hours in a seven day work period.

Pursuant to Section 7(k) of the FLSA, the City has adopted a 28-day work period.

18, ASSIGNMENTS

It is the policy of the Beverly Hills Police Department that selection of employees for special
assignments will be made by following the procedure indicated below.

A. When an opening for a special assignment is available or imminent, the Police Chief or

Division Commander shall request interested personnel to submit a memorandum
requesting assignment to the vacant position.

22
B. Officers submitting requests shall indicate their reasons and qualifications for the new
assignment in memorandum form to their immediate supervisor.

C. Supervisors shall review requests after which they shall attach a memorandum of their
own, which includes any comments they have and a recommendation of the officer for the
position applied for.

D. After reviewing all requests for special assignment the Police Chief or Division
Commander will have the option of (a) making the selection based on the information
submitted or (b) establishing an oral board for the purpose of interviewing ali candidates
and receiving recommendations from the oral board and then making selection.

E. Notwithstanding the above, the Police Chief shall retain the right to assign personnel to
special assignments without following the above procedures when the Police Chief feels
such action is in the best interests of the Department.

F. Within 10 days after an employee is informed that the employee was not chosen for an
assignment, the employee may ask the Division Commander or the Superior officer who
effectively made the selection, for the reason the employee was not selected. The
Division Commander or the Superior officer shall respond within 10 working days.

19. COMPENSATORY TIME - BOARD MEMBERS
Association Time

Beverly Hills Police Association Board members, subject to the approval of the Police Chief or
designee, shall be allowed a reasonable period of time without loss of compensation for the sole
and exclusive purpose of conducting transactions of the Beverly Hills Police Officers’
Association. Said amount of time shall not exceed one (1) hour per day for each Board member
and an aggregate not to exceed five hundred (500) hours per year for all such Board members
provided every reasonable effort is made to conduct Association meetings and/or business on
nonduty time. Permission to attend Association meetings on duty must be obtained 48 hours in
advance from Police Chief or designee. Permission to conduct Association business on duty
must be obtained in advance from the Police Chief or designee. Approval to conduct Association
business or attend Association meetings is conditioned upon field and/or assignment conditions.

As part of the five hundred hours per year paid release time for Association Board members, up
to a total maximum of six (6) days (either 8 hour or 10 hour shifts may be considered (1) day)
may be used to attend police related conferences, seminars or conventions. Permission to attend
such conferences or conventions must be obtained two (2) weeks in advance from the Police
Chief or designee.

23
20. OVERPAYMENT

In the event Sworn Police personnel are overpaid due to an error of the City or employee,
repayment shall be made in a similar manner as the overpayment was received unless
extraordinary circumstances prevent that from occurring or unless the overpayment was the result
of an inappropriate action of the employee.

21, SEPARATION FROM CITY SERVICE

A. Sick Leave Pay-Off

All accrued, unused sick leave at the date of separation from City service shall be the
basis for determining the amount to be paid to each employee who qualified to receive
sick leave pay off.

1, Employees who have achieved ten (10) or more continuous years of service shall be
eligible for sick leave pay upon separation of employment with the City at the rate of
three percent (3%) of accrued, unused sick leave per full year of service. Sick leave
shall be calculated at the rate of pay, including all bonuses, received by the employee
at the time of his/her separation.

2. Police personnel who have achieved twenty (20) or more continuous years of service
shall be eligible for sick leave pay upon separation of employment with the City at
the rate of four percent(4%) of accrued, unused sick leave per full year of service.
Sick leave shall be calculated at the rate of pay, including all bonuses, received by
the employee at the time of his/her separation.

Police personnel eligible to receive sick leave pay shall receive said pay at the time
of termination. At no time can the percentage of sick leave payoff exceed 100%.

B. Vacation Pay-Off

Police personnel who terminate from City service shall receive an amount equal to
accrued unused vacation at the time of termination. The rate of payoff shall be based on
the rate of pay at the time of separation.

C. Conversion of Sick Leave to Deferred Compensation
Police personnel may convert accumulated sick leave to salary. The extra pay may only
be used to fund “catch-up” contributions to deferred compensation. The following
restrictions apply to this program:

1. The employee shall have a minimum of 15 years of service with the City of Beverly
Hills.

24
The individual’s sick leave accrual balance cannot be reduced below 500 hours.

The conversion is limited to no more than three consecutive years, and the
conversion can be used only for funding the deferred compensation “catch-up”.

The conversion shall not exceed the amount which wiil bring the annual deferral to
the maximum allowed by law.

The conversion will be at the then existing sick leave payoff percentage.

22, ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL PROCESS

The following administrative appeal process is established pursuant to Government Code §
3304.5. It shall supplement, though not replace, the existing disciplinary appeal process which
was agreed to by the parties on November 7, 2006. This procedure shall not apply to disciplinary
actions for which officers already are entitled to receive an appeal hearing pursuant to that
agreement for disciplinary transfer, step reduction, suspension, demotion and dismissal.

A. Ris

1.

to Administrative Appeal Under this Procedure

Any public safety officer (as that term is defined by Government Code § 3301)
who is subjected to punitive action (within the meaning of Government Code §
3303) other than dismissal, demotion, step reduction, suspension or disciplinary
transfer or who is subjected to an action which may lead to punitive action, shall
be entitled to receive an administrative appeal under this procedure. The officer
shall not be entitled to appeal the action prior to its imposition, i.e., an officer
shall not be entitled to receive a hearing akin to a Skelly hearing or other pre-
disciplinary appeal hearing prior to imposition of the punitive action.

Officers subjected to dismissal, demotion, step reduction, suspension or
disciplinary transfer shall continue to be entitled to an appeal in accordance with
existing procedures.

B. Notice of Appeal

1.

Within five (5) calendar days of receipt by an officer of notification of punitive
action as set forth above, the officer shall notify the Assistant Director of
Administrative Services/Human Resources in writing of the officer’s intent to
appeal the punitive action.

The notice of appeal shall specify the action being appealed and the substantive
and procedural grounds for the appeal.

25
c. Hearin:

fficer

The City Manager shall have twenty-one (21) calendar days from receipt of the
notice of appeal to designate himself/herself as the hearing officer or appoint a
neutral hearing officer who is not embroiled in the controversy, i.e., a person who
did not initiate or authorize the action in question.

The hearing officer appointed by the City Manager shall serve in an advisory
capacity and shall be responsible for making recommended findings of fact and
issuing an advisory decision to the City Manager. The City Manager may adopt,
modify, or reject the hearing officer’s recommendations and advisory decision and
the City Manager’s decision shall be final and binding.

D. Burden of Proof/Persuasion

1.

1.

If the action being appealed does not involve allegations of misconduct (i.e.,
allegations that the officer has violated one or more federal, state, or local laws,
and/or City or Police Department regulations, procedures, or rules) the limited
purpose of the hearing shall be to provide the officer the opportunity to establish a
record of the circumstances surrounding the action. The City’s burden shall be
satisfied if the City establishes that the action was reasonable, even though
reasonable persons might disagree about whether the action was the best one
under the circumstances.

For example, if the Police Department effected a non-disciplinary transfer of an
officer out of a premium pay assignment with the intent of affording other officers
the opportunity to work in the assignment, the decision would not be subject to
being overturned as long as it was reasonable, even if one or more persons might
disagree with the decision.

If the punitive action involves charges of misconduct, (i-e., allegations that the
officer has violated one or more laws, regulations, procedures, or rules), the City
shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence the facts
which form the basis for the charge of misconduct and the burden of persuasion
that the punitive action was reasonable under the circumstances.

For example, if an officer received a written reprimand for unauthorized absence
from work then the City would bear the burden of proving that the officer was
absent from work without authorization and that a written reprimand was
reasonable under the circumstances.

Conduct of Hearing

The formal rules of evidence do not apply, although the hearing officer shall have
discretion to exclude evidence which is incompetent, irrelevant or cumulative.

The parties may present opening statements.

26
3. The parties may present evidence through documents and testimony.

a. Witnesses shall testify under oath.

b. The hearing officer shall issue subpoenas for documents or testimony upon
reasonable request of the parties,
4. The parties shall be entitled to confront and cross-examine witnesses.
5. Following the presentation of evidence, if any, the parties may submit oral and/or

written closing argument for consideration by the hearing officer.

Recording of the Hearing

If the punitive action involves an allegation of misconduct, then the hearing shall be
stenographically recorded by a certified court reporter. Otherwise, the hearing may be
tape recorded. The per diem cost of the court reporter shall be equally borne by the
parties. The cost to receive a transcript of the hearing shall be borne by the party
requesting the transcript.

Representation

The officer may be represented by an association representative or attorney of his or her
choice at all stages of the proceedings. All costs associated with such representation shall!
be borne by the officer.

The City shall also be entitled to representation at all stages of the proceedings.
Decision

1. If a hearing officer is appointed by the City Manager, the hearing officer shall
issue his/her advisory decision in writing within sixty (60) calendar days of the
submission of the case by the parties for decision. The written decision shall set
forth proposed findings of fact and a proposed decision.

2. Within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the advisory decision, the City
Manager shall serve the parties with written notice of his/her decision adopting,
modifying, or rejecting the hearing officer’s recommendations and decision. If the
City Manager modifies, or rejects the hearing officer’s decision, then he or she
shall review the entire record prior to making a decision.

3. If the City Manager hears the appeal him/herself, he/she will issue his/her decision
within sixty (60) calendar days of the submission of the case by the parties for
decision. The written decision shall set forth his/her findings of fact and final
decision.

27
Untii approved by the City Council, this document is not a contract but a written Memorandum
prepared pursuant to the requirements of Government Code Section 3505.1 for presentation to
the City Council for its determination.

This Memorandum is signed on this _13 ™ day of November 2012.

City of Beverly Hills Beverly Hills Police
Representatives Officers Association

 

28
Police - Officer - Salary Matrix (Base Salary and Assignment Bonus) - No Compounding

 

72,714.96 | 76,769.55
Monthly 6,059.58

Bi-Weekly | 2,796.73 | 2,952.67
Hour! 34.9591 36.9084

Monthly
Bi-Weekly
Hout

 

7,942.47 |5.5% assignment
3,665.76 |bonus

771388 33,103.04 | 87,736.86 2609.07 | W7,784,07 | Base ealry pls

——- 6,925.25 | 7,311.41 8,149.51 |8.25% assignment.
Bi-Weekly 3,196.27 | 3,374.49 3,761.31 |bonus
Hourly ea 8432 39.9534 42.1812 “a 5332 47.0164

 

  

 

Exhibit A
Police - Sergeant - Salary Matrix (Base Salary and Assignment Bonus) - No Compounding

 

 

 

 

Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 5 Step 6

P46 87,921.80 | 92,824.32 | 98,000.21 | 103,464.70 | 109,233.89 | 115,324.77 | BASE SALARY
Monthly 7,326.82 7,735.36 8,166.68 8,622.06 9,102.82 9,610.40
Bi-Weekly 3,381.61 3,670.17 3,769.24 3,979.41 4,201.30 4,435.57
Hourly 42.2701 44.6271 47.1155 49.7426 52.5163 55.4446

P47 90,339.65 | 95,376.99 | 100,695.21] 106,309.98 |_ 112,237.82 | 118,496.20 | Base salary plus
Monthly 7,528.30 7,948.08 8,391.27 8,859.16 9,353.15 9,874.68 |2.75% assignment
Bi-Weekly 3,474.60 3,668.35 3,872.89 4,088.85 4,316.84 4,557.55 |bonus
Hourly 43.4325 45.8543 48.4112 51.1106. 53.9605. 56.9693

iP 48 92,757.50 | 97,929.66 | 103,390.22 | 109,155.26 | 115,241.76 | 121,667.64 | Base salary plus
Monthly 7,729.79 8,160.81 8,615.85 9,096.27 9,603.48 | 10,138.97 |5.5% assignment
Bi-Weekly 3,567.60 3,766.53 3,976.55 4,198.28 4,432.38 4,679.52 |bonus
Hou! 44.5950 47.0816 49.7068 52.4785 55.4047 58.4941

P49 95,175.35 | 100,482.33 | 106,085.23 | 112,000.54 | 118,245.69 | 124,839.07 | Base salary plus
Monthly 7,931.28 8,373.53 8,840.44 9,333.38 9,853.81 10,403.26 |8.25% assignment
Bi-Weekly 3,660.59 3,864.71 4,080.20 4,307.71 4,547.91 4,801.50 [bonus
Hourly 45.7574 48.3088 51.0025 53.8464 56.8489 60.0188

 

Exhibit A

 

 
