Memorandum of Agreement

City of San José

and

San José Police Officers’ Association

SAN JOSE

CAPITAL OF SILICON VALLEY

July 1, 2013 - December 31, 2015

 
CITY OF SAN JOSE
AND
THE SAN JOSE POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE 1 TERM 1
ARTICLE 2. RECOGNITION 1
ARTICLE 3. COMMENCEMENT OF NEGOTIATIONS 1
ARTICLE 4 DEFINITIONS 2
ARTICLE 5 WAGES AND PREMIUM PAY 2
ARTICLE 6 PER DIEM EXPENSE 6
ARTICLE 7 EDUCATION INCENTIVE AND REIMBURSEMENT 6
ARTICLE 8 INSURANCE BENEFITS 9
ARTICLE 9 UNIFORM ALLOWANCE 13
ARTICLE 10 PERSONAL PROPERTY REIMBURSEMENT. 14
ARTICLE 11 PAYCHECKS 14
ARTICLE 12 WORKING IN A HIGHER CLASSIFICATION 15
ARTICLE 13 HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME 15
ARTICLE 14 COURT CALL-IN, APPEARANCE COURT RECESS AND CALL BACK PAY _ 21
ARTICLE 15 STANDBY DUTY 22
ARTICLE 16 CITY RIGHTS AND CHARTER RIGHTS 23
ARTICLE 17 ASSIGNMENTS 24
ARTICLE 18 TRANSFER POLICIES 25
ARTICLE 19 FULL UNDERSTANDING, MODIFICATION AND WAIVER 25
ARTICLE 20 CONCERTED ACTIVITY 26
ARTICLE 21 POLICE VEHICLE 27
ARTICLE 22 LAYOFFS 28
ARTICLE 23 HOLIDAYS 30
ARTICLE 24 DUES DEDUCTION 31
ARTICLE 25 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 32
ARTICLE 26 LEAVES OF ABSENCE 39
ARTICLE 27 ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE. 41
ARTICLE 28 WEAPONS 41

 

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Table of Contents
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE 29 AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVES 43
ARTICLE 30 VACATIONS. 43
ARTICLE 31 SICK LEAVE 45
ARTICLE 32 DISABILITY LEAVE 51
ARTICLE 33. BEREAVEMENT LEAVE 54
ARTICLE 34 NON-DISCRIMINATION 54
ARTICLE 35 MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP. 55
ARTICLE 36 SENIORITY 56
ARTICLE 37 LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE 56
ARTICLE 38 POLICE EQUIPMENT 57
ARTICLE 39 MODIFIED DUTY ASSIGNMENT 58
ARTICLE 40 PROMOTIONAL TESTING 58
ARTICLE 41 TRAINING 59
ARTICLE 42 ORGANIZATION NOTIFICATION OR COMMUNICATIONS 60
ARTICLE 43 INVESTIGATIONS 60
ARTICLE 44 CHAIN OF COMMAND 61
ARTICLE 45 COPIES OF AGREEMENT 61
ARTICLE 46 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 61
ARTICLE 47, DEPARTMENT AUTHORIZED EQUIPMENT OR TECHNIQUE 62
ARTICLE 48 RECRUIT CLASSIFICATION 62
ARTICLE 49 RETIREMENT 64
ARTICLE 50 RETIREE HEALTHCARE FUNDING 65
ARTICLE 51 MODIFICATION OF BARGAINING UNIT WORK 67
ARTICLE 52 COMMUNITY POLICING 67
ARTICLE 53 DRUG TESTING 53
ARTICLE 54 TIME DONATION PROGRAMS 69
ARTICLE 55 SEPARABILITY 69
ARTICLE 56 MEET AND CONFER AND INTEREST ARBITRATION 69
ARTICLE 57 PROBATIONARY PERIOD 70
ARTICLE 58 DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE 71
EXHIBIT | WAGE INCREASES 73
EXHIBIT Il SALARY STEPS 74
SJPOA MOA. July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Table of Contents
The Memorandum of Agreement hereinafter referred to as the “Agreement” is
established by agreement at San Jose, California, this 10‘ day of December, 2013 by
and between the City of San Jose, hereinafter referred to as the "City" or "Management"
and the San Jose Police Officers’ Association, hereinafter referred to as the "Employee
Organization" or "Organization". The use of the term "Memorandum of Agreement" or
“Agreement” is to be considered the same as the term Memorandum of Understanding
contained in Section 3505.1 of the "Meyers-Milias-Brown Act."

The parties agree that the purpose of this Memorandum of Agreement is: To promote
and provide harmonious relations, cooperation and understanding between the City and
the employees covered herein; to provide an orderly and equitable means of resolving
differences which may arise under this Agreement, and to set forth the full agreements
of the parties reached as a result of meeting and conferring in good faith regarding
wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment of the employees
represented by the San Jose Police Officers’ Association.

ARTICLE 1 TERM

1.1. This Memorandum of Agreement (hereinafter, “Agreement") shall become
effective July 1, 2013, except where otherwise provided, and shall remain in
effect through December 31, 2015. No amendment or change to the provisions
of this Agreement shall be valid or binding unless reduced to writing and signed
by duly authorized representative(s) of the parties.

ARTICLE 2 RECOGNITION

Pursuant to Resolution No. 39367 of the City Council of the City of San Jose and the
provisions of applicable state law, the San Jose Police Officers’ Association, hereinafter
referred to as the "Employee Organization" or “Organization”, is recognized as the
exclusive representative for the purpose of meeting and conferring on matters within the
scope of representation for employees assigned to the following classifications:

Unit 011: Police Officer, Police Sergeant, Police Lieutenant

Unit 012: Police Captain, Deputy Chief of Police

Unit 014: Police Recruit

ARTICLE 3 COMMENCEMENT OF NEGOTIATIONS

It is mutually agreed that the first meeting of the parties will be held no later than twenty
(20) calendar days after the City or Association receives notice from the other, which
may be any date after January 1 of the year in which the current contract terminates.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 1
ARTICLE 4 DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Memorandum of Agreement, words, phrases and terms used
herein shall be deemed to have the meanings specified in Section 2 - Definitions, of
Resolution No. 39367 of the Council of the City of San Jose and in Part 2 - Definitions,
of Chapter 3.04 of Title Ill of the San Jose Municipal Code unless it is apparent from the
text that a different meaning is intended.

ARTICLE 5 WAGES AND PREMIUM PAY

5.1

5.2

5.3

Effective December 22, 2013, all salary ranges for employees represented by the
POA shall be increased by approximately 4%.

Effective the first pay period in Fiscal Year 2014-15, all salary ranges for
employees represented by the POA shall be increased by approximately 3.33%.

Effective the first pay period in Fiscal Year 2015-16, all salary ranges for
employees represented by the POA shall be increased by approximately 3.33%.

A one-time non-pensionable lump sum payment equivalent to 2% of an
employee’s current annual base pay paid the pay period beginning January 5,
2014. This amount shall be pro-rated for employees hired after July 1, 2013.

Premium Pay

Compensation for the benefits referenced below, shall be calculated from the
eligible employee's base rate. In the event that an employee is eligible for more
than one such benefit, compensation for each shall be separately calculated from
the base rate and shall not be compounded. With the exception of canine pay,
employees shall not be eligible for any of the premium pays below when on paid
or unpaid leave for two full consecutive pay periods. The loss of premium shall
occur in the second consecutive pay period in which an employee reports 80
hours of “leave” that follows a pay period where the employee reported 80 hours
of leave. In this case, the employee would not receive premium pay in the
second consecutive pay period where 80 hours of leave were reported and the
loss of premium pay shall continue until the pay period the employee returns to
work.

For example, if an employee received 160 hours of consecutive paid leave in two
consecutive pay periods and would regularly receive premium pay while on
regular paid time, he/she would only receive premium pay for the first eighty
hours and would not receive any premium pay beyond the initial eighty hours for
any consecutive full pay periods that the employee continues on leave.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 2
5.3.1 Bomb Squad

Each employee regularly assigned to the "Bomb Squad" on a full-time
basis and who is responsible for disarming bombs and similarly fused
explosive devices shall be paid an amount equivalent to a one-step
increase under the biweekly pay plan during each biweekly period of
such assignment.

5.3.2 Canine Officers

5.3.2.1 Each employee in the classification of Police Officer, Police
Sergeant, and Police Lieutenant who is assigned to the
duty of feeding, caring for and supervising police dogs,
which duty is performed by the employee at his/her home
and during hours when he/she is otherwise not on duty
with the Police Department, and to each employee in the
classification of Police Sergeant who is assigned the duties
of coordinating the BFO Canine Unit, shall be paid an
amount equivalent to a one-step increase under the
biweekly pay plan during each biweekly period of such
assignment.

5.3.2.2 Such additional compensation shall not be paid for any
biweekly period or portion thereof when such additional
duty is not performed by the employee, whether for the
reason that the dog assigned to such employee is boarded
at the kennel at City expense or otherwise.

5.3.2.3 This additional compensation is granted in recognition of
the personal monetary investment, duties and
responsibilities of the K-9 assignment including the time
spent by the unit employee while on or off duty in the care
and maintenance of the assigned canine. This extra
compensation is not to be considered premium pay. The
City shall pay costs associated with the “Initial Basic
Training of Handler and K-9" when an officer is assigned to
canine duty.

5.3.3 Motorcycle Duty Pay

Each employee in the classification of Police Officer, Police Sergeant,
and Police Lieutenant who is assigned to duty that customarily requires
the employee to ride a two-wheel motorcycle during all or a portion of
the hours when he/she is on duty with the Police Department, shall be
paid an amount equivalent to a one-step increase under the biweekly

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 3
pay plan during each biweekly period of such assignment, in addition
to the salary fixed and established for said class title and number.

Such additional compensation shall not be paid to any person for any
biweekly pay period during which the employee is assigned to said
duty for less than one-half (1/2) of the working days of the employee in
such biweekly pay period.

5.3.4 Training Officer Duty Pay

Each employee in the classification of Police Officer or Police
Sergeant, who is assigned by the Chief of Police to perform, and does
perform, the duties of a Training Officer shall receive an amount
equivalent to a one-step increase under the biweekly pay plan during
each biweekly period of such assignment, in addition to the salary fixed
and established for said classification.

5.2.4.1 An employee who is assigned by the Chief of Police on a
temporary basis to perform Training Officer duties, shall
receive an amount equivalent to a one-step increase under
the biweekly pay plan for all hours actually worked
performing such duties.

5.3.5 MERGE Unit

Each employee in the classification of Police Officer, Police Sergeant,
and Police Lieutenant, who is regularly assigned to the Mobile
Emergency Response Group & Equipment, shall be paid an amount
equivalent to a one-step increase under the biweekly pay plan during
each biweekly period of such assignment.

5.3.6 Premium Pay While on Disability Leave

An Officer on disability leave for two full consecutive pay periods shall
not receive any premium pay for which they are eligible. The loss of
premium shall occur in the second consecutive pay period in which an
employee reports 80 hours of “leave” that follows a pay period where
the employee reported 80 hours of leave. In this case, the employee
would not receive premium pay in the second consecutive pay period
where 80 hours of leave were reported and the loss of premium pay
shall continue until the pay period the employee returns to work.

For example, if an employee received 160 hours of consecutive
disability leave in two consecutive pay periods and would regularly
receive premium pay while on regular paid time, he/she would only
receive premium pay for the first eighty hours and would not receive

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 4
any premium pay beyond the initial eighty hours for any consecutive
full pay periods that the employee continues on leave.

Once the Officer is capable of returning to work, but in a job
assignment not having a premium pay status, he/she shall also no
longer be entitled to such premium pay. However, such Officer shall
have the right to return to the previous pay status, at the first available
opening in the assignment he/she left, once such Officer is available to
return to such position. An Officer wrongfully refusing to take such
“light duty" (non-premium pay) assignment may also be denied the
premium pay by the City. Prior to ending the premium pay status of an
employee wrongfully refusing to accept a light duty assignment, the
City shall inform the Organization and give the Organization an
opportunity to communicate with such employee.

5.3.7 Mounted Unit

The City shall provide feed for the horses in the mounted unit, as well
as the shoes and shoeing for the horses.

5.3.8 Air Surveillance Unit

Employees assigned to the air surveillance unit shall be entitled to
standby pay when ordered to stand by. Each employee when
assigned to the Air Surveillance Unit shall be covered by a City
provided $250,000 life insurance policy, which shall cover aerial
photography and aerial surveillance.

5.3.9 Bilingual Pay

Each full time employee who meets the eligibility requirements set forth
herein shall be compensated at the rate of $29.00 per biweekly pay
period for each pay period actually worked.

5.3.9.1 The employee is or was selectively certified for a position
which has been approved by the Director of Human
Resources for selective certification based on Spanish-
English bilingual ability or Vietnamese-English bilingual
ability and is currently assigned to such position, or

5.3.9.2 The duties currently assigned to an employee and/or
currently being performed by an employee require
utilization of Spanish and/or Vietnamese on a regular
basis, to be determined and approved by the Director of
Human Resources.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 5
5.3.9.3 Such employee must be certified as bilingual according to
the current established procedure. Before changing the
current procedure, the City agrees to discuss any proposed
change with the Organization.

5.3.9.4 If the Chief of Police determines that another foreign
language is required in his/her department subject to the
above criteria, he/she may recommend that the employee
receive bilingual pay.

5.3.10 Anti-Terrorist Training Pay

5.3.10.1 Effective March 22, 2009, the 5% Anti-Terrorist Training
pay will be rolled into base pay in recognition of the
additional training that all employees represented by the
POA receive related to Police Anti-Terrorist Tactics.
Employees must successfully complete the Police
Department's annual Police Anti-Terrorist Tactics training
each year as a condition of continued employment. There
shall be no additional compensation for the completion of
Anti-Terrorism Training.

ARTICLE 6 PER DIEM EXPENSE

The City shall provide suitable lodging or reimburse lodging expenses incurred pursuant
to current reimbursement rates for employees assigned to mutual aid, riot, or civil
demonstration, where employees are required to remain overnight. The City shall
provide meals or reimburse for meals pursuant to current reimbursement rates for
employees assigned to mutual aid.

ARTICLE 7 EDUCATION INCENTIVE AND REIMBURSEMENT
7.1 Education Incentive

7.11 The City agrees to pay each person who is awarded the Intermediate
Certificate given by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and
Training of the State of California additional compensation equal to the
difference between his/her salary and the salary that is specified in the
City's biweekly Salary Schedule at his/her salary rate in the salary
range that is approximately five (5%) percent higher than his/her salary
range for each biweekly pay period for which he/she is entitled to
receive a salary under the provisions of this Agreement from and after
the first day of the biweekly pay period following the earliest of either:

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 6
a) He/she files with the Finance Department that he/she has been
awarded the Intermediate Certificate from the Commission on
Peace Officer Standards and Training, or

b) Sixty (60) days after the Police Department certifies and informs the
Finance Department that the person has completed all of the
requirements for the Intermediate Certificate and the application for
the Intermediate certificate has been filed with the Commission on
Peace Officer Standards and Training.

1. Proof of Intermediate Certificate must be submitted to
the Finance Department as soon as it has been
received.

2. If within (180) days of the Police Department certifying
and informing the Finance Department that the person
has completed all of the requirement for the
Intermediate Certificate and the application has been
filed with the Commission on Peace Officer Standards
and Training proof is not filed with the Finance
Department that said Intermediate certificate has been
awarded or if it is determined by the Commission on
Peace Officer Standards and Training that the person is
ineligible for the Intermediate Certification, any
compensation provided pursuant to this agreement
shall be terminated and he/she will be required to repay
to the City all compensation awarded pursuant to this
agreement and any future compensation required by
this agreement will start from and after the first day of
the biweekly pay period following the filing of proof with
the Finance Department that he/she has been awarded
said Intermediate Certificate. Once a determination is
made that a repayment is due to the City, the full
amount shall be due and payable to the City. Should an
employee not make immediate payment in full any
amounts due and payable will be deducted pursuant to
Section 11.3.

7.1.2 The City agrees to pay each person who is awarded the Advanced
Certificate additional compensation equal to the difference between
his/her salary and the salary that is specified in the City's biweekly
Salary Schedule at his/her salary range that is approximately seven
and one-half (7 1/2%) percent higher than his/her salary range for each
biweekly pay period for which he/she is entitled to receive a salary

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 7
under the provisions of this Agreement from and after the first day of
the biweekly pay period following the earliest of either:

a) He/she files with the Finance Department that he/she has been
awarded the Advanced Certificate from the Commission on Peace
Officer Standards and Training, or

b) Sixty (60) days after the Police Department certifies and informs the
Finance Department that the person has completed all of the
requirements for the Advanced Certificate and the application for
the Advanced certificate has been filed with the Commission on
Peace Officer Standards and Training.

1. Proof of Advanced Certificate must be submitted to the
Finance Department as soon as it has been received.

2. If within 180 days of the Police Department certifying and
informing the Finance Department that the person has
completed all of the requirement for the Advanced Certificate
and the application has been filed with the Commission on
Peace Officer Standards and Training proof is not filed with
the Finance Department that said Advanced certificate has
been awarded or if it is determined by the Commission on
Peace Officer Standards and Training that the person is
ineligible for the Advanced Certification, any compensation
provided pursuant to this agreement shall be terminated and
he/she will be required to repay to the City all compensation
awarded pursuant to this agreement and any future
compensation required by this agreement will start from and
after the first day of the biweekly pay period following the
filing of proof with the Finance Department that he/she has
been awarded said Advanced Certificate. Once a
determination is made that a repayment is due to the City,
the full amount shall be due and payable to the City. Should
an employee not make immediate payment in full any
amounts due and payable will be deducted pursuant to
Section 11.3.

7.1.3 Each person who, as of July 1, 1969, had been continuously employed
as a San Jose Police Officer for a period of ten (10) years or more,
who was awarded the Basic Certificate given by the Commission on
Peace Officer Standards and Training of the State of California on or
before February 15, 1970, and who, on or before March 1, 1970, filed
with the Director of Finance proof that he/she had been awarded said
Basic Certificate on or before February 15, 1970, shall be entitled to
the compensation provided in Section 7.1.1.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 8
7.2

7.1.5

7.1.4 A person holding a position in the classification of Police
Artist (2244) is entitled to benefits under this Article only if such person
is a sworn Police Officer.

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Article, no
person shall be entitled to receive additional compensation under the
provisions of more than one section of this Article, provided, however,
that in the event that any person would otherwise be entitled to such
additional compensation as is specified in two or more Sections,
he/she shall be paid such additional compensation at the highest rate
to which he/she is entitled, and no more.

Education Reimbursement

The Tuition Assistance policy as provided in (Section 4.3.1) of the City Policy
Manual of the City of San Jose shall be continued during the term of this
Memorandum of Understanding. In no event shall tuition received from this
program plus reimbursement from other educational incentive programs exceed
the total cost of tuition and books.

ARTICLE 8

8.1

INSURANCE BENEFITS

Health Insurance Coverage

8.1.1

8.1.2

8.1.3

Eligible employees may elect health insurance coverage under one of the
available plans for employee only or employee and dependents.

The City will pay eighty-five percent (85%) of the full premium cost of the
lowest cost plan for employee or for employee and dependent coverage
and the employee will pay fifteen percent (15%) of the premium for the
lowest priced plan for employee or for employee and dependent coverage.
If an employee selects a plan other than the lowest priced plan, the
employee shall pay the difference between the total cost of the selected
plan and the City’s contribution towards the lowest priced plan for
employee or for employee and dependent coverage.

A $25 Co-pay plan shall be implemented for all HMO plans, including the
following changes:

a. Office Visit Co-pay shall be increased to $25.

b. Prescription Co-pay shall be increased to $10 for generic and $25 for
brand name.

Emergency Room Co-pay shall be increased to $100.
Inpatient/Outpatient procedure copay shall be increased to $100.

a9

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 9
8.1.4 An employee may not be simultaneously covered by City-provided
medical benefits as a City employee, and as a dependent of another City
employee or retiree.

8.2 Dental Plan

8.2.1 The City will provide dental coverage for eligible full-time employees and
their dependents in accordance with one of the available plans. Copies of
each plan document shall be available upon request in the Human
Resources Department. This includes the payment by the City of any
increases in the premiums during the term hereof.

8.2.1.1 Effective during the term of this agreement, all active, eligible, full-
time employees and their dependents that have the Delta Dental
Plan may receive a lifetime maximum of $2,000 per eligible full-time
employee and their dependents for orthodontic coverage and a
maximum for dental coverage of $1,500 per calendar year.

8.2.2 The City will provide dental coverage in the lowest priced plan for eligible
full time employees and their dependents. If an employee selects a plan
other than the lowest priced plan, the City will pay ninety-five (95%)
percent of the full premium cost for the selected dental coverage for
eligible full time employees and their dependents and the employee shall
pay five (5%) percent of the full premium cost for the selected plan.

8.2.3 An employee may not be simultaneously covered by City-provided dental
benefits as a City employee, and as a dependent of another City
employee or retiree.

8.3 Payment-in-Lieu of Health and/or Dental Insurance Program

8.3.1 The purpose of the payment-in-lieu of health and/or dental insurance
program is to allow employees who have double health and/or dental
insurance coverage to drop the City's insurance and receive a payment-in-
lieu.

8.3.2 Employees who qualify for and participate in the payment in-lieu of health
and/or dental insurance program will receive the following per payperiod.

Health in-lieu Dental in-lieu
If eligible for family coverage $221.84 $19.95
If NOT eligible for family coverage $89.09 $19.95

8.3.3 A City employee who receives healthcare coverage as a dependent of
another City employee or retiree shall be deemed not eligible for family
coverage.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 10
8.3.4 The payment-in-lieu of health and/or dental insurance program is available
to full-time employees who are not on a reduced workweek or unpaid
leave and have alternate group health and/or dental coverage. To qualify,
an employee must provide proof of alternate group coverage to Human
Resources. Alternate coverage must be acceptable by the City.

8.3.5 Enrollment in the payment-in-lieu of health and/or dental insurance
program can only be done during the first thirty (30) days of employment,
during the annual open enrollment period or within thirty (30) days of a
qualifying event (as defined in the Human Resources Benefit Handbook)
occurring anytime during the year. Employees who fail to enroll in the
payment-in-lieu program during the thirty (30)-day time limit after a
qualifying event must wait until the next open enrollment period to enroll in
the payment-in-lieu of insurance program. The employee may cancel
enrollment in the payment-in-lieu of insurance program only during the
annual open enrollment period unless the employee loses alternate group
coverage. Enrollment or cancellation during the open enrollment period
will become effective the first pay period of the following calendar year.

8.3.6 Payments for the in-lieu insurance program will be discontinued if an
employee becomes ineligible for the program. An employee’s ineligible
status would include, but not be limited to, the following situations:
employment status changes from full to part time, employee is on an
unpaid leave of absence, employee is on a reduced work week, or
employee loses or does not have alternate insurance coverage. An
employee whose in-lieu payments are discontinued may enroll, if eligible,
in a health and/or dental plan during the next annual open enrollment
period.

8.3.7. If an employee loses alternate coverage, the employee may enroll in a
City health and/or dental plan outside of the open enrollment period. To
be eligible the employee must provide verification that alternate coverage
has been lost.

8.3.7.1 HEALTH INSURANCE: To enroll in a City health insurance plan
following loss of alternate coverage, the employee must pay all
unpaid premiums (City and employee contributions) and refund
any excess in-lieu-payments required to make the coverage
effective on the date when alternate coverage ceased. Re-
enrollment in the plan shall be in accordance with the carrier's
enrollment procedures.

8.3.7.2 DENTAL INSURANCE: Enrollment in a City dental insurance
plan following loss of alternate coverage will become effective the
first of the month following payment of two dental premiums

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 11
8.4

8.5

8.6

8.7

8.8

through the City’s payroll process. Re-enrollment in the dental
insurance plan shall not be retroactive.

Psychological Counseling

The City agrees to continue the Psychological Counseling Program with the
provider of services being subject to the approval of the Organization, with
maintenance of Doctor-Patient relationship, and with supplementary counseling
services available including an alcoholic counseling component. Service
provider shall meet insurance needs for City coverage.

The existing benefits to the members relative to the Doctor-Patient relationship,
as contained in the contract between the City and the current provider, shall be
maintained as a minimum.

Diagnostic Psychiatric Service

The City shall provide, when deemed required, diagnostic psychiatric service in
addition to the counseling described in 8.4 above.

Life Insurance

The City agrees to provide life insurance coverage in the amount of $10,000 for
each full-time employee who is eligible for and a subscriber to life insurance
benefits in accordance with the City’s self-insured plan.

8.6.1 Employees may apply to purchase additional Life Insurance coverage
in increments at the rate available to the City in amounts equal to 1x,
2x, 3x or 4x annual salary, not to exceed $750,000.

Physical Examinations

The City will provide adequate funding for the City Medical Services Division to
conduct recurring physical examinations every two years for employees age
forty-five (45) and over and every three years for employees under the age of
forty-five (45). Exams for affected employees will be current by the end of the
term of this Agreement.

Wellness and Lifecheck

The City agrees to provide $60,000 per year for the duration of this contract,
which will allow for the appropriate testing, re-check and specific counseling of all
persons represented by the bargaining unit. The City may change the present
provider after consultation with the Association.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 12
8.9

8.10

8.11

8.8.1 The parties agree that the Wellness and Lifecheck program will not be
funded for the term of this agreement. However, because this is a
matter of mutual value and benefit, the parties will examine reinstituting
this benefit for the subsequent MOA.

Critical Incident Stress Debriefing (CISD

The City agrees to provide adequate funding for the duration of this contract so
as to make available the necessary Critical Incident Stress Debriefing (CISD)
counseling utilizing the services of the present provider, except that the City may
change providers after consultation with the Association.

Inoculations and Immunization

If an employee while carrying out his/her duty is exposed to a contagious disease
the City agrees to pay the expense for inoculation and immunization for officer
and members of his/her family. The City further agrees to reimburse any officer
covered by one of the City's insurance programs any co-payment required for
inoculation and/or immunization required due to the exposure to a contagious
disease as a result of the officer carrying out his/her duties. Any applications for
the above are subject to the review and approval of the City on the basis of oral
and/or written evidence presented by the employee.

Hepatitis B: The City shall provide an inoculation/immunization program to all
sworn members for the Hepatitis "B" virus at no cost to the employee. This
program is in recognition of the fact that Police Officers are exposed to the
Hepatitis "B" virus and it is presumed that exposure is job related for purposes of
Workers' Compensation benefits.

ARTICLE 9 UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

9.1

9.2

9.3

Employees shall receive a uniform allowance not to exceed $675 annually.
Payment shall be made during the first two pay periods of each month, in the
amount of $28.12 per biweekly pay period. If an eligible employee is on unpaid
leave for a period of one (1) full pay period or more, the employee will not receive
uniform allowance pay for that period.

In the event new classifications are established during the term of this Agreement
and assigned to Representation Units 011, 012 and 013 which consist solely of
sworn personnel, such employees shall be paid an annual uniform allowance in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.

The City agrees to pay the prorated cost of replacement or repair for uniforms
damaged in the ordinary course of performance of regular job duties. Schedules
adopted by the City for such reimbursement shall be kept reasonably current.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 13
ARTICLE 10 PERSONAL PROPERTY REIMBURSEMENT

10.1

10.2

10.3

10.4

10.5

10.6

10.7

10.8

The City will reimburse any Officer for the repair and/or the prorata cost of the
replacement of personal property when such personal property is damaged or
destroyed in the performance of his/her duties; provided, however, the amount of
such reimbursement for items set forth in the City schedule covering personal
property reimbursement shall not exceed the amounts listed in the schedule.

The above-described schedule shall be kept reasonably current.

Personal rings and watches shall be included on the above described schedule
but the amounts shall be a subject of the 1983 contract negotiations and in the
absence of agreement shall be submitted to an arbitrator for decision as to the
amounts.

The above-described reimbursement shall not apply to any personal property
issued by the Department.

City may prohibit wearing or possession of jewelry other than watches and rings
(described above) and/or exclude reimbursement therefor, in the performance of
an Officer's duties.

These provisions shall not apply so as to require reimbursement for personal
property not normally associated with an employee's daily work activity.

Pending litigation on personal property reimbursement shall be dismissed. Such
dismissal shall be without prejudice. Provided, however, so long as the
provisions of this agreement are in effect, the reimbursement hereunder shall be
the exclusive remedy and the Organization, on behalf of its members, waives any
and all claims for personal property reimbursement under Labor Code Section
2802 so long as the provisions of this agreement are in effect and Organization
members are permitted to seek reimbursement in accordance herewith.

Any claims paid for personal property reimbursement in connection with pending
litigation are in full satisfaction of such claims.

ARTICLE 11 PAYCHECKS

11.1

City Finance Department shall make paychecks available by 1030 hours on the
day of distribution; provided, however, there will be no penalty in the event that
some unforeseen problem delays distribution. In such event, the Finance
Department will make every reasonable effort to make paychecks available as
soon after 1030 hours as possible.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 14
11.2

11.3

Employees may at their option, file with the Finance Department appropriate
written instructions for the automatic deposit of their pay checks which
instructions may be amended at such times as the Finance Department
determines are reasonable.

Overpayment Payback

Any appropriate payback process from any employee to the City shall be in the
same amount and at the same rate in which the overpayment occurred. This
provision does not create a right of appeal where one did not exist before.

ARTICLE 12 WORKING IN A HIGHER CLASSIFICATION

12.1

12.2

Upon specific assignment by the Chief of Police, or his/her designated
representative, an employee may be required to perform the duties of a higher
classification. Such assignments shall be made only to existing authorized
positions that are not actively occupied due to the temporary absence of the
regularly appointed employee. Such assignments shall not be made to vacant
positions except in accordance with the rules pertaining to temporary or
provisional appointments.

Employees specifically assigned to duties of a higher classification shall be
compensated at the rate in the salary range of the higher class which is at least
one salary rate (step) higher in the salary range schedule than the rate received
by the employee in the employee's present class, provided, however, that the
employee shall not receive any compensation unless the assignment is for ten
(10) consecutive work days, or eight (8) consecutive work days for employees
assigned to a ten-hour day/four-day per week work schedule, or longer. In the
event the assignment is for such period of time specified above, the employee
shall be compensated at the appropriate rate commencing with the first work day
of the assignment.

ARTICLE 13 HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME

13.1

13.2

13.3

The work period shall be fourteen (14) days and shall coincide with the pay
period commencing at 12:01 A.M. Sunday and ending at 12:00 Midnight
Saturday of the following week.

The workday, for pay purposes, shall be a twenty-four (24)-hour period
commencing with the beginning of the employee's regularly scheduled shift.

Except for employees assigned to four days of ten-hour shifts, and employees
assigned to five/eight-hour shifts other than Monday through Friday, the normal
work schedule shall be forty (40) hours per week, consisting of five (5)

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 15
13.4

13.5

consecutive days of eight (8) hours each, Monday through Friday. Shifts other
than the ten-hour shift shall be exclusive of a lunch period.

Employees assigned to a five/eight-hour shift schedule shall be given two (2)
consecutive days off and employees assigned to a four/ten-hour shift shall be
given three (3) consecutive days off even though such days off are in different
work weeks except where due to a change in the employee's work schedule, it is
impossible to provide two or three consecutive days off, whichever is applicable.

The present four/ten workweek shall continue during the term of this Agreement
unless mutually changed by the parties.

13.5.1

13.5.2

13.5.3

However, the Department, in its discretion, may change the following
units to a five/eight workweek:

A. BFO Administrative Unit F. Reserves

B. School Safety G. Training

C. Crime Prevention H. Video

D. Traffic Investigation |. Explosive Control
E. P.AL. J. Captains

In addition, modified duty non-uniformed assignments may be changed
to a five/eight-hour schedule, unless they are assigned to one of the
units listed in Section 13.5.1, whereupon their shift may be changed
with the rest of that unit.

Alternate Work Week

As an alternative to the normal five-day/eight-hour work schedule for
employees outside of the Bureau of Field Operations, in accordance
with Article 13.4 and subject to the concurrence and approval of the
Chief or the Assistant Chief, a regular full-time employee may elect to
work an alternate work schedule. The following conditions and
restrictions shall apply to all employees electing an alternate schedule.

13.5.3.1 An employee may elect to establish a biweekly work
schedule which varies from the normal schedule in the
number of hours worked per day and in the number of days
worked per week, except that no single workday may
exceed ten (10) hours, and total scheduled hours may not
exceed eighty (80) hours in any biweekly pay period.
Alternate schedules shall not include paid lunch periods.
The employee may elect a different schedule for each
calendar week within a biweekly pay period.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 16
13.5.3.2

13.5.3.3

13.5.3.4

13.5.3.5

13.5.3.6

13.5.3.7

13.5.3.8

No alternate work schedule may be established in which
overtime is incurred either under this Agreement or under
federal or state law. Alternate work schedules may be
canceled if overtime or sick leave balances adversely
affect the service level, operation, or budget of a unit.

The alternate schedule is designed to accommodate the
needs of the employee and the work unit. Once elected
and approved, it is intended to continue for an indefinite
period. However, should the needs of the employee or
work unit dictate, the alternate schedule may be terminated
with reasonable notice.

If one or more employees’ request to establish an alternate
workweek is denied, or if an alternate schedule is
canceled, Association shall have the right to meet with the
Assistant Chief to appeal the decision. The decision of the
Assistant Chief shall be final.

Any alternate work schedule shall terminate upon the date
of the transfer, promotion, or demotion of the employee.

Neither the failure of the Department to enter into an
alternate work agreement, nor the termination by the
Department of any such agreement shall be subject to the
Grievance Procedure in Article 25; provided, however, that
if alternate work agreements have been terminated on a
Bureau-wide basis, such action shall be subject to the
grievance procedure.

Consecutive days off may be waived by mutual agreement.

Should the employee have a scheduled court appearance
or any other scheduled requirement to work on his/her
scheduled day off, the employee will adjust his/her
workweek to include the days as part of his/her workweek.

13.6 An employee authorized or required to work overtime who works in excess of
eight (8) hours per day, or ten (10) hours per day if assigned to a work schedule
of four/ten-hour work days, or in excess of forty (40) hours per workweek, shall
be compensated at the rate of time and one-half the employee's base hourly rate,
except when such excess hours result from a change in such employee's
workweek or shift or from the requirement that such employee fulfill his/her
workweek requirement. Except as otherwise required by Article 14, no overtime
compensation shall be paid for overtime worked which does not exceed thirty

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 17
(30) minutes per day. Overtime worked which exceeds thirty (30) minutes in any
work day shall be compensated to the nearest half-hour.

13.6.1 | An employee assigned to work overtime may either request to be paid
for such overtime worked or be credited with compensatory time,
provided that the employee makes such election during the pay period
in which the over time is worked, and provided further, that in the event
the employee requests payment for such over time, the applicable
budget for the Department may accommodate such payment. Payment
for overtime worked, authorized pursuant to this paragraph, shall be
made as soon after the pay period in which the overtime is worked as
practical, but in no event longer than two pay periods after the pay
period in which the overtime is worked.

13.6.1.1 Employees assigned to “pay cars” and/or assigned to work
on overtime in the programs noted herein shall be paid in
cash for such overtime worked. The City reserves the right
to modify the listed functions as necessary.

Entertainment Zone

Downtown Services Detail

Truancy Abatement and Burglary Suppression Program
Project Crackdown

Hazardous Escorts

Programs with Specific Funding Sources (i.e. grant-
funded or fee-supported programs)

13.6.2 The outstanding amount of accrued compensatory time owed to an
employee shall not exceed 240 hours by the end of each calendar
year. An employee may exceed the 240 limit during the year but shall
be responsible for bringing the balance back to the 240 hour maximum
level by taking the time off prior to the end of the calendar year. This
time off must be pre-approved by the supervisor.

13.6.2.1 In the event the outstanding amount of accrued
compensatory time owed to an employee exceeds 480
hours, the employee will automatically receive payment for
any hours in excess of 480 hours.

13.6.3. Once compensatory time off has been approved and scheduled, the
employee shall be permitted to take such time off, unless emergency
circumstances necessitate cancellation of such scheduled time off. In
such event, the employee will remain credited with the compensatory
time canceled.

13.6.4 Except as provided in Section 13.6.5 below, overtime worked by the
employee for compensatory time shall remain compensatory time to be

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 18
taken, subject to provision 13.6.2 and 13.6.3 above, so long as the
employee continues his/her employment in a classification represented
by the Organization. Any employee whose employment is terminated
by reason of resignation, discharge, or retirement, and who, at the time
thereof has accrued unused compensatory time, shall be paid for such
time at the appropriate rate. In the event of the death of an employee
who has accrued unused compensatory time, the appropriate payment
shall be made to the executor of the will, the administrator of the estate
or other representative, as authorized by law.

13.6.5 Notwithstanding the provisions of section 13.6.4 above, the City shall
have authority to require employees to immediately take time off to
reduce the outstanding amount of accrued compensatory time off
above the 240 hour maximum level, with the following exceptions:

13.6.5.1 If an employee is unable to reduce his/her comp-time
balance to 240 hours by the end of the last pay period of the
calendar year, by December 1 of that year, an employee
shall submit a written plan to his/her immediate supervisor
outlining how the excess hours will be reduced. If the
employee submits a plan by that date, the employee shall
receive a ninety (90) day carryover (to March 31 of the next
calendar year) of any accrued compensatory time hours
above the 240 hour maximum level. The plan shall include
the reason(s) for the carryover need and plan of action to
bring the compensatory time balance back into compliance
by March 31.

13.6.5.2 If an employee’s compensatory time balance is above the
240 maximum level at the end of the last pay period of the
calendar year and the employee complied with the provision
of subsection 13.6.5.1 above but earned additional
compensatory time hours above those previously identified
for a ninety (90) day carryover or the employee did not
submit a carryover plan because his/her compensatory time
balance was at or below the 240 maximum level at the time
the carryover plan was due for submittal; the employee shall
submit either an amended or new plan to his/her immediate
supervisor by the end of the first pay period of the new
calendar year outlining how the excess hours will be
reduced. If the employee submits the amended or new plan
within the specified timeline, the employee shall receive a
ninety (90) day carryover (to March 31 of the new calendar
year) of any accrued compensatory time hours above the
240 hour maximum level. The plan shall include the
reason(s) for the carryover need and plan of action to bring

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 19
the compensatory time balance back into compliance within
the ninety (90) day time frame.

13.6.5.3 If emergency circumstances necessitate that an additional
sixty (60) days (beyond the limits set forth in provision
13.6.5.1) is needed for an employee to bring his/her
compensatory time balance into compliance with provision
13.6.2, the employee shall submit a written request to the
Chief of Police, again outlining the reason(s) for the
carryover need and plan of action to bring the compensatory
time balance back into compliance. The approval of this
request shall be at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

13.6.5.4 No employee shall be required to reduce his/her individual
number of accrued hours of compensatory time below 240
hours without the approval of the individual employee.

13.6.6 | Supervisory approval or disapproval of compensatory time off shall be
based on scheduling and staffing needs and not on an individual's
reason for seeking to use the compensatory time.

13.6.7 The City reserves the right to buy down any employee's outstanding
balance of compensatory time, subject to the provision of subsection
13.6.5.3. Such buy down shall be uniform, by percentage, as to all
employees within a bureau.

13.6.8 Disability Leave and Overtime

An employee who has taken approved time off during his/her regularly
scheduled shift for medical appointments, treatment or therapy for an
industrial or non-industrial injury or illness shall not be entitled to count
said hours taken for such appointment, treatment or therapy as hours
worked for the purposes of entitlement to overtime unless said
employee is required by the Chief, or his/her designee, to work
unscheduled, unplanned hours of an emergency nature (similar to a
departmental holdover) or when the department issues a specific order
to an employee on the day of his/her scheduled appointment,
treatment, or therapy.

13.6.9 Deputy Chief Executive Leave

The classification of Deputy Chief is excluded from receiving paid
overtime or accruing compensatory time off for hours worked in excess
of eight (8) hours per day or forty (40) hours per week. In lieu of
receiving paid overtime and compensatory time off, Deputy Chiefs are
entitled to forty (40) hours of Executive Leave per calendar year.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 20
Executive Leave is not an accrued benefit, and may not be carried
over to future calendar years. (Note: the calendar year begins the first
day of pay period 1 and ends the last day of pay period 26.)

13.6.9.1 The Chief of Police may recommend to the City Manager
or his/her designee additional hours of Executive Leave for
Deputy Chiefs per the provisions of the Management
Performance Program (City Policy Manual, Section 3.3.2).

ARTICLE 14 COURT CALL-IN, APPEARANCE, COURT RECESS AND CALL
BACK PAY
14.1 An employee who has completed his/her scheduled work shift and who has left

14.2

14.3

14.4

14.5

the premises and is subsequently called back to work, shall be compensated for
the actual hours worked at the appropriate rate or three (3) hours at the
appropriate rate, whichever is greater. However, no employee shall be entitled to
more than one three-hour minimum for call back per workday.

An employee who is required to report to work prior to the beginning of his/her
scheduled shift, or who is required to work subsequent to the end of his/her
scheduled shift, shall receive overtime compensation as set forth in Section 13.6
hereof.

Any employee who as part of the assigned duties is required to appear in court
shall be compensated as follows:

14.3.1 If the court appearance is required at a time prior to the beginning of
the employee's scheduled work shift, the employee shall receive the
appropriate rate for the time spent, or two (2) hours at the appropriate
rate, whichever is greater.

14.3.2 If the court appearance is required on an employee's scheduled day
off, the employee shall receive three hours compensation at the
appropriate rate or the hours actually spent, whichever is greater.

As a declaration of existing rights and obligations, the City shall continue to
compensate a member, testifying or available to testify in court for any break in
the trial session, including but not limited to lunch periods at the approved
compensation rate.

Optional Court Call-in Procedure for Misdemeanor Jury Trial Notification

 

14.5.1 Officers who are notified to appear in court for misdemeanor jury trials
shall have available the option of calling a voicemail system at the
District Attorney's Office after twelve o'clock noon on the day of the

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 21
14.6

14.7

specified notice, to determine the status of the case prior to having
actually to appear in court. If an officer chooses to utilize this optional
call-in process, he/she will automatically receive a total of one (1)
hour's compensation at the 1.5 rate if he/she is not required to appear
in court on the noticed date.

14.5.2 If an officer chooses not to utilize the call-in option described above,
he/she simply fulfills the obligation to appear in court on the date and
time listed on the notice and receives the appropriate overtime
compensation.

For personnel assigned to specialized units, work shifts may be altered without
incurring overtime when notice of the adjustment in scheduled hours of work is
provided at least 48 hours in advance of the adjustment.

14.6.1 Whenever personnel in specialized units are given less than 48 hours
notice of an adjustment in work schedule, the shift may be altered by up to
two (2) hours without additional payment to the employee. Whenever
shifts are altered with less than 48 hours notice, employees shall receive
time and one half the employee’s base hourly rate for every hour beyond
the two-hour alteration allowed by this Article. This provision shall not
apply in the event of an emergency which includes, but is not limited to,
disasters, civil unrest, or major demonstrations.

For personnel assigned to beat patrol, work shifts may be altered by up to two (2)
hours without incurring overtime for pre-planned/scheduled events.

14.7.1 Altered watch hours for pre-planned/scheduled events shall only occur a
maximum of twice per six (6) month shift change (for a total of four (4)
times per year.) The Department shall provide notice of altered watch
hours in writing thirty (30) days in advance of the adjustment.

14.7.2 Whenever shifts are altered with less than thirty (30) days notice,
employees shall receive time and one half the employee’s base hourly
rate for every hour outside of their normal shift.

ARTICLE 15 STANDBY DUTY

15.1

Employees assigned to the sections noted herein and who are regularly required
to perform standby duty shall be eligible for standby compensation in accordance
with 15.3.

1. The Sexual Assault Investigations Unit.
2. The Homicide Detail
3. The Crime Scene Unit

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 22
15.2

15.3

4. The Bomb Squad
5. Air Surveillance (See Section 5.2.8)
6. Internal Affairs

Employees not assigned to a unit listed in 15.1 shall be eligible to receive
standby compensation in accordance with 15.3 if the employee is explicitly
directed by the employee’s supervisor to perform standby duty.

An employee performing standby duty in accordance with section 15.1 or 15.2
shall be credited with two (2) hours compensation at the appropriate rate for such
standby duty performed on a regularly assigned work day and three (3) hours
compensation at the appropriate rate for such standby duty assigned on regularly
scheduled days off. Such compensation shall be provided as set forth in Section
13.6 of this Article. If the employee on standby is called back to work, callback
pay (as provided in Article 14.1) shall be paid in lieu of standby pay.

ARTICLE 16 CITY RIGHTS AND CHARTER RIGHTS

16.1

Neither party concedes or relinquishes its rights under Charter Section 1111.

Such rights include the ability by the City, for example, to propose a change in
terms and conditions of employment not otherwise covered by the Agreement
and to seek such change pursuant to Charter Section 1111.

In addition, the City reserves its rights to determine matters outside the scope of
representation.

Thus, except to the extent that Section 1111 of the Charter of the City of San
Jose grants rights to the parties herein, and except to the extent that rights are
specifically limited by the provisions of this Agreement, the City retains all rights,
powers and authority granted to it or which it has pursuant to law or other
provisions of the City Charter including, but not limited to: the right to direct the
work force; increase, decrease or reassign the work force; hire, promote,
demote; discharge or discipline for cause; or reclassify employees; provide merit
increases; assign employees overtime and special work requirements, and to
determine the necessity, merits, mission and organization of any service or
activity of the City or any City Department Agency or Unit.

The City has the sole and absolute right to determine the nature and type of,
assign, reassign, revoke assignments of or withdraw assignments of, City
equipment, including motor vehicles, to or from employees during, after, or
before hours of duty, without consultation or meeting and conferring with the
employee affected or the San Jose Police Officers’ Association representing
such employee.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 23
ARTICLE 17

17.1

17.2

ASSIGNMENTS

It is recognized and agreed that the primary obligation of the Department is to
provide service of the highest quality to the public. The right to assign personnel
is inherent to providing such quality service.

Management also recognizes the desire of employees to periodically request
changes in work assignments. In March and September of each year, requests
for shift and beat assignments based on seniority shall be accepted from the
employees in the representation unit, subject to the rights of the Assistant Chief
of Police or in his/her absence his/her specifically designated representative to
deny such request if, in his/her opinion, the obligation of the Department to
provide the public with police service of the highest quality would not be fulfilled.

17.1.1

17.1.2

17.1.3

Any employee otherwise eligible to request a shift and beat
assignment as specified in paragraph 17.1 above whose request for
such assignment is denied, shall be entitled upon request to an
explanation of the denial from the Assistant Chief of Police or the
Assistant Chief's specifically designated representative. Such request
shall be made to the Assistant Chief or his/her specifically designated
representative within five working days following the denial.

In the event the matter is not resolved by the Assistant Chief or his/her
specifically designated representative, the employee may within five
(5) working days of the receipt of the Assistant Chief's decision appeal
to the Employee Relations Director by submitting a written request for
review. Within ten (10) working days following the receipt of the written
request for review, the Employee Relations Director or designee shall
hold a meeting with the employee and/or the appropriate employee
Organization representative. A written decision shall be given to the
employee and/or the appropriate employee representative within five
(5) working days following such meeting.

In the event that the matter is not resolved as a result of the meeting
referenced in 17.1.2 above, the employee may request a review by the
City Manager or his/her designated representative. Such request shall
be in writing and shall include the reason or reasons why the employee
is not satisfied with the decisions previously rendered. Within ten (10)
working days of the receipt of such written request for review, the City
Manager or his/her designated representative shall notify the employee
of the results of such review. The decision of the City Manager or
his/her designated representative shall be final and binding.

Administrative Special Assignments

The City agrees to provide reasonable advance notice of openings in areas of
Administrative Special Assignments, and the qualifying criteria required for

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 24
interested Police Officers. Officers shall be entitled to submit a memo indicating
interest in the position, and the Department thereafter can make the
Administrative Special Assignment(s) at its discretion.

17.2.1 It is understood and agreed that special circumstances and/or
requirements may preclude such notice and opportunity to apply. It is
understood and agreed that decisions pertaining to the assignment of
Administrative Special Assignment areas shall not be subject to
arbitration. It is the intent of the City to provide interested and qualified
Police Officers with the opportunity to serve in such Administrative
Special Assignment areas as may exist from time to time.

17.2.2. When a Police Officer ceases his/her employment, with the Police
Department either by resignation or Leave of Absence, other than
unpaid sick leave, and then returns as a full-time employee claiming all
past benefits and seniority, they are required to spend at least twelve
(12) months in the Bureau of Field Operations, in a basic beat patrol
function, prior to consideration for a special, administrative or regular
transfer to another assignment; provided, however, the Department
may assign such employee directly to an undercover assignment
under special circumstances.

ARTICLE 18 TRANSFER POLICIES
18.1 Police Officer Transfer Policy

18.2

Specialized assignment transfers of Police Officers shall be governed by the
Police Officer Transfer Policy, updated April 22, 2014, which is hereby
incorporated by this reference. Copies of that Policy shall be disseminated to Unit
Commanders, and to the Police Officers Association. A copy of the policy shall
be kept in the Police Department Personnel Unit.

Sergeants Transfer Policy

The transfer of Sergeants shall be governed by the Sergeants’ Transfer Policy
dated December 6, 2005, as modified by the parties, incorporated herein.
Copies of that policy shall be kept in the Police Department Personnel Unit.

ARTICLE 19 FULL UNDERSTANDING, MODIFICATION AND WAIVER

19.1

This Agreement sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties
regarding the matters set forth herein, and any or all prior or existing
Memorandum of Understanding, understandings and agreements, whether
formal or informal, are hereby superseded and terminated in their entirety.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 25
19.2

19.3

19.4

19.5

Existing benefits within the scope of representation, provided by ordinance or
resolution of the City Council or provided in the San Jose Municipal Code, or
provided in the Memorandum of Agreement shall be continued without change
during the term of this Agreement.

It is the intent of the parties that ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations
enacted pursuant to this Memorandum of Agreement be administered and
observed in good faith.

Although nothing in this Agreement shall preclude the parties from mutually
agreeing to meet and confer or negotiate on any subject within the scope of
representation during the term of this Agreement, it is understood and agreed
that neither party may require the other party to meet and confer or negotiate on
the subject matter covered herein. This provision shall not apply to matters
covered by the provisions entitled “Consolidated Arbitration," in the Grievance
Procedure herein.

The parties agree to re-open Article 18 of the agreement to address changes in
the Sergeants’ Transfer Policy.

ARTICLE 20 CONCERTED ACTIVITY

20.1

20.2

20.3

It is understood that:

Participation by any employee in this unit in a strike, work stoppage, or slow
down, or any other concerted activity which results in diminishing services
provided by employees in the representation unit, or the failure to perform
lawfully required work, shall subject the employee to possible disciplinary action
up to and including discharge.

Participation by any employee in picketing, which is otherwise unlawful, shall
subject the employee to disciplinary action up to and including discharge.

If the Employee Organization, its officers or its authorized representatives violate
20.1 above or tolerate the violation of 20.1 above and after notice to responsible
officers or business representatives of the Employee Organization, such officers
or business representatives fail to take prompt affirmative action as is within their
power to correct and terminate the conduct described in 20.1 above, in addition
to any other law, remedy or disciplinary action to which it may be subject, said
Organization may be subject to suspension or revocation of the recognition
granted to such Employee Organization by action of the Director of Employee
Relations; and the Director of Employee Relations may suspend or cancel any or
all payroll deductions payable to or on behalf of members of such Organization,
and prohibit or restrict the use of any City facility of any nature whatsoever and

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 26
prohibit or restrict access by said Officers or representatives to work or duty
stations of employees in the representation unit. Such action on the part of the
Director of Employee Relations shall not be subject to the provisions of Article
25, Grievance Procedure.

ARTICLE 21 POLICE VEHICLE
21.1 Vehicle Replacement

21.2

21.3

21.1.1 In determining when to replace police vehicles, including those
commonly referred to as "detective cars," the Department shall
evaluate the following factors:

a) Mileage on the vehicle;
b) Age of the vehicle;

c) Assessment by City mechanics as to the useful life remaining for
such vehicle;

d) Any concerns or comments voiced by officers operating such
vehicles; and

e) Practices in other law enforcement agencies regarding replacement
of similar vehicles.

21.1.2 The City agrees that in the replacement of vehicles usually referenced
as detective cars, such replacement vehicles shall include air
conditioning.

Police Vehicle Specifications

In the acquisition of new police patrol vehicles, the specifications currently used
by the City of Los Angeles or California Highway Patrol shall be followed by the
City insofar as is reasonably possible so as to provide vehicles reasonably safe
and suitable for patrol purposes.

Police Vehicle Parts
The City shall follow insofar as is reasonably possible the policy of the City of Los

Angeles or the California Highway Patrol pertaining to replacement parts or the
equivalent thereof.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 27
21.4

Police Vehicle Testing

All police patrol vehicles that have been damaged shall be inspected and tested
prior to return to duty status and a record shall be maintained setting forth the
approval for the return to duty and the persons testing the vehicle.

ARTICLE 22 LAYOFFS

22.1

22.2

22.3

Order of Layoff

When one or more employees in the same class in this bargaining unit is to be
laid off for lack of work, purposes of economy, curtailment of positions or other
reason, the order of layoff shall be as follows:

22.1.1 Provisional employees, in the order to be determined by the appointing
authority;

22.1.2 Probationary employees, in the order to be determined by the
appointing authority;

22.1.3. Permanent employees, in inverse order of seniority within the
classification being reduced, or in a higher class;

22.1.4 Permanent employees shall be given every opportunity for transfer to
other departments when layoff is pending.

Notice Requirements

Employees subject to the provisions of this Article 22 shall, wherever possible, be
given at least thirty (30) calendar days notice in writing prior to the effective date
of layoff. The appropriate employee organizations shall receive concurrent
notice, and upon written request within seven (7) calendar days after the notice is
given shall be afforded an opportunity to meet with the appropriate City
representatives to discuss the circumstances necessitating the layoff and any
proposed alternatives to such layoff.

Reassignment in Lieu of Layoff
In the event of layoff, any employee so affected may elect to:
22.3.1 Accept a position in a lateral or lower class, in which he/she has

previously served, provided he/she is otherwise qualified and is more
senior than the least senior employee in such lateral or lower class.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 28
22.4

22.5

22.6

22.3.2

22.3.3

Accept a vacant position in a lateral or lower class for which he/she
has the necessary education, experience, and training as determined
by the Director of Human Resources. An employee may also accept a
vacant position in a higher class, provided he/she has held permanent
status in such higher class, and further provided that the employee's
removal from the higher class was voluntary and occurred during
his/her most recent period of employment. Adverse decisions of said
Director regarding necessary education, experience, and training shall
be subject to the grievance procedure including arbitration. The
employee may file the grievance at Step Ill within ten (10) working
days of the date of being notified of the adverse decision.

Any employee entitled to an option noted above, which involves
assignment to a lower classification, may elect to be placed on layoff in
lieu of accepting such assignment to the lower class. In the event the
employee elects to be placed on layoff, such employee will only be
recalled to the classification from which he/she elected to be placed on
layoff or to any higher classification to which he/she may be entitled
pursuant to the provisions of this Article.

Definitions for Use in This Article

As used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall be defined as

follows:

22.4.1

22.4.2

22.4.3

22.4.4

Except as otherwise provided above, seniority shall be defined as the
length of continuous paid employment within any permanent class or
classes within the classified service of the City. Seniority shall be
retained but shall not accrue during any period of leave without pay,
except for authorized military leave.

A lower class shall mean a class with a lower salary range.

A position in a lateral class shall mean a position in a class with the
same salary range.

A position in a higher class shall mean a position in a class with a
higher salary range.

Except as otherwise provided herein, no employee shall be entitled to a position
in a higher class as a result of the application of the provisions of this Article.

Layoff Reinstatement Eligible List

22.6.1

The names of such persons laid off in accordance with the provisions
of this Article shall be placed upon a reinstatement eligible list in

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 29
22.7

22.6.2

22.6.3

22.6.4

22.6.5

inverse order of seniority; i.e., the person with the greatest seniority on
the reinstatement eligible list for the classes affected shall be offered
reinstatement when a vacancy exists in the affected class. In the
event the person refuses the offer of reinstatement, such person's
name shall be removed from the reinstatement eligible list unless such
person has reinstatement rights under the provisions of this Topic to a
higher class than the one in which the reinstatement is being refused.

In the event an employee accepts reinstatement to a lower class to
which he/she is entitled, such person's name shall remain on the
reinstatement eligible list for reinstatement to a lateral class provided
such person, except for lack of seniority, would have been otherwise
entitled to such lateral class at the time of the most recent layoff.

Any person who is reinstated to a class, which is the highest class to
which he/she would have been entitled at the time of layoff, shall have
his/her name removed from the reinstatement eligible list.

In the event a person on layoff cannot be contacted by the City through
usual and customary channels within ten (10) working days, such
person's name shall be removed from the reinstatement eligible list,
providing, however, that such person within the two-year period
specified herein may request that his/her name be replaced on the
reinstatement eligible list and such person's name may, in the sole
discretion of the Director of Human Resources, be returned to the
reinstatement eligible list.

In no event shall the names of any person laid off pursuant to the
provisions of this Article remain on a reinstatement eligible list for a
period longer than three years from the effective date of such person's
most recent layoff.

Reinstatement of Benefits

Upon reinstatement to any classification to which the employee is entitled
pursuant to the provisions of this Article, all benefits acquired by the employee
prior to his/her layoff shall also be reinstated. An employee shall not receive
credit for time spent on layoff in computing time for any benefit entitlement.

ARTICLE 23

HOLIDAYS

23.1 Effective June 28, 2009, all classifications represented by the POA shall receive
a 5.623% special pay adjustment in place of the holiday-in-lieu compensation.
Beginning June 28, 2009 and continuing thereafter, the holiday in-lieu
compensation shall cease to apply to all classifications represented by the POA.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 30
The 5.623% special pay adjustment shall be added to the general wage increase
effective on June 28, 2009, and shall not be compounded. It is expressly
understood that the 5.623% special pay adjustment is compensation for all
employees in classifications represented by the POA in lieu of holiday benefits.
There shall be no additional holiday compensation.

ARTICLE 24 DUES DEDUCTION

24.1

24.2

24.3

24.4

24.5

The City will deduct from the pay of each employee covered by this
Memorandum of Agreement, while such employee is assigned to a classification
included in a representation unit represented by the Organization, dues uniformly
required as a condition of membership, pursuant to the Employee Organization's
constitution and by-laws provided that the employee has signed an appropriate
Authorized Dues Deduction card. Such authorization shall be on a form
approved by the Director of Employee Relations. Payroll dues deductions shall
be in the amount certified to the Director of Employee Relations from time to time
by the designated Officer of the Employee Organization as regular monthly dues.

Deductions shall be made from wages earned by the employee for the first two
pay periods in each month for dues for the preceding month. The City will remit
to the designated officer of the Employee Organization the amounts so deducted
accompanied by a list of the employees for whom the deduction was made.

City will make available to the Organization a check reflecting the dues deduction
pursuant to the dues deduction provisions hereof on the Tuesday following the
Friday that paychecks are issued. Any adjustments to the amount transmitted
shall be made in a succeeding pay period and/or in a succeeding check to the
Organization.

Properly executed dues deduction authorization cards and an alphabetical list of
the additional employees authorizing the deduction shall be submitted to the
Director of Employee Relations on or before the Monday of the week preceding
the beginning of the pay period in which deductions are to be made. If, through
inadvertence or error, the City fails to make the authorized deduction or any part
thereof, the City shall assume no responsibility to correct such omission or error
retroactively.

It is expressly understood and agreed that the Employee Organization will refund
to the employee any union dues erroneously withheld from an employee's wages
by the City and paid to the Employee Organization. In the event the Employee
Organization fails to refund the dues erroneously withheld within a reasonable
period of time following notification, the City will make such refund and deduct
the amount from the amount due to the Employee Organization.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 31
24.6

24.7

The employee shall indemnify the City and hold it harmless against any and all
suits, claims, demands and liabilities that may arise out of or by reason of any
action that shall be taken by the City for the purpose of complying with the
foregoing provisions of this Article, or/in reliance on any list or certification which
shall have been furnished to the City under the above provisions.

Since the Organization is the exclusive representative of the bargaining unit, it
shall be the only employee organization entitled to dues deduction.

ARTICLE 25 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

25.1

25.2

25.3

Any dispute between the City and an employee, or, between the City and the
Employee Organization, regarding the interpretation or application of this
Memorandum of Agreement shall be considered a grievance. An employee may
file a grievance on his/her own behalf, or by the President of the Employee
Organization, or designated representatives.

Step |

25.2.1 An employee may present the grievance orally either directly or
through his/her Employee Organization representative to the
immediate supervisor within twenty-one (21) calendar days following
the event or events on which the grievance is based. The immediate
supervisor shall make whatever investigation is necessary to obtain the
facts pertaining to the grievance. Within twenty-one (21) calendar
days after receiving the oral grievance, the immediate supervisor shall
give the employee a reply.

25.2.2 If the employee is not satisfied with the reply of the immediate
supervisor, the employee may appeal the grievance to Step Il.

Step II

25.3.1 If the employee desires to appeal the grievance to Step Il, the
grievance shall be reduced to writing, on forms provided, and
presented to the Assistant Chief within five (5) working days following
the receipt of the immediate supervisor's oral reply. The Assistant
Chief may refer the grievance to the appropriate supervisor.

25.3.2 The written grievance shall contain a complete statement of the
grievance, and alleged facts upon which the grievance is based, the
reasons for the appeal, the remedy requested, and the sections of the
agreement claimed to have been violated, if any. The grievance shall
be signed and dated by the employee.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 32
25.4

25.5

25.3.3. The Assistant Chief or the appropriate supervisor to whom the
grievance has been referred may arrange a meeting between
himself/herself, the employee, and the appropriate Employee
Organization representative and attempt to resolve the grievance. In
any event the Assistant Chief, or designated representative, shall give
a written decision to the employee within twenty-one (21) calendar
days following receipt of the written appeal to Step II.

25.3.4 If the employee is not satisfied with the decision, the employee may
appeal the grievance to Step Ill.

Step Ill

25.4.1 If the employee desires to appeal the grievance to Step Ill, the
employee shall complete the appropriate appeal section of the
grievance form, sign the appeal, and present the grievance to the
Director of Employee Relations within five (5) working days following
receipt of the written decision at Step II.

25.4.2 Within ten (10) working days after receipt of the appeal to Step Ill, the
Director of Employee Relations or designee shall schedule a meeting
with the employee, the appropriate Employee Organization
representative, and the Assistant Chief or the appropriate supervisor to
discuss the matter. A written decision shall be given to the employee
or the appropriate Employee Organization representative within
twenty-one (21) calendar days following the meeting.

25.4.3 If the Organization is not satisfied with the decision of the Director of
Employee Relations, the appropriate representative of the
Organization may appeal the grievance to Step IV -- Arbitration.

Step IV__ Arbitration

25.5.1 If the grievance has been properly processed through the previous
steps of the procedure and not resolved, the appropriate Employee
Organization representative may appeal the grievance to Arbitration.
The appropriate Employee Organization representative shall notify the
Director of Employee Relations, in writing, within fourteen (14)
calendar days following receipt by the employee of the written answer
at Step Ill.

25.5.2 Within fourteen (14) calendar days following the receipt of the notice of
appeal to Step IV, a meeting shall be scheduled by the Director of
Employee Relations or designee with the appropriate Employee
Organization representative to prepare a joint statement of the issue,
or issues, to be presented to the arbitrator. If the parties are unable to

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 33
25.5.3

25.5.4

25.5.5

25.5.6

25.5.7

25.5.8

25.5.9

25.5.10

agree upon the issue, or issues, each party will prepare its statement
of the issue, or issues, and jointly submit the separate statement of
issue, or issues to the arbitrator for determination.

The parties may mutually agree upon the selection of the arbitrator or
shall jointly request the State of California Mediation and Conciliation
Service to provide a list of seven persons qualified to act as arbitrators.

Within five (5) working days following receipt of the above referenced
list, the parties shall schedule a meeting to select the arbitrator. The
right to strike the first name shall be determined by lot and the parties
shall alternately strike one name from the list until only one name
remains, and that person shall be the arbitrator.

The arbitrator shall hold a hearing on the issue, or issues, submitted,
or as determined by the arbitrator if the parties have not mutually
agreed upon the issue, or issues, and render a written opinion and
reasons for the opinion as soon after the hearing as possible. The
opinion shall be final and binding on both parties, and shall be limited
to the issue, or issues involved.

The opinion shall be sent to the Director of Employee Relations and to
the employee or appropriate representative of the Employee
Organization.

Except as hereinafter provided, each of the parties shall pay for the
time and expenses of its representatives and witnesses through all
stages of the arbitration procedure and shall contribute equally to the
fee and expenses of the arbitrator. The arbitrator's fee schedule,
whenever possible, shall be determined in advance of the hearing.

Witnesses who are employees and on duty at the time of scheduled
appearance shall be released from duty without loss of compensation
for the time required to testify. No overtime payments shall be made
because of scheduled appearances.

Individual grievants shall be released from duty without loss of pay for
the time of the arbitration hearing. One spokesperson shall be
permitted to be present without loss of compensation for grievances
filed by the Organization.

Arrangements for release time for grievant's witnesses shall, wherever
possible, be made with the Director of Employee Relations no later
than twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the scheduled hearing.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 34
25.5.11

25.5.12

The parties agree that the arbitrator shall not add to, subtract from,
change or modify any provision of this agreement and shall be
authorized only to apply existing provisions of this Agreement to the
specific facts involved and to interpret only applicable provisions of this
Agreement.

The parties agree that the time limits set forth herein are of the
essence of this procedure and are to be strictly complied with. Time
limits may be extended only by written mutual agreement of the
parties.

25.6 Immediate Arbitration

25.6.1

25.6.2

25.6.3

25.6.4

25.6.5

Any party may waive the grievance procedure time limits specified in
this Article and proceed to immediate arbitration in any case where the
party alleges that the other is threatening to take an action in violation
of the Agreement in so short a period of time as to disallow the party
from proceeding within the time limits of this Article. However, the
method of proceeding to Immediate Arbitration must be done
consistent with the following provisions.

The arbitration shall take place no earlier than the fifteenth day
following the request by the grieving party for such “Immediate
Arbitration," unless otherwise mutually agreed. During the two week
period (14 calendar days) immediately following the request for
Immediate Arbitration, the responding party shall have the opportunity
to attempt to resolve the dispute.

If the City is the responding party, the Chief of Police and the Director
of Employee Relations or their designated representatives, jointly, shall
have the opportunity to meet with or otherwise communicate with
appropriate Organization Representatives, in an attempt to resolve the
dispute.

Once the request for Immediate Arbitration is filed, the parties shall
(even though dispute resolution discussions are going on during the
two week period) attempt to agree upon a neutral arbitrator and to
obtain a date for arbitration hearing as soon as possible immediately
following the two week period.

The parties will attempt to have a standing list of available "Immediate
Arbitrators," but if no agreement on the standing list is reached, the
parties will obtain five arbitrators, by telephone if possible, from the
State Mediation and Conciliation Service. The first arbitrator available
to hear the matter following the two-week period shall be selected as
arbitrator. The order of contacting the potential arbitrators shall be

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 35
25.7

25.6.6

25.6.7

25.6.8

determined by lot unless mutually agreed otherwise. The parties are
free to mutually agree upon an immediate arbitrator through any other
process or agreement.

In any such case, the arbitrator selected to decide the dispute or
grievance shall have the full and equitable power to frame a decision,
including an order to the party initiating the dispute or grievance to
abide by the time limits provided in the Article, or a restraining order
against the party threatening the action or any other form of arbitration
order that would resolve the matter in an equitable and just manner.
However, the arbitrator may not add to, subtract from, change or
modify any provision of this Agreement and shall be authorized only to
apply existing provisions of this Agreement to the specific facts
involved and to interpret only applicable provisions of this Agreement.

Unless the parties agree otherwise, closing arguments shall be
presented orally and there shall be a "bench" decision.

The parties shall attempt to have the arbitration proceedings
completed as quickly as possible, including by meeting nights and
weekends, if at all possible.

Consolidated Arbitration

25.7.1

25.7.2

If a matter goes to arbitration, and an arbitrator determines that the
dispute in question is not otherwise covered by this Agreement, but
would be subject to the provisions of Section 1111 of the Charter of the
City of San Jose, then the same arbitrator serving as the neutral
arbitrator and chairperson shall convene a three member Board of
Arbitrators and shall have the same authority as if selected as the
neutral arbitrator under Charter Section 1111. The non-neutral
members of the Board shall be chosen as provided in Section 1111.
The Board shall conduct “mediation/arbitration.". The Parties
contemplate the sort of "“mediation/arbitration" as the process is
traditionally used in the San Francisco Bay Area. This process shall
constitute issue by issue, last best offer arbitration proceedings as
described in Charter Section 1111.

The parties herein contemplate eliminating the additional time and
expense that would occur if a separate arbitrator had to be chosen
under Section 1111 to hear/resolve the dispute in a separate
proceeding.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 36
25.8 Disciplinary Grievances

25.8.1

25.8.2

25.8.3

25.8.4

25.8.5

25.8.6

25.8.7

Employees in the bargaining unit shall only be disciplined for cause.
Discipline is defined to include those matters that are cognizable
before the Civil Service Commission plus disciplinary transfers.

Persons on probationary status (entry-level or promotional) may not
appeal under this agreement rejection on probation.

Letters of reprimand may be appealed under this section only to the
City Manager level.

Documented Oral Counselings (DOCs) retained by the Internal Affairs
Division may be appealed under this section only to the level of
Assistant Chief of Police. However, should a particular DOC be the
result of the Assistant Chief's having reduced a higher form of
discipline to a DOC with which the affected officer is still dissatisfied,
such DOC may be appealed to the level of the Chief of Police. DOCs
received for preventable, automobile accidents shall not be appealable
unless the officer contends that the accident was not preventable.

Nothing herein constitutes a waiver of rights of employees otherwise
granted by law (e.g., Government Code Sections 3300 et. seq.).

An employee challenging a suspension, demotion, dismissal or
disciplinary transfer shall have the option of choosing between the
dispute-resolution provisions of this Agreement, or appeal to the Civil
Service Commission. Any employee who wishes to preserve the right
of appeal to the Commission must comply with the time requirements
for filing such appeal as specified in the Civil Service Rules. Within
twenty (20) days of the date of a Notice of Discipline, the employee
may file an appeal with the Civil Service Commission or pursue the
grievance procedure or both. The grievance procedure shall begin at
Step IV Arbitration for this process. Immediate arbitration shall not

apply.

The employee shall confirm his/her election of remedies in writing to
the Director of Employee Relations. If the employee files an appeal to
the Civil Service Commission and also an appeal through the
grievance procedure of this Agreement within the required timelines,
the election of remedies must be made no later than 45 days from the
date of the Notice of Discipline. The election of remedies must also be
made prior to the submission of a request for a list of arbitrators and
prior to scheduling a Civil Service Commission appeal hearing. As
otherwise provided in this Agreement, for the matter to go to binding

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 37
arbitration, the Organization must agree (i.e., must be the party taking
the matter to arbitration.

25.9 General Provisions of Grievance Procedure

25.9.1.

25.9.2

25.9.3

25.9.4

25.9.5

25.9.6

25.9.7

Although grievances may be processed during normally scheduled
working hours, the employee Organization agrees that the time spent
by its designated representatives shall be kept to a reasonable
minimum and that no Employee Organization representative shall be
entitled to any additional compensation or premium pay for any time
spent in processing grievances outside such representative's regularly
scheduled hours. The Employee Organization also agrees that it will
not process grievances during periods of overtime.

Any grievance not filed or appealed within the time limits specified shall
be considered settled on the basis of the last disposition given. In the
event the grievance is not answered within the time limits set forth
herein, either the employee, where provided, or the appropriate
Employee Organization representative may appeal the grievance to
the next higher step within the time limits provided.

The Employee Organization agrees that it will not initiate or pursue any
other avenue of redress on any matter properly within the scope of
representation, except as otherwise provided by law under the
Doctrine of Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies, the Employee
Organization agreeing that it will not initiate or pursue any other
avenue of redress on any matter properly within the scope of
representation until the provisions of this Article, including arbitration,
have been utilized.

Working days as used in this Article shall be defined as the regularly
scheduled working days of the employee, or the authorized
representative of the Organization, filing or appealing the grievance
and the regularly scheduled working days of the appropriate
representative of the City responsible for replying to the grievance.

If an employee desires to file a grievance involving separation from
City employment pursuant to the application of Article 26, entitled
Leaves of Absence, the employee shall file the grievance in writing at
Step II within ten calendar days following the date of separation.

Any of the time limits specified in Steps | through Ill may be extended
by written mutual agreement of the parties.

No resolution of any grievance, as defined in Article 25, entitled
Grievance Procedure, shall be contrary to the provisions of the

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 38
Memorandum of Agreement. Copies of the resolution of all
grievances, including the grievance, shall be sent to the President of
the Organization.

25.9.8 It is understood and agreed that whenever a provision in this Article
refers to an employee filing a grievance, the Organization may file such
grievance either on the employee's behalf or on behalf of the
Organization. In such event the processing of the grievance shall
comply with all other provisions of the Grievance Procedure Article.

25.9.9 The Organization agrees to provide the City with a list of
representatives authorized to file grievances on behalf of the
Organization. Such list shall be kept current and shall contain no more
than five representatives in addition to the President of the
Organization.

25.9.10 If a party petitions to compel arbitration, then the prevailing party in
such litigation shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees. This
provision contemplates the prevailing party being either the petitioner
or respondent in such litigation, including those situations in which the
City is represented by the City Attorney's Office.

25.9.11 Nothing in the agreement between the City and the Organization shall
be construed so as to prevent the Organization from working out any
arrangement it chooses for the reimbursement or other payment by
members of its bargaining unit for the costs of any arbitration
proceeding involving a disciplinary grievance. The City shall have no
responsibility for collecting such amounts.

25.9.12 Whenever labor/management grievances are resolved by an
Employee Relations Office decision, arbitration or court action, the City
will transmit information regarding such resolution to all Unit
Commanders. If a matter is resolved by mutual agreement, then the
transmittal of information to all unit commanders shall be at
Management discretion.

ARTICLE 26 LEAVES OF ABSENCE

26.1 The appointing authority, or designated representative, may grant an employee a
leave of absence without pay for good and sufficient reason. Such leaves may be
extended by written request of the employee, subject to approval of the
appointing authority, or designated representative. Written requests for an
extension of a leave shall be submitted prior to the expiration of the leave.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 39
26.2

26.3

26.4

26.5

26.6

26.7

26.8

Except as provided in Section 26.5.4, no leave, or extension thereof, granted,
pursuant to the provisions contained herein shall exceed twelve (12) months.

Any leave granted pursuant to the provisions contained herein may be canceled
by the appointing authority by notice in writing mailed to the employee at the
employee's address on file in the Human Resources Department or such other
address as the employee may designate. Such notice shall be by registered
mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed not later than thirty (30) days
prior to the effective date of the cancellation of the leave.

Failure of the employee to return to work on the first scheduled work day after the
effective date of the cancellation, or on the first scheduled work day following the
expiration of a leave, shall be considered a voluntary resignation unless the
failure to return is due to extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the
employee.

Each employee who is granted a leave pursuant to the provisions of this Article
may, upon return from leave, elect one of the following options:

26.5.1 Accept a vacant position in the classification held at the time the leave
commenced, or

26.5.2 Accept a vacant position in a lower classification for which he/she is
qualified. In such event, the employee shall have upgrade rights to the
classification from which he/she elects reduction, or

26.5.3 Replace the least senior employee in the classification held at the time
the leave commenced, or

26.5.4 Continue the leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed
six (6) months.

Any employee who is absent without notification to his/her Chief of Police, or
other designated authority, for two (2) consecutive work shifts, shall be
considered a voluntary resignation unless the failure to report is due to
extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the employee.

Employees who have been separated from City service for failure to return from
leave, or failure to report and whose failure is determined to be the result of
extenuating circumstances beyond their control shall be reinstated.

The parties agree to implement the Federal and State Family Medical Leave
Acts.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 40
ARTICLE 27 ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE

An officer involved in any on-duty incident in which the officer causes serious bodily
injury or death, or involved in any other incident as determined by the Chief, shall be
placed on at least forty (40) consecutive hours of paid administrative leave (or other
paid leave, if applicable). Within the initial administrative leave period, the Department
and the officer shall meet, after which the leave may be extended at the option of the
Department.

ARTICLE 28 WEAPONS

28.1 The City shall supply every officer with one of the following weapons:
a) Sig Sauer semi-automatic pistol in model P225 or P226, or
b) Glock semi-automatic pistol in model G17 or G19.
If both pistols are available, officers will have choice between the two.

Officers who are currently issued a Smith & Wesson model 66, 3906 or 3913 as
a primary weapon may continue to carry the weapon as an option. Upon
termination of City service, any supplied weapon shall be returned to the City.

28.2 Officers who elect not to carry the City issued weapon may carry as their primary
weapon while on duty, at their own expense, the following weapons:

a. A semi-automatic pistol manufactured by Beretta, Glock, Sig Sauer, or
Smith & Wesson, in caliber 9mm, .40 caliber or .45 caliber, or a revolver
manufactured by Colt or Smith & Wesson in .38 caliber or .357 magnum
with a 4-6 inch barrel.

b. Those officers assigned to the MERGE unit, and those officers who (1)
carry it as their primary weapon as of December 6, 2005 or (2) are on the
Range supervisor’s official list for training to carry the 1911 O-Frame style
.45 caliber pistol thirty (30) calendar days after ratification of this MOA,
may choose to carry a 1911 O-Frame style .45 caliber pistol.

28.2.1 All officers who participate in either option must also purchase, at their
own expense, the holster and ammunition case for the selected
weapon.

28.2.2. All officers who participate in option (a) must attend and successfully
complete transition training under the direction of the Range Master.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 41
28.3

28.4

28.5

28.6

28.7

28.8

28.2.3. All officers who participate in option (b) must attend and successfully
complete the San Jose Police Department Range 10-hour training
course specifically designed for that weapon, must have satisfactorily
completed the MERGE or Training Unit handgun school, and must
qualify with that weapon on a semi-annual basis.

28.2.4 All officers who participate in either option are required to turn in their
City-issued semi-automatic pistol or revolver upon completion of their
transition training.

28.2.5 All weapons declared for use under either option must be inspected,
approved and registered with the Range Master prior to training.
These weapons must be standard factory production with no
modifications, unless the modification has prior approval from the
Range Master.

All officers may carry a semi-automatic pistol or revolver in .22, .25, .32, .380,
38, .357, .40, .45, or 9mm caliber for any plainclothes assignment, off duty, or as
a back-up weapon. All weapons must be approved by the Range Master prior to
use. All weapon barrels must be at least 1.75 inches in length. No officer may
carry a single-action only pistol unless that officer has successfully completed
training under the direction of the Range Master.

Any officer may carry a concealed secondary (back-up) weapon while on duty.
The secondary weapon may be any of the above listed weapons provided that
the officer has fulfilled those sections in the Department's Duty Manual regarding
range qualifications.

Any officer may carry while off duty any of the above-described weapons,
provided that the officer has fulfilled those sections in the Department's Duty
Manual regarding range qualifications.

Subject to all of the above restrictions of the Article, all officers, while assigned to
a plainclothes capacity, have the option of carrying any of the above-described
weapons.

The City acknowledges its responsibility to design and administer a training
program in the safe and effective use of firearms.

The City shall provide adequate rounds of ammunition for training and
qualification with weapons described in this Article.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 42
ARTICLE 29

AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVES

For purposes of administering the terms and provisions of the various ordinances,
resolutions, rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Memorandum of Agreement:

29.1 Management's principal authorized agent shall be the Director of Employee
Relations, or his/her duly authorized representative except where a particular
Management representative is otherwise designated.

29.2 The Employee Organization's principal authorized agent shall be the President of
the San Jose Police Officers’ Association, or his/her duly authorized
representative.

ARTICLE 30

VACATIONS

30.1 Each eligible full-time employee shall be granted vacation leave with pay in
accordance with the following:

30.1.1

30.1.2

30.1.3

30.1.4

Vacation Accrual. Each employee shall accrue a leave of absence
with full pay for vacation purposes, in the amount specified below for
each cycle of twenty-six (26) full biweekly pay periods immediately
preceding December 31st, or portion thereof, in each year of his/her
employment as specified below:

Hours of Vacation

 

Years of Service per 26 Pay Period Cycle
ist 5 years 80 hours

6th year - 10th year 120 hours

11th year - 12th year 140 hours

13th year - 14th year 160 hours

15th year or more 180 hours

Vacation Leave

Employees shall not be allowed to accrue vacation in excess
of two times their annual vacation accrual rate. Once the maximum
accumulation has occurred, vacation will cease to accrue until the
employee’s vacation balance has fallen under their maximum vacation
accrual amount.

Employees will only be allowed to use vacation that has already been
accrued.

Reimbursement for Unearned Vacation Leave

 

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 43
30.2

30.3

If the employment of any full-time employee should cease, and if
he/she should have taken more vacation leave than he/she had
accrued at the time of termination of his/her employment, there shall
be deducted from his/her final pay, or he/she shall refund to the City,
such pay as he/she shall have received for vacation leave theretofore
taken by him/her. The provisions of this Subsection 30.1.3 shall not
apply to any full-time employee whose employment by the City is
terminated by reason of the employee's death or entry into active duty
with any of the Armed Forces of the United States that is reasonably
likely to exceed one year in duration.

30.1.5 Payment for Unused Accrued Vacation Leave Upon Termination of
Employment

If the employment by the City of any full-time employee should cease,
he/she shall be given, at the time of such termination, full pay for any
vacation leave which he/she may then have accrued.

Vacation Leave

Any and all leaves granted pursuant to this Article shall be granted at such time
or times as will not reduce the number of employees below that which is
reasonably necessary for the efficient conduct of the public business of such
Department, except no employee who is authorized to take a leave for vacation
purposes shall be required to commence such leave at a time other than the
beginning of a work week, unless he/she elects or consents to commence such
leave at another and different time. Subject to the above provisions, preference
of vacation leave timing in any calendar year shall be given in order of seniority.
For purposes of this section "seniority" shall be determined by the relative length
of time served by each employee in the classification in which he/she is
employed in a Department of the City government, and by the length of time
during which such employee has worked on any shift, if more than one shift is
worked by employees in such classification.

Computation of Vacation Leave

30.3.1 For purposes of this Article, paid leave of absence from duty by reason
of sick leave, holiday leave, vacation leave, disability leave,
compensatory time-off, or any other paid leave, shall be deemed to be
“time worked."

30.3.2 Prior periods of employment shall be credited to the employee for
purposes of determining vacation eligibility provided that during each
such prior employment period, the employee achieved permanent
status. An employee in an initial probationary status shall not be
permitted to take a vacation even though such employee may, upon

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 44
satisfactory completion of the initial probationary period be entitled to
additional vacation pursuant to the above.

30.4 Vacation/Sick Leave Conversion

30.4.1

ARTICLE 31

In the event a member becomes seriously ill or seriously injured
requiring hospital treatment or hospitalization while on vacation, and it
can be established that the member is incapacitated due to the illness
or injury, the day or days he/she is sick under these circumstances
shall be carried as sick time rather than vacation and the member will
for all purposes be treated as though he/she were off solely for the
reason of his/her illness or injury. Upon request, the member shall
submit medical documentation of the illness or injury from attending
physician.

SICK LEAVE

31.1 Each full-time employee shall be entitled to sick leave with pay in accordance
with the following provisions:

31.1.1

31.1.2

31.1.3

Sick leave shall accrue in an amount equal to the number of hours
worked, excluding overtime, multiplied by a factor of 0.04616, up to a
maximum of ninety-six (96) hours per year. Only paid leave for sick
leave, holidays, vacation, disability, compensatory time off, or other
paid leave shall be considered as time worked for purposes of this
section.

Accrued sick leave may be utilized if the employee is required to be
absent from work on account of non-job related illness or injury; routine
medical or dental appointments; illness in the immediate family as
defined herein; or absence of an eligible female employee due to
illness, injury or disability related to pregnancy or childbirth. Immediate
family shall be limited to the eligible employee's mother, father,
spouse, Domestic Partner registered with the Human Resources
Department, child, stepfather, stepmother or step child.

Up to forty-eight (48) hours of accrued sick leave per calendar year
may be utilized if the employee is required to be absent for the care
related to the illness or injury of the employee’s grandchild, brother,
sister, father-in-law or mother-in-law.

Accrued sick leave may also be utilized for job-related illness or injury
if the employee is medically required to be absent from work between
the date an examining physician determines the employee's condition
to be “permanent and stationary" and the date the employee is so

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 45
31.1.4

31.1.5

31.1.6

31.1.7

31.1.8

31.1.9

notified. Such accrued sick leave may not be utilized if the employee
is otherwise entitled to temporary disability leave compensation for the
above referenced period of time. Accrued sick leave not to exceed
three (3) working days may be granted at the discretion of the Director
of Human Resources or his/her designated representative following the
notification referred to above. Telephone notice or a notice mailed to
the employee's last known address of record shall be determined
notice to the employee.

Accrued sick leave not to exceed three (3) working days may be
granted in circumstances where an alleged job-related illness or injury
is involved, but the employee fails to provide medical verification of
such job-related illness or injury.

If an employee is no longer entitled to disability leave, then the Human
Resources Director shall evaluate the prospects of the employee's
return to work and shall have reasonable discretion to authorize use of
sick leave; provided that in no event shall the employee receive an
amount, including any workers' compensation temporary disability
payments, in excess of his/her regular base pay.

Accrued sick leave shall be allowed for any absence from work for
treatment of intoxication, chronic alcoholism, or use of narcotics
prescribed or not prescribed by a licensed physician, if approved by
the City physician. This section shall not affect the City's authority to
discipline employees.

No employee shall be entitled to or be granted sick leave, either with or
without pay, unless he/she or she, or someone on his/her or her
behalf, notifies his/her or her immediate superior or Chief of Police, or
the Director of Human Resources, of his/her or her intent to take such
sick leave, and of the reasons therefore, prior to or within one hour
after the commencement of the sick leave provided, however, that the
City Manager may waive the requirement of such notice upon
presentation of a reasonable excuse of such employee.

An employee may be required to furnish substantiation for any
absence for which Sick Leave payment is requested.

A full-time employee of the City shall be entitled to sick leave without
any pay if required to be absent from work on account of any non-job
related illness, injury or disability, including absences of female
employees related to pregnancy or childbirth, or on account of routine
medical or dental appointment needs of the employee, in all situations
where such employee is not entitled to sick leave with pay.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 46
31.1.10 Any full-time employee who is unable to return to work after being
absent on unpaid sick leave for twelve (12) cumulative months in any
period of twenty-four (24) consecutive months shall be separated from
City service.

31.1.10.1 The City agrees to indemnify the association as to any
liability arising solely from the implementation of this
Section 31.1.10. The indemnification also extends to the
act of Association in cooperating in the defense of this
section before any forum. However, the City will not
indemnify the Association for any liability caused by
separate acts or omissions independent of the acts
described in Section 31.1.10. For example, the City would
not indemnify the Association if the Association is found
liable for misrepresentation or nondisclosure to its
membership, or liable for any breach of duty of fair
representation other than a breach predicated solely on the
acts or omissions described in Section 31.1.10.

The City will not pay attorneys’ fees to or on behalf of the
Association but at the sole option of the Association, the
City Attorney's Office will defend the Association against
claims or lawsuits arising from implementation of this
Section 31.1.10 so long as the Association waives any
conflict of interest, actual or potential, arising out of the
representation of such counsel. However, legal counsel for
the City shall keep Association informed of all
developments particularly as to any possible settlement of
the dispute/litigation. The Association shall have the right
to participate in the defense.

The City’s obligation to indemnify, as described above, is
conditioned upon the City having primary authority for the
defense. The Association and the City attorneys shall
cooperate in the defense of the case. The Association
may not agree to any settlement involving its financial
liability without consent of the City.

31.2 Sick Leave Payout

Any employee hired on or after July 7, 2013, shall not be eligible for sick
leave payout.

For employees hired on or before July 6, 2013, sick leave payout shall be
given to full-time benefited employees who are members of the Federated
City Retirement System and the Police and Fire Retirement Plan at the time
of retirement of death under one of the following conditions:

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 47
31.2.1 Police and Fire Retirement Plan

The employee is a member of the Police and Fire Retirement System
and retired under the provisions cited in the plan and credited with at
least twenty (20) years of service in this retirement plan or credited
with any service prior to a service-connected disability retirement.

31.2.2 Federated City Retirement System

The employee is a member of the Federated City Retirement System
and retired under the provisions cited in the plan and credited with at
least fifteen (15) years of service in this retirement plan or credited with
at least ten (10) years of service prior to a service-connected disability
retirement.

31.2.3 Terminated Employee with Vesting Rights

The employee has terminated service with the City in good standing,
retained vesting rights in a retirement system according to the
provisions of the San Jose Municipal Code and following such
termination qualifies for retirement and retires under the provisions
cited in the code and has at the time of retirement credit for at least;

e 20 years of service in the Police and Fire Retirement System
e 15 years of service in the Federated City Retirement System

31.2.4 Death During Service

The estate of any full-time employee who dies while in City service and
prior to retirement, even though the employee is not credited with at
least;

e 20 years of service in the Police and Fire Retirement System
e 15 years of service in the Federated City Retirement System

31.2.5 Effective July 6, 2013, for purposes of sick leave payout, an
employee’s sick leave balance and hourly rate shall be frozen. This
means that an employee will receive no more in sick leave payout
after having met the requirements contained herein than they would
have been entitled to on July 6, 2013. Any sick leave usage after
July 6, 2013, will come first from the sick leave balance accrued after
July 6, 2013. An employee will continue to accrue sick leave after
July 6, 2013, but it may not be used for sick leave payout purposes.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 48
For example, if an employee’s hourly rate is $40 and their sick leave
balance is 1000 hours on July 6, 2013, if they meet eligibility
requirements, they shall receive payout of their sick leave balance at
the time of retirement using the formula below, but no more than
1000 hours and at an hourly rate of no more than $40. This will
occur even if the employee has subsequently earned more than 1000
hours in sick leave or received a pay increase so that their hourly rate
is higher than $40. In this example, if the employee does not have
available sick leave to use that was accrued after July 6, 2013, and
uses sick leave and reduces their sick leave balance on July 6, 2013,
to 800 hours, they will only be entitled to a sick leave payout of 800
hours, regardless of any sick leave accrued after July 6, 2013.

Payout shall be determined as follows:

31.2.5.1 If a full-time employee at the time of his/her retirement or
death has earned, unused sick leave hours, he/she shall be
paid the equivalent of a specified percent of his/her hourly
rate of pay at the time of retirement, termination or death,
whichever comes first, multiplied by the total number of
his/her accumulated and unused hours of sick leave as of the
date of his/her retirement or death.

Less than 400 hours: Hours accumulated x 50%
of final hourly rate

or, 400 — 799 hours: Hours accumulated x 60%
of final hourly rate

or, 800 — 1200 hours: Hours accumulated x 75%
of final hourly rate.

31.2.5.2 If a full-time employee at the time of his/her service
retirement has between 800 and 1,200 hours of unused
sick leave, at the employee’s request he/she shall be paid
hours accumulated X 80% of final hourly rate.

31.2.5.3 If a full-time employee at the time of his/her service
retirement or upon the employee’s death has 1,200 hours
or greater of earned unused sick leave, he/she, or his/her
estate, shall be paid a sum of money equal to 100%
percent of his/her hourly rate at the time of his/her death or
service retirement, whichever is earlier, multiplied by the
total number of his/her accumulated and unused hours of
sick leave as of the date of his/her death or retirement. If,

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 49
after retirement, the employee switches from service to
disability retirement, the employee shall repay to the City
the difference in sick leave payout between service and
disability retirement (e.g. 100% service, 75% disability).

31.2.5.3.1 An employee who, at the time of his/her
retirement, qualifies for benefits in the 800 to
1,200 hour category as_ provided in
subsections 31.2.4.1 and 31.2.4.2 above,
shall be credited, for insurance purposes
only, with a value equal to twenty-five (25%)
percent of his/her hourly rate of pay for
those individuals in the seventy-five (75%)
percent payment category or a value equal
to twenty (20%) percent of his/her hourly
rate of pay for those individuals in the eighty
80%) percent payment category at the time
of his/her retirement or termination,
whichever is earlier, multiplied by the total
number of his/her accumulated and unused
hours of sick leave as of the date of his/her
retirement, or by 1,200 hours, whichever is
less. The City shall pay the cost of health
and/or dental insurance premium, for the
type of coverage specified by the employee,
for the employee or for the employee and
his/her dependents under one of the health
and/or dental insurance plans available at
the time to regular full-time City employees,
until such time as the total amount of such
payments equals the total amount credited
to such employee hereunder, or until the
death of such employee, whichever is
earlier.

 

31.2.6 Payment for Accrued Sick Time

Pursuant to 31.2.5, upon retirement (Service or Service Connected
Disability) an officer shall receive a lump sum cash payment for the
total amount of accrued sick time hours.

31.2.7. Death of Terminated Employee

The estate of any full-time employee who had terminated service with
the City in good standing but had retained vesting rights in a retirement
system according to the provisions in the San Jose Municipal Code

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 50
and dies (on or after July 10, 1977) prior to becoming eligible for
retirement allowances as cited under provisions of the San Jose
Municipal Code and has at the time of death credit for at least;

e 20 years of service in the Police and Fire Retirement System
e 15 years of service in the Federated City Retirement System

For purposes of determining the total number of accumulated and
unused hours of sick leave of a full-time employee at the time of
his/her retirement or death, unused sick leave from prior periods of
employment with the City shall be used. Such previously accumulated
sick leave shall be credited to the employee for use during an
employee's current employment period.

ARTICLE 32 DISABILITY LEAVE

32.1

32.2

Subject to the terms, conditions, limitations and other provisions contained in this
Article, a full-time employee of the City who is required to be absent from active
service for the City as the result of injury arising out of and in the course of
his/her full-time employment with the City, shall be deemed to be on Disability
Leave of Absence from active City service from the time he/she is required
because of such injury to be absent from such active City service, to the time it is
no longer required by such injury to be absent from such active service or until
his/her employment with the City ends or is terminated, whichever is the earlier
time, and in such situation, such full-time City employee shall be entitled to
receive, and shall be paid, in lieu of his/her regular salary, and in addition to such
temporary disability compensation as he/she may be entitled to under the
Workers' Compensation provisions of Division 1 or Division 4 of the Labor Code
of the State of California, such temporary disability leave compensation, if any,
as he/she may be entitled to under the following provisions of this Article for the
periods of time hereinafter specified in this Article.

Anything elsewhere to the contrary notwithstanding, no full-time employee of the
City who is required to be absent from active service for the City as a result of
any injury shall be deemed to be on disability leave of absence, or be entitled to
any compensation or other benefits under the provisions of this Article unless
such employee, as a result and because of such injury and absence from active
City service, is entitled to temporary disability compensation from the City under
and by virtue of the Workers' Compensation provisions of Division 1 or Division 4
of the Labor Code of the State of California. If the Workers’ Compensation
Appeals Board of the State of California, or any judicial court having jurisdiction
over the matter, should determine that such employee is not entitled to temporary
disability compensation from the City under said provisions of said Labor Code,
said employee shall not be entitled to any benefits under the provisions of this

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 51
32.3

32.4

32.5

32.6

Article, and any monies theretofore paid to him/her under the provisions of this
Article shall be deemed to have been paid in error, and the City shall be entitled
to recover the same.

An employee of the City shall not be deemed to be on disability leave of absence
and he/she shall not be entitled to any compensation or other benefits under the
provisions of this Article if the injury as a result of which he/she is required to be
absent from active City service results from (i) an act of gross negligence of such
employee, or (ii) any work voluntarily undertaken by such employee which he/she
had been prohibited from engaging in prior to the date of such injury by an
examining physician of the City.

An employee of the City shall not be deemed to be on disability leave of absence
and shall not be entitled to any compensation or other benefits under the
provisions of this Article for any period of absence from active City service if
he/she is offered alternative employment during such period of absence in a
class of employment identical or substantially similar to that in which the
employee worked immediately prior to the time he/she was required to be
absent, and if, in addition, such employee was physically qualified for such
alternative employment and refused or failed to accept such employment.

In no event shall any compensation or other benefits be payable under the
provisions of this Article to any employee, because of absence resulting from an
injury, for any period of time greater than the shortest of any of the following
periods of time, to wit: (i) the time during which the employee is required to be
absent from active City service as a result of injury arising out of and in the
course of his/her full-time employment with the City, (ii) the period of time for
which temporary disability compensation is payable to the employee under the
Workers' Compensation provisions of Division 1 or Division 4 of the Labor Code
of the State of California, (iii) one year. Also, no employee shall be entitled to
any benefits or compensation under the provisions of this Article because of
absence resulting from an injury for any time after the expiration of five years
immediately following the date of such injury.

Unless and except to the extent otherwise expressly provided in this Article, an
employee who becomes entitled, because of disability, to any leave of absence,
compensation or other benefits under the provisions of this Article, shall not be
entitled to any salary, leave of absence or other compensation under the
provisions of any other Section or Sections of this Article, or under the provisions
of Chapter 3.12 of Title Ill of the San Jose Municipal Code, or under the
provisions of any other ordinance or resolution, for or because of his/her injury or
absence from active service, the leave, compensation and benefits provided by
this Article for disability of such employee, being in lieu of, and not in addition to,
salary leaves of absence, or other compensation or benefits to which the
employee might otherwise become eligible under the provisions of any other

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 52
32.7

32.8

32.9

32.10

Section of this Article, or under the provisions of Chapter 3.12 of Title Ill of the
San Jose Municipal Code.

Subject to the terms, conditions, limitations and other provisions contained in this
Article, a full-time employee of the City on disability leave of absence shall be
entitled to the following temporary disability leave compensation, to wit:

32.7.1 For the first 365 days of his/her disability leave of absence, or for such
portion of such 365 days as he/she may be absent on such leave
where he/she is absent for less than the full term of such 365 days,
he/she shall be entitled to an amount of money which when added to
the temporary disability compensation paid or payable to him/her for
such period of time under the Workers’ Compensation provisions of
Division 1 or Division 4 of the Labor Code of the State of California, will
equal one-hundred (100%) percent of what would have been his/her
regular salary for such period if he/she were in active service rather
than on disability leave of absence.

32.7.2 For any period of disability leave of absence following the expiration of
the above-mentioned periods of time, he/she shall not be entitled to
any compensation, except as provided by Article 31 hereof.

No employee shall be entitled to any compensation or other benefits under the
provisions of this Article unless the Director of Human Resources shall have
determined that such employee is entitled to such compensation or benefits.

The Director of Human Resources in order to properly make any determination
respecting an employee's claim to benefits hereunder, may require the employee
to present evidence proving that such employee is entitled to the benefits
claimed, including, but not limited to, proof of the injury, proof that it arose out of
and in the course of his/her employment with the City, proof of the disability and
of its duration, and proof of any other relevant matters. Also, said Director may
require the employee to submit himself to medical and physical examinations by
physicians selected by said Director.

The Director of Human Resources shall not make any determination holding that
an employee is entitled to any compensation or leave of absence hereunder for
any period of time because of an injury if the Workers' Compensation Appeals
Board, or any judicial court having jurisdiction over the matter, shall have already
determined that such employee is not entitled because of such injury to any
temporary disability compensation whatsoever from the City, or to any such
compensation from the City for said period of time, under the Workers’
Compensation provisions of Division 1 or Division 4 of the Labor Code of the
State of California. Any such determination by said Director in violation of this
paragraph shall be null and void.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 53
32.11 Also, in the event the Director of Human Resources should determine that an

employee is entitled to any compensation or leave of absence hereunder for any
period of time because of an injury, and, subsequently, the Workers’
Compensation Appeals Board, or any judicial court having jurisdiction over the
matter, should determine that the employee is not entitled, because of such
injury, to any temporary disability compensation whatsoever from the City, or to
any such compensation from the City for such period of time, under the Workers’
Compensation provisions of Division 1 or Division 4 of said Labor Code, then in
that event, the determination of said Director shall become null and void and the
City shall be entitled to reimbursement for all monies, if any, theretofore paid by
the City to said employee for or because of said injury and absence.

ARTICLE 33 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

33.1

33.2

Each full-time employee shall be granted bereavement leave with full pay for a
period of forty (40) work hours to attend the customary obligations arising from
the death of any of the following relatives of such employee or employee’s
spouse or employee’s domestic partner. All leave must be used within fourteen
(14) calendar days following the death of the eligible person. Under extreme
circumstances, the fourteen (14)-day requirement may be waived by the Director
of Employee Relations. The decision of the Director of Employee Relations
regarding the waiver shall be final, with no process for further appeal:

a) Parent/Step Parents

b) Spouse

c) Child/Step-Child

d) Brother/Sister/Step-Brother/Step-Sister/Half-Brother/Half-Sister
e) Grandparents/Step-Grandparents

f) Great Grandparents/ Step- Great Grandparents

g) Grandchildren

h) Domestic Partner

i) Sister in-law/Brother in-law/Daughter in-law/Son in-law

33.1.1 A domestic partner, as referenced in Section 33.1, must be the domestic
partner registered with the Department of Human Resources.

No eligible employee shall be granted bereavement leave in the event of the
death of any of the above relatives, if such employee is not scheduled to work
when such bereavement leave is required.

ARTICLE 34 NON-DISCRIMINATION

34.1

Parties agree that they and each of them shall not discriminate against any
employee or Organization member on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex,

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 54
34.2

sexual orientation, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, physical or
mental disability, familial status, or political affiliation. An employee seeking to
utilize the grievance procedure, claiming a violation of this sub-paragraph, shall
make an election of remedies between the grievance procedure and any other
remedy available at law, through local, State or Federal law, including but not
limited to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. No employee shall be allowed
to pursue the grievance procedure claiming a violation of this subparagraph if
that employee cites the same underlying facts in pursuing any other remedy
available at law, through local, State or Federal law, including but not limited to
Title VIl of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and if no adverse finding has been
rendered in pursuit of such other remedy. When an employee seeks to use the
grievance procedure claiming a violation of this subparagraph, the City, the
Organization and the employee shall enter into a complete settlement agreement
which provides that in exchange for the agreement to voluntarily settle the
dispute through the grievance procedure, the employee agrees to waive his/her
right to pursue any other remedy otherwise available through local, State or
Federal law, including but not limited to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Such settlement agreement shall contain a provision that the employee has been
advised of his/her right to consult an attorney and/or a local, State or Federal
anti-discrimination agency regarding his/her discrimination claim and that his/her
consent to the settlement agreement is voluntary and knowing.

The parties agree that they and each of them shall not discriminate against any
employee or Organization member because of membership or lack of
membership in the Organization, or because of any authorized activity on behalf
of the Organization. However, nothing herein shall preclude a unit commander
from denying or delaying the release from any given unit (or team in B.F.O.) of
more than one Organization representative in the case of operational necessity.

ARTICLE 35 MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP

35.1

35.2

Except as otherwise provided herein, each employee who, on December 10,
2013, is a member in good standing of the Organization shall thereafter, as a
condition of employment, maintain such membership for the duration of this
Agreement, to the extent of paying the periodic dues uniformly required by the
Organization as a condition of retaining membership.

Any employee who, on December 10, 2013, is not a member of the Organization
or any person who becomes an employee after December 10, 2013, shall not be
required to become a member as a condition of employment. Any such
employee who thereafter becomes a member of the Organization shall thereafter
maintain such membership for the duration of the Agreement except as
otherwise provided herein.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 55
35.3

35.4

Any employee who, on December 10, 2013, was a member of the Organization,
and any employee who subsequently becomes a member may, during the period
beginning December 1, 2015 through December 31, 2015, resign such
membership and thereafter shall not be required to join as a condition of
employment. Resignations shall be in writing addressed to the Director of
Employee Relations with a copy to the Organization.

The Organization shall indemnify the City and hold it harmless against any and
all suits, claims, demands and liabilities that may arise out of or by reason of the
application of or implementation of the provisions of this Article.

ARTICLE 36 SENIORITY

36.1

36.2

36.3

36.4

Employees shall be placed on the classification seniority list in accordance with
the date they were first placed on the payroll of the Police Department as full time
sworn Officers. When two or more employees are assigned to the payroll on the
same date, preference in placement on the list shall be given based on the
relative standing on the Police Officer eligibility list.

Seniority list placement for Police Sergeant, Police Lieutenant and Police Captain
shall be based on the date of rank. Where two or more employees are promoted
to the same rank on the same date, placement on the list shall be based on
relative standing on the respective eligibility lists.

Placement on the seniority list shall not be affected by any authorized leave with
pay.

The Police Administration shall prepare an accurate list setting forth the present
seniority dates of all Officers covered by this agreement. Such lists shall resolve
all questions of seniority affecting Officers covered under this agreement. The
seniority list shall be updated every twelve (12) months and distributed to all Unit
Commanders with one copy being delivered to the Organization President.

ARTICLE 37 LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

37.1

There shall be a Department Labor/Management Committee consisting of three
(3) representatives of the Department at the rank of Lieutenant and above, and
three (3) members of the Association. The Chief of Police, or his/her designee,
shall sit as one of the Department representatives and any of the six (6)
members may be replaced with an alternate from time to time. The Director of
Employee Relations shall be requested to attend Labor/Management meetings
and shall be provided an agenda in advance. The Director of Employee
Relations shall sit at these meetings and attempt to resolve concerns to mutual
satisfaction.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 56
The Labor/Management Committee shall meet no less than quarterly and shall
consider and discuss matters of mutual concern pertaining to the improvement of
the Department and the welfare of its employees. Accordingly, the
Labor/Management Committee will not discuss grievances properly the subject of
the procedural process except to the extent that such discussion may be useful
in suggesting improved department policies. Either the Association
representatives or the Department representatives may initiate discussion of any
subject of a general nature affecting the operation of the Department or its
employees.

An agenda describing the issue(s) to be discussed shall be prepared by the
initiating party and distributed at least three days in advance of each meeting,
and minutes shall be kept and maintained.

All persons representing both parties sit as equals with the Director of Employee
Relations sitting as the facilitator. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
limit, restrict or reduce the management prerogatives outlined elsewhere in this
agreement.

ARTICLE 38 POLICE EQUIPMENT
38.1 Flashlights

38.2

38.3

City will issue "SL 15" or equivalent plastic flashlights with "SL 15 Plus" or
equivalent bulb to approximate 20,000 candlepower. Each employee will be
issued for his/her own use as personal equipment one such flashlight and
recharger plus any necessary parts or replacements.

Police Shield

The City shall authorize the possession of two Police identification badges by
individual Police Officers. The past practice of providing one authorized Police
badge inscribed upon which is the Officers serial, or identification number, shall
be continued. The second authorized badge may be purchased at the expense
of the individual Officer as long as it resembles the Department issued badge in
all of its detail except the quality of material from which the badge is made. The
individually purchased badges shall be the sole property of the Officer. However,
any Officers leaving the service for reasons other than retirement shall turn in the
second badge as well as the Department-issued badge.

Lockers

The City shall endeavor to make available additional full length lockers for
storage of personal clothing and property.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 57
ARTICLE 39 MODIFIED DUTY ASSIGNMENT

Modified duty assignments shall be governed by the Consent Decree dated June 21,
2005, for the term of this agreement, except as modified below.

Effective October 1, 2011, the number of exempt officer positions shall be reduced to
10.

The City agrees to indemnify the association as to any liability arising solely from the
implementation of the change in the number of exempt officer positions stated above.
The indemnification also extends to the act of Association in cooperating in the defense
of this change in the number of exempt officer provisions before any forum. However,
the City will not indemnify the Association for any liability caused by separate acts or
omissions independent of the acts related to the reduction in the number of exempt
officer positions. For example, the City would not indemnify the Association if the
Association is found liable for misrepresentation or nondisclosure to its membership, or
liable for any breach of duty of fair representation other than a breach predicated solely
on the acts or omissions related to the change in the number of exempt officer
positions.

The City will not pay attorneys’ fees to or on behalf of the Association but at the sole
option of the Association, the City Attorney’s Office will defend the Association against
claims or lawsuits arising from implementation of the change in the number of exempt
officer positions so long as the Association waives any conflict of interest, actual or
potential, arising out of the representation by the City Attorney's Office. However, legal
counsel for the City shall keep the Association informed of all developments particularly
as to any possible settlement of the disputellitigation. The Association shall have the
right to participate in the defense.

The City’s obligation to indemnify, as described above, is conditioned upon the City
having primary authority for the defense. The Association and the City Attorneys shall
cooperate in the defense of the case. The Association may not agree to any settlement
involving its financial liability without consent of the City.

ARTICLE 40 PROMOTIONAL TESTING
Promotional testing shall be subject to the terms and conditions of a separate

Memorandum of Agreement between the City of San Jose and the San Jose Police
Officers’ Association, which is incorporated herein by this reference.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 58
ARTICLE 41 TRAINING

41.1

41.2

41.3

41.4

41.5

FBI Academy

During all future twelve (12) month periods the Police Administration may assign
one or more members of the Command Staff (the rank of Lieutenant and above)
to attend the National FBI Academy if the Academy makes a partially subsidized
opening available to the City and a member volunteers to participate. All
remaining costs (aside from above-mentioned subsidy) will be borne by the City.
The method of selection for attendance shall be from a list of volunteers arranged
after an adequate time period of notice. Selection shall be at discretion of the
Chief. In the event adequate funding for more than one Command Officer to
attend the Academy in any single annual budget period is determined, the same
process for selection to attend shall occur.

Remedial Driver Training

Any Officer involved in two or more preventable accidents within a one year
period shall receive remedial Driver Training so long as the Regional Academy
makes such training available to the City. Any additional training for bargaining
unit personnel shall be assigned in a non-arbitrary manner.

Library

There shall be maintained at each Police facility a complete library selection
including thirty (30) copies of each book, manual, periodical, study guides, etc.
that are listed as required study material for all level promotional examinations.

Training for Department Authorized Equipment

Training for the approved use of all Department authorized equipment will be
completed at the Department's expense. Compensation of employees for such
training shall be as follows: instructors will be compensated for all instruction;
students will be on their own time, if their training does not fall within their
Department authorized working hours.

Athletic Facilities

The City agrees to provide adequate space in the appropriate police facilities for
the installation of the necessary gymnasium athletic workout equipment
purchased by the Association.

The Association agrees to be responsible for the installation of that equipment
which it purchases. Furthermore, employees of the Police Department, and one
POA representative, shall be allowed continual access to the designated space
for the purpose of utilizing any piece of athletic workout equipment located

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 59
therein. The City agrees to accept any liability associated with the installation,
use and maintenance of all above referred gymnastic equipment. Absent a
special order, employees are using these facilities on their own time.

ARTICLE 42 ORGANIZATION NOTIFICATION OR COMMUNICATIONS

42.1

42.2

42.3

42.4

The City shall, through the City/County Communications Department notify the
On-Call Organization Representative of all incidents involving on-duty sworn
Police Department personnel that may require the services of an Organization
Attorney or Psychologist, i.e., shooting, accidents, major member arrest
situations, etc. That is, an Organization representative is on the call-up list.

The Department agrees to route to the Organization President any general order,
special order or personnel order. The Department will use reasonable effort to
cause its unit commanders to route to the Organization President any orders or
directives of a generalized nature, which affects any one or all persons,
represented by the unit.

Upon written request of the Organization, the City Attorney himself/herself shall
continue to meet with Organization representatives to discuss any perceived
problems in legal representation of Officers.

The City agrees to put the POA on the distribution list of the Watch Commander's
logs.

ARTICLE 43 INVESTIGATIONS

43.1

43.2

43.3

43.4

The City agrees that an Officer suspected of misconduct may be ordered to
answer questions, notwithstanding the officer’s constitutional rights, upon penalty
of discipline, if advised that such answers may not be used in any criminal
proceedings against the officer. Provided, however, only Internal Affairs
investigators or command staff may so direct an Officer.

No photo of an Officer under investigation for criminal violations or disciplinary
matters shall be made available to any media.

If an officer is under investigation for misconduct of any kind at the time when
he/she is eligible for transfer (including transfer to a premium pay assignment),
then the fact of such investigation shall not be considered in making a decision
on his/her transfer, but the result of such investigation may cause the transfer to
be rescinded and/or other discipline to be imposed.

The Department shall undertake investigations of possible misconduct and
dispose of them within a reasonable period of time. While the parties recognize
that the final disposition of such cases may be delayed by related criminal
investigations and other considerations outside the complete control of the City,

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 60
the Department shall make reasonable efforts to minimize these delays and
dispose of cases in a timely manner. If an investigation is not completed within
120 days of coming into Internal Affairs, Internal Affairs will prepare a status
report at the end of the 120 day period and at 60 day intervals thereafter to be
sent to the affected police officer. The inability of the Department to dispose of a
case within a particular period of time shall not be subject to the grievance
procedure.

ARTICLE 44 CHAIN OF COMMAND

All Details, Units, and Bureaus within the complete structure of the San Jose Police
Department shall follow the chain of Command in the supervisorial staff assigned to
those Units. That is, Sergeants shall not be supervised by Police Officers and
Lieutenants shall not be held responsible to Sergeants, etc., provided, however, during
training and non-operational functions, a lower ranking employee may be in charge.

ARTICLE 45 COPIES OF AGREEMENT

The City will provide one hundred (100) 8.5 x 11" copies of this agreement to the POA.
The City will also provide an electronic file of this agreement for the POA to use to make
additional copies. Additionally, this agreement will be available on the City’s Intranet
and Internet websites.

ARTICLE 46 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

46.1 Key Element Review

If the employee formally receives an overall performance rating of “meets
standards” or above, but receives below “meets standards” in an individual key
rating, the employee may request a review of that individual key element by the
Chief of Police or designee. The employee must submit a written request to the
Chief of Police, or designee, specifying the reasons for the request within 30
calendar days from the date the employee received the final performance
appraisal. The Chief of Police, or designee, shall investigate the request,
arrange a meeting with the employee, and provide a written response to the
employee within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt. The written response of the
Chief of Police, or designee, shall be final.

46.2 Overall Rating Appeal

If the employee formally receives an overall performance rating that is below
“meets standards,” the employee may appeal the rating. Such appeal shall be
made in writing to the Chief of Police, or designee, within thirty (30) calendar
days from the date the employee received the final performance appraisal. The

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 61
Chief of Police, or designee, shall investigate the appeal, arrange a meeting, and
provide a written response to the employee within thirty (30) calendar days of the
receipt.

46.2.1 If the employee is dissatisfied with the decision of the Chief of
Police, or designee, the employee may, within ten (10) calendar
days from the Chief of Police’s or designee’s, response, request a
meeting with the City Manager, or designee. Such request shall be
made in writing and shall include the reason(s) the employee is not
satisfied with the decision previously rendered.

46.2.2 The City Manager, or designee, shall hold a meeting within a
reasonable time, and within ten (10) days of the hearing shall
inform the employee of the decision. The decision of the City
Manager, or designee, shall be final. This will be the only appeal
process applicable to review the performance appraisal. The
employee shall have the right to Organization representation at the
meeting with the Chief of Police, or designee, or the City Manager,
or designee.

ARTICLE 47 DEPARTMENT AUTHORIZED EQUIPMENT OR

47.1

47.2

TECHNIQUE

While acting in the course and scope of his/her employment, the use by an
employee either of a department-authorized or department-required piece of
equipment and/or technique, in and of itself, shall not adversely affect the
employee's right to indemnification under the California Government Code as to
a compensatory damage claim award against such employee, pertaining to such
use.

Neither party concedes or relinquishes any of its rights under the California
Government Code and other applicable statutes or precedent.

ARTICLE 48 RECRUIT CLASSIFICATION

48.1

All applicants who meet the requirements for the classification of Police Officer
and who are selected for possible appointment to the classification of Police
Officer shall first be classified as a Police Recruit while in attendance and training
at the Regional Police Academy. A Police Recruit shall be a non-sworn
employee unless and until he/she completes the police academy training and is
graduated from the Regional Police Academy. Upon completion of such training
and graduation from the Academy, a Police Recruit will be eligible to be
appointed to the classification of Police Officer. While they are in the class,

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 62
48.2

48.3

48.4

48.5

provisions of this Agreement unique to police officers and Disability Leave
Supplement shall not apply to Police Recruits. They shall be treated by the City
as a civilian employee for these purposes.

The established salary for a Police Recruit shall commence at approximately
fifteen (15%) percent below that of first step Police Officer.

Police Recruits shall be awarded a step increase approximately five (5%) percent
upon being sworn in as a Police Officer. Their next step increases shall be due
on their first, second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth anniversary dates of being
appointed to the classification of Police Officer.

Whenever the City hires a Police Recruit or sworn Police Officer as a new
employee, it will inform the Association in writing of such employment, giving the
name, date of hire and job classification of the new employee.

The City also agrees to allocate no less than one hour at the end of second day
of employment of Police Recruit(s) (new hires) for the POA to dispense
information about insurance and other benefits available through the Association,
the Mentor Program, the Wellness Program, salary continuation, Employee
Assistance Program, Critical Incident Stress Debriefing and other Association
matters.

The recruit classification is a temporary classification running only for the period
of one Police Academy. There is no classification comparable to the Police
Recruit classification.

48.5.1 The City must apply the medical standards for a Police Officer to all
Police Recruits. In addition, Police Recruits must be field ready prior to
being promoted to the classification of Police Officer.

48.5.2 If a Police Recruit is temporarily disabled or is otherwise not field ready
for medical reasons, he or she will not be promoted to the classification of
police officer.

48.5.3 If a Police Recruit is temporarily disabled or is otherwise not field ready
for medical reasons, he or she will continue to serve as a police recruit in
a Modified Duty capacity during the term of the Academy.

48.5.4 At the conclusion of the Academy, all Recruit positions will be eliminated.
At that time,

48.5.4.1 Any Recruit who has not been promoted to the classification of
Police Officer because he or she has failed to complete the
Academy shall be released. However, if the Recruit was unable to
complete the Academy solely due to temporary disability or other

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 63
medical reasons, he or she may request reinstatement to the Police
Recruit classification at the initiation of a future Academy. Any
request for reinstatement must be within three (3) years of the
incumbent's separation. The incumbent shall be reinstated to the
future Academy if the Department deems the incumbent to be
eligible.

48.5.4.2 Any Recruit who has successfully completed the Academy but has
not been promoted to the classification of Police Officer solely
because he or she is not field ready due to a temporary disability or
other medical reason shall be placed on unpaid medical leave
during the period of disability, up to a maximum of one (1) year
from the end of the Academy.

ARTICLE 49 RETIREMENT

49.1 Benefits of the Police and Fire Retirement Plan System are to be paid in

49.2

49.3

49.4

49.5

accordance with the provisions of the plan.

The City shall provide an annual pre-retirement advisory program covering
benefits and rights of retired employees. The program shall include retiree tax
information, workers’ compensation and rehabilitation benefits, and available
alternatives to retirement.

Permanent employees represented by the POA who transfer to Fire service shall
remain in the Police and Fire Retirement plan while they are in the Fire Academy.

The current formula for calculating retirement benefits is two and one half (2 42%)
percent of final compensation for each year of service with the City up to twenty
(20) years, plus four (4%) percent of final compensation for each year of service
with the City between 21 - 30 years subject to a maximum of ninety (90%)
percent.

Service from a reciprocal agency may not be combined with the City service in
order to earn four (4%) percent per year.

Effective July 1, 2006, the following employee paid plan changes will be in effect
for all employees represented by the organization;

49.5.1 — Elimination of the thirty (30)-day window for the redeposit of withdrawn
contributions, allowing for redeposit at anytime for active employees.
Total impact to the plan to be paid by affected employee.

49.5.2 Elimination of the thirty (30)-day window for the purchase of service
credit for previous Federated Retirement service credit, allowing for

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 64
purchase at any time for active employees. Total impact to the plan to
be paid by affected employee.

49.5.3. The ability to purchase service credit for time on unpaid leave of
absence. Total impact to the plan to be paid by affected employee.

49.6 In lieu of an enhancement to the current retirement formula (2.5% of final
compensation per year for up to 20 years and 4% of final compensation per year
for 21-30 years of service), effective June 29, 2008, employees in classifications
represented by the POA shall receive a 1.75% base pay increase. The 1.75%
base pay increase shall be added to the general wage increase effective on June
29, 2008, and shall not be compounded.

49.7 Second Tier Retirement Benefits — Employees Hired, Rehired, or Reinstated on
or After August 4, 2013:

It is hereby acknowledged that the City of San Jose (“City”) and the San Jose
Police Officers’ Association (“POA”) have met and conferred and reached an
agreement over a second tier retirement benefit (“Tier 2”).

The retirement benefits for employees in Tier 2 are limited to those specifically
defined in the second tier agreement and set forth in the City Charter. Tier 2
employees will receive the Tier 1 retiree healthcare benefits, including retiree
healthcare survivorship benefits, unless otherwise modified through the meet and
confer process.

For additional information, please see the Police and Fire Department Retirement
Plan — Police Benefits Tier 2 Fact Sheet:

http://www.sanjoseca.gov/DocumentCenter/View/21133

ARTICLE 50 RETIREE HEALTHCARE FUNDING

50.1 The City and the Employee Organization agree to transition from the current
partial pre-funding of police retiree medical and dental healthcare benefits
(referred to as the “policy method”) to pre-funding of the full Annual Required
Contribution (ARC) for the police retiree healthcare benefits plan (“Plan”). The
transition shall be accomplished by phasing into fully funding the ARC over a
period of five (5) years beginning June 28, 2009. The Plan's initial unfunded
retiree healthcare liability shall be fully amortized over a thirty year period so that
it shall be paid by June 30, 2039 (closed amortization). Amortization of changes
in the unfunded retiree healthcare liability other than the initial retiree healthcare
liability (e.g. gains, losses, changes in actuarial assumptions, etc.) shall be
determined by the Plan’s actuary. The City and Plan members (active
employees) shall contribute to funding the ARC in the ratio currently provided

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 65
50.2

50.3

50.4

50.5

under Section 3.36.575 (C) (1) and (2) of the San Jose Municipal Code.
Specifically, contributions for retiree medical benefits shall be made by the City
and members in the ratio of one-to-one. Contributions for retiree dental benefits
shall be made by the City and members in the ratio of three-to-one. When
determining the contribution rates for the Plan, the Plan actuary shall continue to
use the Entry Age Normal (EAN) actuarial cost method and a discount rate
consistent with the pre-funding policy for the Plan as outlined in this Article.

The City and the Employee Organization further agree that the Municipal Code
and/or applicable plan documents shall be amended in accordance with the
above agreement and that the Employee Organization will support such
amendments.

It is understood that in reaching this agreement, the parties have been informed
by cost estimates prepared by the Police and Fire Department Retirement Plan
Board’s actuary, and that the actual contribution rates to reach full pre-funding of
retiree healthcare will differ. The phase-in to the ARC shall be divided in five
steps (using a straight line method), each to be effective on the first pay period of
the City’s fiscal year in each succeeding year. The first increment of the phase-in
shall be effective on June 28, 2009. It is understood that because of changes
resulting from future actuarial valuations, the amount of each increase may vary
upward or downward. The City and Employee Organization agree that the Plan
member cash contribution rate shall not have an incremental increase of more
than 1.25% of pensionable pay in each fiscal year and the City cash contribution
rate shall not have an incremental increase of more than 1.35% of pensionable
pay in each fiscal year. For example, if the members’ contribution rate is 4% of
pensionable pay, the subsequent fiscal year’s contribution rate for retiree
healthcare cannot exceed 5.25% of pensionable pay.

If, at any time the calculated Plan member cash retiree healthcare contributions
exceed 10% of pensionable pay or the calculated City cash retiree healthcare
contributions exceed 11% of pensionable pay for the City (excluding implicit
subsidy), the parties shall meet and confer on how to address any retiree
healthcare contributions above 10% of pensionable pay for Plan members or
11% of pensionable pay for the City in order to fund the full ARC. Such
discussions shall include alternatives to reduce retiree healthcare costs. If the
parties are unable to agree on the manner in which to fully fund the retiree
healthcare ARC (contributions exceeding 10% of pensionable pay for Plan
members or 11% of pensionable pay for the City, excluding implicit subsidy),
applicable impasse dispute resolution procedures shall apply.

Nothing in this Article shall be construed to obligate Plan members to pay more
than 10% of pensionable pay or the City to pay more than 11% of pensionable
pay to fund retiree healthcare.

The City will establish a qualified trust (“Trust”) before June 28, 2009. If the Trust
can not be established before June 28, 2009, then the City will hold in a separate

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 66
50.6

reserve any required contributions over the policy method and then deposit, with
interest actually earned, into the Trust as soon as practical after the Trust is
established.

It is the objective of the parties that the Trust created pursuant to this agreement
shall become the sole funding vehicle for Police retiree healthcare benefits,
subject to any legal restrictions under the current plan, or other applicable law.

ARTICLE 51 MODIFICATION OF BARGAINING UNIT WORK

51.1

51.2

The City has the discretion to contract out and/or civilianize twenty positions
during the term of this Agreement.

Any contracting out and/or further civilianization of positions represented by the
POA during the term of this Agreement would be subject to the meet and confer
process. The City will provide advance notice to the POA and the opportunity to
demand to meet and confer regarding contracting out and/or further
civilianization of work currently performed by bargaining unit members.

ARTICLE 52 COMMUNITY POLICING

52.1

52.2

52.3

52.4

52.5

The POA hereby reiterates its support for the concept and implementation of
community policing, and endorses the same. The POA and the City agree to
combining efforts to ensure the success of Community Policing.

The mutual efforts of the parties include, but are not limited to, joint presentations
by the Chief (or his/her designee) and the POA President (or his/her designee) to
support Community Policing before members of the Police Department,
community groups, media or other forums or groups determined by the parties.

Each party shall also support and encourage community policing on its own. To
this end, each six months prior to sign up for shift changes, the POA agrees to
send a notice and discuss at union meetings the fact that it urges its members to
remain in assignments for at least two six-month rotations to further Community
Policing efforts.

The parties hereby jointly establish a goal of increasing the number of employees
by twenty (20%) percent who voluntarily remain in the same assignment and shift
for at least twelve (12) months, within the next two rotations.

A Labor-Management Committee shall be established to identify and discuss
ways to increase the length of time employees remain on a shift and in a given
assignment. Further the Labor-Management Committee shall discuss and
evaluate acceptable methods for reducing staff turnover in assignments which

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 67
52.6

impact Community Policing, including such concepts as "shift within shift" (i.e.,
changes by exception during longer assignments), ways to address the personal
disadvantages of longer assignments and other matters related to the length of
shift rotations.

At its own expense, the POA shall provide printed material such as public
education brochures on Community Policing for distribution to the residents and
businesses in San Jose. Such printed materials shall be found acceptable by the
Police Chief before distribution.

ARTICLE 53 DRUG TESTING

53.1

53.2

53.3

53.4

53.5

53.6

53.7

The Department may implement drug testing for any officers who henceforth
apply to the units/assignments listed below.

The tests shall be carried out in the manner described by, and consistent with,
the City's Human Resources Department Drug Testing Procedures and the
Substance Abuse Program & Policy (City Policy Manual, Section 1.4.2). These
documents are hereby incorporated herein by reference.

52.2.1 The Doctor-patient privilege shall be maintained concerning the referral
procedures of the above-mentioned Substance Abuse Program,
including the "gatekeeping" procedures concerning treatment facilities.

As to any officer in the following units assignments: NCI, NET, Vice/Intelligence,
MERGE, Bomb, Air Support Unit, the Department may implement random drug
testing four months or more after the Rehabilitation Program described in
paragraph 53.5 below is implemented.

The testing procedures in such random tests shall be those in paragraph 53.2,
above.

The City shall implement for all bargaining unit members the substance abuse
rehabilitation plan described in paragraph 53.2 above, and hereby incorporated
herein by reference. If implementation is delayed, then the random testing for
persons in the affected units/assignments likewise must be delayed.

Effective immediately, all sworn personnel from Lieutenant through the Chief of
Police in the chain of command of the units/assignments described above shall
be tested as described herein. Thereafter, they shall be part of the random
selection pool and shall also be tested upon assignment/rotation into that chain
of command.

Testing for anabolic steroids will continue where reasonable suspicion exists.
Testing for anabolic steroids as part of the selection process for

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 68
units/assignments described above shall be discussed in the Labor Management
Committee, with implementation to occur upon mutual agreement.

53.8 No more than one-third of the affected employees will be randomly tested at
intervals any more frequently than four times per year.

53.9 The laboratory for testing will be Pharm Chem, presently in Menlo Park.

53.10 The City will comply with the new Federal regulations requiring random drug and
alcohol testing for employees in positions that require special driver's licenses.
Should the new Federal regulations exceed the City's current drug screening
procedures, the POA will be notified prior to implementation.

53.11 During the random selection process, a POA representative shall be present.

53.12 This article does not supersede or replace “For Cause" testing, as described in
the SJPD Duty Manual.

ARTICLE 54 TIME DONATION PROGRAMS

Employees may donate time to eligible employees as outlined in the Time Donation
Programs Section in the City Policy Manual as of June 1, 2007.

ARTICLE 55 SEPARABILITY

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Agreement to the contrary, in the event that
any article, or subsections thereof, of this Agreement shall be declared invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, or by any applicable State or Federal law or regulation,
or should a decision by any court of competent jurisdiction or any applicable State or
Federal law or regulation diminish the benefits provided by this Agreement, or impose
additional obligations on the City, the parties shall meet and confer or negotiate on the
Article or subsections thereof affected. If they are unable to come to an agreement on
the matter, the provisions of Section 1111 of the Charter shall apply. All other
provisions of this Agreement not affected shall continue in full force and effect.

ARTICLE 56 MEET AND CONFER AND INTEREST ARBITRATION

The meet and confer process between the City and the Police Officers’ Association
shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures:

56.1 Meetand Confer. The goal of the meet and confer process is to reach a
voluntary settlement which adequately addresses the interests of both parties.
The parties shall be committed to conducting the process in good faith, treating

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 69
56.2

56.3

all participants with respect and honoring each others’ time by providing advance
notice of scheduled and cancelled meeting dates.

Mediation. In the event impasse is declared regarding contract negotiations for
a new MOA, the parties will participate in mediation prior to arbitration in an
attempt to resolve the dispute. However, the parties shall arrange for an
arbitrator and schedule arbitration dates in advance (arbitration shall be
conducted in accordance with City Charter Section 1111). If the mediation
process has not been completed within a 90-day period, beginning with the first
day of impasse as determined by written notification of impasse by either party,
either party may proceed to arbitration. If the parties do not proceed to
arbitration, the arbitrator shall be cancelled.

If the parties remain at impasse following mediation, the POA may choose to
make a presentation during a public City Council meeting without the
requirement of a Council response.

ARTICLE 57 PROBATIONARY PERIOD

57.1

57.2

57.3

57.4

With respect to the method for calculating the end of the probationary period for
employees within the SJPOA bargaining unit, vacation time, sick time, disability
leave, lost time, and all other periods of absence with or without pay shall not be
considered to be part of the employee’s service to the City and shall not count
toward the calculation of the employee's probationary period except as specified
in 57.3 below.

Time spent on modified/light duty shall not count toward calculation of the
employee’s probationary period, other than employees serving a promotional
probationary period in the classification of Sergeant and above who are in
permanent modified duty positions.

Compensatory time off that is mandated in writing by the City pursuant to Section
13.6.5 of the Memorandum of Agreement shall be deemed to be part of the
employee’s service to the city and shall count toward the calculation of the
employee's probationary period. Additionally, voluntary approved compensatory
“time off’, up to and including eighty (80) hours in the aggregate, whether taken
in sort or extended increments shall be deemed to be part of the employee’s
probationary period. Any and all voluntary approved compensatory “time off” in
excess of eighty (80) hours shall not be considered to be part of the employee’s
service to the City and shall not count toward the calculation of the employee’s
probationary period.

The City agrees to indemnify the Association as to any liability arising solely from
the implementation of Section 57.2. The indemnification also extends to the act
of Association’s cooperation in the defense of this section before any forum.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 70
The City will not indemnify the Association for any liability caused by separate
acts or omissions independent of the acts described in Section 57.2. For
example, the City would not indemnify the Association if the Association is found
liable for misrepresentations or nondisclosures to its membership, or liable for
any breach of duty of fair representation other than a breach predicted solely on
the acts or omissions described in Section 57.2.

The City will not pay attorneys’ fees to or on behalf of the Association but at the
sole option of the Association, the City Attorney's Office will defend the
Association against claims or lawsuits arising from the implementation of Section
57.2 so long as the Association waives any conflict of interest, actual or potential,
arising out of representation by such counsel. However, legal counsel for the
City shall keep Association informed of all developments particularly as to any
possible settlement of the dispute/litigation. The Association shall have the right
to participate in the defense.

The City's obligation to indemnify, as described above, is conditioned upon the
City having primary authority for the defense. The Association and the City
attorneys shall cooperate in the defense of the case. The Association may not
agree to any settlement involving its financial liability without consent of the City.

ARTICLE 58 DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE

Effective January 22, 2012, employees appointed to the classification of Deputy Chief of
Police shall be unclassified, at-will employees.

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 71
THIS AGREEMENT executed on the 19"" day of November, 2013 between the City of
San Jose and the San Jose Police Officers’ Association, in WITNESS thereof, the
appropriate representative if the parties have affixed their signature thereto.

 

For the City of San Jose: For the San Jose
Police Officers’ Association:
EAH
Ed Shikada

 

City Manager

Alex Gurza fohn Robb

 

 

Deputy City Manager Vice President, SJPOA
Fibre D
Yennifer Schembri Frahco Vado

Deputy Director of Em;

   

ee Relations Chief Financial Officer, SJPOA

 

 

Edgar David Woolsey . ~
Assistant Chief of Police Director, SJPOA
Rob Perrin EE
Executive Analyst Director, §JPOA

 

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 — December 31, 2015 Page 72
Salaries Effective December 22, 2013

EXHIBIT |

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Job Top Hourly Hourly Annual Annual

Code Job Classification | FLSA | Step | Rate (Min) | Rate (Max) | Salary (Min) | Salary (Max)
2214 Police Recruit N 1 $31.15 $31.15 $64,792.00 $64,792.00
2215 Police Officer N 7 $36.29 $48.60 $75,483.20 $101,088.00
2216 Police Sergeant N 5 $46.29 $56.26 $96,283.20 $117,020.80
2217 Police Lieutenant N 5 $53.59 $65.16 $111,467.20 $135,532.80
2218 Police Captain N 5 $62.04 $75.40 $129,043.20 | $156,832.00
2219 Deputy Chief of Police | E 5 $71.82 $87.30 $149,385.60 | $181,584.00
Salaries Effective the First Pay Period in Fiscal Year 2014-2015 (Includes 3.33% GWI)

Job Top Hourly Hourly Annual Annual

Code Job Classification | FLSA | Step | Rate (Min) | Rate (Max) | Salary (Min) | Salary (Max)
2214 Police Recruit N 1 $32.19 $32.19 $ 66,955.20 | $ 66,955.20
2215 Police Officer N 7 $37.50 $50.22 $ 78,000.00 | $104,457.60
2216 Police Sergeant N 5 $47.83 $58.13 $ 99,486.40 | $120,910.40
2217 Police Lieutenant N 5 $55.37 $67.33 $115,169.60 $140,046.40
2218 Police Captain N 5 $64.11 $77.91 $133,348.80 | $162,052.80
2219 Deputy Chief of Police | E 5 $74.21 $90.21 $154,356.80 | $187,636.80
Salaries Effective the First Pay Period in Fiscal Year 2015-2016 (Includes 3.33% GWI)

Job Top Hourly Hourly Annual Annual

Code Job Classification | FLSA | Step | Rate (Min) | Rate (Max) | Salary (Min) | Salary (Max)
2214 Police Recruit N 1 $33.26 $33.26 $ 69,180.80 | $ 69,180.80
2215 Police Officer N 7 $38.75 $51.89 $ 80,600.00 | $107,931.20
2216 Police Sergeant N 5 $49.42 $60.07 $102,793.60 | $124,945.60
2217 Police Lieutenant N 5 $57.21 $69.57 $118,996.80 $144,705.60
2218 Police Captain N 5 $66.24 $80.50 $137,779.20 | $167,440.00
2219 Deputy Chief of Police | E 5 $76.68 $93.21 $159,494.40 | $193,876.80

 

 

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015

Page 73

 
Salaries Effective December 22, 2013

EXHIBIT II

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

eon. Job Classification Step1 | Step2 | Step3 | Step4 | Step5 | Step6 | Step7
2214 | Police Recruit $31.15 : - - : : -
2215 | Police Officer $36.29 | $38.08 | $40.00 | $41.97 | $44.12 | $46.29 | $48.60
2216 | Police Sergeant $46.29 | $48.60 | $51.04 | $53.59 | $56.26 = =
2217 | Police Lieutenant $53.59 | $56.26 | $59.07 | $62.04 | $65.16 : :
2218 | Police Captain $62.04 | $65.16 | $68.40 | $71.82 | $75.40 : :
2219 | Deputy Chief of Police $71.82 | $75.40 | $79.19 | $83.16 | $87.30 = =
Salaries Effective the First Pay Period in Fiscal Year 2014-2015 (Includes 3.33% GWI)

eon. Job Classification Step1 | Step2 | Step3 | Step4 | Step5 | Step6 | Step7
2214 | Police Recruit $32.19 : - : : : -
2215 | Police Officer $37.50 | $39.35 | $41.33 | $43.37 | $45.59 | $47.83 | $50.22
2216 | Police Sergeant $47.83 | $50.22 | $52.74 | $55.37 | $58.13 : :
2217 | Police Lieutenant $55.37 | $58.13 | $61.04 | $64.11 | $67.33 = =
2218 | Police Captain $64.11 | $67.33 | $70.68 | $74.21 | $77.91 : :
2219 | Deputy Chief of Police $74.21 | $77.91 | $81.83 | $85.93 | $90.21 : :
Salaries Effective the First Pay Period in Fiscal Year 2015-2016 (Includes 3.33% GWI)

eon. Job Classification Step1 | Step2 | Step3 | Step4 | Step5 | Step6 | Step7
2214 | Police Recruit $33.26 : - = : : -
2215 | Police Officer $38.75 | $40.66 | $42.71 | $44.81 | $47.11 | $49.42 | $51.89
2216 | Police Sergeant $49.42 | $51.89 | $54.50 | $57.21 | $60.07 : -
2217 | Police Lieutenant $57.21 | $60.07 | $63.07 | $66.24 | $69.57 : -
2218 | Police Captain $66.24 | $69.57 | $73.03 | $76.68 | $80.50 : -
2219 | Deputy Chief of Police $76.68 | $80.50 | $84.55 | $88.79 | $93.21 : -

SJPOA MOA July 1, 2013 — December 31, 2015 Page 74
