Chapter 29: Law Enforcement

Article 14: Peace Officer's Employer-
Employee Relations, 29-14-1 through 29-14-
11

29-14-10. Political activity.

A. A peace officer shall not be prohibited by his police or sheriff's department
employer from engaging in any political activity when the officer is off duty,
except as otherwise required by law.

B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, any peace
officer employed by the New Mexico state police department shall be governed
by the provisions of regulations adopted by the department regarding political
activity.

29-14-2. Findings and purpose.

A. The legislature finds and declares that effective law enforcement is dependent
upon the maintenance of stable relations between peace officers and their
employers. Moreover, the existence of stable relations between peace officers
and their employers will enhance law enforcement services provided to the
citizens of New Mexico.

B. The purpose of the Peace Officer's Employer-Employee Relations Act [29-14-
1 NMSA 1978] is to prescribe certain rights for peace officers, particularly when
they are placed under investigation by their employer.

C. Provisions of this act only apply to administrative actions and shall not apply to
criminal investigations of a peace officer except as provided in Section 8 [29-14-8
NMSA 1978] of this act.

29-14-3. Definition.

As used in the Peace Officer's Employer-Employee Relations Act [29-14-1 NMSA
1978], "peace officer" or "officer" means any employee of a police or sheriff's
department that is part of or administered by the state or any political subdivision
of the state who is responsible for the prevention and detection of crime and the
enforcement of the penal, traffic or highway laws of the state.

29-14-4. Investigations of peace officers; requirements.

When any peace officer is under investigation by his employer for alleged actions
that could result in administrative sanctions being levied against the officer, the
following requirements shall be adhered to:

A. any interrogation of an officer shall be conducted when the officer is on duty or
during his normal waking hours, unless the urgency of the investigation requires
otherwise;

B. any interrogation of an officer shall be conducted at the employer's facility,
unless the urgency of the investigation requires otherwise;

C. prior to commencement of any interrogation session:

(1) an officer shall be informed of the name and rank of the person in charge of
the interrogation and all other persons who will be present during the
interrogation;

(2) an officer shall be informed of the nature of the investigation, and the names
of all known complainants shall be disclosed to the officer unless the chief
administrator of the officer's employer determines that the identification of the
complainant shall not be disclosed because it is necessary for the protection of
an informant or because disclosure would jeopardize or compromise the integrity
or security of the investigation; and

(3) a reasonable attempt shall be made to notify the officer's commanding officer
of the pending interrogation;

D. during any interrogation session, the following requirements shall be adhered
to:

(1) each interrogation session shall not exceed two hours unless the parties
mutually consent to continuation of the session;
(2) there shall not be more than two interrogation sessions within a twenty-four
hour period, unless the parties mutually consent to additional sessions, provided
that there shall be at least a one-hour rest period between the sessions;

(3) the combined duration of an officer's work shift and any interrogation session
shall not exceed fourteen hours within a twenty-four hour period, unless the
urgency of the investigation requires otherwise;

(4) there shall not be more than two interrogators at any given time;

(5) an officer shall be allowed to attend to physical necessities as they occur in
the course of an interrogation session; and

(6) an officer shall not be subjected to offensive language or illegal coercion by
his interrogator in the course of an interrogation session;

E. any interrogation of an officer shall be recorded, either mechanically or by a
stenographer, and the complete interrogation shall be published as a transcript;
provided that any recesses called during the interrogation shall be noted in the
transcript; and

F. an accurate copy of the transcript or tape shall be provided to the officer, upon
his written request, no later than fifteen working days after the investigation has
been completed.

29-14-5. Polygraph examinations.

After reviewing all the information collected in the course of an investigation of a
peace officer, the chief administrator of the officer's employer may order the
officer to submit to a polygraph examination administered by a licensed
polygraph examiner, provided that:

A. all other reasonable investigative means have been exhausted; and

B. the officer has been advised of the administrator's reasons for ordering the
polygraph examination.

29-14-6. Investigation of administrative matters.
When any peace officer is under investigation for an administrative matter, the
officer shall be permitted to produce any relevant documents, witnesses or other
evidence to support his case and he may cross-examine any adverse witnesses
during any grievance process or appeal involving disciplinary action.

29-14-7. Personnel files.

A. No document containing comments adverse to a peace officer shall be
entered into his personnel file unless the officer has read and signed the
document. When an officer refuses to sign a document containing comments
adverse to him, the document may be entered into an officer's personnel file if:

(1) the officer's refusal to sign is noted on the document by the chief
administrator of the officer's employer; and

(2) the notation regarding the officer's refusal to sign the document is witnessed
by a third party.

B. A peace officer may file a written response to any document containing
adverse comments entered into his personnel file and the response shall be filed
with the officer's employer within thirty days after the document was entered into
the officer's personnel file. A peace officer's written response shall be attached to
the document.

29-14-8. Constitutional rights; notification.

When any peace officer is under administrative investigation and a determination
is made to commence a criminal investigation, he shall be immediately notified of
the investigation and shall be afforded all the protections set forth in the bill of
rights of the United States and New Mexico constitutions.

29-14-9. Forced disclosure of financial status prohibited.

A peace officer shall not be required by his police or sheriff's department
employer to disclose information regarding his financial status, unless all other
reasonable investigative means have been exhausted or except as otherwise
required by law.

29-14-10. Political activity.
A. A peace officer shall not be prohibited by his police or sheriff's department
employer from engaging in any political activity when the officer is off duty,
except as otherwise required by law.

B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, any peace
officer employed by the New Mexico state police department shall be governed
by the provisions of regulations adopted by the department regarding political
activity.

29-14-11. Exercise of rights.

A peace officer shall not be subjected to any retaliation by his employer due to
the officer's lawful exercise of his rights under the Peace Officer's Employer-
Employee Relations Act [29-14-1 NMSA 1978].
