Between The Representatives of
2 Oo 1 8 The Costa Mesa Police Management Association

And the City of Costa Mesa
2022

 
ARTICLE 1
ARTICLE 2
ARTICLE 3
ARTICLE 4
ARTICLE 5
ARTICLE 6
ARTICLE 7
ARTICLE 8
ARTICLE 9
ARTICLE 10
ARTICLE 11
ARTICLE 12
ARTICLE 13
ARTICLE 14
ARTICLE 15
ARTICLE 16
ARTICLE 17
ARTICLE 18
ARTICLE 19
ARTICLE 20
ARTICLE 21
ARTICLE 22
ARTICLE 23
ARTICLE 24
ARTICLE 25
APPENDIX A

CMPMA MOU.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

RECOGNITION/PREAMBLE

TERM OF AGREEMENT

BASIC SALARIES AND WAGES

HEALTH INSURANCE

RETIREMENT

RETIREE MEDICAL & 401(a) DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
BENEFIT REVIEW COMMITTEE

DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY

POST PAY

TUITION REIMBURSEMENT & PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXECUTIVE LEAVE

AUTOMOBILE AVAILABILITY

SPECIALTY ASSIGNMENT PAY

VACATION LEAVE

SICK LEAVE

BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

LONG TERM DISABILITY

LAYOFF PROCEDURES

DISCIPLINE

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

HOLIDAY PAY

UNIFORM MAINTENANCE ALLOWANCE

SENIORITY

WORK SCHEDULES

PROHIBITION OF TOBACCO

VEHICLE USE POLICY (ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATION 5.5)

 
ARTICLE 1 - RECOGNITION/PREAMBLE

11 By resolution of the City Council of the City of Costa Mesa, and pursuant to the provisions of the
Meyers-Milias-Brown Act, California Government Code Section 3500, et seq., the City of Costa Mesa
(hereinafter referred to as “City”) recognizes the Costa Mesa Police Management Association
(hereinafter referred to as “Association” or “CMPMA”) as the exclusive representative and the agent for
collective bargaining purposes of sworn Police Captains and Police Lieutenants employed in the Costa
Mesa Police Department.

1.2 This Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) has been prepared by representatives of the City
and representatives of the Association who have met and conferred in good faith, examining a number of
proposals and counter proposals concerning wages, hours of employment, working conditions, fringe
benefits and other terms and conditions of employment for the sworn officers of the Costa Mesa Police
Department as defined herein. The Parties to this MOU are the City and the Association, which are
jointly recognized and referred to herein below as the “Parties.”

1.3 It is the mutual understanding of the City and the Association that this MOU shall be submitted
to the Costa Mesa City Council upon the joint recommendations of the Parties that this MOU be adopted.
The City Council will take such action as may be needed to implement this MOU.

1.4 The City and the Association hereby acknowledge that the terms of this MOU may not cover all
terms of employment relating to wages, hours and conditions of employment at the City of Costa Mesa.
These parties further acknowledge that any term or condition of employment which is not expressly
covered herein, but is expressly covered by existing ordinances, resolutions, policies and regulations of
the City, including the Personnel Rules and Regulations presently in effect, shall be controlled by the
existing provisions of said ordinances, resolutions, policies, and regulations to the extent that said
policies and regulations do not change, abrogate, modify or amend any express term of this MOU. All
other terms and conditions of employment in effect at the time of execution of this MOU shall remain
status quo during the term hereof, unless such a term or condition is excepted from collective bargaining
and the scope of representation as set forth in California Government Code 3504 or constitutes an
emergency matter as set forth in California Government Code 3504.5.

15 If any portion of this MOU is found to be unlawful, in conflict or inconsistent with existing laws,
regulations, or ordinances; or determined to be invalid or unenforceable by an administrative or judicial
tribunal with competent jurisdiction, such portion or part of this MOU shall be superseded and not
enforced. The remainder of this MOU shall continue in full force and effect, and shall be enforced
through the term of the agreement pursuant to Government Code Section 3500, et seq.

1.6 Continuous, uninterrupted and efficient service to the community by the City and its employees,
and orderly employer-employee relations are essential considerations of this MOU. Accordingly, the
Association agrees, on behalf of itself and its members, individually and collectively, that there shall not
be any strikes, non-informational picketing, boycotting, work stoppages, slow-down strikes, or any other
concerted job action or refusal to render services, including overtime or any other curtailment or
restriction of work and service at any time during the term of this MOU.

17 The Association recognizes its duty and obligation to comply with the provisions of Section 1.6
of this MOU and shall make every reasonable effort to assure that all employees covered by this MOU
similarly do so. In the event of any concerted activity by employees in contravention to the provisions or
intent of Section 1.6, the Association hereby agrees to direct its members to cease any such actions or

CMPMA MOU.
activities forthwith. No employee covered by this MOU shall be entitled to any benefits or wages
whatsoever while engaged in any activities or actions prohibited by Section 1.6 of the MOU

ARTICLE 2 - TERM OF AGREEMENT

2.1 The term of this MOU will commence on July 1, 2018, and expire in the pay period, which
includes June 30, 2022.

ARTICLE 3 - BASIC SALARIES AND WAGES

3.1 Employees covered by this MOU shall be compensated at the established monthly base salary
rates under the Basic Pay Schedule for covered employees. The two classifications in the Association
under this Schedule (Police Lieutenant and Police Captain) shall be assigned a range number established
by the City Council resolution.

3.2 The City will adjust the monthly base salary for members of the Association as follows:

e Effective in the pay period which includes January 1, 2019, employees shall receive a three
percent (3.0 %) base salary increase.

e Effective in the pay period which includes July 1, 2019, employees shall receive a three
percent (3.0%) base salary increase.

e Effective in the pay period which includes July 1, 2020, employees shall receive a three
percent (3.0%) base salary increase.

e Effective in the pay period which includes July 1, 2021, employees shall receive a three
percent (3.0%) base salary increase.

ARTICLE 4 - HEALTH INSURANCE

Al IRS SECTION 125 BENEFIT PLAN - The City shall provide the amount listed below toward the
payment of premiums under an IRS Section 125 Benefit Plan. The City may also offer other pre-tax
benefits.

4.2 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL CARE ACT - The City contracts with
the California Public Employees’ Retirement System (“CalPERS”) for medical insurance pursuant to the
Public Employees’ Medical and Hospital Care Act (“PEMHCA”). The City will contribute the annual
CalPERS statutory minimum on behalf of each participant in the program, which is included in the
amount of the City’s contribution to the flexible benefit account (i.e., the Section 125 Benefit Plan)
described below. Eligible employees may select any of the medical insurance plans offered by CalPERS.

43 MANDATORY BENEFITS - Employees must use a portion of the City contribution to pay for

life insurance and long term disability. Employees also must enroll in medical insurance unless the
employee meets the eligible opt out requirements to receive cash in lieu.

CMPMA MOU.
44 QUALIFICATION FOR FLEX CONTRIBUTION - Employees must receive compensation
for the entire pay period to receive the flexible benefit contribution amount. Use of accrued leave
qualifies as compensation for this purpose. Employees will be ineligible for the flexible benefit
contribution if the employee records absence without pay hours within the pay period except for the
following reasons:

e If an employee exhausts his/her accrued leaves prior to the end of the pay period, he/she shall
receive the flex contribution for that pay period.

e Disciplinary actions will not apply to this article/qualification i.e. suspensions without pay.

45 CONTRIBUTION AMOUNT - For those employees who enroll in City offered coverage, the
City’s contribution towards each employee’s flexible benefit account is as follows: two thousand one
hundred and nineteen dollars ($2,119.00) per month effective the pay period which includes
January 1, 2019. This amount is inclusive of the CalPERS statutory minimum amount for each year. An
employee who selects benefits which cost less than the dollars contributed by the City (which also
requires the employee to select life insurance and long term disability per Article 4.3) shall receive the
remainder of the flexible benefit contribution in cash up to a maximum of one thousand and sixty dollars
($1,060.00) per month.

46 WAIVER OF INSURANCE - An employee may opt out of medical coverage offered by the City
and receive cash in lieu only if the employee provides before the start of each plan year, an attestation
that the employee and his or her tax family have minimum essential coverage through another source
(other than coverage in the individual market, whether or not obtained through Covered California) for
the plan year. The City will not pay cash in lieu if the City knows or has reason to know that the
employee or an individual in the employee’s tax family does not have the required alternative coverage.

Any employee in the unit who meets the requirements to opt out of medical coverage can receive one
thousand and sixty dollars ($1,060.00) per month. Those employees who meet the requirements and opt
out of medical coverage will still receive an employer contribution to cover the mandatory life and
disability insurance benefits.

ARTICLE 5 - RETIREMENT

5.1 CALPERS - The City contracts with CalPERS for retirement benefits.

A. Employees Who Are Not “New Members” as Defined by Government Code Section
7522.04(f) —i.e., “Classic Members”

 

1. Retirement Formula - The City contracts with CalPERS to provide the 3% at 50
retirement formula as set forth in California Government Code Section 21362.2 for
all employees covered by this MOU hired before December 31, 2012 or lateral
employees hired after that date who qualify as “classic members” under the Public
Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 (“PEPRA”).

2. Retirement Benefit Calculation Period - The City's contract with CalPERS provides
for the "Single Highest Year" retirement benefit for these employees per
Government Code section 20042. The retirement benefit is based on the highest
annual compensation for the twelve (12) consecutive months selected by the
employee or not selected, the employee’s last twelve (12) months of employment.

5
CMPMA MOU.
CMPMA MOU.

3.

4.

Payment of Employee/Member Contribution:

a. Effective at the beginning of the pay period following City Council approval of
this MOU, these employees will pay three percent (3.0%) compensation earnable
towards their CalPERS member contribution. The City pays and reports six
percent (6.0%) as an Employer Paid Member Contribution (EPMC) under
Government Code section 20636(c)(4) pursuant to section 20691.

b. Effective at the beginning of the pay period which includes July 1, 2019, these
employees will pay six percent (6.0%) compensation earnable towards their
CalPERS member contribution. The City pays and reports three percent (3.0%)
as an Employer Paid Member Contribution (EPMC) under Government Code
section 20636(c)(4) pursuant to section 20691.

c. Effective at the beginning of the pay period which includes July 1, 2020, these
employees will pay the full nine CalPERS member contribution of nine percent
(9%) of compensation earnable towards their CalPERS member contribution.
The City shall pay and report zero percent (0%) of compensation earnable as an
Employer Paid Member Contribution (EPMC) under Government Code section
20636(c)(4) pursuant to section 20691.

Cost Sharing:

a. Classic member employees subject to the 3%@50 formula pay an additional five
percent (5%) compensation earnable as cost sharing into their employee account
with CalPERS in accordance with Government Code section 20516(a).

For “New Member” Employees

1.

Retirement Formula - Unit members who are defined as “new members” under the
PEPRA, are covered by the 2.7%@ 57 formula provided for by the Public
Employees’ Retirement Law at Government Code section 7522.25(d).

Retirement Benefit Calculation Period - These employees’ final compensation will
be based on the highest annual average compensation earnable during the three
consecutive years of employment immediately preceding the effective date of his or
her retirement or any other three consecutive year period chosen by the employee as
set forth in Government Code section 7522.32(a).

Payment_of Employee/Member Contribution - New member employees are
responsible for paying the employee contribution of one-half of the total normal cost
of the plan, as defined by CalPERS, through a payroll deduction. This amount will
be determined by CalPERS in the future.

Cost Sharing:

a. New member employees pay additional retirement contributions as cost sharing
as follows:
ii.

Effective at the beginning of the pay period which includes July 1, 2018, these
employees will pay an additional percentage of their compensation earnable as
cost sharing in accordance with Government Code section 20516(f) so that that
when their employee contribution (the rate established by CalPERS for new
members) and the cost share are combined, these employees will be paying
fourteen percent (14%) of compensation earnable for retirement contributions.

Notwithstanding subparagraph 4(a) above, subsequent to July 1, 2018, the cost
share payment for new member employees will fluctuate if the normal cost rate
changes. If the annual rate established by CalPERS for new members reduces,
the cost share (per Government Code section 20516(f) will go up so that when
combined with the rate established for new members, the employee is paying a
total of fourteen percent (14%) for retirement. If the rate increases above its rate
as of July 1, 2018, the cost share (per Government Code section 20516(f) will go
down so that when combined with the half the normal cost rate, the employee is
paying a total of fourteen percent (14%) for retirement. If the annual rate
established by CalPERS for new members goes above fourteen percent (14%),
there will be no cost share payment due from the new member employees.
Rather, the employee will just pay the applicable annual rate established by
CalPERS for new members as determined by CalPERS.

Adoption of the IRS Code section 414(h)(2) Resolution

 

The City has adopted the CalPERS resolution in accordance with IRS Code section
414(h)(2) to ensure that the employee contribution is made on a pre-tax basis.

5.2 CALPERS CONTRACT - The City will continue to provide pension benefits to represented
employees in accordance with the CalPERS contract in effect on the effective date of this MOU. The
City's contract with CalPERS for employees covered by this MOU includes the following options:

CMPMA MOU.

Section 20042

Section 20516
Section 20965
Sections 21624/
21626
Section 21620
Section 21329
Section 21362.2
Section 20903
Section 21635
Section 21573
Section 21551
Section 20055
Section 20938
Section 21536
Section 20481
Section 21024

(One Year Final Compensation, only applies to classic member
employees)

(Employee Cost Share, only applies to classic member employees)
(Credit for Unused Sick Leave)

(Post-Retirement Survivor Allowance, only applies classic member
employees)

(Retired Death Benefit of $500)

(COLA of 2%)

(3% @ 50 Benefit Formula, only applies to classic member employees)
(Two Years Additional Service —- Golden Handshake)
(Post-Retirement Survivor Allowance Continues After Remarriage)
(Third Level of 1959 Survivor Benefits)

(Death Benefit Continues After Remarriage)

(Credit for Service Before CalPERS Contract)

(Limited Prior Service Credit to Employees on Contract Date)
(Local System Service Credit for Basic Death Benefit)

(Transfer of Local System Assets to CalPERS)

(Military Stats 76)
e = Section 21023.5 (Peace Corps/AmeriCorps Service)

e Section 21027 (Military Retiree)

e IRC 414(h)(2) (Pre-tax payroll deduction plan for member contributions and service
credit purchase)

ARTICLE 6 - RETIREE MEDICAL & 401(a) DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN

6.1 RETIREE MEDICAL - The Defined Contribution Retirement Health Savings Plan (Plan) went
into effect on January 1, 2004 and payments made by the City were suspended in 2010. The purpose of
the Plan was to establish a tax protected savings program for every full-time employee that:

e Provided a retiree medical benefit for employees who were hired after January 1, 2004 who
will not be eligible for the health insurance contribution under the Council Policy 300-1.

e Provided a supplemental benefit to the City contribution under Council Policy 300-1 for
employees hired before January 1, 2004.

The program required mandatory participation by all full-time employees. However, in 2010, payments
by both the City and employees were permanently suspended. Up until 2010, employees made a monthly
contribution to the plan equal to 1% of their base monthly salary, which was matched by a 1% salary
monthly contribution from the City into employees’ accounts. The account assets which accumulated,
plus investment earnings, will be used in retirement to pay health insurance premiums and other eligible
out-of-pocket medical expenses such as deductibles, co-payments, vision care or dental care. The
previously made employee contributions plus vested employer contributions are portable if an employee
should leave employment with Costa Mesa prior to retirement. However, since 2010, no additional funds
(either City funds or employee funds) were added to the plan and the funds are currently earning interest
and will be available to employees at retirement.

For all employees in the unit, the City will pay the CalPERS statutory minimum for each member of the
bargaining unit for retiree medical benefits.

6.2 401(a) DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN FOR POLICE CAPTAINS - The 401(a)
deferred compensation plan provides Police Captains with a tax-deferred savings plan for future financial
planning. The City provides a one half of one percent (.5%) per pay period contribution for each Police
Captain in the Association into the employee’s account in the 401(a) plan.

ARTICLE 7 - BENEFIT REVIEW COMMITTEE

 

71 CMPMA shall maintain one representative on the City’s Benefit Review Committee. The
Committee continually evaluates the City’s benefit programs and makes recommendations on plan
changes, benefit levels, payroll deductions and the addition or deletion of plans.

CMPMA MOU.
ARTICLE 8 - DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY

8.1 The Costa Mesa Police Department Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy applies to employees
represented by the Association. The Policy permits reasonable suspicion drug and alcohol testing. The
Policy is incorporated into this MOU by reference.

ARTICLE 9 - POST PAY

9.1 PAY FOR CERTIFICATIONS ISSUED BY THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
COMMISSION ON POLICE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING (“POST”) - Employees in
the Association shall be eligible for additional pay as follows:

A. Advanced Certificate - Police Lieutenant

Employees at the rank of Police Lieutenant shall receive ten percent (10%) of base pay
for receipt of a POST Advanced Certificate. Employees must present the Certificate to
the City to receive the pay. Police Captains are not eligible for this pay.

B. Management Certificate - Police Captain

Employees at the rank of Police Captain shall receive five percent (5%) of base pay for
receipt of a POST Management Certificate. Employees must present the Certificate to
the City to receive the pay. Police Lieutenants are not eligible for this pay.

The POST Certificate pays do not stack. An employee who receives Management Certificate Pay of five
percent (5%) no longer receives the ten percent (10%) for the Advanced Certificate. The parties agree, to
the extent permitted by law, the compensation in this section is special compensation and shall be
reported as such pursuant to Title 2 CCR, Section 571(a)(2) Peace Officer Standard Training (POST)
Certificate Pay.

ARTICLE 10 - TUITION REIMBURSEMENT & PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT

10.1. TUITION REIMBURSEMENT - Tuition and/or textbook costs required to complete job-
related educational courses which are taken by an employee and which pertain directly to his or her City
employment, may be reimbursed to the employee if reimbursement is recommended by the Chief of
Police and approved by the Assistant City Manager. An employee requesting tuition reimbursement
must obtain prior approval before enrollment per Administrative Regulation 2.1. The employee
participating must achieve a passing grade of a “C” or better, Credit/No Credit or a Certificate of
Completion and should see that the Human Resources Manager receives a copy, where appropriate, of the
employee’s grade(s) before any reimbursement is provided.

The City will reimburse up to a maximum of $1,250 per fiscal year for qualifying tuition, textbook costs,
and/or class material costs. It is the intent of the parties that any units/degrees submitted are accredited by
Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC, www.wascweb.org), Council for Higher Education
Accreditation (CHEA, www.chea.org/directories), or pre-approved by the Police Chief and Assistant City
Manager.

10.2 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT - The City agrees to reimburse Police Captains (and
effective in the pay period following City Council approval of this MOU, Police Lieutenants) up to

9
CMPMA MOU.
$1,000 per fiscal year for activities, materials, equipment or fees that will aid in their individual
professional development. The reimbursement options include: education fees that exceed the City’s
annual $1,250 tuition reimbursement limit;

10.3. TECHNOLOGY ALLOWANCE - Effective in the pay period following City Council approval
of this MOU, employees covered by this MOU shall be provided with a $75 monthly technology
allowance.

ARTICLE 11 - EXECUTIVE LEAVE

11.1 Pursuant to Section 13(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act, it is mutually agreed that Police
Lieutenants and Police Captains are exempt from both the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the
Fair Labor Standards Act. Due to the additional hours (above their regularly scheduled 40 hours per
week) that Police Lieutenants and Police Captains work, these employees will receive 80 hours of
Executive Leave each calendar year. As permitted by California Labor Code section 227.3, any
Executive Leave not used in the calendar year in which it is received will be lost. Executive Leave has
no cash value and cannot be cashed out. The Executive Leave hours are subject to the same carry
forward limitations and benefit provisions as detailed in Administrative Regulation 2.19.

ARTICLE 12 - AUTOMOBILE AVAILABILTY

12.1. The City agrees that there will be automobiles available for Police Captains and Police
Lieutenants within the Police Department vehicle fleet. Use of the vehicles will comply with the City’s
Vehicle Use Policy (Administrative Regulation 5.5) attached to this MOU as Appendix A.

ARTICLE 13 - SPECIALTY ASSIGNMENT PAY

13.1 The City and Association recognize that special assignments out of the scope of the covered
classifications of Police Lieutenant will at times be required for the efficient operation of the department,
and therefore these special assignments and their associated specialty assignment compensation are listed
below. The parties agree, to the extent permitted by law, the compensation in this section is special
compensation and shall be reported as such pursuant to Title 2 California Code of Regulations, Section
571.

13.2. UNIFORM ASSIGNMENT PAY - Employees in the classifications of Police Lieutenant who
are regularly assigned to uniform automobile/motorcycle patrol, or traffic enforcement shall receive
uniform assignment pay (2.5% of base salary). Employees assigned to patrol or traffic enforcement for
less than 14 consecutive days shall not be eligible for Uniform Assignment Pay.

13.3. BILINGUAL PAY - Applicable only to employees in the job classifications determined by the
City Manager and when so assigned using their bilingual abilities as part of their regular job assignment:
5% of the top step base salary for the Senior Police Officer classification. Employees who are approved
and assigned by their Chief of Police to utilize bilingual skills, which includes Spanish, Vietnamese,
American Sign Language (ASL) and any other language approved by the Assistant City Manager, must
be certified by the Chief of Police and may be tested by the Human Resources Division annually to verify
their language proficiency in order to maintain eligibility for said compensation.

10
CMPMA MOU.
The City shall establish a second level of proficiency, designed for employees who are capable of
“speaking only” and shall receive 2.5% of the top step base salary for the Senior Police Officer
classification. Testing procedures will be determined and administered by the City. This level of
proficiency is not intended to replace “higher” level of proficiency nor to “demote” employees currently
receiving that level of benefit, providing they maintain appropriate proficiency.

A. The following standard of spoken Spanish, Vietnamese, or American Sign Language is
followed for the 2.5% Certification:

1. The applicant has the ability to create with language, recombining and adapting
learned material to express personal meaning and can handle simple situations and
transactions in the course of his/her work such as explanation of procedures,
obtaining personal information, instructions to victims and onlookers, among others.

2. The applicant is able to maintain simple face-to-face conversations, asking and
answering questions regarding everyday survival on topics most related to self and
immediate work environment; courtesy requirements, and personal needs during the
course of routine calls not likely to be of a life or death nature.

3. The applicant can be understood with some repetition by a sympathetic native
speaker.

4. The applicant demonstrates mastery of work-related vocabulary including: time, days
of the week, months, family members, parts of the body, motions and states,
greetings, home and community, food and beverages, alphabet and numbers,
vehicles, simple commands, interrogatory words, etc.

5. Accuracy is required in the present tense and gender distinctions.

6. Core vocabulary of 300-600 words.

B. The 5% Certification requires:

1. Accuracy in present and past tenses.

2. Core vocabulary of 600-1200 words.

3. Exhibits good pronunciation, stress, and intonation skills as judged by the ability to
be understood with little repetition or confusion by native speaker.

4. Ability to interview the victim of a crime or accident or other situation involving a
native speaker and conduct simple interrogations and investigations which could be
of a life or death nature.

5. Ability to understand description, narration, main ideas and details on a variety of

topics beyond the immediate situation.

The City will continue payment of bilingual pay in the event of an industrial injury in accordance with
the City's Personnel Rules and Regulations.

CMPMA MOU.

11
ARTICLE 14 - VACATION LEAVE

14.1 The purpose of annual vacation leave is to enable each eligible employee to spend a reasonable
amount of time away from his or her job and to return to work refreshed. Any leave of absence without
pay shall not accrue vacation leave for each full pay period of such absence.

14.2 Regular full-time employees in the classified services with an average work-week of forty (40)
hours shall receive annual vacation with pay in accordance with the following provisions:

A. After continuous full-time service amounting to one (1) year or more, an employee shall
have earned paid vacation at the rate of ninety-two (92) working hours per year.

B. Upon completion of three (3) years of continuous full-time service, but less than five (5)
years of continuous full-time service, such employee shall earn one hundred sixteen
(116) working hours per year.

C. Upon completion of five (5) years of continuous full-time service, but less than ten (10)
years of continuous full-time service, such employee shall earn one hundred forty (140)
working hours per year.

D. Upon completion of ten (10) years of continuous full-time service, but less than fifteen
(15) years of continuous full-time service, such employee shall earn one hundred sixty-
four (164) working hours per year.

E. Upon completion of fifteen (15) years of continuous full-time service but less than
twenty (20) years of continuous full-time service, such employee shall earn one hundred
eighty-eight (188) working hours per year.

F. Upon completion of twenty (20) years of continuous full-time service, such employee
shall earn two hundred twelve (212) working hours per year (effective
September 1, 2009).

G. Employees shall be allowed to accrue a maximum of 424 hours of Vacation time. If an
employee’s vacation hours reach this maximum, his/her accrual will be frozen until such
time that his/her accrual drops below the maximum. There will be no payoff for vacation
hours beyond the employee’s current accrual maximum.

14.3. ACCUMULATION OF VACATION LEAVE - Accumulation of vacation leave in excess of
that earned in a calendar year is allowable upon approval of the department director as authorized
by the City Manager by means of an Administrative Regulation. The current provisions of
Administrative Regulation 2.22 will remain in effect until September 1, 2009.

A. Vacation Accrual Ceiling - Effective with the pay period that begins on September 1,
2009, the accrual of vacation hours will be capped at the following maximum levels
based upon an employee’s years of service as follows:

 

Years of Service Annual Accrual 40-Hour Maximum Accrual 40-Hour
1-2 92.0 184.0
3-4 116.0 232.0
5-9 140.0 280.0
10-14 164.0 328.0
12

CMPMA MOU.
15-19 188.0 376.0
20+ 212.0 424.0

Once the maximum accrual is reached, the employee will stop accruing additional
Vacation Leave. Annual vacation accruals will re-commence in the next pay period
following the use of vacation leave which reduces the balance below the maximum
allowed. It is the responsibility of the employee to manage accrued vacation time off to
not exceed the cap or maximum amount allowed per the chart above.

Scheduling of Vacation Leave - It is the employee’s responsibility to request, schedule
and use vacation time to avoid exceeding the maximums. However, in the event the
maximum is reached, the City has the right to schedule the employee off in order to
reduce the accrued hours to be within the cap.

Employees must submit vacation requests in a timely manner in accordance with the
Department requirement and as appropriate for the employee’s Departmental operational
needs.

Departments which have 24 hours a day/7 days a week operations have established
request procedures that require significant advance notice so all vacation requests may be
coordinated as fairly as possible based upon the operational needs of the Department and
or Division.

Departmental Needs & Exception - When an employee submits a timely vacation leave
request and the Supervisor and/or the Chief of Police must deny it due to the operational
needs of the City and/or Department, an exception may be granted by the Chief of Police
with a written explanation from the employee’s supervisor and advance approval from
the City Manager. If such an exception is granted, a cash-out of the excess, accrued
vacation time in excess of the maximum amount allowed will be processed for the pay
period in question. There will be no approvals for Vacation Leave Accrual beyond the
Maximum Accrual Level.

Should a scheduled Vacation Leave have to be cancelled by the Chief of Police due to
the operational needs of the City/Department, an exception for a “Cash-Out” may be
granted by the Chief of with a written explanation from the employee’s supervisor and
advance approval from the City Manager.

All employees who are at the Maximum Accrual Level or who may reach the Maximum
Accrual Level shall utilize the “Cash-Out” and/or “Vacation Leave” options so as to
NOT exceed the Vacation Accrual Ceiling. Other than exceptions granted based upon
City and/or Departmental needs as approved by both the Department Director and the
City Manager, there will no other cash-out of Vacation Leave time beyond the Maximum
Accrual rates that have been established.

14.3. VACATION LEAVE CASH OUT

A.

CMPMA MOU.

Vacation Leave Cash Outs through December 31, 2018 - Employees will have the

following cash-out options: 1) One eighty (80) hour cash-out any time during the fiscal

year, regardless of the employee’s maximum accrual and regardless of the employee’s

Vacation Leave usage; and, 2) Up to four cash-outs per fiscal year, any time during the

fiscal year (irrespective of quarter), based on a “2 for 1” usage ratio, up to a maximum of
13

 
80-hours for each cash out. For example, if an employee uses 10 hours of Vacation
Leave, the employee could cash out up to 20 hours of Vacation Leave; in order for an
employee to cash-out the maximum of 80-hours Vacation Leave, the employee would
need to use 40 hours of Vacation Leave.

All employees who are at the Maximum Accrual Level or who may reach the Maximum
Accrual Level shall utilize the “Cash-Out” and/or “Vacation Leave” options so as to
NOT exceed the Vacation Accrual Ceiling. Other than exceptions granted based upon
City and/or Departmental needs as approved by both the Chief of Police and the City
Manager, there will no other cash-out of Vacation Leave time beyond the Maximum
Accrual rates that have been established.

This subsection (a) shall end on December 31, 2018.

B. Vacation Leave Cash Out for 2019 and Thereafter - On or before the pay period which
includes December 15 of each calendar year (which includes December 15, 2018), an
employee may make an irrevocable election to cash out up to one hundred and twenty
(120) hours of vacation leave which will be earned in the following calendar year at the
employee’s base rate of pay as follows:

An employee can cash out vacation during any quarter of the following year as long as
on the date(s) chosen for cash out the employee has earned at least the amount of
vacation he/she chooses to cash out. In other words, employees who made an
irrevocable election to cash out vacation (up to a maximum of 120 hours for the year)
shall choose to be paid out during one or more of the following payroll periods:

Payroll period which includes April 1st
Payroll period which includes July 1st
Payroll period which includes October 1*
Final Payroll period of the calendar year.

Employees will notify the Human Resources Division of which quarter(s) they wish their
cash outs to be paid by the payroll deadlines as set by the Finance Department and
Human Resources Division. Any remaining elected vacation hours that have not been
previously paid out during the year will be paid out on the final payroll period of the
calendar year.

ARTICLE 15 - SICK LEAVE

15.1 ACCRUAL OF SICK LEAVE - Employees in the Association accrue four (4) hours of sick
leave per pay period into a Primary Sick Leave Bank.

15.2 MAXIMUM ACCRUAL IN THE PRIMARY SICK LEAVE BANK - Employees may
accrue up to 480 hours of sick leave credit in a Primary Sick Leave Bank.

15.3 OPTIONS WHEN AN EMPLOYEE REACHES THE MAXIMUM ACCRUAL OF SICK
LEAVE IN THE PRIMARY SICK LEAVE BANK - When an employee has 480 hours of sick leave
in his/her Primary Sick Leave Bank, his/her pay period accrual will be distributed in the following
manner:

14
CMPMA MOU.
A. At the employee's option, one-half of the benefit will be:

1. Paid as monetary compensation to the employee at the employee's then current
hourly base rate of pay or,

2. Converted into vacation hours. If this option is chosen, the employee cannot accrue
more than the maximum vacation hours as provided in the vacation hours article of
this MOU.

B. The remaining one-half benefit will be placed in the employee's Secondary Sick Leave
Bank.

15.4 USE OF PRIMARY SICK LEAVE BANK - Hours in this bank may be used if an employee is
sick or as otherwise provided by law.

15.5 SECONDARY SICK LEAVE BANK - In the past, there was no cap on the accrual of sick
leave. As provided above, the parties agreed to place a cap on the accrual of sick leave in the Primary
Sick Leave Bank and create a Secondary Sick Leave Bank. This bank includes sick leave previously
earned and as well as sick leave deposited into the bank when an employee reaches their maximum
accrual in the Primary Sick Leave Bank as provided for in Article 15.1.

If an employee has a Secondary Sick Leave Bank, the first 40 hours of sick leave used per calendar year
must be from this bank. Hours in this bank may also be used in the event of a verified non-industrial
disability which has resulted in an absence from duty of at least 60 consecutive calendar days. In this
event, sick leave in the Secondary Sick Leave Bank may be used for additional consecutive absences
resulting from the disability; or it may be used to supplement LTD payments (so that the employee
receives his/her full compensation) should the employee qualify for long term disability benefits.
Additionally, an amount of sick leave equal to the hours used from the Primary Bank for said disability
(i.e., if an employee is out for at least 60 days) may be transferred from the Secondary Bank to the
Primary Bank provided that such transfer shall not result in there being in excess of 480 hours in the
Primary Bank.

15.6 At the time of separation from the City, (unless terminated for cause) with a minimum of 20
years of continuous service, including if separation is by retirement (defined as having applied for
retirement benefits from CalPERS), the employee shall have the option of:

A. Being paid at his/her then current hourly rate for one-half of the sick leave accrued in
both his/her Primary Sick Leave Bank, and Secondary Sick Leave Bank, or,

B. The employee can choose to apply all credited time (both Banks) towards his or her
service credit.

ARTICLE 16 - BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

16.1 A maximum of three (3) days of paid leave may be used by an employee in the event of a death
in his/her immediate family or the immediate family of his/her spouse. "Immediate family" is defined as
grandparent, father, mother, domestic partner, brother, sister, spouse, or child. Employees are also
permitted to use up to an additional two (2) days of sick leave to extend the bereavement leave up to a
maximum of five (5) working days. Bereavement leave does not accumulate as it is not an accrued leave
and is not carried over into a subsequent calendar year.

15
CMPMA MOU.
ARTICLE 17 - LONG TERM DISABILITY

17.1. An employee is eligible for Long Term Disability (“LTD”) benefits. The premium for the Plan is
paid for by each employee. Employees are eligible for benefits under the current plan for disabilities as
defined by the plan and per the provisions of the plan after a 60-day elimination period. Once eligible for
LTD, an employee may exercise the option of using accumulated vacation and sick leave in his or her
Primary or Secondary Sick Leave Bank to supplement LTD payments up to an amount not to exceed
100% of monthly salary.

ARTICLE 18 - LAYOFF PROCEDURES

18.1 Because of material change in duties or organization of the Costa Mesa Police Department, or
shortage of work or funds, positions represented by the Association and covered by this MOU may be
subject to lay off. Thirty (30) calendar days before the effective date of a layoff, the Chief of Police shall
notify the Assistant City Manager and employee subject to layoff of the layoff decision. The City’s
Personnel Rules and Regulations provide the policies and procedures related to the layoff of City
employees.

ARTICLE 19 - DISCIPLINE

19.1 DISCIPLINE GENERALLY - Represented employees are sworn employees who are covered
by Public Safety Officers’ Procedural Bill of Rights Act. The provisions provided in this article are
intended to comply with that law. Employees may be subject to discipline if they engage in misconduct
or if they have any of the performance deficiencies which are set forth below in Article 19.5 which have
not been addressed through performance management. Generally, performance based discipline will not
occur unless and until the employee has been given opportunities for improvement which have not been
successful. Misconduct based discipline will generally use a progressive discipline approach (i.e., using
discipline to modify behavior which gets progressively more severe if there is a continuation of the
misconduct). However, depending on the severity of the particular misconduct, an employee could be
subject to any of the various types of discipline from a warning to dismissal.

19.2 TYPES OF DISCIPLINE - Represented employees are subject to the types of discipline set
forth below. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall inform an employee of any proposed
discipline in writing and allow the employee a reasonable opportunity to respond to the proposed
discipline before being imposed.

All proposed discipline will set forth the alleged facts upon which the discipline is based, the specific
expectations of change or improvement to be demonstrated by the employee, and notice that additional
discipline could be imposed against the employee in the event a change in the employee's conduct or
performance does not occur.

Any written documentation regarding discipline which is imposed on the employee will be entered into
the employee’s personnel file. An employee may be placed on administrative leave with pay pending
pre-disciplinary procedures.

The following are the applicable types of discipline:
A. Written Warning

B. Written Reprimand

16
CMPMA MOU.
C. Suspension: Unless extended by approval of the City Manager or Assistant City Manager on
written recommendation of the Chief of Police, the maximum period of suspension is thirty
(30) calendar days.

D. Demotion: A demotion is defined a reduction in the employee’s rank.

E. Reduction in Pay

F. Dismissal

19.3. NOTICE OF PROPOSED DISCIPLINE - Employees subject to proposed discipline will be
provided with pre-deprivation procedural due process. The Notice of Proposed Discipline will set forth
the alleged facts upon which the proposed discipline is based and the employee will be provided with all
documents upon which the City relied in issuing the Notice. The employee will also be notified that he
or she has the right to respond to the discipline either orally or in writing and the employee has the right
to be represented during any meetings (by a representative of his/her choice per Government Code
section 3303(i) at which the proposed discipline will be discussed with the employee. However, the
right to respond is up the employee. The employee has the right not to respond if he/she chooses.
However, if that occurs, if the Chief of Police or his/her designee imposes the proposed discipline it will
be without the employee’s input or response.

An employee's opportunity to respond to the proposed discipline is not intended to be an evidentiary
hearing. It is a meeting to give the employee an opportunity to respond to the proposed discipline. If, as
a result of the meeting, the Chief of Police or his/her designee determines that the information provided
by the employee raises doubts as to the accuracy of the information leading to the proposed discipline
further investigation may be initiated to determine if the proposed discipline is warranted.

The Chief of Police will evaluate the proposed discipline in light of the employee’s response, if any.
Within five (5) working days of the employee's response, or other deadline for response established by
the parties, the decision of the Chief of Police or designee will be transmitted in writing to the employee.

19.4 APPEAL PROCEDURES
Employees have the right to appeal discipline which qualifies as “punitive action” under the Public
Safety Officers’ Procedural Bill of Rights Act (“Act”). The Parties agree to the following appeal

procedures:

A. Appeal Process for Reductions in Pay, Demotion, Suspension in Excess of 20 Hours or
Dismissal

 

An employee desiring to appeal the Chief of Police’s decision shall have ten (10)
calendar days after receipt of the response to file an appeal. The employee's request for
appeal must be communicated to the Assistant City Manager within the 10-day period.

If, within the 10-day appeal period, the employee involved does not file an appeal, unless
good cause for the failure is shown, the action of the Chief of Police shall be considered
conclusive and shall take effect as prescribed. If, within the 10-day appeal period, the
employee files such notice of appeal an advisory arbitration appeal hearing shall be
established as follows:

17
CMPMA MOU.
CMPMA MOU.

A list of registered arbitrators will be certified by the parties. CMPMA and the City
shall each submit the names of five (5) arbitrators to complete a listing of ten (10)
arbitrators. The arbitrators shall be registered with the American Arbitration
Association, California State Mediation and Conciliation Service or some other
agreed upon recognized reputable source. Within seven (7) calendar days of the
employee's request for an arbitration appeals hearing, each party may strike three or
less names from the established list. If the employee or the Association fails to strike
within thirty (30) calendar days, the employee is considered to have abandoned the
appeal. If a mutual agreement cannot be reached between the parties as to the
selection of an arbitrator from the remaining names, the matter will be heard by the
listed arbitrator who is first available to hear the matter within the time frames of the
process. The party to have the first opportunity to strike a name from the list of ten
arbitrators shall be determined by a coin toss.

The selected arbitrator shall serve as the hearing officer.

Where practicable, the date for a hearing shall not be less than 20 calendar days, nor
more than 90 calendar days, from the date of the filing of the appeal with the
Assistant City Manager. The parties may however stipulate to a longer or shorter
period of time in which to hear the appeal. All interested parties shall be notified in
writing of the date, time, and place of hearing and the identity of the hearing officer
to whom the matter has been assigned.

All hearings shall be private, however, the employee may request to open the hearing
to the public.

Subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum pertaining to a hearing shall be issued at the
request of either party to the Hearing Officer, not less than seven (7) calendar days,
prior to the commencement of such hearing. After the commencement of such
hearing, subpoenas shall be issued only at the discretion of the hearing officer.

The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with technical rules relating to
evidence, civil procedure and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it
is the sort of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the
conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or
statutory rules which might make improper the admission of such evidence over
objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of
supplementing or explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself
to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions.
The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now or
hereafter may be recognized in civil actions, and irrelevant and unduly repetitious
evidence shall be excluded. The hearing officer shall not be bound by technical rules
of evidence. The hearing officer shall rule on the admission or exclusion of
evidence.

Each party shall have these rights: To be represented by legal counsel or other person

of his/her choice; to call and examine witnesses; to introduce evidence; to cross-

examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though that

matter was not covered in the direct examination; to impeach any witness regardless

of which party first called him/her to testify; and to rebut the evidence against

him/her. If the employee does not testify in his/her own behalf, he/she may be called
18
CMPMA MOU.

10.

11.

and examined by an opposing party, as if under cross-examination. Oral evidence
shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. A court reporter will be engaged to
record the hearing, unless the parties (City, hearing officer, employee/employee
representative) mutually agree that it is not necessary.

The hearing shall proceed in the following order, unless the hearing officer, for
special reason, otherwise directs:

a. The party imposing discipline shall be permitted to make an opening statement;
b. The appealing employee shall then be permitted to make an opening statement;

c. The City shall produce the evidence on its part; the City bears the burden of
proof and burden of producing evidence;

d. The employee appealing the disciplinary action may then open his/her defense
and offer his/her evidence in support thereof. The employee bears the burden of
producing evidence for any affirmative defenses asserted;

e. The parties may then, in order, respectively offer rebutting evidence, unless the
hearing officer for good reason permits them to offer evidence upon their
original case;

f. Closing arguments shall be permitted and written briefs may be permitted at the
discretion of the hearing officer.

The hearing officer shall determine relevancy, weight, and credibility of testimony
and evidence. He/she shall base his/her findings on a preponderance of evidence
presented. During the examination of a witness, all other witnesses, except the
parties, shall be excluded from the hearing unless the hearing officer, in his/her
discretion, for good cause, otherwise directs. The hearing officer, prior to or during
a hearing, may grant a continuance for any reason he/she believes to be important to
reaching a fair and proper decision. The hearing officer shall render his/her opinion
as soon after the conclusion of the hearing as possible and in no event later than 30
days after conclusion of the hearing, absent a stipulation from the parties that a
longer period of time is warranted. His/her decision shall set forth which charges, if
any, are sustained and the reasons therefor. The opinion shall set forth findings of
fact and conclusions.

The hearing officer may recommend sustaining or rejecting any or all of the charges
filed against the employee. He/she may recommend sustaining, rejecting, or
modifying the disciplinary action invoked against the employee. He/she may not
recommend discipline more stringent than that issued by the Chief of Police.

The hearing officer's opinion and recommendation shall be filed with the City
Manager or designee, with a copy sent to the appealing employee, and the Assistant
City Manager and shall set forth his/her findings and recommendations. If it is a
dismissal hearing and a dismissal is not the hearing officer's recommendation, the
opinion shall set forth the date the employee is recommended to be reinstated and/or
other recommended action. The reinstatement date, if appropriate, may be any time
on or after the date of disciplinary action.
19
CMPMA MOU.

12.

13.

14.

15.

The City Manager or designee shall then review the hearing officer’s opinion and
recommendation and render a decision on the appeal within thirty (30) days of the
filing of the opinion and recommendation. The decision of the City Manager or
designee shall be final and conclusive. Copies of the City Manager's or designee’s
decision, including the hearing officer’s recommendation(s) shall be filed where
appropriate, including the employee's personnel file, unless no discipline is upheld
by the City Manager or designee. A copy of said decision shall also be served upon
the parties and the employee.

Each party shall bear the cost of its own witness and attorney fees. The costs of the
hearing and the court reporter shall be shared by the parties. If either party
unilaterally cancels or postpones a scheduled hearing, thereby resulting in a fee
charged by the hearing officer or court reporter, then the party responsible for the
cancellation or postponement shall be solely responsible for payment of that fee.
This process may not apply to mutual settlements by the parties which result in an
arbitration fee.

In the case of suspension, demotion, reduction in salary, or dismissal prescribed by
the City Manager or designee, the time of such discipline shall relate back to the date
the employee was disciplined or after delivery of the City Manager’s or designee’s
decision if discipline was stayed pending the arbitration hearing. If the City
Manager’s or designee’s decision results in a reduction or elimination of a loss of
pay which was previously recommended by the Chief of Police, the pay loss shall be
restored to the employee.

The provisions of Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall
be applicable to proceedings under this section, including the appeal of the City
Manager’s or designee’s final determination into the California court system, which
must be made in accordance with the time standards and procedures established by
Section1094.6 of California's Code of Civil Procedure.

Appeal Process for Lower Level Discipline

The following appeal process is established pursuant to Government Code § 3304.5.

A permanent Police Lieutenant or Police Captain shall have the right to appeal
suspensions of 20 hours or less, written warnings, or written reprimands in the following
manner:

The Police Chief shall cause to be served on the employee a statement signed by the
Police Chief of the specific action against the employee. This statement shall inform
the employee that he/she has the right, within five (5) working days after receipt of
this notice, to request an informal hearing on the action by filing the request with the
Assistant City Manager.

If within the five (5) day appeal period the employee involved does not file said

appeal, unless good cause for the failure is shown, the action of the City shall be
considered conclusive and shall take effect as prescribed.

20
3. If within the five (5) day appeal period the employee involved files a written notice
of appeal with the Assistant City Manager a time for an appeal hearing before the
City Manager or designee shall be established. The date for a hearing shall not be
less than ten (10) days, nor more than thirty (30) days, from the date of the filing of
the appeal, unless the parties stipulate to a different date. The employee shall be
notified in writing of the date, time, and place of the hearing at least seven (7)
calendar days prior to the hearing.

4. The City Manager or designee shall conduct an informal hearing on the appeal. Each
party shall have the opportunity to present all relevant information in support of its
respective position. These proceedings may be electronically recorded and either
party shall have the right to cause them to be reported by a certified shorthand
reporter at the party's expense.

a. If the action involves charges of misconduct, (i.e., allegations that the employee
has violated one or more laws, regulations, procedures, or rules), the City shall
have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence the facts which
form the basis for the charge of misconduct and the burden of persuasion that the
punitive action was reasonable under the circumstances.

5. Within ten (10) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager or
designee shall deliver to the employee a final written decision, and, which shall
either: (a) affirm the decision; (b) modify it by: (1) holding that certain charges were
not established by a preponderance of the evidence, and/or (2) reducing the penalty,
or (3) overturn the decision in its entirety. The decision shall be final and binding on
the parties and the employee, subject to their right to seek judicial review pursuant to
1094.5 and 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure.

19.5 BASIS FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION - The tenure of every City employee shall be based on
reasonable standards of personal conduct and job performance. Failure to meet such standards shall be
grounds for appropriate disciplinary action, which shall be commensurate with the seriousness of the
offense and with consideration of the employee's prior performance record. Disciplinary action shall be

based upon

A.

CMPMA MOU.

any of the following grounds:

Fraud in securing employment or making a materially false statement on an application for
employment or on any supporting documents furnished with or made a part of any
application.

Incompetence such as failure to comply with the minimum standards for an employee's
position for a significant period of time.

Neglect of duty, such as failure to perform the duties required of an employee’s position.
Willful disobedience and insubordination such as a willful failure to submit to duly
appointed and acting supervision or to conform to duly established orders or directions of
persons in a supervisory position.

Dishonesty involving or affecting employment.

Being under the influence of alcohol or intoxicating drugs while on duty without a

prescription. Unauthorized use of alcohol or any intoxicating drugs while on duty, or
21
CMPMA MOU.

bringing alcohol or controlled substances onto any City work area, including work areas
which are located away from the City Hall or Police Headquarters if the employee is on duty,
without authorization from management.

. Abuse of alcoholic beverages, narcotics or any habit forming drug, in violation of the City's

drug testing policy.

. Inexcusable absence without leave.

Conviction of a felony or conviction of a misdemeanor. A plea or verdict of guilty, or a
conviction following a plea of nolo contenders, to a charge of a felony or misdemeanor is
deemed to be a conviction within the meaning of this section.

Discourteous treatment of the public.

. Improper or unauthorized use of City property.

Violation of the rules and regulations of the Police Department.

. Any act or conduct undertaken which is of such a nature that it causes discredit to fall upon

the City, the employee's department or division, whether during or outside of duty hours.

. Failure to maintain proper conduct during working hours causing discredit to the employee's

department or division.

. Fighting, threats of bodily harm or causing an assault on a fellow worker without

justification.

Misuse of City records or information obtained for use outside the scope of their
employment.

. Falsification of City records, including the intentional omission of relevant or required

information.
Willful destruction of City property
Abuse of sick leave.

Knowingly failing to follow the procedures governing grievances when pursuing a grievance.

. Inattention to duty, tardiness, carelessness or negligence in the care and handling of City

property, private property in their care or Departmental business.

. The employee's failure to resolve a physical or mental infirmity(s) or defect(s), when it is

within the capacity of the employee to do so and when so directed by his/her supervisor.

. Outside employment, which conflicts with the employee's position or the mission of the

Department, and is not specifically authorized by the Chief of Police.

. Acceptance from any source of a reward, gift or other form of remuneration in addition to the

employee's regular compensation, as a personal benefit to the employee for actions
22
BB.

cc.

performed in the normal course of the employee's assigned duties. This does not include
items of recognition, such as commendation, certificates and other such incidents of office
which may be presented to officers in recognition of superior performance or a job well
done, so long as the presentation does not include any sort of payment or compensation for
the performance of the officer's duty.

. Falsification of any City report or record, or of any report or record required to be, or, filed

by the employee or which the employee causes to be filed.

Violation of any of the provisions of the City Code, ordinances, resolutions, or any rules,
regulations or policies which may be prescribed by the City Council, City Manager,
department manager or supervisor.

Engaging in political activities precluded by State or Federal law.

Other acts which are incompatible with service to the public.

Violation of the City’s harassment policy.

ARTICLE 20 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

20.1 DEFINITION - A "grievance" is a formal, written allegation by an employee or the Association
(referred to as “grievant”) that there has been a violation, misinterpretation or misapplication of this
MOU and/or provisions of the Personnel Rules and Regulations. The grievance procedure is the sole and
exclusive method to resolve any grievance as defined herein.

20.2. PROCEDURE

A.

CMPMA MOU.

Informal Resolution: Every effort shall be made to resolve a grievance through
discussion between the employee and his/her immediate supervisor. It is the spirit and
intent of this procedure that all grievances are settled quickly and fairly without any
discrimination against employees who may seek to resolve a grievance by invoking this
procedure. Every effort should be made to find an acceptable solution at the lowest level
of supervision. Within fifteen (15) calendar days after a grievant (either an employee or
the Association) knew, or by reasonable diligence should have known, of the condition
upon which a grievance may be based, the grievant shall attempt to resolve it by an
informal meeting with the grievant’s immediate supervisor. The supervisor shall respond
with a decision within ten (10) calendar days after meeting with grievant.

If the problem cannot be resolved between the employee and the supervisor, the
employee may, within seven (7) calendar days from the date of receiving the answer
from his/her supervisor, the grievant may request and be granted an interview with the
division manager, if one exists, in order to further discuss the grievance. The division
manager shall respond with a decision within ten (10) calendar days after meeting with
grievant.

If the grievant and the division manager cannot reach a resolution to the grievance, the

employee may, within seven (7) calendar days from the date of receiving the answer

from the, request, in writing, and be granted an interview with the Chief of Police within

seven (7) calendar days of the grievant’s request to discuss the grievance to try and reach
23
CMPMA MOU.

a resolution which is satisfactory to the grievant. The Chief of Police shall meet with the
employee within seven (7) calendar days unless the date is mutually extended between
the Chief and the grievant. If the grievant and Chief of Police cannot satisfactory resolve
the grievance, the Chief of Police will issue a written decision regarding the grievance
within fifteen (15) calendar days after meeting with the grievant.

The grievant may, within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the decision by the
Chief of Police, submit a written request with the Human Resources Division requesting
for advisory arbitration.

A list of registered arbitrators will be certified by the Parties. CMPMA and the City
shall each submit the names of five (5) arbitrators to complete a listing of ten (10)
arbitrators. The arbitrators shall be registered with the American Arbitration
Association, California State Mediation and Conciliation Service or some other agreed
upon recognized reputable source. Within seven (7) calendar days of the employee's
request for an arbitration appeals hearing, each party may strike up to three names from
the established list. If the employee or CMPMA fails to strike within thirty (30) calendar
days, the employee is considered to have abandoned the appeal. If a mutual agreement
cannot be reached between the parties as to the selection of an arbitrator from the
remaining names, the matter will be heard by the listed arbitrator who is first available to
hear the matter within the time frames of the process. The party to have the first
opportunity to strike a name from the list of ten arbitrators shall be determined by a coin
toss.

The selected arbitrator shall serve as the hearing officer.

Where practicable, the date for a hearing shall not be less than 20 calendar days, nor
more than 90 calendar days, from the date of the filing of the appeal with the Assistant
City Manager. The parties may however stipulate to a longer or shorter period of time in
which to hear the appeal. All interested parties shall be notified in writing of the date,
time, and place of hearing and the identity of the hearing officer to whom the matter has
been assigned.

All hearings shall be private, however, the employee may request that the hearing be
open to the public.

Subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecums pertaining to a hearing shall be issued at the
request of either party to the Hearing Officer, not less than seven (7) calendar days, prior
to the commencement of such hearing. After the commencement of such hearing,
subpoenas shall be issued only at the discretion of the hearing officer.

The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with technical rules relating to
evidence, civil procedure and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is
the sort of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct
of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rules which
might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions.
Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct
evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be
admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the
same extent that they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions, and
irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. The hearing officer shall

24
CMPMA MOU.

not be bound by technical rules of evidence. The hearing officer shall rule on the
admission or exclusion of evidence.

Each party shall have these rights: To be represented by legal counsel or other person of
his/her choice; to call and examine witnesses; to introduce evidence; to cross-examine
opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though that matter was not
covered in the direct examination; to impeach any witness regardless of which party first
called him/her to testify; and to rebut the evidence against him/her. Oral evidence shall
be taken only on oath or affirmation. A court reporter will be engaged to record the
hearing, unless the parties (City, hearing officer, employee/employee representative)
mutually agree that same is not necessary.

The hearing shall proceed in the following order, unless the hearing officer, for special
reason, otherwise directs:

1. The grievant shall be permitted to make an opening statement;
2. The City’s representative shall then be permitted to make an opening statement;

3. The grievant shall produce the evidence on his/her part; the employee bears the
burden of proof and burden of producing evidence;

4. The City’s representative may then open his/her defense and offer his/her evidence
in support thereof;

5. The parties may then, in order, respectively offer rebutting evidence, unless the
hearing officer for good reason, permits them to offer evidence upon their original
case;

6. Closing arguments shall be permitted and written briefs may be permitted at the
discretion of the hearing officer.

The hearing officer shall determine relevancy, weight, and credibility of testimony and
evidence. He/she shall base his/her findings on a preponderance of evidence presented.
During the examination of a witness, all other witnesses, except the parties, shall be
excluded from the hearing unless the hearing officer, in his/her discretion, for good
cause, otherwise directs. The hearing officer, prior to or during a hearing, may grant a
continuance for any reason he/she believes to be important to reaching a fair and proper
decision. The hearing officer shall render his/her opinion as soon after the conclusion of
the hearing as possible and in no event later than 30 days after the conclusion of the
hearing, absent a stipulation from the parties that a longer period of time is warranted.
His/her advisory decision shall set forth why the grievance should or should not be
sustained based on the evidence presented.

 

The City Manager or designee shall then review the hearing officer’s advisory opinion
and recommendation and render a decision on the appeal within thirty days of the filing
of said opinion and recommendation. The decision of the City Manager or designee
shall be final and conclusive. Copies of the City Manager's or designee’s decision,
including the hearing officer’s recommendation(s) shall be served upon the parties and
the employee by first class mail.

25
oO. Each party shall bear equally the cost of facilities, fees and expenses of the hearing
officer if the officer is not an employee of the City. These fees also, include the fee of
the court reporter and the costs of preparing the transcripts of the hearing. Each party
shall bear the cost of its own witness and attorney fees. If either party unilaterally
cancels or postpones a scheduled hearing, thereby resulting in a fee charged by the
hearing officer or court reporter, then the party responsible for the cancellation or
postponement shall be solely responsible for payment of that fee. This process shall not
apply to mutual settlements by the parties, which result in an arbitration fee.

P. If the time limits for processing the employee’s grievance at any step defined above
should elapse, the grievance shall be considered withdrawn. Time limits may be
extended by mutual consent. If the City fails to respond within the prescribed time
limits, the grievance will be deemed to have been denied and the employee may go to the
next step. If the City Manager or designee fails to respond within the prescribed time
limit, the grievance will be deemed to have been denied and the employee will be
deemed to have exhausted his/her administrative remedy.

Q The employee and/or his/her representative may use a reasonable amount of work time as
determined by the Chief of Police in presenting the grievance. However, no employee
shall absent himself/herself without first being excused by the Chief of Police.

R. Employees shall be assured freedom from reprisal for using the grievance procedures by
both the City and CMPMA.

Ss. The settlement terms of a grievance, which is processed by an employee individually or
by the Association shall not conflict with the express provisions of this MOU

T. A group grievance may be filed when one (1) set of circumstances or occurrences affects
more than one (1) employee in the same manner or to the same extent. The group may
file one (1) document, which all members of the group have read and signed. Members
of the group shall be limited to those who have signed the grievance. The resolution of a
group grievance may not be consistent among all employees in the group grievance due
to differences in the circumstances or occurrences that brought about the grievance.

ARTICLE 21 - HOLIDAY PAY

21.1 DESIGNATED HOLIDAYS - The following are the twelve (12) designated holidays:

 

 

 

 

New Year’s Day Independence Day Day after Thanksgiving
January 1* 4" of July 4" Friday in November
Martin Luther King, Jr. Labor Day Christmas Day
3" Monday in January 1* Monday in September December 25"
President’s Day Veteran’s Day Floating Holiday :
3 Monday in February November 11" Designated as Lincoln’s
Birthday
Memorial Day Thanksgiving Day Floating Holiday

 

Last Monday in May

 

4" Thursday in November

 

Designated as Admission Day

 

CMPMA MOU.

26

 
21.2 Inthe event any of the above holidays fall on Saturday, the preceding Friday will be observed. In
the event any of the above holidays fall on Sunday, the following Monday will be observed.

21.3 Prior to the beginning of each calendar year, employees must irrevocably elect for the next year
to either receive holiday leave (in which case they will receive 120 hours of holiday leave which they can
use either on the actual holiday or work on the holiday and use at another time) or cash out for the
holidays (in which case they will receive 96 hours of holiday pay. Employees who choose the cash out
option will receive a holiday pay bank of 96 hours beginning the first pay period for the new payroll year.
This holiday pay bank may be cashed out at any time during the year. At the end of the calendar year,
any remaining holiday pay will be cashed out throughout the payroll year, if an employee, who has
selected holiday pay, decides to take a holiday off, he/she must use either vacation or executive leave to
cover their leave since he/she received holiday pay.

21.4 Employees who irrevocably elect (prior to the end of the calendar year for the following calendar
year) to earn holiday leave rather than holiday pay will receive a bank of 120 hours. The hours will be
available the first pay period of the new payroll year. Employees will have holiday leave available to use
during the year, including (assuming if the employee requests and is approved for taking a holiday off, an
actual holiday). However, employees must make a request to use holiday leave at least four (4) working
days prior to the requested time off. Approval of the time off request will be based upon available
staffing needs and the needs of the employee. At the end of the payroll year, any remaining hours in the
holiday leave bank will be carried over to the next payroll year (however, the subsequent year’s bank,
shall be reduced by the number of hours carried over).

21.5 If an employee separates from the service of the City and has used or been paid for holiday pay
in advance of the date(s) or day(s) the holidays actually occurred, the City will deduct the cash value for
holiday benefits already paid, but unearned at the time of separation from the employee’s final paycheck.

21.6 Employees hired after January 1 of each year are eligible for a pro-rata amount of holiday
pay/leave during the calendar year.

ARTICLE 22 - UNIFORM MAINTENANCE ALLOWANCE

22.1. The City provides uniforms or uniform allowance for employees represented by the Association.
The City will continue to replace, repair and maintain uniforms worn in the line of duty. The average
cost of the uniforms/uniform allowances are reported as special compensation (for those employees
defined as “classic employees” by the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 for retirement
calculation purposes and is currently reported as $17 per pay period.

22.2 Lieutenants not currently assigned to the Field Operations Division and Captains will have a
complete uniform for duty wear. These Lieutenant and Captains may replace worn equipment or
uniforms in the same manner as officers assigned to the Field Operations Division in addition to the
$500.00 annual clothing allowance currently paid to employees working plain-clothes assignments.

27
CMPMA MOU.
ARTICLE 23 - SENIORITY

 

23.1 Seniority is determined by length of continuous and uninterrupted service in each employee’s
respective classification. Seniority is used for shift selection and selection of vacation. Seniority for
purposes of layoff is addressed in the Personnel Rules and Regulations.

ARTICLE 24 - WORK SCHEDULES

24.1 The current work schedule for Lieutenants and Captains is the four day workweek, ten hour day,
(4/10). This schedule will be in effect for the duration of the M.O.U. unless mutually modified pursuant
to the Meet and Confer process. Seniority based on time in grade will determine the order in which
employees select their yearly work schedules.

24.2 The annual selection of schedules and shifts/watch (watch synonymous with shift) for Patrol and
Traffic personnel shall begin upon the completion of the rotation selection and shall conclude as soon as

practical but before the January starting dates of the new shifts.

ARTICLE 25 - PROHIBITION OF TOBACCO

25.1 The on-duty use of tobacco in any form (cigarettes, cigars e-cigarettes [“vaping”] and related
tobacco products and technologies) is prohibited for all employees in the Association.

 

 

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COSTA MESA REPRESENTATIVES OF THE,
POLICE MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION CITY OF COSTA MESA
; ie G
Vxzee > tleh¢ Bereare DYN COLL Alig
L~KEITH DAVIS Date TAMARA LETOURNEA' Date
Police Captain Assistant City Manager
LANCE NAKAMOTO,
Police"Captain Human Resources Manager

    

‘AUL BECKMAN
Police Lieutenant

CMPMA MOU
APPENDIX A

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATION A.R55
CITY OF COSTA MESA. July 30, 2000 (Revised)
Page 1 of 3

 

 

VEHICLE USE POLICY

| Purpose:

The purpose of this regulation is to establish and implement City policies and procedures
relative to the assignment, utilization and control of City-owned vehicles as transportation for
employees while engaged in official City business, to establish reimbursement procedures for
privately-owned vehicles used for City business and to clarify the City's responsibility for damage
and/or liability for private vehicles used on official City business.

i. Policy:

These regulations cover the use of City and private vehicles for conducting official City business
and shall be applicable to ail elected officials and employees of the City.

Il, Procedure:

When necessary during the course of an employee's official duties, transportation or
reimbursement therefore shall be provided by the City.

In the event no City vehicle is available, the employee may use his/her personal vehicle.
Employees using either their own or a City-owned vehicle on official business must possess a
valid California driver's license for the class of vehicle they will be operating. The transportation
method utilized will be mutually agreeable to the employee and department. It is the
responsibility of each Department Director to enforce the provisions of this regulation as it
relates to the employees of his/her department.

City-owned vehicles shall only be used for official City business. City-owned vehicles shall not
be driven to and kept at the employee's home or any location other than the regular work
tocation or Corporation Yard, except as provided by this regulation.

City employees cannot be compelled to use their own vehicle for City business unless it is a pre-
specified condition/requirement of employment.

A. Assigned Vehicles

4 Assigned City vehicles may be taken home by Department Directors and Division
Managers as approved by the City Manager.

2. City vehicles may also be taken home by those employees who are called back on
an unscheduled basis to perform official City business outside of regular working
hours upan approval by the City Manager.

B. Emergency Response Units
1. Employees who are required to respond without delay in order to protect the public

health, safety and property may take City vehicles home upon approval by the City
Manager.

ARs last ravieed on 7/3000 (8228.26.14)

29
CMPMA MOU.
CMPMA MOU.

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATION AR. 5.5
CITY OF COSTA MESA July 30, 2000 (Revised)

Page 2 of 3

 

C. Pool Vehicles

1. Pool vehicles will be available for employees who require transportation to perform
official City business but do not meet the criteria for a permanently assigned City
vehicle.

D. Reimbursement for Use of Personal Vehicles
1. Executive Use

All Department Directors may, at City Manager discretion, receive the monthly
automobile allowance as established.

2. Mileage Reimbursement

a Employees may use their own vehicles on official City business and shall be
reimbursed at the established rate for mileage drive on official City business.

b. Employees shall not be reimbursed for commuting to and from work, except
that employees who are required to attend scheduled meetings outside of
normal working hours may be reimbursed for mileage required.

Vehicle Assignment Review

During the month of December of each year, departments that have assigned City-owned
vehicles to employees shall review such assignments. A report of these assignments will be
prepared containing the following information:

Department and Division employee name and classification; employee address and
telephone number; justification for assignment; justification for driving vehicle home (if
applicable); average monthly business mileage; average monthly personal mileage (includes
mileage to and from home); radio equipped (yes or no); special emergency equipment.

Insurance Requirements

All privately owned vehicles to be used on official City business shall be insured by the individual
employee. The employee's insurance coverage is deemed to be primary. It shall be the
Department Director's respansibility to insure that no privately owned vehicle is operated on City
business without insurance coverage and a valid operator's license as required by this
regulation.

Clarification on City Liability

The City shall be responsible to such employee only when the employee is determined not to be
negligent and the other party is uninsured. Under such circumstances, the City shall be
responsible to the employee for the amount of the deductible for comprehensive and/or collision
damages suffered by the employee.

ARs lst revised on 7180100 (6226-26.WP)

30
CMPMA MOU.

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATION AR 5.5
CITY OF COSTA MESA July 30, 2000 (Revised)

Page 3 of 3

 

IV. Effective Date:

The effective date of the Administrative Regulation is July 1, 1984 and subsequently revised July 30,
2000.

  

N E. HAYMAN
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DIRECTOR,

ALLAN L. ROEDER
CITY MANAGER

ARS last revised on 7/3000 (6228.24 WP)

31
