 

yt

 

SPOKANE Agenda Sheet for City Council Meeting of:

Bz

w~ 12/16/2013

Submitting Dept

Contact Name/Phone

 

Contact E-M.

 

Date Rec’d 12/4/2013

Glerk’s File # [OPR 2013-0804 _]

Renews #

 

 

Agenda Item Type

 

 

HUMAN RESOURCES Cross Ref #
HEATHER LOWE 6233 Project #
HLOWE@SPOKANECITY. ORG Bid #

Contract Item Requisition #

 

Agenda Item Name

| 2012-2015 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT WITH THE POLICE GUILD

 

Agenda Wording

Authorization to enter into a collective bargaining agreement with the Police Guild covering wages and
benefits for the years 2012-2015.

Summa

Background

The City of Spokane and the Police Guild have concluded negotiations and reached a Tentative Agreement for
a successor collective bargaining agreement with a four-year term, from January 1, 2012 through December
31, 2015. The average annual increase in total cost of compensation over the four-year term is projected to be

2.76%.

Fiscal Impact

Budget Account

 

 

 

Expense $ 2012 $778,501 # various

Expense $ 2013 $744,665 # various

Expense $ 2014 $900,439 # various

Expense $ 2015 $950,972 # various

Approvals Council Notifications
Dept Head LOWE, HEATHER Study Session

 

 

ision Director

LOWE, HEATHER
LESESNE, MICHELE

 

For the Mayor
Additional A,

 

rovals

BURNS, BARBARA
SANDERS, THERESA

Other

Distribution List
ejacobson@spokanecity.org
hlowe @spokanecity.org

rkokot@spokanecity.org

 

Purchasing

fstraub@spokanepolice.org

 

cmeidl @spokanepolice.org

 

tdunivant@spokanecity.org

 

 

jgately @spokanepolice.org

 

 

 
 

OPR 201B- OBG4

RECEIVED
JUN 28 2014
AGREEMENT CITY CLERK'S OFFICE
‘SPOKANE, WA
between
CITY OF SPOKANE
and

SPOKANE POLICE GUILD

(2012-2016)
Contents
PREAMBLE .ssssssessessesserseenee sseosssssosssssseneesesguneneerscatennecnterereeroutentennsnnneateneeat 5

EMBODIMENT.......+es000

 

LABOR MANAGEMENT MEETINGG.......csssseseeesee

 

ARTICLE 1 — RECOGNITION ........sssssssonsssseescsssssssonessssssenssncenes sesoncanseonvenn
ARTICLE 2 - CONDITIONS AND DURATION OF AGREEMENT - TERMINATION .. 6
ARTICLE 3 - EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITIES .....ssscssssssscsssssscsssssessensecccssnesssssscenscsnsesssssnes ©

ARTICLE 4 — CHECKOFF......sssssssssscesossenssesoesessnsnsncesssone

 

 

ARTICLE 5 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE - PERMANENT UMPIRE...........

SECTION A - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE STEPS
SECTION B - ARBITRATION.
SECTION C - TIME LIMITS........

 

 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 

SECTION A ....sscessssessssssssssesseesecsesssssssecscsuesncanenesecsesseenececsusneeancaeenennsssasesecseenssneessaseassetenenernsansnaes 10
SECTION B
SECTION C

SECTION F
ARTICLE 7 — HOLIDAYS. ......s..ses000 sesssaceasencavenesscanensensensansoncansosensensensssesnescenee! seeseacencencenenseanene 11

SECTION A
SECTION B - WoRK ON A NON-FLOATING HOLIDAY

ARTICLE 8 - COURT TIME .......sscsssensssscessossoes

SECTION A.
SECTION B .
SECTION C u..seesseesssseees

ARTICLE 9 - OVERTIME

SECTION A - MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION B - OVERTIME RATE
SECTION C - COMPENSATORY TIME OFF

svsseuessesenecenconscensenscanconssonconnsooneee sssssersecssseeee 13

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016

Page 1

 
SECTION D - ON CALL....ssssesssesssesseessseseessssssssssesscsnscanesecssessassssssecssesseesesssssasssesssessessesenassesesnees 16
ARTICLE 10 - CONTRACT PERSONNEL,.....ccsssssssssssssssnessnscsessncenscenessneenecsecenscensesessseeseeeeee 16,

ARTICLE 11 - WAGES

SERVICE ADVANCEMENT
ACTING SERGEANT.
SPECIALTY PA’
LONGEVITY.
SHIFT PREMIUM ..
EXTRA DuTy WAGES
BASIC LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING (BLET).

ARTICLE 12 — VACATION......cccssssssssesesseen

caseeneecensecnnecenees sassanesansnsconscsscsssseassancsnscanconscsscesseooee LT

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

ARTICLE 13 — UNIFORMG..........000«

 

ARTICLE 14 - SPECIAL EQUIPMENT .....cssssssssssssnssosssssssnsecsssnscensesnsosssensconscnssnccnssssssnseeneens 22
ARTICLE 15 - REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF PERSONAL PROPERTY ........se0000002 23

ARTICLE 16 - LEAVES OF ABSENCE .....scssssssssssssssssssnecsnecnsesnecaneenecenscanesnecaneaneesneeseesneen seen 23,

SECTION A - FAMILY EMERGENCY LEAVE (LEOFF I AND LEOFF II.
SECTION B — FAMILY LEAVE
SECTION C - FUNERAL LEAVE (LEOFF I AND LEOFF I).
SECTION D - ILLNESS LEAVE (LEOFF Il) ............:-::000+
SECTION E - DISABILITY LEAVE (LEOFF II OFFICERS ONLY)
SECTION F - APPLICATION FOR LEAVE
SECTION G— MATERNITY LEAVE....
SECTION H— ACTIVE Duty CALL UP
SECTION I - CARE FOR MINOR CHILDRE)

ARTICLE 17 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION A - PLEDGE AGAINST DISCRIMINATION .
SECTION B - GUILD BULLETIN BOARD ......+++++0++

SECTION C - GUILD ACTIVITIES ON City's TIME AND PREMISES
SECTION D - GUILD BUSINESS - PAID LEAVES...
SECTION E - SENIORITY......
SECTION F - SENIORITY LIsT!
SECTION G - ANNUAL BID FOR SHIFTS
SECTION H - TRANSFERS
SECTION I - SPECIAL ASSIGNMENTS
SECTION J - VEBA MEDICAL SAVINGS TRUS

  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

 

 

 

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 2

 

 
 

SECTION K - DUPLICATION OF BENEFITS
SECTION L - LEOFF II LIGHT DUTY...

ARTICLE 18 — SUPPLEMENTAL AGREEMENTS ........cssssssssseeeses

 
 

ARTICLE 19 - SAVING CLAUSE

 

ARTICLE 20 - JURY DUTY ...sccssssssssssssessssecsnsssssessssssrnessssscssnsssnsessssssessessssscensesesssensseeee sosensseee 34

 

ARTICLE 21 — MISCELLANEOUS ......ssccsssessees

SECTION A - NEGOTIATIONS .......
SECTION B - MILEAGE ALLOWANCE
SECTION C - TUITION REIMBURSEMENT .
SECTION D - JOINT COMMITTEE
SECTION E— SWAT TEao ..
SECTION F — ON DUTY PHYSICAL FITNESS TRAINING
SECTION G— LEAVE SHARING ....
SECTION H— SWING SHIFT PARKING.

ARTICLE 22 - SALARY COMPUTATIONS .....sscssssssssssssesssseceseeessecesneeseoee

SECTION A - REGULAR HOURLY RATE.......
SECTION B - PAY PERIODS AND PAY CHECKS

ARTICLE 23 - DEFERRED COMPENSATION...........

SECTION A - DEFERRED COMP
SECTION B - DEFERRED COMP EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS.
SECTION C - VEBA ALTERNATIVE. ......ssseessesseeseesseeneesees:

ARTICLE 24 — DISCIPLINE.........004+

SECTION A - GENERAL
SECTION B - FORMS OF DISCIPLINE .
SECTION C - RIGHT OF APPEAL....
SECTION D(1) - PROBATIONARY PERIOD:
SECTION D(2) - RIGHT OF PETITION ....
SECTION E - POLICE OFFICER RIGHTS IN DISCIPLINE

ARTICLE 25 - DRUG TESTING ............ aeconseasensssnscossonscoecssssossconceversnesensenecs

SECTION A
SECTION B
SECTION C
SECTION D
SECTION E.
SECTION F

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

 
 
   
 

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016

Page 3
ARTICLE 26 — HEALTH AND WELFARE ....0..csssssssesssssssssssssssssesesses
SECTION A - INSURANCE ..sssssssssssesssssssesecsessssssseessecsssnsseccesssssssssessessssssnsesecsecessnnsecsesetsnnnaneceeeesane 50

 

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016

Page 4
 

PREAMBLE

This Agreement entered into by the City of Spokane, Washington, hereinafter referred to as the City
and the Spokane Police Guild, hereinafter referred to as the Guild, has as its purpose the promotion of
harmonious relations between the City and the Guild and the establishment of an equitable and peaceful

procedure for the resolution of differences.

EMBODIMENT

The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which preceded this Agreement, each had the
unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with respect to any subject or matter not
removed by law from the area of collective bargaining and that the understandings and agreements arrived at
by the parties after the exercise of that right and opportunity are set forth in this Agreement, each voluntarily
and unqualifiedly waive the right, and each agree that the other shall not be obligated to bargain collectively

with respect to any known subject or matter not specifically referred to or covered in this Agreement.

LABOR MANAGEMENT MEETINGS

It is mutually agreed that the City Management and the Police Guild shall work together individually
and collectively to provide the public with efficient and courteous service, to encourage good attendance of
employees and to promote a climate of labor relations that will aid in achieving a high level of efficiency in the

Spokane Police Department.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 5
ARTICLE 1 — RECOGNITION

The City recognizes the Guild as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for the purpose of establishing
salaries, wages, hours, and other conditions of employment for all of its commissioned police employees with the

exception of the Chief of Police, Assistant Police Chiefs, Majors, Captains, and Lieutenants.

ARTICLE 2 - CONDITIONS AND DURATION OF AGREEMENT — TERMINATION

 

This Agreement shall be in effect as of the first day of January 2012 and shall remain in full force and effect
through the thirty-first day of December 2016.

This Agreement shall remain in full force and be effective during the period of negotiations and until notice of
termination of this Agreement is provided to the other party in the manner set forth in the following paragraph. In the
event that either party desires to terminate this Agreement, written notice must be given to the other party not less
than thirty (30) days prior to the desired termination date, which date shall not be before the expiration of this

contract.

ARTICLE 3 - EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITIES

Management Rights - The Guild recognizes the City’s rights concerned with efficient management and
operation of the department are exclusively that of the City Police Department Administration unless otherwise
provided through the terms of this Agreement or by operation of RCW 41.56. In addition, management has the right
to assign work within the bargaining unit and to determine the number of personnel to be assigned at any time and to
perform all of the functions not otherwise expressly limited by this Agreement or applicable law.

The Guild recognizes that an area of responsibility must be reserved to management if it is to function
effectively. In recognition of this principle, it is agreed that the following responsibilities are not subject to collective
bargaining and are management responsibilities of the City. Unless specifically modified by sections in this
Agreement, management retains the exclusive right to:

1. Determine the management of the organization, and the selection, retention, and

promotion for occupations not within the scope of this Agreement.

2. Direct employees of the bargaining unit in the performance of their official duties.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 6

 

 

 
9.

The above listing of specific management rights is not intended nor shall be considered restrictive or, act as a waiver
of any rights of the City not listed herein. Such inherent management responsibilities are not subject to arbitration
and shall remain exclusively with the City except as they may be shared with the Guild by specific provisions of the

Agreement.

The City agrees to deduct the Guild membership initiation fee, assessments, and, once each month, Guild

dues from the pay of those employees who individually request in writing that such deduction be made. The type of

To hire, assign, transfer and evaluate employees in positions in the bargaining unit;
provided that disciplinary transfers must be for just cause; and to suspend, demote,
discharge, or take other disciplinary action against such employees for just cause.
To determine the methods, means and equipment by which departmental
operations are to be conducted, provided that this section shall not extend to
assigning work outside of the bargaining unit.

To take whatever actions may be necessary to carry out police functions in
emergency situations.

To determine the necessity of overtime and the amount thereof, provided that the
City shall pay for all time worked.

To maintain efficiency of government operations entrusted to management.

To assign employees to specific jobs, determine job content and/or duties and to
consolidate jobs within the bargaining unit.

To lay off employees in accordance with current Civil Service Rules.

ARTICLE 4 —- CHECKOFF

 

deduction cards to be used shall be certified to the City by the Treasurer of the Guild.

ARTICLE 5 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE - PERMANENT UMPIRE

Section A - Grievance Procedure Steps

1.

Any grievance or dispute which may arise between parties concerning the application, meaning, or

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
 

interpretation of this Agreement, shall be settled in the manner prescribed by this grievance
procedure.
A "Grievance" is defined as a claim or dispute by an employee, group of employees, or authorized
Guild representatives concerning the interpretation or application of the provisions of this
Agreement. Nothing in this procedure shall prohibit an employee from discussing a complaint
directly with his supervisor or department head without representation by the Guild as provided by
State Law.
Should a subject for claim or dispute arise, there shall be no stoppage of work by employees, but an
earnest effort shall be made to settle such claims or disputes promptly and in the manner
hereinafter outlined. Prior to initiating a written grievance, an employee shall attempt to resolve the
matter with his/her supervisor, or in their absence, with the next person in the chain of command.
Step 1

A grievance may be presented to the Police Chief or designee by a Guild Executive Board
Officer or designee within twenty-eight (28) calendar days of the alleged occurrence, in writing,
setting forth:

a. The nature of the grievance;

b. A statement of the facts upon which the grievance is based;

c. The provisions of the Agreement allegedly violated, and;

d. A statement of the relief desired.
Step 2

The Police Chief or designee shall attempt to settle the grievance within twenty-one (21)
calendar days after it has been presented.
Step 3

If the grievance is not settled by the Police Chief within the time allowed, it may be
presented to the City Administrator, with a copy to the Human Resources Department, by a Guild
Executive Board Officer or designee within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the Police Chiefs

response or the expiration of the time limit in step 2.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016

Page 8
Step 4
The City Administrator shall have twenty-one (21) calendar days to review the grievance. If
the City Administrator does not respond or otherwise settle the grievance within the twenty-one day
period, the grievance may be advanced to step 5 within twenty-one (21) days of the Step 3 response
or, if not received within the allotted time period, the date the response was due.
Step 5
If the grievance is not settled at Step 4, the dispute will be referred to the negotiating
committee of both parties. The two committees shall meet within fourteen (14) calendar days to
consider the dispute. At that meeting, all pertinent facts and information will be reviewed in an effort
to resolve the matter through conciliation. If no satisfactory solution is reached in this step, the
matter may be submitted to arbitration within twenty-eight (28) calendar days of the conciliation
meeting.
Section B - ration
The parties shall attempt to select an arbitrator by mutual agreement. If the parties have been unable to
select an arbitrator within ten (10) days, the Arbitrator shall be selected on a rotating basis from the following panel of
arbitrators: Janet Gaunt, Mike Cavanaugh, Alan Krebs, and Howell Lankford. The Arbitrator shall be selected from
the list by both the City representative and the Guild's attorney within ten days of the matter being submitted to
arbitration. Each party shall alternatively strike or accept the top name on the list. If both parties accept the
arbitrator, that person shall hear the case. Once both parties have had two strikes/acceptances, the next arbitrator
on the list shall hear the case. The selected arbitrator shall move to the bottom of the list for the next arbitration
hearing. The arbitrator shall conduct the arbitration within six months of the appointment unless otherwise agreed by
the parties. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties.

1. The Arbitrator shall make his/her own rules of procedure. The Arbitrator shall have no authority to
amend, alter, or modify this Agreement or its terms and shall limit his/her decision solely to the
interpretation and application of this Agreement.

2. Each grievance or dispute will be submitted separately except when the City and the Police Guild
mutually agree to have more than one grievance or dispute submitted to the Arbitrator.

3. The City and the Police Guild shall bear the expense of the Arbitrator and related stenographic

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 9

 
expenses on an equal basis.

4. Each party shall bear the costs of their own attorney(s) unless the City either fails to abide by an
Arbitration award thereby requiring the Guild to seek judicial enforcement or appeals the same into
the courts. In such an event, this provision shall have no force and effect retroactive to the initiation
of the grievance procedure.

5. The decision of the Arbitrator shall be issued within thirty (30) days of the close of the hearing and
scheduled receipt of any post-hearing briefs.

Section C - Time Limits

Time limits may be extended by mutual written agreement. Except as otherwise provided herein, if the City
fails to comply with any of the above time limits, the matter will be settled in favor of the Guild’s last requested
remedy. If the aggrieved/Guild fails to comply with any of the above time limits, the grievance is dropped and the
City’s position sustained. While forfeiture under this clause will finally resolve the matter in dispute, it will not
establish a precedent between the parties on issues of contractual interpretation. There shall be no interruption of

work while grievances are being resolved.

ARTICLE 6 - CITY SECURITY

Section A

The Guild and the Police Officers agree that during the life of this Agreement they will not cause, encourage,
participate in, or support any strike against management or any slowdown or other interruption of or interference
with the normal work routine of any law enforcement activities or agencies.
Section B

Violation of any provision of this Article by the Guild shall be cause for the City terminating this Agreement
upon the giving of written notice to this effect to the President of the Guild in addition to whatever other remedies may
be available to the City at law or in equity.
Section C

Violation of any of the provisions of this Article by any Police Officer shall be cause for the immediate
discharge of that officer. Except as otherwise provided by law, no Police Officer shall receive any portion of his or her
salary while engaging in activity in violation of this Article.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016

Page 10

 
 

Section D

In the event of a strike, work stoppage, or interference with the operation of the Police Department, the
President of the Guild shall within twenty-four (24) hours publicly disavow such strike or work stoppage and request
the employees return to work and attempt to bring about prompt resumption of normal operation. Such request shall
be made in writing with a copy of such written request supplied to the City. The Guild shall notify the City within
twenty-four (24) hours after the commencement of such work interruption as to the measures taken to comply with
the provisions of this Article.

Section E

In the event the provisions of this Article are not complied with, the City may proceed directly to court in order
to obtain any and all possible judicial relief, as well as pursuing whatever remedies are available under this
Agreement.

Section F

The City agrees that there shall be no lockout of Police Department employees under any circumstances.

ARTICLE 7 — HOLIDAYS

Section A
The following holidays shall be recognized by permanent employees on the days established by the City for

that holiday, except that patrol employees shall observe the actual holiday on New Years, Independence Day, and

Christmas Day.
1. New Year's Day
2. Memorial Day
3. Independence Day
4, Labor Day
5. Thanksgiving Day
6. Friday after Thanksgiving Day
7. Christmas Day
8. Forty hours of Floating Holidays
9. Any day that is designated as a legal holiday by the State Legislature or by a state official who has

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 11
 

been granted legal authority to declare such a holiday.

The floating holidays shall be taken at a time mutually agreeable by the employee and the Police Chief within
the policy established for this holiday and may be utilized by the hour.

When a holiday falls on an employee’s regular day off, the employee will receive compensatory time or pay
for that day. An employee on approved paid leave shall be eligible for holiday pay. When a holiday falls during an
employee's regular vacation period, that day will not be charged against the employee's vacation. The manner of
compensation will be determined by the Chief of Police.

Those members of the bargaining unit who are normally scheduled to work four ten hour shifts per week but
are released from work on a normally scheduled work day in observance of any of the eight specifically designated
holidays, will be granted 10 hours of holiday pay. In such situations, an eight (8) hour employee shall receive eight
(8) hours of holiday pay. Such holiday pay shall not be charged against any other source of paid leave other than the
specific holiday that is observed.

Section B - Work on a Non-Floating Holiday

When an employee takes the day off or is considered non-essential for the holiday, he/she will be paid eight
(8), ten (10) or ten and sixty seven hundredths (10.67) hours for the day depending on the employees’ work
schedule.

When an employee works on any of the holidays listed above, he/she shall be paid eight (8), ten (10) or ten
and sixty seven hundredths (10.67) hours of holiday pay depending on the work schedule the employee is assigned
to. All employees who work on a designated holiday shall be paid an additional one and one-half (1 %) times their
current regular rate of pay for all hours worked on the holiday. The employee has the option of taking pay or comp
for the time worked on the holiday, as provided in Article 9, section C.

Any hours worked that are in excess of the normal shift period will be considered overtime and will be paid
at two and one-half (2 4) times their current regular rate of pay for all overtime hours worked on a holiday. The
employee has the option of taking pay or comp for overtime worked on a holiday. The holiday pay (straight time)

portion will not be available as compensatory time.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 12
 

ARTICLE 8 - COURT TIME

Section A

When an officer is required to appear in court outside the regular duty hours, they shall be paid a minimum of
two (2) hours, except where such appearance is an extension of the regularly scheduled shift. If an officer is required
to appear on the officer’s day off or while on vacation, the officer shall be paid a minimum of four (4) hours at the time
and one half (1 % ) rate.

Court is defined as any court of law or administrative hearing where the officer is required to appear,
including pretrial conferences with the attorneys representing the prosecution in a criminal case or the City in a civil
suit.

Employees who have been served a subpoena shall appear in court unless notified otherwise by the
prosecutor or a court official. Prosecutors and court officials cannot authorize stand-by pay. If the need to appear
cannot be clarified once the subpoena has been served, employees should respond and be available to testify.

If the officer failed to clear with the court, prior to vacation, the above would not apply as vacation court pay.

When an employee is required to provide telephonic testimony on a day off or outside regular duty hours,
they shall be paid a minimum of one (1) hour at the rate of time and one-half (1) for the time they are required to
be available and to give testimony. This provision applies to administrative hearings and court proceedings in which
the employee has been subpoenaed.

Section B

The above provision shall not apply when the court time starts during the employee's regular work shift and
extends beyond the end of the shift. When the court time commences on the employee's regular shift and extends
beyond the work shift, time and one-half (1%) shall be paid for the number of hours beyond the regular shift.
Section

Employees shall have the option of selecting court time pay or compensatory time off.

ARTICLE 9 - OVERTIME
Section A - Miscellaneous
Temporary Schedule Adjustment — It is understood that employees in unique assignments such as the

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 13
 

 

Special Investigative Unit, the Targeted Crimes Unit, the Patrol Anti-Crime Team, the Neighborhood Resource

Officer Unit, the Traffic Unit and the Support Services Division will be expected to temporarily flex their schedules.

With forty-eight (48) hours notice employees assigned to the Special Investigative Unit and the Targeted
Crimes Unit may be required to temporarily adjust their work shift by up to four (4) hours.

With seven (7) calendar days notice, employees assigned to the Patrol Anti-Crime Team, the Neighborhood
Resource Officer Unit, the Traffic Unit, and the Support Services Division may be required to temporarily adjust their
work shift by up to four (4) hours. Mandatory schedule adjustments shall not exceed four (4) adjustments within a
calendar month. If the required notification is not given as stated above all work done outside of the regularly
scheduled shift will be compensated and one and one-half (1 1/2) times the regular hourly rate of pay.

Availability of Special Overtime Assignments — Guild members may volunteer for an overtime
assignment on their regularly scheduled days off, or outside their regularly scheduled shift consistent with the
collective bargaining agreement.

Guild members who wish to volunteer for an overtime assignment that overlaps with their regularly scheduled
hours of work may do so only under the following conditions:

Subject to this article and mutual agreement of the parties, Guild members may flex their work hours to avoid
an overlap between their hours of work and the voluntary overtime assignment; or

Guild members may request the ability to switch a regularly scheduled work shift for a regularly scheduled
day off. Both shifts must be within the same calendar pay period, and for a sister patrol team (if the Guild member is
in patrol) during the same work hours as the Guild member's regularly scheduled work hours. All such trade
requests must be pre-approved by the Guild member's sergeant, the sergeant supervising the sister patrol team
involved in the trade, and the Guild member's lieutenant. The respective team sergeants and lieutenant may
approve/deny requests based upon various operational factors, including the following: appropriate staffing levels,
efficient use of department resources, and Guild members’ fatigue. The lieutenant may approve a different make-up
day than requested if it is in the best interest of the Department. Trade requests will not be approved if they result in
additional overtime. Once approved, the make-up day will be considered the Guild members’ regularly scheduled
duty day for all purposes. Approval for trade requests may be cancelled due to an emergency. If a conflict develops
between Guild members on the same team who have requested to switch shifts for same overtime opportunity,
department seniority shall prevail.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 14
Mutual Schedule Adjustment — An employee or the Employer may request a temporary schedule
adjustment. Upon request a work shift may start by up to four (4) hours earlier or four (4) hours later than normally
scheduled. The request may be initiated by either the employee or the Employer and must be mutually agreed upon.

Unscheduled Overtime - When employees are required to return to work outside their normal duty hours
and a minimum of 48 hours notice is not given, they will receive a minimum of four (4) hours pay at one and one-half
times the employee's regular rate of pay. For those hours worked over four (4), they would be paid at the employee's
time and one-half (1 1/2) rate until the overtime overlaps the employee's regular work shift. This section shall not
apply to shift extensions at the end of the work shift.

Exception - If an employee is required to return to duty to complete work which is incomplete through the
fault of the officer--necessary reports, citations, affidavits, etc.--no call back will be paid. Overtime at one and one-
half times the employee's regular rate of pay will be paid for actual hours worked.

Section B - Overtime Rate

All overtime other than call-back time shall be compensated at the rate of one and one half (1 % ) times the

regular hourly rate of pay.
ion mpensatory Time Off

At the employee's request, and with the approval of the Chief of Police, a renewable bank of up to 80 hours
of compensatory time off may be accumulated at the rate of time and one half for all overtime hours worked. Accrual
over 80 hours will be paid as overtime. Employees shall be allowed to carry over their compensatory time off into the
following year. On November 1 of each year employees may elect to cash out up to a maximum of 96 hours of
accrued compensatory time, floating holiday, and or vacation time. The City will pay for the cashed out time at the
Officer's straight time regular rate of pay, and shall make the payment with the second payment of November. All
compensatory time in excess of forty (40) hours accrual must be cashed out first. Either party may reopen the
compensatory time provisions of this Agreement if there is a change in legal interpretation of the FLSA related to the
accrual or use of compensatory time. Any such reopening shall proceed in accordance with Article 18.

In regulating the use of comp time, supervisors will use the following guidelines, which have been agreed by
the parties in order to ensure compliance with the FLSA. The parties therefore agree it is unduly disruptive to the
operation of the police department if employees:

1. give less than five days written notice of their desire to use compensatory time off, provided that less
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 15

 

 
 

notice may be given with the mutual agreement of the employee and their supervisor;

2. request the use of compensatory time on any recognized holiday as set forth in this bargaining
agreement or on Christmas Eve or New Years Eve, when the granting of such time off would require
the City to bring in another employee to cover the shift; or

3. request the use of compensatory time during any special event (Bloomsday, Lilac Parade, Neighbor
days, etc)

The above list is not intended to be all inclusive of situations that are unduly disruptive, but rather is intended
to give the parties guidance concerning the unduly disruptive provisions of the FLSA.
Section D - On Call
Any employee required by a supervisor to remain on-call for a weekend or fixed period of time shall be
compensated at the following rate:
1. 1.5 hours of pay at the regular rate of pay for each 8 hours that the employee is
required to remain on call.
2. 2.5 hours of pay at the regular rate for each 8 hours that the employee is required
to remain on-call during any holiday.
3. If unscheduled call-out occurs during any 8-hour period that the employee is
required to remain on-call, the unscheduled overtime provisions of Article 9 shall

apply in addition to the on-call pay for that period of time.

ARTICLE 10 - CONTRACT PERSONNEL

The City and the Guild mutually agree that circumstances arise from time to time that call for the presence of
more law enforcement personnel that are regularly on duty at that time. In order to meet the law enforcement needs
of these circumstances, the City and the Guild agree that the City has the right to contract with other law enforcement
agencies to supply law enforcement personnel and equipment.

In the event the City elects to so contract with other law enforcement agencies and sufficient time exists for
proper planning, the City will first allow Guild members, not on regular duty during the time of need, to volunteer for
the assignment. If the need is not filled by the volunteers, then the City may elect to implement contracts with other

law enforcement agencies.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 16
 

In an emergency or in the event the need for personnel is not filled by volunteers from the Guild, it is

understood the City retains the right to require Guild members to report for duty under the terms and conditions of the
general contract between the City and the Spokane Guild as amended.

State law (e.g. 10.93 RCW, Mutual Aid Peace Officers Powers) and provisions of the individual contracts with
agencies supplying personnel shall govern the relationship between the City of Spokane, those agencies, and their
personnel. No rights, duties, or provisions of the contract between the Guild and the City shall apply to those

agencies.

ARTICLE 11 —- WAGES

Upon approval by the Guild and the City Council of the tentative agreement agreed upon by the Guild
Negotiating Committee and the City Negotiating Committee, the agreement shall be made a part of the City
Employees Pay Plan and administered in accordance with the City Employees Pay Plan Rules.

Effective January 1, 2012, wages of all classifications covered by the Guild will be increased by 2%.

Effective January 1, 2013, wages of all classifications covered by the Guild will be increased by 2%.

Effective January 1, 2014, wages of all classifications covered by the Guild will be increased by 2%.

Effective January 1, 2015, wages of all classifications covered by the Guild will be increased by 2%.
Servi lvancement

All police officers with five (5) or more years of service as commissioned officers in the department will be
moved to 902 — Senior Police Officer, Range 29 at their respective longevity levels. This movement will be described
as a “Service Advancement” and will be on a qualifying basis with no probationary period.

Henceforth, when a police officer reaches five (5) years of commissioned service with the department, they
will be entitled to advance to Senior Police Officer at the beginning of the next quarter.

When they reach five (5) years longevity as a police officer, they will have their normal longevity increase
during the affected pay period. At the beginning of the next quarter, they will advance to Senior Police Officer. In the
interim, they will be paid out of grade at the Senior Police Officer pay range, five (5) year longevity level.

Lateral police officers will advance at a different rate than entry-level police officers. No later than completion
of three (3) years of service in the department, their Service Advancement will occur. They will advance to Senior

Police Officer at the entry level of Range 29 at the beginning of the next quarter, being paid out of grade until the

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 17
paperwork is completed. They will remain at the entry level until they have completed five (5) years longevity in the
department. At that time, they will progress through the normal longevity increase process in the Senior Police
Officer pay range.

The quarterly changes are to be initiated by the department who will be keeping track of the next group of
employees eligible for the Service Advancement. The parties will work with the Spokane Civil Service Commission to
ensure a smooth transition.

Actin: jeant

Patrol Corporals when filling a vacant Sergeant position for four (4) hours or more shall receive an additional

three (3%) percent of Corporal base pay for that shift.
Specialty Pay
When assigned, employees will be paid the following monthly pay in addition to their normal compensation

based on the top step of the officers pay:

Hostage Negotiator 3%
S.W.A.T Team 3%
K-9 Handlers 3%
Field Training Officers 3%
Motorcycle Officer 3%
Tactical Team 3%
Bomb Squad 6%
Meth Team 4%
Assistant Range Master 3% (if a rank below Sergeant is assigned)

An additional $30.00 per month will be paid if an officer is assigned to a second specialty. The Chief of
Police must approve any multiple specialty assignment. Any overtime required to complete the duties associated
with being a FTO will be pre-authorized by the Sergeant in charge of the FTO and paid in accord with contract

provisions.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 18
 

Years of Service Percent

After 5 Years 2%
After 10 Years 4%
After 15 Years 6%
After 20 Years 8%
After 25 years 10%
After 30 years 12% (effective January 1, 2015)

Education

Effective May 1, 2014, any employee who has earned a degree shall receive additional compensation as

follows:
Degree Percent
AAor AS 5%
BA or BS 1%

Effective January 1, 2015, any employee who has earned a degree shall receive additional compensation as

follows:
Degree Percent
AAor AS 1%
BA or BS. 2%

Shift Premium
When a member is assigned a shift, the City agrees to pay the following monthly amounts based on the top

step of the Senior Police Officer:

Second Shift 0.75%

Third Shift 1.5%

Fourth Shift 2.25%
Extra Duty Wages

Extra duty employment is defined as work that is voluntarily performed for a separate and independent

employer from the City. Extra duty pay and procedures shall be subject to renegotiation between the parties and
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 19
 

recorded in a Memorandum of Understanding. The parties agree to meet during the month of July each year of the
life of this agreement to determine the wages for extra duty employment for the following year.
Basic Law Enforcement Training (BLET)

A. Members instructing at the BLET and Reserve BLET sessions will be paid the then current hourly
rate for instructors at the Burien, Washington WSCJTA.

B. Members who instruct during BLET sessions will be given first consideration for other instruction
opportunities sponsored by the department. Instruction outside BLET sessions will follow current
contract provisions with the overtime rate applying when applicable. BLET instructors gain more
experience in classroom settings and will therefore be in higher demand as instructors in other than
BLET training sponsored by the department.

For purposes of pay rates, FLSA requires that any member who works over 171 hours in a 28 day work period will
be paid at their regular rate at time and one half for each hour over the 171 hour threshold. These are for hours
worked not hours paid (physically on duty, not including discretionary paid time off). The current 10/40 patrol
schedule has established 13 individual 28 day work periods in each calendar year that can be used to identify any

work period under consideration.

ARTICLE 12 ~ VACATION

 

Vacation shall accrue on a bi-weekly basis as follows:

Years of Service Bi-Weekly Hours of Vacation
At the beginning of the 1" year through completion of the 4" year 5.69 hours 148 hours
At the beginning of the 5° year through completion of the 10” year 7.23 hours 188 hours
At the beginning of the 11" year through completion of the 17" year 8.76 hours 228 hours
At the beginning of the 18" year and over 10.30 hours 268 hours

On December 31 of any year, the City may reduce the above-referenced accrual rates to their 2010 levels by
permanently increasing all pay steps by 2.5% across the board.

Maximum accrual will not exceed two times the annual allowance plus forty (40) hours. Maximum vacation
cash-out at retirement is the same as the maximum accrual. Annual vacation bids will be granted on the basis of
department seniority, within work unit/team.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 20

 
 

With the approval of their supervisor, and after completion of six (6) months of service employees may use

vacation up to and including the amount accrued. Employees will be allowed to take vacation in hourly increments.

An employee shall not be credited with any vacation leave in a particular pay period unless that employee
has been in a paid status for eighty percent (80%) or more of the hours in that pay period.

For the purposes of application, maximum accrual and maximum carryover are interchangeable terms.

If the Employer cancels vacation once vacation has been approved and the affected employee has incurred
non-refundable expenses in planning for the same, the employee shall be reimbursed by the City for those expenses.
Any employee called back to duty by the City for any reason once the vacation has begun shall be reimbursed for

required round trip transportation costs involved in returning for duty if the employee is out of the area.

ARTICLE 13 — UNIFORMS

New hires will be furnished with uniforms as provided below. Existing employees shall have their uniform
and equipment allotment maintained in accordance with this list. Said uniforms shall remain the property of the City.
The City reserves the right to make changes in the color, material, and quality of the uniforms it provides, provided
that it issues the full complement of uniform items enumerated below.

The City shall provide contract uniform cleaning, on the basis of a maximum of eight (8) items per two
calendar week period (non-cumulative) per officer; provided that jumpsuits are to be laundered at home by the
employee and not submitted for cleaning at City expense. Motorcycle Officers shall, during the months of May
through September, be entitled to have ten items cleaned during a two calendar week period (non-cumulative) per
officer. Plain-clothes employees may substitute eight items of business attire in lieu of uniform items. Business
dress attire may include dress shirts/blouses, slacks, sport coats, suits, ties, dresses and/or skirts. Additional items
in excess of the eight (8) items per two calendar week per officer will be at the expense of the individual. Casual
sports wear such as polo shirts and cotton twill pants are not covered under this agreement.

The following items shall be provided by the Department to all new hires and/or replaced to all sworn
personnel should the item be deemed by the employee's supervisor to no longer be in a serviceable condition.

3 pairs of trousers (1 pair for det. & special units)
3 winter shirts (1 winter shirt for det. & special units)

2 winter jumpsuits

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 21
 

3 summer shirts (1 summer shirt for det. & special units)

2 summer jumpsuits

3 white shirts if required (motors, bike unit, etc.)

1 Uniform Tie

1 water resistant coat

1 badge

1 service weapon with 3 magazines.

1 duty belt with 4 keepers

1 holster

1 set of handcuffs with case and key

1 OC 10 canister and holder

1 approved baton and holder

1 department radio and holder

1 rubber glove holder

1 protective vest

1 flashlight and holder

The City shall continue to provide special items to units with special requirements (motors, bike patrol, etc.).
These special items will remain the property of the City. Probationary officers will receive one (1) uniform
(summer/winter) at the time of hire and two (2) more upon completion of the Academy.
The items listed are the approved quartermaster issue items or replacement items. There are other items

that are deemed approved and optional items that the employee is authorized to wear. Refer to applicable

department uniform policy.

ARTICLE 14 - SPECIAL EQUIPMENT

The City shall provide motorcycle helmets, handcuffs, leather and all other items that are presently being
furnished. These special items shall remain the property of the City. When the employer mandates a change in
equipment, the employer shall provide the initial issue, unless the employee is allowed to continue using the obsolete

article until no longer serviceable.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 22
The City may utilize in car and/or body cameras in providing police services to the citizens of Spokane. The
parties recognize that there are many working condition issues that will need to be resolved related to utilization of
the cameras. Without limitation, these include the extent to which video from the cameras may be used in discipline,
and potential limitations on access to and use of the video. The City and Guild agree that these issues will be
resolved pursuant to bargaining, consistent with RCW 41.56. Inthe event the parties are unable to reach agreement,
either party may require that the parties jointly request the assistance of Mediator Jamie Siegel from the PERC. The

City will not utilize videos from the cameras for disciplinary purposes until bargaining has been completed.

ARTICLE 15 - REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
——S RS RET MR RETLACEMENT OF PERSONAL PROPERTY

The City agrees to repair or replace items of Personal property damaged or lost while in the line of duty as
‘specified in the guidelines established by the Guild and the City. The specific guidelines established by the Guild and

the City to determine claims and the procedure for filing claims shall be posted.

ARTICLE 16 - LEAVES OF ABSENCE

The normal procedure for Processing requests for leave of absence shall follow those procedures generally
set forth by the Civil Service Rules and Charter of the Civil Service Commission. In addition, however, the following
items are made by a part of the agreement:

Section A - Family Emergency Leave (LEOFF | and LEOFF il)

1. In the event of a serious sickness in the employee's family of any spouse, parent, child,
brother, sister, grandparent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, or
grandchild, the employee may on request be granted up to three (3) days leave of absence
with full pay to make household adjustments and arrange for medical service. In unusual
situations, a LEOFF | officer may request a short extension of this leave. If any question
arises, the President of the Guild and the Chief of Police, or their designee, will negotiate
the matter and their decision will be final.

2. In the event of a natural disaster, fire, or event creating an emergency beyond the

employee's control, the employee may on request be granted up to three (3) days leave of

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 23
absence with full pay to make household adjustments or to make temporary arrangements

to resolve the problem. If any question arises, the President of the Police Guild and the

Chief of Police, or their designees, will negotiate the matter and their decision will be final.
Section B — Family Leave

The Federal Family and Medical Leave Act requires employers to provide up to a total of twelve (12) weeks.
(480-hours) of unpaid leave during any 12 month period for eligible employees at the time of birth or adoption of a
child or at the time of a serious health condition affecting the employee or family member. Additionally, employees
shall be allowed to use any accumulated leave to continue pay during a lawful period of family leave; provided that,
no more than 80 hours of sick leave may be used for maternity/paternity leave issues not related to a serious health
condition or a period of temporary disability.

If any question arises regarding the interpretation of this article, the President of the Guild and the Chief of
Police, or their designees, will negotiate the matter and their decision will be final.

Section C - Funeral Leave (LEOFF | and LEOFF Il)

In the event of a death in the family of any employee--spouse, parents, children, brother, sister,
grandparents, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, or grandchildren, the employee may on
request be granted up to three (3) days leave of absence with full pay to make household adjustments or to attend
funeral services. If any question arises, the President of the Guild and the Chief of Police, or their designees, will
negotiate the matter and their decision will be final.

Section D - Illness Leave (LEOFF Il)

1. Accrual - Cumulative illness leave with pay shall accrue to each new Police Officer at the rate of six
(6) hours for each bi-weekly pay period. An employee shall not be credited with any illness leave in
a particular pay period unless that employee has been in a pay status for eighty (80) percent or
more of the hours in that pay period.

2. Use of IlIness Leave - Iliness leave may be used after six (6) months of continuous service by the
employee when that employee is incapable of reporting to duty due to an iliness or injury to that
employee.

3. Waiver of Six Months Waiting Period - The six months waiting period may be waived if the

employee is hospitalized. An employee shall be required to furnish evidence supporting the need

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 24
for the use of illness leave when such evidence is requested by the employee's supervisor.

4. Duplication of IlIness Leave & Industrial Insurance - When an employee uses illness leave that
is duplicated by Industrial Insurance Compensation, the total amount of compensation paid by
Industrial Insurance must be turned in to the Personnel Department. The employee's illness leave
account shall then be credited by the amount of compensation returned.

5. Sick Leave Buy Back - Through February 20, 2014, LEOFF | employees retiring from service in
the Spokane Police Department will be allowed to cash in unused sick leave at a ratio of forty
percent (40%). The maximum allowed for buy out will be three hundred and eighty-four (384) hours
of pay, which is 40% of 960 hours. Effective February 21, 2014, the cash out ratio will be sixty
percent (60%), resulting in a maximum buy out of five hundred and seventy-six (576) hours of pay,
which is 60% of 960 hours. If possible, all such amounts will be placed into a tax deferred account.

Section E - Disability Leave (LEOFF II Officers Only)

When an employee becomes entitled to coverage under RCW 51.32.090 due toa temporary total disability,
the City shall compensate the employee for the difference between his Worker's Compensation entitlement and the
employee’s regular net salary for a period not to exceed six (6) months or the termination of the Workers’
Compensation payments, whichever comes first. To accomplish this, the City shall pay the employee his/her regular
net salary for said period in lieu of any time-loss payments or disability leave supplement payments to which the
employee would otherwise be entitled. In no event will the City pay for more than a total of six (6) months for any
particular temporary total disability. If an employee is returned to work on a conditional basis and the disability
reoccurs, any additional payments under this section shall be limited to the remaining, unused portion of the original
six (6) months.

Section F - Application for Leave

Any request for leave of absence shall be submitted in writing by the employee to his immediate supervisor.
The request shall state the reason the leave of absence is being requested and the length of time off the employee
desires. Authorization of a leave of absence shall be furnished to the employee by his immediate supervisor and it
shall be in writing, provided that approval of such authorization shall reside in the Police Chief or designee and the
Human Resources Department. Any request for a leave of absence shall be answered promptly. Requests for
immediate leave (for example, family sickness or death) shall be answered before the end of the shift on which the
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 25
request is submitted. Other requests for leave shall be answered within ten (10) days.
Section G - Maternity Leave

Maternity leave is defined as a temporary medical disability due to pregnancy and/or childbirth or
complications resulting from childbirth and will be administered in compliance with state and federal laws and
regulations for granting maternity leave. An employee who is on an authorized maternity leave shall first use accrued
illness leave to maintain paid status while on maternity leave. “Authorized maternity leave” means maternity leave
granted pursuant to a medical certification provided by the employee to the office of the Chief of Police.

Section H — Active Duty Call Up

A. Members ordered to active military duty by the President of the United States or the Governor of the State
of Washington are entitled to pay and benefits as outlined in Paragraph B and C of this section. This leave is
separate from any leave required by State or Federal law for training for any branch of the United States Reserve
Forces or the National Guard.

B. Commencing on the first day of active duty and ending on the last day of active duty, each member's
military pay will be supplemented by an amount necessary to equal what the member's pay would be if they were not
on active duty. However, in no event may the combined pay exceed their regular City pay. All other employee
benefits will continue as if the member had not been called to active duty.

C. Whether and to what extent a member called to active duty is covered by City sponsored medical, dental,
life and long-term disability insurance is governed by the terms of the collective bargaining agreement and insurance
contracts.

Section | - Care for Minor Children

Employees may use accrued leave (vacation, etc.) to care for a minor child under the age of 18 that requires
treatment or supervision. Additionally, LEOFF II members may use accrued sick leave in addition to other leaves
available to them.

Limits on Leave for Minor Children
1. Sick leave must be previously accrued.
2. The leave must be used to care for the employees child under the age of 18; and
3. The child must have a health condition that requires treatment or supervision. Employees
may be required to provide documentation from a physician that a child has a health
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 26
condition.

4. ALEOFF II officer may use sick leave to stay home and supervise children under the age of
16 if the officer's spouse is so ill that he/she is unable to care for the children. Employees
may be required to provide documentation from a physician verifying the spouse's health
condition. Since the parties recognize that sick leave abuse is misconduct, the City retains

the right to reopen this section if the City perceives an abuse problem.

ARTICLE 17 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section A - Pledge Against Discrimination

The City and the Police Guild are mutually committed to a workplace free from discrimination. Any claim of

 

unlawful discrimination must be processed privately by the employee to the appropriate local, state or federal agency
or through the courts and shall not be subject to the grievance procedure. Employees believing they may have been
discriminated against should comply with City policies concerning the notification to the City. All references to
employees in the Agreement designate both sexes and wherever the male gender is used it shall be construed to
include male and female employees.
Section B - Guild Bulletin Board
The City agrees to allow suitable bulletin boards in convenient places in each work area to be used by the
Guild. The Guild shall limit its posting of notices and bulletins to such bulletin boards.
Section C - Guild Activities on City's Time and Premises
The City agrees that during working hours, on the employer's premises, or elsewhere, and without loss of
pay, Guild officials shall be allowed to:
1. Post Guild notices and distribute Guild literature.
2. Attend meetings with the approval of the Police Chief or designee and solicit Guild
membership without hindering normal operations.
3. Transmit communications authorized by the local Guild or its officers to the City or
its representative.
4. Consult with the City, his representative, local Guild officers, or other Guild
representatives concerning the enforcement of this Agreement.
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 27
Section D - Guild Business - Paid Leaves

Upon the approval of the Chief of Police and the City Administrator, two (2) Guild officials, and such Guild
legislative officials as agreed upon by the Guild, the Chief of Police, and the City Administrator shall be allowed the
required time without loss of pay to attend official Guild conferences, Guild legislative conventions, and state or
national conferences, not to exceed five (5) days, each official, for each conference or convention. If any section of
this Agreement is determined to be unlawful as a result of a final decision of the Washington courts or is rendered
unlawful by an action of the Legislature, either party may reopen that section for renegotiation.

Section E - Seniority
1) Definitions

Department Seniority - The total length of unbroken service within the Police Department.

Job Classification Seniority - Based on the date of appointment to that classification and

shall apply throughout the department.

Non-Supervisory Personnel - All personnel below the rank of Sergeant.

Bureaus - There are two bureaus in the Police Department structure, which are:

Operations Bureau and Investigations Bureau
Transfer - The reassignment from one bureau to another.
2) Shifts
a. The Chief of Police retains the exclusive right to determine the
Starting time of the work shifts and the number of shifts in a work
day; provided that in the event the shift starting times are reset
during the year by the Chief, sufficient notice will be given to the
Guild to allow for a re-bid process as set forth under "Annual Bid
for Shift". A re-bid shall not be required for seasonal shift
changes of less than two hours. This section shall be interpreted
as a waiver of the Guild’s right to bargain changes in the starting
times of work shifts in accordance with its terms but it shall not be
considered a waiver of the Guild’s right to require the Employer to
bargain over changes in the length of the work shifts. Examples:
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 28
5/8, 4/10, 10/40’s etc.

Shift assignment within a bureau will be based on job
classification seniority; provided, however, if the total police
experience level of Police Officers and PFC’s/Senior Police
Officers on any shift falls below 4.5 years, the Chief of Police shall
have the right to assign personnel to raise the level toa minimum
of 4.5 years. The experience level shall be determined by adding
together the years of experience (rounded to the nearest year) of
Police Officers and PFC's/Senior Police Officers assigned to the
shift, divided by the number of Police Officers and PFC's/Senior
Police Officers so assigned. Assignment in this case shall first be
a call for volunteers. In the event insufficient volunteers come
forward, then personnel will be selected starting with the Police
Officer or PFC/Senior Police Officer with the least seniority of 4.5
years or over not assigned to the shift needing the higher
experience and proceeding upward temporarily until such time as
the 4.5 year level is attained.

Probationary officers will not be counted into shift staffing until
they have completed at least their ninth (9th) month of service.
Each K-9 Officer will work a 4/10 hour work schedule. Each K-9
Officer will check into and out of service at their residence. One
and one-half (1 %) hour each work day will be allowed for
maintenance, care, and training. Officers will log on for a
minimum of 8.5 hours each workday. When a member is using
vacation, compensatory time, floating holidays, or sick leave, and
in care of the Department’s K-9 it shall be shown as 1.5 hours
worked and 8.5 hours of leave. When the K-9is not in the care of

the officer, then use of any type of leave will be shown as 10

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016

Page 29
 

hours of leave used.

Section F - Seniority Lists

Each bureau shall have its seniority lists according to department seniority and job classification seniority.

The member with the least department and job classification seniority shall be placed at the bottom of that respective

seniority list.

The established seniority lists of the Spokane Police Department shall be brought up to date January 1st of

each year, and a copy of this list will be delivered to the Guild ten (10) days prior to the effective date of this contract.

Any objection to these lists shall be made during this ten (10) day period to the Executive Board of the Guild.

Section G - Annual Bid for Shifts

Prior to the first of each calendar year, in sufficient time for the development of the first mark-up of the year,

non-supervisory personnel shall submit in writing to their immediate supervisor a bid for shift assignment. Shift

assignment within a bureau shall be based on job classification seniority; except Police Officer, Police Officer First

Class and Senior Police Officer shift assignment will be based on departmental seniority.

1.

Patrol Supervisor Shift Assignment - By December 1st of each year, sergeants shall submit to
their immediate supervisor a written request for patrol shift assignment for the following year.
Seniority shall be given primary but not exclusive consideration in assigning such shifts. The City
may make shift assignments without regard to seniority for reasonable cause.

Reassignments shall only be made when a vacancy exists or the City has reasonable cause

to make a change. When a vacancy exists and the most senior sergeant’s request is unable to be
granted, the bureau commander, upon request, shall explain the reasons to the employee
concerned in writing.
Mid-Year_Shift Assignment - When a vacancy within a bureau in a non-supervisory job
classification position occurs on a shift during the calendar year, assignment to that shift will be
based on job classification seniority. Police Officer, Police Officer First Class and Senior Police
Officer shift assignment will be based on departmental seniority.

Vacancy means a position available in the total complement of personnel assigned and not
to a particular job assignment. Exceptions may be made for reasonable cause.

Short-term exceptions for extreme hardship, not to exceed sixty (60) days, may be made

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016

Page 30
when mutually agreed upon by the Chief of Police and the Guild President.
Section H - Transfers
In determining transfers of non-supervisory personnel, seniority shall be the determining factor. Exceptions
may be made for reasonable cause.
Section | - Special Assignments
Management has the right to assign a member to a special assignment without regard to seniority. Special
assignments include the following assignments and any other assignments mutually agreed to in writing:
1, Probationary Officer (newly hired)
Special Investigative Unit
Administrative Services Division
K-9 Officer
Traffic Unit
Neighborhood Resource Officer
Field Training Officer

Special Weapons & Tactics Officer

oc ep NO WF F YW N

Hostage Negotiator
10. Bomb Squad
11. Tactical Team
12. Dignitary Protection Team
13, Meth Team
14. Assistant Range Master (Current Sergeant FTE will not be eliminated but may be moved to
meet department needs)
15. Patrol Anti-Crime Team
16. Other assignments as agreed to by the Police Guild President and the Office of the Chief.
For those special assignments where more than one (1) person is assigned and more than one (1)
shift is involved, shift assignment will be by seniority as per the annual shift bid process. Any person so
attached will not displace any other person regularly assigned to the bureau.
When an employee is assigned or removed from a special assignment, a letter of notice will be sent
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 31
 

from the Chief notifying the employee of their official change of status. This form will serve as formal notice
for payroll to begin or suspend specialty pay.
Section J - VEBA Medical Savings Trust
The City will contribute to the employees’ deferred compensation accounts in accordance with specific
provisions in Article 23 in lieu of contributing toa VEBA Account.
Section K - Duplication of Benefits
Should Legislature improve or add new benefits to LEOFF II members that duplicate benefits provided by
the City, the legislative benefits shall prevail. At such time that this should occur, the City will discontinue the
duplicated benefits to the members. Members shall receive the greater of the benefits provided by the City and
legislative action but shall not receive benefits from the City that are duplicated by legislative action.
Section L - LEOFF li Light Duty
If an employee is disabled from performing his/her regular duties, but is released by his/her physician for light
duty, the following procedures shall apply;
Non-duty related tem, isabili
1. The employee shall provide the Office of the Chief with the physician’s release in which the
physical limitations of the employee shall be stated.
2. When work is available, the Chief of Police shall offer the employee the opportunity to perform
work, which is within the employee’s ability to perform within the department.
3. The light duty assignment shall continue for such period of time as there is a need for the duty or
until the employee is released by the physician for full-duty but not to exceed six months
(cumulative).
4. The Chief of Police shall have the right to have an independent medical examination of the
employee conducted to determine the extent of the employee's disability.
5. The employee shall suffer no loss of wages or benefits during the light duty assignment. This
provision shall apply only to temporarily disabled LEOFF || employees.
6. If any question arises as to the application of this section, the President of the Guild and the Chief

of Police, or their designee, will negotiate the matter and their decision will be final.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 32
Duty related temporary disability

This section (L) shall not apply to LEOFF II employees covered by worker compensation. The
employer reserves all rights it has under the law to administer such claims, including requiring light duty,
consistent with state law. The parties are bound by state, federal and applicable laws/regulations with

respect to permanently disabled employees.

ARTICLE 18 —- SUPPLEMENTAL AGREEMENTS

 

The parties recognize that circumstances change from time to time during the term of labor agreements that
give rise to a need discuss changes in hours or working conditions (including the scope of bargaining unit work). In
order to provide a convenient forum to discuss these issues, the parties agree to the following procedure.

This Agreement may be amended within the scope of this Article provided both parties concur.
Supplemental agreements may be completed through negotiations between the parties at any time during the life of
this Agreement. A joint committee comprised of the negotiating teams of the two parties will meet upon the request
of either party to discuss proposals related to work hours or changes in working conditions, including the scope of
bargaining unit work. Should either party desire to negotiate a matter of this kind, it shall notify the other party in
writing of its desire to negotiate. Supplemental agreements thus completed will be signed by the Guild President or
designee and the Mayor or designee.

Should either party, having been notified of the proposed supplemental language, not respond by requesting
a meeting of the joint committee within thirty (30) days, the proposed language shall be considered acceptable and
shall be forwarded to the other party for signature. Supplemental agreements thus completed shall become a part of
this Agreement.

The City reserves the right to implement changes that are not mandatory subjects of bargaining, or those

which have otherwise been reserved to the City by the express terms of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 19 - SAVING CLAUSE

 

If any section of this Agreement is declared invalid or unconstitutional for any reason, such declaration of

invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other sections or portions thereof which shall be valid.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 33
ARTICLE 20 - JURY DUTY

 

City Employees shall be encouraged to serve jury duty at times when they are called. Employees so called
and asked to serve during working hours will suffer no loss of pay. Employees called during the working day, or
excused during the day, shall report immediately by phone to the shift supervisor for instructions as to whether to

report for work during the remainder of the work date.

ARTICLE 21 — MISCELLANEOUS

 

Section A - Negotiations

Police Guild members selected to negotiate with the City shall be paid for their time during negotiations if
those meetings are held during the regular scheduled duty hours.
Section B - Mileage Allowance

The City agrees to pay the rate established by City policy to all Guild employees who use their personal
vehicles to conduct approved City business.
Section C - Tuition Reimbursement

The City agrees to reimburse the employee for 100 percent of the tuition fee for any approved job related
course upon satisfactory completion of the said course up to the applicable tuition level established at Washington
State University. In order to qualify for tuition reimbursement, the course must be approved by the Police Chief or
designee and the Human Resources Department before the course is taken. The cost for books, laboratory and
other related expenses shall not be paid by the City. Satisfactory completion of any course shall mean a grade of "C"
or better.

For all courses that are approved for reimbursement after February 21, 2014, the employee must refund the
City for tuition reimbursement under the following circumstances:

1. The employee voluntarily leaves City employment within two years after receiving tuition

reimbursement; and
2. The course(s) for which the City reimbursed tuition was completed during the two years prior to the

effective date of the voluntary separation. The course(s) shall be considered completed on the date the

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 34
employee submitted his or her grade to the City for purposes of demonstrating satisfactory completion.

There shall be an exception to this requirement in the event extenuating circumstances require the employee
to terminate employment with the City (e.g., employee quits in order to move and take care of sick parent). The
employee’s requests shall be reviewed for approval by the Police Chief or designee and the Human Resources
Department and such approval shall not be unreasonably denied.

Section D - Joint Committee

The Chief of Police (or designee) and the President of the Guild (or designee) will meet for the purpose of
developing recommendations for the Civil Service Commission concerning the sources, structure, and general
components of promotional examinations within the bargaining unit. In the event that the joint recommendations are
rejected by the Civil Service Commission, either party may reopen this section of the Agreement for the limited
purpose of negotiating the possible implementation of the recommended changes in the promotional process.
Section E- SWAT Team

A. Each SWAT team member will receive two hours per week during duty hours for physical fitness training.
The training will occur at the beginning or end of a work shift and must be done at the Public Safety Building.
Training time will be pre-approved by the member's unit supervisor. SWAT team members will submit a signature
card to the unit supervisor for approval. The unit supervisor will forward the signature card to the SWAT Training
Coordinator and it will be entered into a training log. The training log will be submitted quarterly to the Office of the
Chief.

B. The training time will be scheduled by mutual agreement between the officer and their supervisor. The
training may be denied where shift staffing levels or work of the department so requires.

C. Training time may not be carried over if not used during a given week.

D. No overtime will be permitted to complete shift or assigned duties, or for working out if the officer
continues to work out following the end of their shift. All other time that an officer may spend working out (unless
specifically ordered to work out by the responsible supervisor), including time immediately before or after their shift,
is not compensable.

E. Officers will be subject to call at all times while they are being compensated for working out (physical
fitness training).

F. The Guild and the City agree that they will work together to minimize the operational impact on the
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 35
department of the physical fitness release time.

G. The parties recognize the importance of having some balance in shift assignments for SWAT team
members. Should the shift selection process result in an imbalance, the City may reassign SWAT team members,
by seniority, to restore such balance.

Section F — On Duty Physical Fitness Training

1. Each employee assigned to uniformed field assignment may use two hours per week during duty hours
for physical fitness training. The training will occur at the beginning or end of a work shift and must be done at the
Public Safety Building. Employees assigned to all other assignments will be allowed to convert lunch breaks (30
minutes) and the two daily rest periods (15 minutes each) for physical training. Detectives only may leave the Public
Safety Building to jog as long as they carry their pagers or cell phones for emergency contact.

2. The training time will be scheduled by mutual agreement between the employee and their supervisor.
The training may be denied where shift staffing levels or work of the department so requires, however, reasonable
requests for physical fitness training shall not be denied.

3. Training time may not be carried over if not used during a given week.

4. No overtime will be permitted to complete shift or assigned duties or for working out if the employee
continues to work out following the end of their shift. All other times that an employee may spend working out,
including time immediately before or after their shift, is not compensable.

5. Employees will be subject to call at all times while they are being compensated for working out (physical
fitness training).

6. The Guild and the City agree that they will work together to minimize the operational impact on the
department of the physical fitness release time.

Section G — Leave Sharing

Occasionally Guild employees suffer from a severe or extraordinary illness or sustain an injury, or have an
immediate family member suffering from a severe or extraordinary illness or injury and exhaust their leave balances.
Often co-workers who have substantial leave balances wish to donate some of their leave to those employees.
Leave sharing is the mechanism to accommodate both groups.

This agreement will permit employees of the Police Guild to donate vacation time, illness leave and/or

compensatory time to a co-worker, who is suffering from, or has an immediate family member suffering from, a

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016

Page 36

 
severe or extraordinary non-job-related illness, injury, or other impairment, is out of vacation time, illness leave,

compensatory time, floating holidays, and personal leave (if applicable) and who will imminently go on leave without

Pay or terminate City employment.

1. Eligibility to Receive Shared Leave

a.

b.

The employee must not be receiving time-loss payments as a result of an on-the-job injury or illness.

The employee's position must be one in which vacation and illness leave can be accrued and used,

All Police Guild employees may receive leave under this program if the employee suffers from a
severe or extraordinary non-job-related illness, injury, or impairment which has caused, or is likely to
cause, the employee to go on leave without pay or which may cause the employee to be terminated from
City employment.

An employee may also receive leave under this program if an immediate family member of the
employee suffers from a severe or extraordinary illness or injury.

Requests to receive the leave-sharing benefit shall be submitted to a committee composed of one
person from Human Resources, one person from the Police Department and one person representing
the Police Guild. The decision of the committee shall be final; however, if the decision of the committee
is to deny the request, the requester has the right to petition the committee for reconsideration. The
decision of the committee shall not be subject to the grievance procedure.

An employee must have exhausted his/her illness leave, vacation time, compensatory time, floating
holidays, and personal leave (if applicable) before receiving shared leave.

An employee receiving the leave sharing benefit must have abided by the City’s policies respecting
illness leave. Itis the responsibility of the supervisor to ensure that the employee has not abused iliness
leave before submitting the request.

For the purpose of this policy, immediate family is defined as spouse, child, parents, or other more

distant relative living in the home of the employee.

2. Lifetime Maximums

a.

Employees receiving the leave-sharing benefit shall receive not more than a total of one hundred
and twenty (120) days (960 hours) of such leave every ten (1 0) years of his/her employment with the

City of Spokane, provided, however, the received leave after the first one hundred and twenty (120) days

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016

Page 37
may only be direct donations of accrued leave from other Guild members.
b. The employee's position must be one in which vacation and illness leave can be accrued and used.
c. The employee must not be receiving time-loss payments as a result of an on-the-job injury or ilness.
3. Leave Transference Process

a An employee wishing to receive shared leave shall submit a written request to the Human
Resources Director and attach a detailed statement from his/her physician verifying the severe or
extraordinary nature of the condition and expected duration of time off from work. A Guild
representative or other person may submit the request on behalf of the employee.

b. After receiving the request, a committee composed of one person from Human Resources, one
person from the department and one person from the Police Guild will review the request and if
approved, the Human Resources Department will notify the Police Chief, or designee, who will
communicate the employee's eligibility for leave-sharing to the other employees in the department.

c. If the employee does not supply adequate documentation from his/her physician, the Human
Resources Department will contact the employee or Guild representative and require additional
information be supplied. A decision will not be rendered until adequate documentation is supplied.

d. The decision of the committee shall be final; however, if the decision of the committee is to deny the
request, the requester has the right to petition the committee for reconsideration. The decision of the
committee shall not be subject to the grievance procedure.

e. There shall be no retroactive applications of donated leave.

4. Donating Leave

a. Guild members wishing to donate leave shall send the Leave-Sharing Donation form to the Payroll
Division for processing.

b. All donated leave shall be in full days. A day shall be considered eight (8) hours regardless of
whether the employee is on a flex schedule or compressed workweek. No differentiation will be made
between the salary level of the donor and the recipient.

c. An employee may donate a total of ten (10) days of vacation time, illness leave, or compensatory
time, or any combination that does not exceed ten (10) days, in any calendar year. All donations shall
be entered as illness leave in the recipient's account.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 38
 

Donations of vacation time or illness leave may not bring the donor’s balances below thirteen (13)
days each.

All donations of leave shall be strictly voluntary and confidential and shall be done on the Leave-
Sharing Donation form. The donor shall designate the recipient.

No employee shall be coerced, threatened, intimidated, or financially induced into donating leave.

Once leave has been donated, it becomes the recipient's leave regardless of any changes in his/her
employment status, subject to the maximum stated in section 5(d) below.

If the employee receiving the leave sharing donations passes away before using all donated hours,
the employee's beneficiary will receive a maximum payout of up to ten (10) days in accordance with the

City policy on payouts. The remaining hours will be deleted from the system.

5. Leave-Sharing Bank

a.

The employees of the Police Guild will have access to the leave-sharing bank. All donations shall
be made by completing the Leave-Sharing Donation form. All donations will be applied to the recipient's
illness leave bank.

Except as provided in section 5(f) below, the total of any one employee’s donations to the bank may
not exceed ten (10) days in any calendar year. Donating to the bank shall not affect an employee's right
to donate up to ten (10) days to an individual(s).

Only employees who have been approved to receive shared leave and who have exhausted their
recipient-specific leave may, with the approval of the committee that approved their leave-sharing
request, draw leave from the leave sharing bank with up-to-date supporting documentation from their
physician. The amount of leave drawn from the bank shall be the lesser of: (i) the amount needed to
cover the balance of their illness; (ii) the amount needed to make up their lifetime maximum of one
hundred and twenty (120) days; (iii) half the number of days in the leave sharing bank; or (iv) thirty (30)
days.

Employees who have been approved to receive shared leave and receive more recipient-specific
leave than they need may keep up to ten (10) days of the excess. Donated leave above ten (10) excess
days shail be transferred to the leave-sharing bank. Employees may not keep any part of the excess

leave that would put them over their one hundred and twenty (120) day lifetime maximum.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016

Page 39
e. Police Guild members who have more than nine hundred and sixty (960) hours of sick leave, have
surplus compensatory time, or have vacation time they are on the verge of forfeiting may donate their
surplus leave to the bank in units of a day.

f. Police Guild employees who terminate with five (5) or more years of service may donate all accrued
illness leave hours in excess of nine hundred and sixty (960) hours to the leave-sharing bank.
Employees who retire from City employment may donate all accrued illness leave hours in excess of
nine hundred and sixty (960) hours to the leave-sharing bank.

6. Administration
a. The Human Resources Department shall administer the leave-sharing program.
Section H — Swing Shift Parking
Swing shift officers will have twenty spaces provided on or near the Spokane County campus. The cost of
the monthly parking will be the same as the Spokane County parking committee established rate for parking
(currently $10), using permits issued by the County. Employees using these spots are expected to comply with the
County's requirements, and will be responsible for any tickets or fines. Failure to pay the fee or otherwise comply

may result in loss of the permit.

ARTICLE 22 - SALARY COMPUTATIONS
Section A - Regular Hourly Rate

Regular rate of pay shall mean base salary together with any shift differential pay, longevity, specialty pay,

 

educational or other incentive pays.
Section B - Pay Periods and Pay Checks

Pay periods shall be established on a bi-weekly basis. Pay checks shall be issued on a bi-weekly basis on
alternate Fridays. Employees who do not work on Friday and those employees working the Thursday evening shift

shall have their pay checks distributed, whenever possible, on the Thursday before pay day.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 40
ARTICLE 23 - DEFERRED COMPENSATION

Section A - Deferred comp.

The City agrees to make a deferred compensation plan available to Guild members. Through December 31,
2015, the City’s match will be 4% of the employee’s base monthly pay including longevity and education.

Effective January 1, 2016, the City shall contribute 2.2% of the employee's base pay including longevity and
education, regardless of whether that employee makes their own contribution. If the employee makes contributions
to his or her own account, the City shall make matching contributions of 4% of the employee’s base monthly pay
including longevity and education, in addition to the 2.2%.

Section B - Deferred comp Employer contributions.

In addition to the foregoing, through December 31, 2015, the Employer will adjust its rate of contribution to
the deferred compensation program without regard to employee contributions in accordance with the following
formula:

In the event of an increase in regularly embedded general fund tax revenues (excluding the impact of
reducing authorized property tax increases or not renewing previously passed discretionary property taxes) between
tax year 2005 and 2006, and in subsequent years (applying the same analytical standard from year to year) the City
shall make additional contributions to employee deferred compensation accounts, in the following year and on the

same basis as the basic match (excluding the requirement for employee matching) as follows:

Increase in tax collection Additional City contribution
3% - 4% 1%
4% - 6% 2%
6% or more 3%

Effective January 1, 2016, these additional revenue-sharing contributions shall cease.
Section C - VEBA Alternative.
The City will contribute $50.00 per employee per month to the employee’s deferred compensation account

without requiring a match in lieu of a VEBA contribution.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 41
 

ARTICLE 24 — DISCIPLINE

 

Section A - General

Both parties recognize that Police Officers have certain rights and responsibilities. Some of these rights and
responsibilities are included in the departmental policy manual, under the title Complaint and Disciplinary Procedures.

Both parties agree that the carrying out of departmental Policy and Procedures is exclusively the province of
the Chief of Police.

An employee shall be allowed to inspect his/her personnel file with the exception of materials that are exempt
from disclosure pursuant to Washington law and may obtain a copy of such file at any reasonable time. The
employee may request removal of material which he/she believes erroneous or irrelevant. This request will be
reviewed by the Chief of Police. If the employee does not agree with the Chief's decision, he/she may prepare a
‘statement of dissent which will be placed in the file. Employees may request that written reprimands be expunged
from personnel files after a minimum period of three years if there is no reoccurrence of similar misconduct for which
the employee was disciplined during that period. Employees may request that records of serious discipline be
expunged from personnel files after a minimum period of five years if there is no recurrence of similar misconduct for
which the employee was disciplined during that period. Requests for the expungement of disciplinary references in
personnel files, pursuant to this section, shall not be unreasonably denied. Nothing in this section shall be construed
as requiring the City to destroy any employment records necessary to the City's case if it is engaged in litigation in
any way related to that employee's employment at the time those records would otherwise be destroyed.

Section B - Forms of Discipline

The following disciplinary procedures apply to Guild members who are permanent employees, that is, have
completed their probationary period. The City will continue to administer disciplinary actions in accordance with the
"Just Cause" concept. Disciplinary actions may include, but are not limited to, the following actions: oral reprimand,
written reprimand, denial of promotion, demotion, suspension, and discharge for cause.

Section C - Right of Appeal

Permanent employees (completed probation) shall have the right to take up discipline as a grievance, as set

forth in Article 5 or as an appeal through the Civil Service Rules and Regulations, but the employee is limited to one

or the other.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 42
Section D(1) - Probationary Periods

Probationary periods upon initial appointment shall not exceed eighteen (18) months for entry level and
twelve (12) months for laterals and may not be extended without the written agreement of the Guild. During an
employee's initial probationary period, he/she may be discharged by the employer at-will and such discharge shall
not be subject to the grievance procedure. Probationary periods upon promotion shall not exceed six months and
shall not be extended without the written agreement of the Guild. During a promotional probationary period, an
employee may be reverted to his/her former classification and such reversion shall not be subject to the grievance
procedure.
Section D(2) - Right of Petition

Any probationary Guild employee who reverted or discharged pursuant to section D(1) above shall have the
opportunity, upon request, for hearing with the Chief of Police or his designated representative. However, this
opportunity shall not be subject to the grievance procedure. The Guild may provide representation at this hearing.
Section E - Police Officer Rights in Discipline

It is agreed that the Employer has the right to discipline, suspend, or discharge any employee for just cause.
The City must meet the just cause requirements for disciplining employees for off-duty conduct. Examples of off-duty
conduct that may be subject to discipline include: 1) the off-duty misconduct materially effects the employer's
business operation; or 2) the conduct is inconsistent with the office that the police officer holds.

1. In an effort to ensure that investigations are conducted in a manner which is conducive to good
order and discipline, bargaining unit employees shall be entitled to the following protections which
shall hereafter be termed as the “Police Officers’ Rights in Discipline". Every employee who
becomes the subject of an internal investigation shall be afforded the rights contained in the rest of
this Section. This Section shall not apply to routine supervisory inquiries.

2. Every employee who becomes the subject of a formal internal investigation shall be advised at the
time of their interview that he/she is accused of:

a. Committing a criminal offense; and/or
b. Conduct that would be grounds for termination, suspension, or
other disciplinary actions.
c. Of their right to Guild representation
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 43

 
 

Any employee who becomes the subject of a criminal investigation shall, prior to their interview, be

Notified that he/she is the subject of a criminal investigation and, further, that he/she is under no
obligation to answer any questions or to remain in an interview setting involuntarily, except as
provided herein. So long as the matter remains a criminal investigation, the remainder of this article
shall not apply until or unless the Department determines to compel the subject employee to answer
questions. A criminal investigation as used herein shall be interpreted as any investigation which
could result in the filing of a criminal charge against the officer. In any non-criminal investigation,
the balance of this article shall apply.

Any interview shall take place at the Spokane Police Department, except when impractical. The
employee shall be advised of his/her right to and allowed that Guild representation to the extent
required by law. If the employee is a suspect, they shall be given a general overview of the factual
allegations in writing before the interview commences

The interview of any employee shail be at a reasonable hour, when the employee is on duty, unless
the exigency of the interview dictates otherwise. If the employee is suspected of misconduct, the
interview generally shall be conducted in person, except that for limited follow-up questions or where
there are other unusual situations, questioning may be telephonic so long as a Guild representative
is given the opportunity to participate in the call.

The employee or Employer may request that an internal investigation interview be recorded, either
mechanically or by a stenographer. There can be no “off the record" questions. Upon request, the
employee under internal investigation shall be provided an exact copy of any written statement
he/she has signed or of a verbatim transcript of any interview if one is created.

Interviewing shall be completed within a reasonable time and, in all internal investigation interviews,
the employee shall be afforded such intermissions as he/she shall reasonably request for personal
necessities, meals, telephone calls and rest periods.

All interviewing shall be limited in scope to activities, circumstances, or events which pertain to an
employee's conduct or fitness to hold office.

The employee will not be threatened with dismissal or other disciplinary punishment as a guise to

attempt to obtain his/her resignation, nor shall he/she be subject to abusive or offensive language

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016

Page 44
10.

11.

12.

or intimidation in any other manner. No promises or rewards shall be made as an inducement for
the accused officer to answer questions.

No employee shall be required to unwillingly submit to a polygraph test, nor will employees be
required to answer questions without a direct order to do so.

Internal Investigation Files - Employees and/or their Guild Representative (if representing the
employee) shall have access to complete copies of completed Internal Investigation files at any
reasonable time once a Loudermill hearing has been scheduled, or after discipline has been
imposed if no Loudermill hearing is held. Internal investigation files that do not result in an adverse
finding shall not, in any way, be notated in that employee’s personnel file and shall not be
considered in determining the level of discipline which is appropriate.

Administrative investigations must be completed within 180 days of the matter coming to the
attention of the Department (Assistant Chief or above). In the event the Office of the Chief believes
an extension beyond 180 days is necessary, and the City can show that it has acted with due
diligence and the investigation could not be reasonably be completed due to factors beyond the
control of the City (including, but not limited to, for example, extended illness or other unavailability
of a critical witness (i.e. - the complainant, the officer being investigated), or necessary delays in the
processing of forensic evidence by other agencies) the Chief must contact the Guild prior to the
expiration of the 180 days seeking to extend the time period. Any request for extension based on
the unavailability of witnesses shall include a showing that the witness is expected to become
available in a reasonable period of time. A request for extension based upon the above criteria will
not be unreasonably denied. The period of investigation may also be extended by mutual
agreement between the Guild President and the Chief.

The 180 day period shall be suspended when a complaint involving alleged criminal conduct
is being reviewed by a prosecuting authority or is being prosecuted at the city, state or federal level,
or if the alleged conduct occurred in another jurisdiction and is being criminally investigated or
prosecuted in that jurisdiction. In cases of an officer involved fatal incident, the 180 day period will
commence when the completed criminal file is provided to the Prosecuting Attorney, and will only be

tolled in the event criminal charges are filed.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016

Page 45
 

In the event an outside agency conducts a criminal investigation of a matter within the
Jurisdiction of the City, and the Department receives the completed criminal file with less than sixty
(60) days remaining for the administrative investigation, the Department will have up to an additional
sixty (60) days to complete its administrative investigation; in no event, shall the investigation last
more than 240 days.

Compliance with this provision is required if findings are to be entered or discipline is to be
imposed. Issuance of a Loudermill notice of intent to discipline will constitute conclusion of the
administrative investigation for purposes of this section.

Nothing in this article prohibits the City from disciplining (provided just cause exists) an
officer convicted of a crime, or laying off an employee pursuant to Civil Service Rule IX, Section

6 (d).

ARTICLE 25 - DRUG TESTING

 

Section A

Reporting to work under the influence of alcohol and/or illegal drugs, or the use, sale, or possession by an
employee of illegal drugs is strictly prohibited and will result in disciplinary action (unless otherwise required by law),
including immediate termination. For the purpose of this policy, substances that require a prescription or other
written approval from a licensed physician or dentist for their use shall also be included when used other than as
prescribed. Each employee must advise the Employer if they are using prescription or other over-the-counter drugs
they know or reasonably should know may impair their ability to perform job functions and/or operate machinery such
as automobiles. Under appropriate circumstances the Employer may request the employee provide written medical
authorization to perform various essential job functions from a physician while using such drugs.

Any voluntary request by an employee for assistance with his/her own alcohol abuse problem will remain
confidential and shall not be used as the basis for any disciplinary action provided that the request for assistance is
initiated prior to being identified as impaired through the procedures herein.

The parties recognize the essential purpose of any law enforcement agency is to enforce the criminal laws.
Moreover, the parties recognize the courts have held it would substantially impair law enforcement agencies if they

were required to employ individuals within their ranks who have violated the very laws said agencies are charged

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 46
 

with enforcing. Therefore, the Employer reserves the right to refuse to employ or continue the employment of
individuals who are or have been engaged in serious criminal conduct, whether drug related or not.
Section B
Where a supervisory employee of the City has a reasonable suspicion to believe an employee is under the
influence of alcohol or illegal drugs or is abusing the use of prescription or over-the-counter drugs, or is using illegal
drugs, the employee in question will be ordered to immediately submit to discovery testing. Such tests include
breath tests, urinalysis and blood screens to identify any involvement with alcohol or such drugs. An employee who
refuses to submit to discovery testing shall be conclusively presumed to be under the influence of alcohol or an
illegal drug for the purpose of administering this Article and therefore will be subject to discipline, including immediate
discharge.
Section C
For the purpose of administering this Article the following definition of terms is provided:
1. Reasonable Suspicion - Reasonable suspicion is based on objective facts and reasonable
inferences from those facts, that discovery testing will produce evidence of a violation of this policy.
2. Under the Influence — In determining whether an employee is under the influence or using illegal
drugs, the following cutoff levels shall be used for the initial screening of specimens to determine
whether they are negative for these drugs or classes of drugs:
Nanograms per milliliter (ng/ml)
Test Level

Amphetamines. seeee, 1000

 

 

 

 

 

Barbiturates +. 300
Benzodiazepines .... 300
Cannabinoids........ 100
Cocaine metabolites ..... -- 300
Methadone 300
Methaqualone 300
Opiates (Codeine) 300
Opiates (Morphine) .... 300

 

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 47
 

Phencyclidine (PCP) ....

 

 

 

Propoxyphene ....
Level of the positive result for alcohol...... ....0.04 blood alcoho!
3. Illegal Drugs - All forms of narcotics, depressants, stimulants, hallucinogens, and cannabis, which

sale, purchase, transfer, or unauthorized use or possession is prohibited or restricted by law.

4. Over-the-Counter Drugs - Are those drugs which are generally available without a prescription and
are limited to those drugs which are capable of impairing the judgment of an employee to safely
perform the employee's duties.

5. Prescription Drugs - All drugs which are used in the course of medical treatment and have been
prescribed and authorized for use by a licensed practitioner/physician or dentist.

Section D

If an employee is required to submit to a drug test, the following procedure shall be followed:

1. The employee shall be given notice of an opportunity to confer with a Guild
representative if one is readily available.

2. The employee shall be given an opportunity to explain the reasons for the
employee's condition, such as reaction to a prescribed drug, fatigue, exposure to
toxic substances, or any other reasons known to employee, to the test
administrator. The Guild representative may be present during this discussion.

3. The Employer may request urine and/or blood samples.

4. Urine and blood samples shall be collected at a local laboratory, hospital or

medical facility. The Employer shall transport the employee to the collection site.
The Employer and/or Guild representative may be allowed to accompany the
employee to the collection site and observe the bottling and sealing of the
specimen. The employee shall not be observed by the Employer when the urine
specimen is given.

5. All specimen containers, vials, and bags used to transport the specimen, shall be
sealed to safeguard their integrity, (upon request in the presence of the Employer,

employee and Guild representative) and proper chain-of-custody procedures shall

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016

Page 48

 

 
be followed.

The collection and testing of the samples shall be performed only at Occupational
Medicine Associates or at another laboratory mutually agreed to by the parties.
The results of such tests shall be made available to the Employer and the Guild.
If a specimen tests positive in an immunoassay screen test, the results must be
confirmed by a gas chromatography/mass spectrometry tests. The specimen must
show positive results at/within the following limits on the GC/MS (gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry) confirmatory test to be considered positive.
If immunoassay is specific for free morphine the initial test level is 25 ng/ml.

Confirmatory Test

Marijuana metabolites 15 ng/ml
Cocaine metabolites 150 ng/ml
Opiates:
Morphine 300 ng/m!
Codeine 300 ng/mi
Phencyclidine 25 ng/ml

Amphetamines:

Amphetamine 500 ng/ml

Methamphetamine 500 ng/ml
Atthe employee's or the Guild's option, a sample of the specimen may be requisitioned and sent to
a laboratory chosen by the Guild for testing. The cost of this test will be paid by the Guild or the
employee. Failure to exercise this option may not be considered as evidence in arbitration or other
proceeding concerning the drug test or its consequences. The results of this second test shall be
provided to the City.
The employee (and the Guild, upon approval of the employee) shall be informed of the results of all
tests, and provided with all documentation regarding the tests as soon as the test results are

available. Such disclosure shall be in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016

Page 49
Section E

The parties shall designate a Medical Review Officer (MRO) to review all confirmed positive test results and
communicate those results to the Employer. The MRO shall have the responsibility to determine when an individual
has failed a drug test in accordance with the standards enumerated herein. The MRO shall retain all records of all
positive tests for at least five years and records of all negative tests for at least one year.
Section F

If the results of the drug test are positive, and support a conclusion that the employee used an illegal drug,
abused the use of a prescription or over-the-counter drug, or reported to work while under the influence of alcohol,

the employee will be subject to discipline, including immediate discharge, unless otherwise required by law.

ARTICLE 26 — HEALTH AND WELFARE

 

Section A - Insurance

1. Family Dental Insurance - The City agrees to provide the current Premier Dental Insurance plan at no cost
to the employee, including orthodontia at a 50% benefit level, through April 30, 2014. Effective May 1, 2014,
the City agrees to provide the PPO Dental Insurance plan at no cost to the employee, including orthodontia
at a 50% benefit level.

2. Family Medical Insurance (LEOFF 1) - The City will pay for employee medical coverage as is required by
law and will pay for 90% of dependent coverage and the employee will be responsible for 10% of the
dependent premium. Medical plans offered will be City Plan III and Group Health. Prescription drugs under
City Plan III shall be subject to the following co-pays: generic medications $10.00, all other medications
$20.00. Group Health participants shall be required to pay the following co-pays: generic medications
$10.00, all other medications $30.00. All other medical benefits will be maintained at current levels. The City
program for domestic partner benefits is available for bargaining unit employees.

3 Family Medical Insurance (LEOFF Il) - Police Officers hired after September 30, 1977, and their
dependents, shall be covered under a City sponsored plan for non-duty related medical care.

Through April 30, 2014, medical plans offered will be City Plan Ill and Group Health |, with

employees paying $105/month toward coverage of the employee and his/her dependents in the employee’s

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 50
 

selected medical plan and the City paying the balance of the monthly premium.

Effective May 1, 2014, medical plan options will be City Plan III, City Plan IV, Group Health |, and
Group Health II. Employee contributions for City Plan III and Group Health | will increase by $15/month to
$120/month. Employee contributions for City Plan IV and Group Health II will be $105/month.

Effective January 1, 2015, employee contributions for City Plan Ill and Group Health | will increase by
$15/month to $135/month. Employee contributions for City Plan !V and Group Health I! will remain
$105/month.

Prescription drugs under City Plan III shall be subject to the following co-pays: generic medications
$10.00, all other medications $20.00. City Plan IV and Group Health participants shall be subject to the
following co-pays: generic medications $10.00, all other medications $30.00. All other medical benefits will
be maintained at current levels. The City program for domestic partner benefits will be made available for
bargaining unit employees.

Retiree Medical — The Guild has agreed to work with the City on redesigning the current medical plans and

creating a Retirees Medical Plan. The Guild has indicated that it would work towards development ofa

retirees plan similar to the current Plan III with the costs assumed in total by the retiree. The Guild would

also like to develop a plan where contributions could be made by existing employees prior to retirement to

help offset the costs. The Guild has also requested that employees who have retired since January 2002 be

allowed to access the retirees plan. The parties have agreed that they will work in concert during 2004 with

a goal to implement the plan in 2005. The goal date may be extended by the parties.

Life Insurance

(a) For Police Officers: The City shall provide $10,000 life insurance coverage to be paid in full by the City.

(b) For Dependents: The City shall make a life insurance plan available at the employee's option and
expense.

(c) Bomb Squad and Swat Team Members will be provided 1% times their annual salary in life insurance
coverage to a maximum of $60,000. K-9 Handlers and Hostage Negotiators will be provided $50,000 in
life insurance coverage.

Long-Term Disability Insurance - The City shall make payroll deduction available for Guild members to

purchase the group disability insurance plan, which the Guild sponsors. LEOFF II employees shall be required to

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016

Page 51
purchase this insurance as a condition of employment. The City shall contribute $30.50 per month, as wages, for
LEOFF 1! officers.

7. Vision Care - The City agrees to provide vision care coverage for LEOFF || employees at the same level as
LEOFF | in a manner determined by the City.

8. Health Plan Redesign. The Guild will participate in City Health plan redesign discussions along with other
employee groups provided that this section shall not be construed as either a reopener on employee benefits or as

evidence that the Guild agrees to change any health care provision of this agreement by their participation.

ARTICLE 27 - CIVILIAN REVIEW

The Office of Police Ombudsman (OPO) will provide a professional presence to help ensure a quality
investigation in real time, and visible, independent oversight to reassure the public. The City and the Guild agree that
the OPO and the Police Ombudsman Commission as set forth in Article 27 complies with and satisfies all of the
requirements of the City Charter in effect on March 1, 2013.

(a) The OPO will actively monitor all police department OPO involved investigations as provided for herein.

(b) An “OPO Involved Investigation” is defined as an IA investigation where the complaint giving rise to the
investigation, whether made to the Department or the OPO, is a complaint of a serious matter (complaints that could
lead to suspension, demotion or discharge) involving allegations that an employee either improperly used force or
improperly/inappropriately interacted with citizens.

(c) The OPO may receive complaints from any complaining party, including, without limitation, citizens or employees
of the police department. The OPO may conduct a preliminary investigation regarding the complaint for the purpose
of determining whether to forward the complaint to IA. The preliminary investigation shall include, as appropriate,
interviewing the complainant and interviewing any other person who the complainant asserts was subject to the
improper use of force or improper/inappropriate interaction with an officer. If after this interview(s) the OPO is unable
to determine whether the matter should be forwarded to IA, the OPO may conduct such additional interviews as are
reasonably necessary to determine whether to forward the case to IA. If a complainant or witness refuses to have his
or her interview recorded, he or she shall be asked to write out his or her complaint. All interviews will be conducted

by the OPO. In the event the OPO is unavailable to conduct the initial interview, the complainant will be asked to

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016

Page 52

 
 

prepare a written statement or taped oral narrative concerning the matter, allowing the OPO to subsequently

determine whether an actual interview should be conducted. Officers will not be interviewed as part of the
preliminary investigation, unless the complainant is an officer. If the complainant is an officer, the OPO may request
an interview from the complainant officer as part of the preliminary investigation.

If the OPO determines that the complaint should not be forwarded to IA, the OPO may publish a closing
report, which states the allegations of the complaint and the basis for the OPO’s determination that the complaint did
not need to be forwarded to IA. Neither this closing report nor the preliminary investigation shall be used for
discipline; the closing report and any part of the preliminary investigation that is released shall not reveal the names
of the officers involved. For each complaint where the OPO determines that the complaint does not need to be
forwarded to IA, the OPO shall forward to IA its determination as well as the name of any complainant and/or
witnesses and the details of the alleged complaint.

Ifthe OPO determines that the complaint should be forwarded to IA, the OPO will forward the complaint and
any preliminary investigation to IA within three business days for processing and, when appropriate, investigation.
The OPO will not act upon complaints concerning events that occurred more than one year prior to the filing of a
complaint. The OPO will not conduct separate disciplinary investigations, but may participate in interviews and
request that further investigation be completed, as provided herein.

(d) In addition to complaints received by the OPO, Internal Affairs will provide copies of all other OPO Involved
Investigation complaints to the OPO within three business days. Once the case is closed, the OPO will return all
case file materials to IA for retention, but will have subsequent access to closed cases.

(e) The OPO will have the opportunity to make a recommendation for mediation to the Chief of Police, prior to
investigation. In the event the Department, the complainant and the officer all agree to mediation, that process will
be utilized rather than sending the matter on for investigation. Assuming the officer participates in good faith during
the mediation process, the officer will not be subject to discipline and no disciplinary finding will be entered against
the officer. Good faith means that the officer listens and considers the issues raised by the complainant, and acts and
responds appropriately. Agreement with either the complainant or the mediator is not a requirement of good faith. In
the event an agreement to mediate is reached and the complainant thereafter refuses to participate, the officer will be
considered to have participated in good faith.

(f) Once any complaint is received by the Internal Affairs unit (including those forwarded to IA from the OPO), it shall
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 53

 
 

be submitted to the chain of command for review per existing policy. When either the Chief or her/his designee
determines that the allegations warrant investigation, such investigation shall be approved, and IA will initiate the
investigative process. The OPO will participate in that investigative process for OPO Involved Investigations as
follows:

1. Internal Affairs will notify the OPO of all administrative interviews on all OPO Involved Investigations.
The OPO may attend and observe interviews, in person or by telephone, and will be given the opportunity to ask
questions during the interview after the completion of questioning by the Department. The OPO will not participate in
criminal investigations of Department employees but will be notified when the criminal case is concluded.

2. Upon completion of OPO Involved Investigations, |A will forward a complete copy of the case file to
the OPO for review. The OPO will review the case file and determine whether the investigation was thorough and
objective. :

3. As a part of the review process, the OPO may conclude that further investigation is needed on
issues deemed material to the outcome. The OPO will notify IA of the suggested further investigation. The OPO’s
suggestions and rationale for further investigation will be provided to IA in writing. The OPO and assigned
investigator(s) will discuss the suggested further investigation and attempt to reach an agreement. If there is no
agreement between the assigned investigator(s) and the OPO regarding the necessity, practicality or materiality of
the requested further investigation, the OPO will notify the Chief (or designee) in writing of the OPO’s suggestions
and rationale for further investigation. The Chief (or designee) will determine whether further investigation will be
undertaken by IA. The Chief (or designee) will provide his/her determination in writing.

If the OPO is not satisfied with the determination of the Chief, the OPO's request for further investigation may
be presented to the Police Ombudsman Commission, whose decision will be final. The decision of the Police
Ombudsman Commission will be based upon the OPO’s written request and the Chief's (or designee’s) written
response. Once the matter has been referred to and resolved by the Police Ombudsman Commission, the
investigation will be completed consistent with the decision of the Police Ombudsman Commission on the OPO’s
request. After providing IA a reasonable opportunity to complete the further investigation, if the Commission
determines and specifically describes in writing how the IA investigation was not completed consistent with the
Commission's decision, the Commission may again direct |A to complete the further investigation in the OPO's
request, or the Commission may publish a report stating what further investigation in the OPO’s request the
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 54
 

Commission believes was not completed by IA. If the OPO has not yet made a certification decision, a certification
decision shall be made by the OPO. In addition to its report, the Commission may direct the OPO or a third-party
investigator to complete the further investigation requested by the OPO; however, no such investigation may
commence until the Chief has made a final, written discipline determination in the matter. If the Commission
contracts for a third-party investigation, it shall be conducted by someone with knowledge and experience in
conducting a fair and objective law-enforcement investigation and who has no conflict of interest. The OPO or third-
party investigator may request, but not require, participation by police officers in the investigation. Once the OPO or
third-party investigator has completed the OPO requested investigation, the Commission may publish a report of the
results of the investigation of the OPO or third-party investigation, so long as the report does not identify specific
members of the Department and does not in any way comment on officer discipline (or lack thereof). The further
investigation and/or the Commission's report may not be used by the City as a basis to open or re-open complaints
against any bargaining unit employees, including those assigned to IA, or to reconsider any decision(s) previously
made concerning discipline. No discipline of bargaining unit employees may result from the OPO or third-party
investigation.

The request from the OPO for IA to do further investigation, the process of review and decision making on
that request, or the requirement to do further investigation do not suspend the 180 day requirement of Article 24.

4. After completion of the further investigation by IA, or the conclusion (by IA or the Commission) that no
further investigation by IA will be undertaken, the OPO will then certify whether or not, in the opinion of the OPO, the
internal investigation was thorough and objective. This determination will be made within five business days. Once
the certification determination is made, the OPO will not be involved further in the disciplinary process in that case.
(g) The OPO will be notified if the Chief or designee determines that any complaint that meets the definition of an
OPO Involved Investigation will not be investigated by IA. If the OPO believes that an investigation should be
completed, the OPO shall notify the Chief or designee in writing. The OPO and Chief or designee will discuss the
OPO’'s request for investigation and attempt to reach an agreement. The Chief will provide a written response to the
OPO's request within 14 days. If there is no agreement between the Chief or designee and the OPO regarding the
investigation, the Police Ombudsman Commission will decide whether the investigation requested by the OPO will be
undertaken by IA, as provided in section (f). The decision of the Police Ombudsman Commission will be based upon
the OPO’s written request and the Chief's (or designee’s) written response. After providing IA a reasonable
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 55
opportunity to undertake the investigation, if the Commission determines and specifically describes in writing howlA
failed to undertake an investigation consistent with the Commission's decision, the Commission may again direct lA
to undertake an investigation, or the Commission may direct the OPO to conduct an independent investigation into
the complaint that meets the definition of an OPO Involved Investigation that the Chief determined would not be
investigated by IA. The OPO may request, but not require, participation by police officers in the investigation. The
OPO may publish a report of the results of the investigation, so long as the report does not identify specific members
of the Department and does not in any way comment on officer discipline (or lack thereof). Any released investigation
will not identify specific members of the Department. The OPO’s investigation and/or report may not be used by the
City as a basis to open complaints against any bargaining unit employee(s), including those assigned to IA, or to
reconsider any decision(s) previously made concerning discipline. No discipline of bargaining unit employees may
result from the OPO investigation.

The request from the OPO for IA to do an investigation, the process of review and decision making on that
request, or the requirement to do an investigation do not suspend the 180 day requirement of Article 24.
(h) All disciplinary decisions will be made by the Chief (or designee).
(i) The OPO will be provided a copy of any letter or other notification to an officer informing them of actual discipline
imposed as a result of an internal affairs investigation or any Notice of Finding in the event that the complaint is not
sustained.
(j) The OPO will be notified by IA within five business days of case closure of all OPO Involved Investigations. The
OPO, in addition to the Department's written Notice of Finding letter to the complainant, may send a closing letter to
the complainant. The letter may summarize the case findings.
(k) Any complaining party who is not satisfied with the findings of the Department conceming their complaint may
contact the Office of Police Ombudsman to discuss the matter further. However, unless persuasive and probative
new information is provided, the investigation will remain closed. In accordance with established arbitral case law,
employees may not be disciplined twice for the same incident. In the event the investigation is re-opened and
discipline imposed, the appropriate burden of establishing compliance with this section rests with the City in any
subsequent challenge to the discipline.
(!) Once the OPO has made a certification decision and the Chief has made a final determination on the case, the
OPO may publish a closing report that summarizes the complaint, the OPO Involved Investigation, and the findings.
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 56
The closing report will not disclose the names of officers or witnesses. The OPO’s closing report shall not be used in
disciplinary proceedings of bargaining unit employees.

(m) In addition to the investigative process, the OPO will have unimpeded access to all complaint and investigative
files from OPO Involved Investigations for auditing and reporting purposes. The OPO shall not retain investigative
files beyond one year and will return the same to Internal Affairs for safekeeping. At all times and including, without
limitation, issuing written reports, the OPO will not release the name(s) of employees or other individuals involved in
incidents or investigations nor any other personally identifying information. The OPO may make statistical
observations regarding the disciplinary results of sustained internal investigations, but shall not take issue with
discipline imposed by the Chief of Police in specific cases.

(n) The OPO may recommend policies and procedures for the review and/or audit of the complaint resolution
process, and review and recommend changes in departmental policies to improve the quality of police investigations
and practices. The OPO may publish a policy and procedure report that identifies the OPO’s recommended policy
and procedure changes. The OPO’s recommendations will be related to departmental procedure, policies, training, or
related issues. The OPO will not make recommendations conceming discipline for specific cases or officers.
Nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver of the Guilds right to require the City to engage in collective bargaining
as authorized by law.

(0) A committee of five (5) members (Committee) will be formed that will recommend three (3) candidates for the
OPO position to the Police Ombudsman Commission (one of which must be selected). The Committee shall be
composed of one member appointed by the Spokane Police Officers Guild; one member appointed by the
Lieutenants and Captains Association; one member appointed by the President of the City Council; one member
appointed by the Mayor; and a fifth member selected by the other four members.

(p) In addition to whatever job requirements may be established by the City, one of the minimum job requirements for
the OPO will be to have a history that includes the establishment of a reputation for even-handedness in dealing with
both complainants and the regulated parties. The City also agrees that compliance with the confidentiality provisions
of this agreement will be a condition of employment for the OPO. Inadvertent, de minimis disclosures shall not be
considered a violation of this section.

(q) Alleged violations of this agreement are subject to the grievance and arbitration provisions of the bargaining
agreement. In the event the Guild believes a candidate recommended by the Committee for OPO does not meet the
Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 57
 

minimum job requirement established in Section (p) above, the Guild must within three (3) days of the
recommendation present information to the Police Ombudsman Commission about their concern. If that person is
ultimately selected by the Police Ombudsman Commission, the Guild may file a grievance within five (5) days of the
appointment and an expedited arbitration process will be utilized to resolve the matter. The Arbitrator will conduct an
arbitration within twenty-one (21) days, and issue a bench decision. The decision will be final and binding upon the
parties. Upon the filing of a grievance, the appointment shall be held in abeyance pending completion of the
arbitration.

(1) The City will require that each member of the Police Ombudsman Commission sign a confidentiality statement
confirming as a condition of service that they will not release the name(s) of employees or other individuals involved
in incidents or investigations, nor any other personally identifying information. Inadvertent, de minimis disclosures
shall not be considered a violation of this section.

(s) In addition to whatever job requirements may be established by the City, one of the minimum job requirements for
the members of the Police Ombudsman Commission will be to have a history that includes the establishment of a
reputation for even-handedness in dealing with both complainants and the regulated parties.

(t) Nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver of the Guilds right to require the City to engage in collective

bargaining as authorized by law.

ARTICLE 28 —- SALARY SAVINGS PLAN

ARTICLE 28 - SA ee
The parties agree to adopt the Guild Salary Savings Plan under the following terms:

A. Eligibility and Payment Terms

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Minimum Age Age + Years of | Monthly Payment Duration
Service
LEOFF II 53 78 $500 8 years
(96 months)
LEOFF | 53 78 $300 5 years
| (60 months)

 

 

 

The monthly payment will be made into an HRA account. The individual accounts are subject to deduction for

administration costs. The HRA will be an inheritable asset, if allowed by law.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 58
B. Limits and Deadlines

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2010 Subsequent years
r T
Number eligible 10 10
Deadline to apply for | March 1, 2010 Dec. 31 of the prior year
the incentive
Deadline to retire August 30, 2010 Between January 1 and
June 30
L

 

Employees must complete and turn in an application form by the above deadline in order to be eligible for the
incentive. Applicants must meet retirement eligibility requirements under their LEOFF pension plan.

If the City receives applications from more than 10 employees in one year, the incentive will be given to the
eligible employees highest on the seniority list. If an employee does not receive the benefit based on seniority, that
employee may be eligible for the incentive in future years.

c. Disqualifications

The intent of this program is for service retirements only. Employees who are receiving L&I or long term disability
or are on medical layoff/retirement are disqualified from the incentive. If at any time during the incentive payment
term the recipient of the incentive begins receiving L&I or long term disability, incentive payments under this program
will cease.

Employees who have already applied and been approved for the City's Voluntary Retirement Incentive Program
(VRIP) are disqualified from the incentive. Under no circumstance can an employee receive benefits from both the
VRIP and the incentive program outlined by this Salary Savings Plan.

Ifan employee applies for the incentive but does not retire by the established deadline, the employee will not be
eligible for the incentive in that year or any future year. If an employee is approved for the benefit but does not retire,
then the next eligible applicant on the seniority list will receive the incentive.

D. COLA

The agreed monthly payment amounts will not be subject to any cost of living adjustment.

E. Discontinuance/Reinstatement of Plan

The City has the right to discontinue this incentive plan at any time. The City has provided notice that the
program will be discontinued following 2013 retirements.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 59
The City has the right to reinstate the plan on January 1 of any year.
if at any point the incentive is modified or discontinued, employees who have already been approved to receive

the incentive will continue to receive payments under the terms that were in place at the time that they were approved

for the incentive.

Spokane Police Guild Agreement

2012-2016
Page 60
 

Dated this Losey of June , 2014.

FOR THE CITY OF SPOKANE: FOR THE SPOKANE POLICE GUILD:
“wk. QO DLE

David A. Condon John Gately

Mayor President

   

WMD? ic

Theresa M. Sanders John Griffin

City Administrator Vice-President
Fi fi PeutGerpenter 777 OT TMAIZ
Poltté Chie’ Vice-President
)
Rick Dobrow Ty Snider
Assistant Police Chief Secretary

    
 

Human Resources Analyst reasurer

V..
Terri Pfister

City Clerk

Approved as to form:

oe Meh

Erin A. Jacobson
Assistant City Attorney

 

Spokane Police Guild Agreement
2012-2016
Page 61
