MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

2013 — 2015

CITY OF CHANDLER
AND

CHANDLER LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSOCIATION

REPRESENTING
CHANDLER POLICE OFFICERS
Preamble
Article 1:

Section 1-1
Section 1-2
Section 1-3
Section 1-4
Section 1-5

Article 2:

Section 2-1
Section 2-2

Article 3:

Section 3-1
Section 3-2
Section 3-3
Section 3-4
Section 3-5
Section 3-6
Section 3-7
Section 3-8
Section 3-9
Section 3-10
Section 3-11
Section 3-12

Article 4:

Section 4-1

Article 5:

Section 5-1
Section 5-2
Section 5-3
Section 5-4
Section 5-4A
Section 5-5
Section 5-6
Section 5-6A

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Rights

Purpose/Gender

City and Management Rights
Right of the Association

Unit Member Rights

Prohibition of Strike and Lockout

Grievance/Arbitration/Labor-Management

Grievance Procedure
Labor-Management Committee

Compensation and Wages

Merit Pay

Longevity Pay

Total Annual Cash Compensation Survey
Field Training Pay/K-9 Pay
nterpreting and Translation Pay
Overtime

Court Overtime

Jury Duty

Call-Out Pay

Swing and Night Shift Differential Pay
Deferred Compensation
Vacation/Comp Time Buy Back

 

Hours of Work/Working Conditions

Hours

Benefits

Health Insurance

Dental Insurance

Life Insurance

Vacation Leave

Maximum Accrual of Vacation Credits
Holidays

Sick Leave

Payment of Sick Leave at Retirement or Death

 

2

RoeaM

15

23
Section 5-7
Section 5-8
Section 5-9

Article 6:

Section 6-1
Section 6-2
Section 6-3
Section 6-4
Section 6-5
Section 6-6

Training/Tuition Reimbursement
Out-of-State Vacation Recall
Uniform, Clothing and Equipment

Miscellaneous

Saving Clause

Copies of Memorandum

Seniority

Limited Duty Status

Changes in Departmental General Orders pursuant to this MOU
Term and Effect of Memorandum

28

29
PREAMBLE

Whereas the well being and morale of the employees of the City are benefited by
providing an opportunity to participate in the formulation of policies and practices affecting the
wages, hours, benefits and other conditions of their employment; and

Whereas the parties hereby acknowledge that the provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding (hereinafter “Memorandum”) are not intended to abrogate the authority and
responsibility of the City government provided for under the statutes of the State of Arizona or
the charter or ordinances of the City; and

Whereas the parties, through their designated representatives, met and conferred in
good faith pursuant to the Meet and Confer Ordinance in order to reach agreement concerning
wages, hours, benefits and other conditions of employment in the bargaining unit; and

Now therefore, the City of Chandler, hereinafter referred to as the “City” and, Chandler
Law Enforcement Association (CLEA), hereinafter referred to as the “Association,” or
Association having reached this complete agreement concerning wages, hours, and working
conditions for the term specified, the parties submit the Memorandum to the Mayor and the City
Council of the City of Chandler with their joint recommendation that the body resolve to adopt its
terms.
ARTICLE 1: RIGHTS
Section 1-1: Purpose / Gender

It is the purpose of this Memorandum to continue and maintain harmonious relations,
cooperation, and understanding between the City and its unit members; and to set forth the full
and entire understanding of the parties reached as a result of a good faith meeting and
conferring regarding wages, hours, benefits, terms and other conditions of employment of the
unit members covered hereby, which understanding the parties intend jointly to submit and
recommend for approval and implementation to the Mayor and City Council.

Whenever any words used herein are in the masculine, feminine, or neuter, they shall be
construed as though they were also used in another gender in all cases where they would so
apply.

Section 1 - 2: City and Management Rights

The City and the City Manager’s rights are not subjugated or diminished in any way by any
expressed or implied duty or obligation to meet and confer. Retained management rights are
not subject to the grievance procedure contained in any Memorandum of Understanding, nor
are they subject to any other appeal or complaint process.

A. The City has and will continue to retain, whether exercised or not, the unilateral and
exclusive right to operate, administer, and manage its municipal services and work force
performing those services. The authority of the City shall not be modified or limited by
inference or implication.

B. The exclusive rights of the City shall include, but not be limited to;

¢ The right to determine the organization of City government, the purpose of each of its
departments, and the purpose and mission of its constituent agencies, boards and
commissions;

¢ Set standards of service to be offered to the public, and through its management
officials to exercise control and discretion over its organization and operations;

¢ Establish rules and practices governing the conduct of unit members, to direct and
supervise its unit members and their work, to take disciplinary action, to relieve its
unit members from duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons;

¢ Determine whether goods and or services shall be made, purchased or contracted
for;

¢ Determine the methods, means and personnel by which the City’s services are to be
provided, including the right to schedule, and assign work and overtime, to hire,
transfer and reassign unit members and to otherwise act in the interests of efficient
service to the community;

¢ The City reserves the right to establish and revise work schedules and work
locations; to establish, revise and implement standards for hiring and promoting unit
members; to determine the need for additional positions and the qualifications of new
unit members and to determine the qualifications for and/or the qualifications of unit
members considered for transfer and/or promotion; to evaluate and judge the skill,
ability and efficiency and general work performance of unit members;
¢ Adopt and manage its budget, provide for the funding of certain levels of service, to
add, delete, modify, or suspend certain programs, functions, divisions, and
departments as the City Council in the exercise of its legislative authority to create
and manage the City’s budget and to determine whatever action to be necessary and
appropriate;

¢ Take all necessary actions to maintain uninterrupted service to the community.

C. The City retains all rights not specifically limited by a Memorandum of Understanding
approved in accordance with the provisions of the Meet and Confer Ordinance.

D. The enumeration of the above rights is illustrative only and is not to be construed as being
all-inclusive.

Section 1 - 3: Rights of the Association

Section 1-3 will be open in the second year for discussion of the following issues (i) mandating
vacation donation by non-dues paying members, (ii) number of vacation hours to donate (iii)
alternates to vacation donation to fund release time.

A. The City recognizes the Chandler Law Enforcement Association as the sole and exclusive
Meet and Confer authorized representative pursuant to the Meet and Confer Ordinance for
purposes of representation regarding wages, hours, benefits, and other conditions of
employment for all regular, full-time, non-probationary unit members in the Police Officers
employee group. Associations shall have no rights beyond those specified in the Meet and
Confer Ordinance, Title 38 of Arizona Revised Statute, and this Memorandum.

B. Certain specified representatives of the Association have the right to paid release time herein
as follows:

1) The Association may designate up to eleven (11) representatives and shall notify the
Chief of Police in writing of such designations. There shall be no obligation on the
City to change or adjust normal departmental scheduling or assignments of
personnel as a result of such designations.

2) One (1) Association representative may, when the Association is designated in
writing by the unit member group member as his representative, attend mutually
scheduled grievance meetings and hearings with department and City
representatives without loss of pay or benefits. In no event shall this paid release
time be used for any other purposes, such as gathering information, interviewing the
grievant/appellant or witnesses, or preparing a presentation. The Association
representative is required to obtain the permission of his department supervisor to
absent himself from his duties to attend scheduled grievance meetings. Subject to
operational needs and scheduling factors this permission shall not be unreasonably
withheld. An Association representative wishing to enter a work area for the purpose
of investigating a formal grievance must first gain the permission of the work area
supervisor. This permission will not be unreasonably withheld, giving proper
consideration to essential work of the department and the occupational safety of the
Association representative.
C. Payroll Dues Deduction

1) The City shall deduct yearly from all (26) twenty-six checks of Association members,
the regular periodic Association membership dues pursuant to the City’s deduction
authorization form duly completed and signed by the unit member and transmit such
deductions monthly to the Association no later than the fourteenth (14) day following
the end of the pay period in which the deduction occurs, along with an alphabetical
list of all unit members for whom the deductions have been made. Such deduction
shall be made only when the Association member's earnings for a pay period are
sufficient after other legally required deductions are made.

2) Authorization for membership dues deduction here under includes authorization for
the deduction of two (2) hours of accrued vacation leave annually each July from the
leave bank of each dues-paying member as set forth under Section 1-3 (H) and shall
remain in effect during the term hereof unless revoked in writing by the unit member.
The City shall accept revocation of dues/vacation hour deductions only between
January 1-10" and July 1-10" each year. Termination of dues deductions shall be
effective the first full payroll period following receipt of the revocation. Termination of
vacation hour deductions shall be effective as of the next scheduled deduction in
July. The City will notify the Association of any revocations submitted to it.

 

3) The City shall not make any payroll deductions for unit members on behalf of any
other organization that purports to provide benefits similar to those offered by the
designated Association (as defined in the Meet and Confer Ordinance) during the
term of this Memorandum.

4) It is agreed that the City assumes no liability on account of any actions taken
pursuant to this section. The City will however, as promptly as technically possible,
implement changes brought to its attention.

5) The City shall, at the written request of the Association during the term of this
agreement, make changes in the amount of dues deduction hereunder for the
general membership, provided costs for implementing such changes shall be
reimbursed by the Association at actual cost incurred by the City.

D. Solicitation, Distribution of Material, and Use of Facilities and Services

1) The solicitation of members, dues collection, and other internal Association business
shall be conducted only during non-working hours and shall not interfere with the
work process.

2) The Association may distribute material on the City’s premises (buildings and
grounds) before and after scheduled working hours or in a non-work area during
scheduled work hours provided that both the person distributing and the unit member
receiving such material are on their own time.

3) The City shall provide the Association with space for bulletin boards for its use in
communicating with its members at mutually agreeable locations. The City shall
grant sole and exclusive use of such bulletin boards to the Association. Bulletin
boards shall not exceed 4’ x 3’ (width by height) in size.
E.

4) The bulletin boards shall be used only for the following notices: recreational and
social affairs of the Association; Association meetings; Association elections; reports
of the Executive Board or committees; rulings or policies of the state or national
organizations; and legislative enactments and judicial decisions affecting public
sector labor relations. Notices shall not contain anything political; anything reflecting
adversely on the City or any of its employees; or anything that is disruptive of the
City’s operations. The City may order the removal of any posted notice on the basis
that it violates the requirements herein. The Association may dispute the order of
removal by filing a grievance pursuant to Article 2, the Grievance Procedure. Posted
material will be signed by an authorized official of the organization. The Association
agrees to keep the bulletin board in good order.

5) The Association is authorized to use mutually agreed upon non-work areas in City
facilities for pick-up by or distribution to unit members of official Association literature
that is not political in nature, abusive of any person or organization. The use of
working areas, or use of City equipment, and information systems for the solicitation
of members, dues collection, and distribution of materials relating to other
Association business shall be prohibited unless allowed by a specific section of the
Memorandum.

6) The Association President, or his designee, will be provided a mail slot for
department communications and may use the City’s e-mail system to send emails to
unit members to announce meetings. With pre-approval from the Chief or designee,
notice of association charities and upcoming events may be sent by the email
system.

Release Time

In recognition of the mutual benefit to both the City and the Association, a unit member
using Association release time as defined by Articles in this Memorandum to conduct
Association business shall be accorded all insurance-related benefits. Claims made for
benefits will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis in the same manner as the claim of any
other employee.

A member of the Executive Board of the Association, or a designated CLEA representative,
will, with the approval of the Chief of Police or designee, subject to twenty-four (24) hours
written notice in advance, be authorized to engage in Association related activities during
City work hours on a non-paid basis. Approval for use of unpaid time hereunder shall be
subject to Department operational and scheduling factors and administration control as to
usage of such time, but shall not be unreasonably withheld. There shall be no use of official
hours worked paid time for Association related activities under this paragraph.

. A bank of 250 hours of paid Association released time shall be created per Memorandum

year for use by the Association to engage in legitimate Association business. Unused hours
will expire on June 30, 2014.

These hours may be used as follows:
1) For designated members to attend meeting of the Executive Board, meeting of the

general membership, and for preparation for negotiations pursuant to the Meet and
Confer Ordinance.
2) For a unit member designated by the President to be used for legitimate Association
purposes.

3) Approval for use of paid time hereunder shall be subject to Departmental operational
and scheduling factors. When using such paid time, designated representatives
shall give at least twenty-four (24) hours written notice in advance.

H. Beginning July 1, 2013, each dues-paying Association members will contribute two (2) hours
accrued vacation leave to be placed in an Association leave time bank for use by the
Association to engage in legitimate Association business. An Association member's
revocation of authority for the deduction of dues simultaneously revokes the authority for the
annual deductions of vacation hours. Revocation of such authority applies prospectively
only. Non-dues paying members may elect to annually contribute two (2) hours of accrued
vacation to the leave time bank. The following conditions shall apply to the donation of
vacation hours to the leave bank.

1) Authorization for the deduction of accrued vacation hours from dues-paying
Association members is included with the member's authorization for the deduction
of dues and may be revoked as set forth under Section 1-3(C)(2).

2) For voluntary donations of hours by non-dues-paying members, the Association shall
supply the City with a Release Hours Authorization Form, which includes the name
and signature of the unit member and the number of hours of vacation donated by
the unit member into the leave time bank.

3) The City shall withdraw the bank hours from members’ vacation balances in the first
full pay period after the first week of July.

4) For voluntary donations of hours by non-dues paying members, the executed
Release Hours Authorization form provides the unit member's authorization for
vacation hours to be withdrawn from the unit member's vacation balance in the first
full pay period following July 10" each year.

a. A unit member may revoke his or her authorization for the donation of
vacation hours by submitting written revocation to the CLEA President who
will forward to Human Resources no later than first week of July. The
revocation shall apply prospectively to the vacation donation scheduled to
take place in in the first full pay period following July 10" each year..

b. An individual who hires or transfers into an CLEA-represented position after
July 10", and who executes a Payroll Dues Deduction Authorization or
Release Hours Authorization form, may elect at that time to have the vacation
hours withdrawn from his or her vacation balance: (i) in the first full pay
period after receipt of the Authorization form by the City, or (ii) in the first full
pay period following July 10" in July the following year. A new unit member
who elects to have vacation hours withdrawn before July, will have additional
hours withdrawn in July.

c. The Release Hours Authorization of a unit member shall be automatically
revoked when the individual is no longer in a position covered by this MOU.
The revocation shall apply only prospectively to the vacation donation
scheduled to take place in July.

9
5) Donated hours in the leave time bank shall be used in the same manner as
Association release hours and may only be used by CLEA representatives as
authorized by CLEA for the purpose of conducting Association-only business as
defined above in Section 1-2 (C).

6) Human Resources shall keep a record of all time donated and used.

7) Any unused donated hours in the Association leave time bank may be carried over
from one fiscal year to the next.

|. The Association shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City against any and all
claims made and any actions brought against the City arising from or related in any way to
the actions taken by the City to comply with any of the provisions of this Section.

J. The Association will be allowed one-half (72) hour to talk to and possibly sign newly sworn
police officers into the Association and to explain the rights and benefits under the
Memorandum. This time will be allotted during the post-academy training time of said
officers. The content of such information shall not be political in nature, abusive of any
person or the Department or disruptive of the Department’s operation.

K. It is understood by the parties that the benefits granted by this Article shall not be interpreted
or applied as requiring the employer to count as time worked, any hours or fractions of hours
spent outside the unit member's work shift in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article. The
employer shall count as time worked any hours or fractions of hours spent within the unit
member's regular work shift in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article.

L. A bank of 1,040 hours shall be created per Memorandum year for one designated
Association representative to use to engage in legitimate Association business. The CLEA
President may reallocate 520 hours of the 1,040 hours at his/her discretion for use by other
Association representative(s). Any unused hours will expire on June 30, 2014.

M. The Association may designate up to five (5) unit members to represent the Association in
the Meet and Confer process with the City. These designated unit members shall be
granted time off with pay for the purposes of such representation, and such times shall not
be applied to bank hours.

Section 1 - 4: Unit Member Rights

A. All unit members shall have the right to join or not to join the Association as they individually
prefer. Unit members have the right to participate on behalf of or engage in activities on
behalf of an Association and have the right to refrain from such activity. Unit members shall
be free from any interference, restraint, or coercion by any unit member, supervisor, or
manager for or against the Association. Violations will necessitate disciplinary action.

The Association must equally and fairly represent all unit members in the unit.

B. Eligible City employees have the right to be represented by the Association and to have a
member of the Association present during the grievance and the disciplinary process. The
disciplinary process does not apply to an interview of a unit member during the normal
course of work, counseling, instruction, informal verbal admonishment or other routine or
unplanned contact with a supervisor. If a supervisor has knowledge of a violation of General

10
Orders, City Personnel Rules, or criminal law by a unit member, he/she will follow the
requirements of this Memorandum, Title 38 of Arizona Revised Statutes, and the General
Orders applicable to the questioning of said member.

. If a unit member requests, representation will be allowed when the member is the subject of
an administrative investigation and the employee reasonably believes that the interview
could result in dismissal, demotion or suspension by Professional Standards Section, or any
Police Department supervisor, who is conducting an administrative investigation. The unit
member will obtain the most readily available Association representative. The Association
representative will make every reasonable attempt to arrive within one (1) hour from the time
a phone call is made by the unit member to the representative. The Association
representative will attend the above interview only as an observer. At the end of the
interview, but prior to the conclusion of the interview, the unit member being interviewed
may privately confer with their representative. Upon returning to the interview the unit
member will be allowed to make a statement not to exceed five (5) minutes addressing
specific factors or policies related to the interview. The interview session shall be for a
reasonable period of time, taking into consideration the gravity and complexity of the
misconduct being investigated.

. Any unit member who is the subject of an officer involved shooting investigation who has
discharged a weapon or was shot at or violently assaulted may request to have the
administrative interview postponed for up to 48 hours from the time of the incident. The
Police Chief may deny the request when he or she determines that delaying the interview
would be detrimental to the investigation. A unit member may waive his/her rights to make
the request for postponement of the administrative interview. In all cases, the overall mental
and physical health of the unit member shall be taken into consideration.

. A unit member under investigation will be notified in writing every thirty (30) days as to the
current status of the investigation. This will include a brief description of the number of
known witnesses still to be interviewed and other investigative processes remaining to be
completed, as well as an estimated date of completion.

. A unit member has the right to present his own grievance in person and has the right to be
represented.

. Aunit member covered hereunder shall, on his request and by appointment, be permitted to
examine his departmental or divisional personnel file in the presence of an appropriate
supervisor/official of the Department within three (3) business days of the requested review.
Another person of his or her choosing may accompany the unit member. When a City-
directed work fitness/job performance medical evaluation process is completed, the unit
member may request copies of his or her medical information from the City-selected
physician. The City must agree to give the City-selected physician authorization to release
any/all information to the requesting unit member.

. No unit member shall have any adverse comments entered into his departmental personnel
file without the member being informed by the supervisor. If the unit member requests, he
may receive a copy of the adverse comment.

A unit member may, at his discretion, attach rebuttal statements to any material contained in
his departmental personnel file, which may be adverse in nature.

11
|. Material purged from a unit member's files in accordance with the below procedures or
allegations about a unit member which are unfounded, exonerated, not sustained or a policy
failure will not be used in future performance ratings or disciplinary actions.

J. Consistent with the requirements of A.R.S § 39-128, the City shall maintain as part of a unit
member's official personnel record all documents relating to disciplinary actions, including
the unit member's response to the disciplinary action, and shall make such records available
for inspection and copying as required by public records laws.

Upon written request, a unit member may have written reprimands, suspensions, and letters
of admonishment, which are over three (3) years old removed from the department working
file when there have been no incidents or problems of a similar nature within the three (3)
year period immediately preceding the request. A unit member may request to have letters
of instruction and counseling statements, which are over one (1) year old removed from the
department working file.

K. A unit member under investigation by Professional Standards Section or a Police Department
supervisor for a disciplinary matter that may lead to a written reprimand, suspension,
demotion, or discharge, and who is interviewed, or requested to produce any
documentation, shall be given a written notice informing him of the specific nature of the
investigation, his status in the investigation, and all known allegations of misconduct
involved in the interview of the unit member. In addition, the unit member and/ or the Police
Department supervisor/Professional Standards Section representative may mechanically
record such interview. Should any mechanical recordings take place, the department
reserves the right to transcribe any such interview for the purpose of verifying the accuracy
of the interview and, if requested, the unit member shall sign the transcription if it is
accurate. For any sustained allegations resulting in a letter of reprimand or higher, the unit
member has rights under the Personnel Rules or, where applicable, Title 38 of Arizona
Revised Statutes.

At the time of a scheduled interview by the Professional Standards Section, a Police
Department supervisor, or other City employee, the investigator will advise the unit member
of all evidence known at the time of the interview that will be used in the course of the
investigation. This includes any written documents, video or audio recordings, or
photographs. The Investigator will inform the unit member of such evidence at the time of
the interview.

1) A copy of the signed and dated notice of investigation will be given to the unit
member prior to the beginning of the interview. The unit member shall have the right
to retain the notice of investigation for his use throughout the entire course of the
interview. A unit member will be provided an opportunity to make a telephone call
after the issuance of the notice of investigation to obtain an Association
representative.

2) In the event a unit member does not record his interview he may request a copy of
the investigator's tape(s) if the investigator records the interview, (the unit member
provides the tape).

3) If any unit member is told not to speak to anyone regarding an investigation, this
admonition does not apply to speaking with an attorney functioning within the
attorney-client relationship, or with an Association representative who may discuss
the matter only with the Grievance Chair or Association President.

12
When the investigation is completed, the accused unit member will be notified in
writing of the findings. A unit member under internal or administrative investigation
may be reassigned (may include reassignment to his home), until the completion of
the investigation.

4) If during the course of the above-mentioned investigation, information is learned
concerning additional misconduct on the part of the unit member being interviewed, a
notice of investigation will be issued to the unit member prior to the unit member
being questioned about the additional misconduct information.

5) The unit member's immediate supervisor will normally investigate LEVEL 1
complaints, whether generated internally or externally and LEVEL II Class A “First
Violation” complaints that result from a complaint of a third LEVEL 1 violation within a
one-year period. The Professional Standards Section will normally investigate
LEVEL II complaints unless otherwise directed by the Office of the Chief.

6) The Professional Standards Section will normally investigate any complaint that
involves extensive manpower and resources that would unreasonably burden a
supervisor. Division Commanders may request the Professional Standards Section
to conduct an investigation for a variety of reasons. These requests will be routed
through the Office of the Chief.

L. The employer shall count as time worked any hours or fractions of hours spent within the unit
member's regular work shift in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article, (Unit member
association representative) but shall not count as time worked any hours or fractions of
hours spent outside the unit member's work shift.

M. A unit member who receives a written reprimand may request a copy of the official
documentation, if any, supporting the written reprimand.

N. If a polygraph examination is required of a unit member, an Association representative may
monitor and observe the preliminary and post examination interview and examination from
the monitoring room, if one is available to do so. The results of a polygraph or voice stress
examination alone will not be the sole factor for determining truthfulness or on which to
impose disciplinary action. A copy of the examination results including charts will be
provided to the unit member upon request.

O. Once an employee has been formally counseled or disciplined in accordance with General
Orders B-12, including the counseling/discipline chart, and B-13, no further investigation will
be conducted for the same allegation for the same incident except when:

a. New information reveals additional allegations arising from or related to the same
incident.

b. The Office of the Chief requests further investigation for the integrity of the
organization and to maintain public trust.

P. A complaint will be treated as a delayed complaint if it relates to non-criminal misconduct by
an employee that occurred more than 120 days prior to the date of the immediate complaint.
The supervisor receiving the complaint will document the information in a memorandum.
The memorandum will be sent through the chain-of-command to the Professional Standards

13
Section, which will review and inform the Office of the Chief. A determination will be made
whether or not a formal investigation will be initiated. If an investigation is merited, the
Professional Standards Section will conduct the investigation, unless otherwise directed by
the Office of the Chief.

Section 1-5: Prohibition of Strike and Lockouts

A.

The Association and the unit members covered by this Memorandum recognize and agree
that rendering of services to the community cannot under any circumstances or conditions
be withheld, interrupted, or discontinued, and to do so would endanger the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the City of Chandler.

The Association pledges to maintain unimpaired municipal services as directed by the City.
Neither the Association, nor any unit member, for any reason, will authorize, institute, aid,
condone or engage in a slowdown, work stoppage, strike, or any other interference with the
work and statutory functions and obligations of the City or the Department. During the term
of this Memorandum neither the City nor its agents for any reason shall authorize, institute,
aid or promote a lockout of unit members covered by this Memorandum.

Should any unit member during the term of this Memorandum, and until such time that it is
expressly and legally rescinded breach the obligations of Section 1-5B, the City Manager or
his designee shall immediately notify the Association that a prohibited action is in progress.

The Association shall forthwith, through its executive officers and other authorized
representatives, disavow said strike or other prohibited action, and shall notify in writing all
Association members and representatives of their obligation and responsibility for
maintaining compliance with this Article, including their responsibility to remain at work
during any interruption which may be caused or initiated by others. Copies of such
notification shall be delivered to the Office of the City Manager. In addition, the Association
shall order all unit members violating this Article to immediately return to work and cease the
strike or other prohibited activity. Such order shall be delivered both orally and in writing to
all unit members violating this Article with copies of the written order to be delivered to the
Office of the City Manager.

Penalties or sanctions the City may assess against a unit member who violates this Section
shall include, but not be limited to:

1) Discipline up to and including discharge.

2) Loss of all compensation and benefits, including seniority, during the period of such
prohibited activity.

Should the Association during the term of this Memorandum and until such time that it is
expressly and legally rescinded, breach its obligations under this Section, it is agreed that all
penalties set forth in the City Charter, shall be imposed on the Association, in addition to any
other legal and administrative remedies available to the City that in its discretion it may elect
to pursue.

. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the City from obtaining judicial restraint or from

seeking damages from the Association, in the event of a violation of this Section.

14
ARTICLE 2: GRIEVANCE / ARBITRATION / LABOR MANAGEMENT

 

Section 2-1: Grievance Procedure
A. Informal Resolution

1) As a matter of good labor-management relations the parties encourage a unit
member who believes that he/she has a bona fide grievance to discuss and attempt
to resolve it with his immediate supervisor as designated by the City.

2) If the above informal discussion is held and does not resolve the grievance, the unit
member may file a formal grievance in accordance with the following procedure.

B. Definition of Grievance

1) A grievance is a written allegation by a unit member, submitted as herein specified,
claiming violation(s) of the specific express terms of this Memorandum for which
there is no Merit Board appeal or other specific method of review provided by State
or City law.

C. Procedure
1) Step 1

a. The unit member shall reduce his grievance to writing by signing and completing
all parts of the grievance form provided by the City and submit it to his immediate
supervisor within fifteen (15) workdays days of the initial commencement of the
occurrence being grieved. The supervisor shall further consider and discuss the
grievance with the grievant and the grievant’s representative, if any, as he deems
appropriate, and shall, within five (5) workdays of having received the written
grievance, submit his response thereto in writing to the grievant. The parties by
written agreement may move the grievance to Step 2 of the grievance procedure.

2) Step 2

a. If the written response of the immediate supervisor does not result in a resolution
of the grievance, the grievant may appeal the grievance by signing and
completing the City form and presenting it to his Police Commander within five
(5) workdays of the grievant’s receipt of the supervisor's response. The Police
Commander may investigate the grievance and may set a meeting with the
grievant, and the grievant's designated representative, if any, and such other
personnel as he deems appropriate to consider the grievance. Within five (5)
workdays of receipt of the grievance, or within five (5) workdays after the
grievance meeting, the Police Commander shall submit his written response to
the grievance to the grievant and the grievant's representative, if any.

3) Step 3
a. If the response of the second level of review does not result in resolution of the
grievance, the grievant may appeal the grievance by signing and completing the

City form and presenting it to the Police Chief within five (5) workdays of the
grievant's receipt of the Step 2 response.

15
b.

c.

The Police Chief shall hold a meeting within five (5) workdays of receipt of the
grievance regarding the grievance at which the grievant shall be afforded the
opportunity to fully present his position and to be represented. Within five (5)
workdays of the hearing, the Police Chief or his designee shall submit his written
response to the grievant and the grievant's representative, if any.

By mutual agreement, the parties may combine steps 3 and 3.5.

4) Step 3.5

a.

After the Police Chief's decision, but prior to review by the Grievance Committee
or the arbitrator, the parties involved may mutually agree to submit the grievance
to the HR Director or designee. The grievance, as originally written and the
attached response from the Police Chief must be submitted to the HR Director or
designee within five (5) workdays of receipt of the Police Chief's answer. The
HR Director or designee shall within ten (10) workdays of the receipt of the
grievance, meet with the Police Chief or designee and the unit member and his
representative in an attempt to resolve the grievance. The HR Director or
designee shall then submit written recommendations for resolution to the unit
member and Police Chief within five (5) workdays of the meeting.

5) Step 4

a.

If the response of the Police Chief does not result in resolution of the grievance,
the grievant may, within five (5) workdays of the Step 3 response, appeal the
grievance by signing and completing the City form and presenting it to the
Grievance Committee. The Grievance Committee shall be composed of:

Chairman — A member designated by the City Manager.
Secretary — HR Director or designee.
Member — Association President or his designee.

The Grievance Committee shall schedule a hearing regarding the grievance at
which the grievant shall be afforded the opportunity to fully present his position
and to be represented.

If the grievant and the Association jointly so elect, in writing, within the above
time limit, in lieu of such hearing the grievance may be reviewed by an arbitrator.
The parties, or their designated representatives, shall agree on an arbitrator, and
if they are unable to agree on an arbitrator within a reasonable time, either party
may request the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to submit to them a
list of seven (7) arbitrators who have had experience in the public sector. The
parties shall, within five (5) workdays of the receipt of said list, select the
arbitrator by alternately striking names from said list until one name remains.
Such person shall then become the arbitrator. The arbitrator so selected shall
hold a hearing as expeditiously as possible at a time and place convenient to the
parties, and shall be bound by the following:

16
i. The arbitrator shall be bound by the language of the Memorandum and
departmental rules and regulations consistent therewith in considering
any issue properly before him.

ii. The arbitrator shall expressly confine himself to the precise issue
submitted to him and shall have no authority to consider any other issue
not so submitted to him.

iii. | The arbitrator shall be bound by applicable State and City law.

iv. The Grievance Committee or the arbitrator shall submit findings and
advisory recommendations to the grievant and to the City Manager. The
cost of the arbitrator and any other mutually incurred costs shall be borne
equally by the parties.

v. | The City Manager shall, within ten (10) workdays of the receipt of the
written findings and recommendations, make the final determination of
the grievance and submit it in writing to the grievant and his designated
representative.

. Time Limits

Failure of City Management representatives to comply with time limits specified in
Paragraph C shall entitle the grievant to appeal to the next level of review; and failure of the
grievant to comply with said time limits shall constitute abandonment of the grievance;
except however, that the parties may extend time limits by mutual written agreement in
advance.

. The Association may, in its own name, file a grievance that alleges violation by the City of
the rights accorded to the Association by the specific terms of Article 1 — 3 of the
Memorandum. The Association shall file such grievance at Step 3 of the Procedure.
Grievances must be filed and signed by a unit member and the CLEA President, subject to
the provisions of this Article.

. Grievances involving three (3) or more unit members may be filed as a group grievance by
the Association. A group grievance shall commence at Step 2 of the Procedure. Group
grievances must be filed and signed by the CLEA President, subject to the provisions of this
Article.

. Employer grievances, should they occur as a result of official Association activities or
actions, including the failure to act as required under this agreement, will be presented
directly to the Association President within ten (10) days of the occurrence prompting the
grievance. The President shall in each case provide a written answer within five (5) days
from receipt of the grievance.

Section 2-2: Labor-Management Committee

It is understood by the parties that the benefits granted by this Article shall not be interpreted or
applied as requiring the employer to count as time worked, any hours or fractions of hours spent
outside the unit member's work shift in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article. The employer
shall count as time worked any hours or fractions of hours spent within the unit member's
regular work shift in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article.

17
A. There shall be a Labor-Management Committee consisting of two (2) representatives of the
Association and two (2) representatives of the City and the City’s HR Director or designee
who shall be the Chairperson. The purpose of the Committee is to facilitate improved labor-
management relationships by providing a forum for free and informal discussion of mutual
concerns and problems.

B. The Committee shall meet, when necessary, at mutually agreed upon times.

C. If the representative of the Association is a unit member, such representative shall not lose
pay or benefits for meetings mutually scheduled during duty time.

ARTICLE 3: COMPENSATION AND WAGES

All items in Article 3 will be eligible subjects of negotiation as part of the Compensation and
Wage reopener in the second year of the contract.

Section 3-1: Merit Pay

For FY 13/14, the City will fund a merit increase of up to a 5% for eligible unit members,
effective on the first day of the pay period in which the date of the unit member's current job
classification falls, until the unit member is at the top of the pay grade.

Section 3-2: Longevity Pay

A. In recognition of continuous service and overall performance, the City agrees to provide the
following longevity payment for eligible unit members:

1) A unit member who meets the qualifications specified in this article shall receive
annually a longevity payment of two percent (2.0%) of his or her base pay. This
longevity payment is not added to base pay.

2) The 2% will be paid in two (2) equal installments with the unit member being eligible
for the first installment during the pay period of the date of classification and the
second installment during the pay period six (6) months after the initial payment.

a. An officer who retires or resigns from City employment after receiving the first
installment of this pay but before the second installment is due, shall receive
the full amount of the second installment in his/her final check. The second
installment shall not qualify as compensation for the purposes of Public
Safety Retirement contributions.

b. An officer who is promoted to another position in the City after the first
installment of this pay has been paid out but before the second installment is
due, shall receive the second installment in accordance with the payment
schedule set forth in this section.

3) Qualifications:

a. (i) For FY 13/14 a unit member must have completed at least one (1) year of
continuous full-time service at the top of the pay range for his or her

18
classification; or (ii) In FY 14/15, a unit member must have eight (8) years as
a Chandler Police Officer or be at the top of his or her pay range, whichever
is sooner.

b. A unit member must have achieved the overall performance rating as “meets
expectations” or better on his or her latest scheduled performance evaluation
on file in the Human Resources Department.

B. Unit members who have earned longevity pay and are not at the top of the salary range will
be eligible to receive merit plus longevity pay not to exceed 5%.

Section 3-3: Total Annual Cash Compensation Survey
Wage increases are to be determined as follows:

1. For the purposes of this section, “Total Annual Cash Compensation” means the
following:

a. the maximum annualized base wages for an individual officer at the top of the
pay range (i.e. maximum hourly rate X 2080); and

b. the annual amount paid by the City in deferred compensation, or equivalent,
to an individual officer at the top of the pay range; and

c. the annual amount contributed by the City towards the retirement health
savings plan, or equivalent, for an individual officer at the top of the pay
range; and

d. the annual amount received as longevity pay, or equivalent, by an individual
officer at the top of the officer pay range.

2. Human Resources will finalize a Compensation Survey no later than August 1‘ of
each year that compares Total Annual Cash Compensation for eight (8) cities:
Chandler, Gilbert, Glendale, Mesa, Peoria, Phoenix, Scottsdale and Tempe (“the
Surveyed Cities”) based on JIMS data and/or verification from the Surveyed Cities’
HR Departments. At the conclusion of the Compensation Survey, the eight (8) cities
shall be ranked in numerical order based on Total Annual Cash Compensation with
the highest being ranked as number one (1) and the lowest ranked as number eight

(8).

Human Resources shall determine the rank of the City of Chandler in comparison to
the ranking of the seven other cities. If the City of Chandler's Total Annual Cash
Compensation is ranked at or above the fourth (4") position in the rankings, no wage
adjustments shall be made.

lf the City of Chandler’s Total Annual Cash Compensation is ranked below the Total
Annual Cash Compensation of the fourth (4"") highest city in the rankings, the top of
the Chandler Officer pay scale shall be adjusted by the percentage required for
Chandler’s Total Annual Cash Compensation to be equal to the midpoint between
the Total Annual Cash Compensation of the third (3) and fourth (4"") highest cities.

19
Unit members’ wages shall be increased to correspond with any upward adjustment
made to the officer salary range as a result of the annual survey. Any wage increase
will become effective on the first day of the next full pay period after the survey data
has been accepted and signed by the Association. In the event that the survey
results in Chandler's being ranked above the fourth 4" position as defined in this
section, Chandler's range will not be decreased.

Any time an adjustment is made to the maximum pay range for the officer position
pursuant to this section, the minimum pay range for the position shall be adjusted by
the same percentage increase.

Section 3 - 4: Field Training Pay/K-9 Pay

A.

Field Training Officers (FTOs) whom the department selects to conduct department-
approved officer field training will receive an additional five percent (5%) of their regular rate
of pay for every day they are assigned to an officially authorized field training position.

One K-9 unit trainer, designated by the K-9 Sergeant and approved by the Police Chief to
conduct unit approved K-9 training, will receive an additional five percent (5%) of his or her
regular rate of pay for every day he or she is assigned to the officially authorized K-9 trainer
position.

Section 3-5: Interpreting and Translation Pay

A.

Officers who receive certification as an Intermediate level translator will receive an additional
two and one-half percent (2.5%) of their regular rate of pay for every day they are officially
certified to perform translation for the Department.

Officers who receive certification as an Advanced level translator will receive an additional
five percent (5%) of their regular rate of pay for every day they are officially certified to
perform translation for the Department.

Section 3 - 6: Overtime

A.

Overtime is defined as time worked in excess of 40 hours in a 7-day work period for all
classes of non-exempt full time unit members. All paid leave taken in lieu of hours worked,
except time off taken as compensatory time, shall be counted as “hours worked” for
purposes of overtime calculation. The “hours worked" requirement does not apply to
overtime compensation the City is obligated to pay by the specific terms of this MOU or
Department regulations (i.e., "contract overtime") for certain activities or situations. Payment
for hours worked on a holiday, as part of the regularly scheduled hours of work, shall be
compensated as provided by this Memorandum.

. Part-time unit members shall be compensated for overtime when the needs of the

department require scheduling the unit member to work more than 40 hours in a seven day
work period.

Overtime may be authorized and required by the Police Chief when it is clearly in the best

interest of the City. Overtime shall be authorized in advance by the Police Chief unless
emergency situations preclude advance authorization.

20
H.

Overtime compensation for non-exempt unit members shall be computed in accordance with
the Fair Labor Standards Act and adjusted rate of pay including applicable shift differential,
on call pay and assignment pays. If overtime is to be paid, it must be recorded and paid, at
one and one-half (1.5) time, on the payroll immediately following the conclusion of the pay
period in which the overtime was worked. If compensatory time is to be accrued in lieu of
overtime pay, it must be accrued at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) hours of
compensatory time off for each hour worked.

The decision to pay overtime or record it as compensatory time shall be at the discretion of
the Police Chief.

Compensatory time shall not accrue in excess of 80 hours maximum.
Accrued compensatory time shall be paid:

1) When the accrued compensatory time exceeds the maximum. Payment will be for
that amount which exceeds the maximum.

2) Upon the separation for any reason, including death of the unit member.
3) When authorized by the Police Chief.
4) When requested by the unit member in accordance with Article 3, Section 3-10.
The time at which a unit member will take compensatory time off shall be chosen by the unit

member with the approval of the unit member's supervisor based on whether the unit
member's absence would interfere with the Department's operation.

Section 3 - 7: Court Overtime

A.

When a required court appearance is scheduled, other than normal work hours, overtime is
authorized. The unit member will be credited with two (2) hours or the actual number of
hours worked, whichever is greater. When court is scheduled within two (2) hours of a
scheduled shift, then the actual time of court and preparation for court prior to shift will be
paid.

For purposes of this Article the term “Court” shall be defined as including Federal District
Court, Superior Court, State of Arizona, City Court, City of Chandler, Municipal Courts in
Maricopa County, Justice Court, Federal, State, County Grand Juries, Motor Vehicle
Department hearings, and Prosecutorial and Defense interviews. It is understood that this
Article shall not apply to administrative hearings including but not limited to arbitration
hearings pursuant to the Memorandum and hearings pursuant to the C.O.C. 2-13.D.9-
grievance procedure.

Section 3 - 8: Jury Duty

When a unit member is called upon to serve as a juror in any court action, they will be allowed
leave from their duties without loss of pay for the time required for his service, in accordance
with Personnel Rule 15, Section 15.

21
Section 3 - 9: Call-Out Pay

A.

When a unit member is called back to regular duty after leaving City facilities at a time other
than his regular assigned shift, the unit member will receive a minimum of two (2) hours pay
at time and one-half the unit member’s base pay calculated to the nearest quarter (1/4)
hour, except that a unit member shall not be eligible for additional compensation during that
two hour period.

Compensation to a unit member who is called out at times other than his regularly
scheduled shift will begin at the time the unit member is notified, but not to exceed 30
minutes and shall terminate 30 minutes after being relieved from duty. Where applicable,
the travel time shall be paid only if the total work and allowed travel time exceed the
minimum call out guarantee. Travel time shall not apply when a unit member is working
overtime planned in advance.

A unit member beginning an overtime period within two (2) hours or less prior to the
regularly scheduled duty reporting time will be compensated from the time the overtime
period begins to the time he is scheduled to report for duty except that a unit member shall
not be eligible for additional compensation during that period.

Holdover time, i.e., being held over on shift (no break in duty exceeding fifteen (15) minutes
will be compensated for actual time spent in accordance with Section 3-2 of Article 3.

If the unit member is called back because of his own negligence the unit member shall not
be eligible for the two (2) hours minimum. He will only be paid for the actual time worked.

Section 3-10: Swing Shift and Nightshift Differential Pay

A unit member shall receive the shift differential pay associated with a particular shift when the
unit member actually works that shift. If a unit member is reassigned to a different shift because
he or she has suffered an on-the-job injury, the unit member shall continue to receive the shift
differential pay associated with the shift to which the unit member was originally assigned until
the unit member is released to return to full duty. If a unit member is reassigned to a different
shift because of a non-job-related injury or at the unit member's own request, the unit member
will receive the shift differential pay, if any, associated with the new shift.

A.

A unit member shall receive mid-day shift differential of thirty cents ($.30) per hour in
addition to his base hourly rate of pay when working a shift which ends between 2000 hours
and 2359 hours.

A unit member shall receive swing shift shift differential of forty cents ($.40) per hour in
addition to his base hourly rate of pay when working a shift which ends between 2400 hours
and 0359 hours.

A unit member shall receive grave-yard shift differential of fifty cents ($.50) per hour in

addition to his base hourly rate of pay when working a shift which ends between 0400 hours
and 0800 hours.

22
Section 3-11: Deferred Compensation

The City shall contribute one percent (1%) of each unit members bi-weekly gross pay per pay
period to City’s deferred compensation plan up to the I.R.S. annual contribution limit if the unit
member contributes a minimum of twenty ($20) dollars per pay period into City’s deferred
compensation plan.

Section 3 - 12: Vacation/Comp Time Buy Back

Unit members will be allowed to cash out up to forty (40) hours of comp time and twenty (20)
hours of vacation time. This time will be compensated at the unit member's hourly rate of pay
and can only be exercised once per fiscal year. The City shall provide a means for the unit
member to submit his or her request. The payment will be made the pay period immediately
following the request.

ARTICLE 4: HOURS OF WORK / WORKING CONDITIONS

 

Section 4-1: Hours

A. The regular duty hours for a unit member shall be five (5) consecutive shifts of eight (8)
hours in a seven (7) calendar day workweek. These (5) consecutive shifts will be preceded
and followed by two (2) “non-work” days. Duty hours may also include a 4/10’s or 9/80's
shift.

B. The regular duty hours per shift shall be consecutive and may include any “briefing time”
and shall include a meal period of thirty (30) minutes as reasonable work demands allow. In
addition to all duties as assigned by the Chief of Police or his/her designees, work hours
shall continue to include under normal conditions two (2) fifteen (15) minute rest periods for
use as work demands allow. If work volume and service calls allow, a unit member may
combine one 15 minute rest period with the meal period to create an expanded meal period
of 45 minutes in length. The expanded meal period may not be used for exercising during
the unit member's shift.

C. At times, the department may have operational needs, which necessitate a change in
current work schedules. The department shall give a unit member a minimum seven (7) day
advance written notice when his days or hours will be changed. If this seven (7) day written
notice is not given the days or hours change will be rescheduled to allow for a seven (7) day
notice period, except for emergency situations.

D. A unit member may return to his work station ten (10) minutes before his scheduled end of
shift if work demands permit for the purpose of completing required paperwork, notifying
oncoming unit members of any beat conditions, and to notify his supervisor of any unusual
occurrences he encountered during his shift.

E. Prior to any permanent change of current work schedules the parties will discuss any
proposed changes in the Labor/Management Committee setting.

F. When a unit member is off duty or on leave and is contacted by telephone by his or her
supervisor for purposes other than callout or a supervisor approves of the making or
receiving of the call, the unit member will be paid at time and one-half his or her regular rate
of pay for each quarter hour calculated to the nearest quarter hour (over five (5) minutes

23
goes to the next quarter hour). There will be no compensation for calls under five (5)
minutes.
ARTICLE 5: BENEFITS
Section 5-1: Health Insurance

For the term of this Memorandum the City will pay 80% and the unit member will pay 20% of the
cost of the monthly premium of the City’s medical insurance benefit.

Section 5 - 2: Dental Insurance

For the term of this Memorandum the City will pay 100% of the dental insurance premium for
unit member only coverage; 70% for unit member plus one and 50% for unit member plus two
coverage.

Section 5 - 3: Life Insurance

The City shall make group life insurance coverage available for every regular or initial
probationary unit member who works in a budgetary approved position of 20 hours or more per
week at least equal to the unit member’s annual salary. Additional life insurance coverage for
the unit member, spouse and dependent children shall also be made available. The premiums
for this insurance shall be paid by the City or the unit member as determined by the City
Council.

Section 5-4: Vacation Leave
Section 5-4 Vacation Leave will be opened for negotiation in second year of the contract.

A. A full-time work schedule consists of 52 weeks a year and 80 hours of work during the pay
period.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B. Every unit member who works a full-time schedule 52 weeks a year, shall be credited
vacation leave as follows for every completed pay period:
Years of Service Current Schedule Effective July 1,
Effective July 1, 2014
2013
Hours Hours
0-4 Years 3.9 4.4
5-9 Years 4.6 5.1
10-14 Years 5.3 5.8
15-19 Years 6.0 6.6
20+ Years 7.6 8.1

 

 

 

 

 

C. Unit members who work less than full-time but 1040 hours or more a year in a budgetary
approved position shall be credited vacation leave on a prorated basis. The prorated basis
shall be established by dividing the number of hours scheduled per week by 40 and
multiplying by the accrual rate for a full-time unit member with the same length of service.

24
D. Leaves of absence compensated under the Worker's Compensation statutes shall be
considered as paid service if the absence is for no longer than one year and the unit
member shall continue to accrue vacation leave.

E. Unit members who have accrued 240 hours or more of accrued and unused vacation leave
(vacation, safety days, and holiday accrual hours) and who have attained a minimum of
seventeen (17) years of City service may elect to have the additional vacation leave (that
he/she earns paid to them as salary on a bi-weekly basis for the upcoming three (3)
consecutive years. Once the unit member elects to exercise this benefit, it must continue for
the full three (3) consecutive years. A unit member may draw down the current 240 hours
balance.

F. On July 13, 2014, each unit member's vacation leave bank shall be credited with a one-time
accrual of four (4) hours of vacation leave.

Section 5 - 4A: Maximum Accrual of Vacation Credits

A. Vacation credits shall not be allowed to accrue in excess of 240 hours, or the equivalent
number of hours computed under the applicable Rule for regular employees who work less
than full-time but 1040 hours or more per year in a part-time regular budgeted position, as of
the last full pay period with a payday in January.

B. Any vacation credits in excess of 240 hours, or the equivalent number of hours computed
under the applicable Rule for regular employees who work less than full-time but 1040 hours
or more per year in a part-time regular budgeted position, shall automatically be moved to a
vacation carryover accrual balance that must used by June 30" of that same year. Any
vacation carryover not used by June 30", will be forfeited. .

C. Employees that elect to forfeit vacation credits in excess of 240 hours or the equivalent as
computed under the applicable Rule for regular employees who work less than full-time but
1040 hours or more per year in a part-time regular budgeted position, in lieu of having the
hours moved to vacation carryover balance that must be used by June 30" of that same
year, shall notify the Human Resources Director in writing of their request.

Section 5-5: Holidays

A. When possible without decreasing the effectiveness of the various municipal services, all
unit members, except temporary unit members and regular part-time unit members
scheduled to work less than 1040 hours per year, shall be allowed paid holidays as provided
below:

 

 

 

 

New Year’s Day January 1

Martin Luther King, Jr. / Civil Third Monday in January
Rights Day

Presidents’ Day Third Monday in February
Memorial Day Last Monday in May

 

 

 

 

25
 

Independence Day July 4

 

 

 

 

Labor Day First Monday in September

Veterans’ Day November 11

Thanksgiving Day Fourth Thursday in November
Friday after Thanksgiving

Christmas Day December 25

 

Personal Holiday

 

 

 

 

B. When a holiday falls on Sunday, it will be observed on the following Monday. When
a holiday falls on Saturday, it will be observed on the preceding Friday.

C. Compensation or paid time off when not working a Holiday.

1) When an observed holiday falls on a scheduled work day, unit members shall
receive paid time off equivalent to the number of hours in their regularly scheduled
work day.

2) When an observed holiday falls on a non-scheduled work day, unit members shall
receive paid time off equivalent to the number of hours in their regularly scheduled
work day on an alternate day during the pay period. When operational requirements
do not permit an alternate day off in lieu of the official holiday, unit members shall
receive holiday pay equivalent to the number of hours in their regularly scheduled
work day.

3) Unit members who are scheduled to work at least 1040 hours per year shall be
provided holiday pay or paid time off on an alternative day during the pay period for
holidays on a prorated basis. The prorated basis shall be calculated based on the
position’s number of budgeted hours.

4) The Police Chief has the discretion of requiring unit members to return to a regular
schedule of five (5) eight (8)-hour days for the week in which the holiday occurs if it
does not affect the unit member’s established work period.

D. Compensation or paid time off when working a Holiday.

1) When an observed holiday falls on a non-scheduled work day unit members who are
called in or required to work on the observed holiday shall receive compensation at
one and one-half (1.5) times their rate of pay for each hour worked on a holiday. In
addition, unit members shall receive holiday pay equivalent to the number of hours in
their regularly scheduled work day, or paid time off equivalent to the number of hours
in their regularly scheduled work day on an alternative day during the pay period.
Unit members who are scheduled to work at least 1040 hours per year and who work
a holiday shall be provided holiday pay or paid time off on an alternative day during
the pay period on a prorated basis. The prorated basis shall be calculated based on
the position’s number of budgeted hours.

26
2) When an observed holiday falls on a scheduled work day, unit members that work on
the observed holiday shall receive holiday pay equivalent to the number of hours in
their regularly scheduled work day or paid time off equivalent to the number of hours
in their regularly scheduled work day on an alternative day during the pay period.

3) When a unit member works on an observed holiday, the Police Chief has the
discretion to determine whether the unit member will receive holiday pay or paid time
off equivalent to the number of hours in their regularly scheduled work day on an
alternative day during the pay period.

E. Holiday Pay When Unit Member is on Leave or Separates from City Service

1) Unit members shall receive no additional pay and shall not be charged with vacation
or sick leave time while on paid leave when a holiday occurs.

2) Unit members must work or be on paid leave the last scheduled work day before the
holiday and the first scheduled work day after the holiday to be paid for the holiday.

3) A unit member who is separated from City service when the last day worked is the
last working day before a holiday shall not be paid for the holiday.

F. All unit members shall receive payment for holiday work on the payroll immediately following
the conclusion of the pay period in which the work was performed.

Section 5-6: Sick Leave

A. A full-time work schedule consists of 52 weeks a year and 80 hours of work during the pay
period.

B. Every unit member who works a full-time schedule 52 weeks per year shall be credited 3.7
hours of sick leave accrual for each completed pay period. Sick leave shall accrue with no
maximum.

C. Unit members who work less than full-time, but 1040 hours or more a year in a budgetary
approved position, shall be credited sick leave benefits on a prorated basis. The prorated
basis shall be computed according to the same formula as in Section 4F of this rule.

D. Leaves of absence compensated under Worker's Compensation statutes shall be
considered as paid service if the absence is for no longer than one year and sick leave
credits shall continue to accrue.

E. Unit members who have accrued 1,000 hours or more of accrued and unused sick leave
and who have attained a minimum of seventeen (17) years of City service may elect to have
the additional sick leave they earn to be paid to them as salary on a bi-weekly basis for the
upcoming three (3) consecutive years. Once the unit member elects to exercise this benefit,
it must continue for the full three (3) consecutive year period. After electing to receive this
benefit, the unit member may draw down the requisite 1,000 hour balance.

F. The City Manager may establish policies for the conversion of a portion of unit member's
sick leave balances to either vacation credits or cash payment, as appropriate.

27
Section 5 - 6A: Payment of Sick Leave at Retirement or Death

A. A unit member who has met the requirements for retirement from the City and retires shall
have deposited into his or her Retirement Health Savings Account fifty (50%) percent of his
or her unused sick leave. Payment will be made at the hourly base rate at time of retirement
after verification that the unit member has submitted a retirement application with the
appropriate retirement system agency.

B. The beneficiaries of a unit member who dies prior to retirement shall receive compensation
for all accrued sick leave at the rate of fifty percent (50%) of the accrued sick leave hours at
the unit member’s current base rate and shall receive compensation for Years of Service
Pay as established by the City Manager for each twelve (12) month year of City of Chandler
service prorated for any partial year.

C. The beneficiaries of a unit member who dies in the line of duty shall receive compensation
for all accrued sick leave at the rate of one hundred (100%) of the accrued sick leave hours
at the employee’s current base rate and shall receive compensation for Years of Service as
established by the City Manager for each twelve (12) month year of City of Chandler service
prorated for any partial year.

D. During the term of the Memorandum, the City will continue its Citywide Retirement Health
Savings Plan (RHSP) for all regular, benefited employees with a contribution of $800 for
every year of City service paid into retiring employee’s RHSP account provided they have
five (5) or more years of service with the City.

Section 5-7: Training/Tuition Reimbursement
A. Responsibility for Training
1) The City Council encourages the training and education of unit members. The
Human Resources Director shall assume responsibility for developing citywide
training programs for unit members. The Police Chief may establish department-
specific training programs.
B. Credit for Special Training

1) Participation in, and successful completion of, special job related training courses
may be considered in advancements and promotions.

C. Reimbursement for Formal Training
1) Fiscal conditions permitting, the City will assist regular unit members in their pursuit
of additional formal education from an institution in areas related to a City career
field. A policy and procedure shall be established by which tuition reimbursement
will be administered and which will reimburse unit members.

2) Procedures shall be established to repay the City the tuition fees upon separation
from City service within 12 months of completion of the course.

28
D. Seminars/Workshops Training Programs

1) As fiscal conditions permit, the City supports unit members’ attendance in seminars
and workshop training programs as a part of their regular duties with the approval of
the Police Chief.

2) The City shall pay all fees for such programs and the unit member shall be provided
transportation under the administrative regulation established by Personnel Rule 4,
Section 2.

3) If a unit member separates from City service within 12 months of completion of the
workshop or seminar, the unit member may be required to reimburse the City for the
costs of those workshops or seminars that are primarily designed to enhance a unit
member's career. A unit member normally will not be required to reimburse the City
for workshops or seminars that they are directed to attend.

Section 5 - 8: Out-Of-State Vacation Recall

When a unit member is temporarily recalled to duty from out-of-state while on an authorized
vacation by order of the Chief of Police, he shall be reimbursed for necessary and provable
transportation expenses as determined by the Police Chief.

Section 5 - 9: Uniform, Clothing, and Equipment

A. The unit member will continue to receive uniforms and equipment through the Chandler
Police Department Quartermaster system, as outlined in General Orders.

1) The Department shall replace those items as they, in the judgment of the
Department, become unserviceable to wear or damage in the course and scope of
official duties through the Quartermaster.

B. A unit member, who is required to wear civilian attire during the performance of his or her
duties, will receive a fiscal year uniform allowance ($750) in accordance with Chandler
Police Department General Orders. This payment will be made through the payroll system
one time per year and paid in the first full pay period in July.

ARTICLE 6: MISCELLANEOUS
Section 6-1: Saving Clause

A. If any Article or Section of this Memorandum should be held invalid by operation of law or by
final judgment of any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or if compliance with or enforcement
of any Article or Section should be restrained by such tribunal, the remainder of this
Memorandum shall not be affected thereby; and upon issuance of such final decree, the
parties, upon request of either of them, shall meet and confer and endeavor to agree on a
substitution provision or that such a substitute provision is not indicated.

B. It is recognized by the parties that this Memorandum shall be administered in compliance
with appropriate provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act as may be amended; consistent
with the provisions of this Memorandum and current overtime policies of the City of
Chandler.

29
Section 6 — 2: Copies of Memorandum

Within sixty (60) days of the date that this Memorandum is adopted by the City Council, the
Association will arrange for printing of jointly approved copies of it for furnishing one to every
unit member, unit supervisor and to management personnel. The cost of such duplication and
distribution will be paid for equally by the Association and the City.

Section 6 - 3: Seniority

A. The City shall provide the Association with a list of unit members showing each unit
member's City employment date and badge number.

B. Seniority shall be by badge number except when a unit member returns to City employment
under the City’s Personnel Rule 6, Section 4 (Return to City Employment). Seniority of a unit
member rehired under this program shall be calculated by their original date of hire,
provided the employee returns to City employment within two (2) years of their resignation.
If an officer returns to City employment within two (2) years of resignation, officers retain
their badge number. This shall apply to all unit members hired under this City Personnel
Rule in the future and retroactively to those hired under the Rule in the past.

C. Seniority shall be used as a factor consistent with established Merit System rules and
current practice in choice of work assignments, vacation schedules and in the determination
of layoffs.

D. If a patrol officer opening on a traditional patrol team becomes available due to promotion,
specialty movement, retirement, or any other reason; officers may submit a memo
requesting to be placed into the vacancy. This option is available by seniority and is limited
to two (2) potential total movements. An officer may use this option only once during a shift
cycle and no movement shall occur after September 30" of each year. If a unit member
requests a hardship transfer, and it is approved by the Chief of Police, the hardship transfer
shall take precedence over any requests submitted by unit members to be placed in the
available vacancy according to seniority.

Section 6 - 4: Limited Duty Status

A unit member, who is injured on the job, may be assigned limited duty status by the employer.
Such assignment may be made without regard to the unit member's normal assignment and
shall be made within the Police Department.

Section 6 - 5: Changes in Departmental General Orders Pursuant to this
Memorandum

A. Within (90) days from the date this Memorandum is adopted by the City Council, the
Department shall print copies of those Department General Orders and Operations Orders
reflecting changes pursuant to this Memorandum. Copies of such changes shall be
available to each unit member on or about August 1 of each Memorandum year or as soon
thereafter as possible. Prior to the printing of the described changes, the Chief of Police or
his representative shall review such changes with a representative of the Association to
insure that such changes are consistent with the specific express terms of the
Memorandum.
B.

During the preparation of changes to the Department’s General Orders, drafts of the
proposed changes will be staffed out to the Association.

Section 6 - 6: Term and Effect of Memorandum

A.

This Memorandum shall remain in full force and effect beginning July 1, 2013 through June
30, 2015, unless a specific provision of the MOU provides otherwise and thereafter shall
continue in effect year-by-year unless one of the parties notifies the other in writing no later
than November 1, 2014, of its request(s) to modify or terminate it.

Except as expressly provided in this Memorandum, the City shall not be required to meet
and confer concerning any matter, whether covered or not covered herein, during the term
or extensions thereof.

If any section or provision of this Memorandum violates existing Federal, State, or City law,
then such law shall supersede such provisions or section.

The lawful provisions of this Memorandum are binding upon the parties for the term thereof.
The Association having had an opportunity to raise all matters in connection with the meet
and confer proceedings resulting in this Memorandum is precluded from initiating any further
meeting and conferring for the term thereof relative to matters under the control of the City
Council or the City Manager.

This Memorandum constitutes the total and entire agreement between the parties and no
verbal statement shall supersede any of its provisions.

The City’s rules and regulations, administrative directives, departmental rules and
regulations, and work place practices shall govern unit member relations unless there is a
specific conflict with a Memorandum of Understanding approved by the City Council
pursuant to the Meet and Confer Ordinance. Where a specific conflict exists, the
memorandum of understanding shall govern.

. A Memorandum of Understanding cannot contradict the Meet and Confer Ordinance.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have hereunto subscribed their names this
day of, , 2013.

City of Chandler Association Representative
By: By:

Mayor Robert Dykstra
Attest:

City Clerk
Approved to form: (SEAL)

ATTEST:
City Attorney
