MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

July 1, 2013 — June 30, 2015

CITY OF CHANDLER
AND

POLICE SERGEANTS BARGAINING UNIT
Preamble
Article 1:

Section 1-1
Section 1-2
Section 1-3
Section 1-4
Section 1-5

Article 2:

Section 2-1
Section 2-2

Article 3:

Section 3-1
Section 3-2
Section 3-3
Section 3-4
Section 3-5
Section 3-6
Section 3-7
Section 3-8
Section 3-9
Section 3-10
Section 3-11
Section 3-12
Section 3-13

Article 4:
Section 4-1
Article 5:

Section 5-1
Section 5-2
Section 5-3
Section 5-4
Section 5-4A
Section 5-5
Section 5-6
Section 5-6A
Section 5-7

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Rights

Purpose/Gender

City and Management Rights
Rights of the Association
Sergeant Rights

Prohibition of Strike and Lockout

Grievance/Arbitration/Labor-Management

Grievance Procedure
Labor-Management Committee

Compensation and Wages

Merit Pay

Supervisory Incentive Pay

Market Salary Adjustment

Total Annual Cash Compensation Survey
Field Training Pay

Interpreting and Translation Pay
Overtime

Court Overtime

Jury Duty

Call-Out Pay

Swing and Night Shift Differential Pay
Deferred Compensation

Vacation & Comp-Time Buy Backs

Hours of Work/Working Conditions
Hours
Benefits

Health Insurance

Dental Insurance

Life Insurance

Vacation Leave

Maximum Accrual of Vacation Credits
Holidays

Sick Leave

Payment of Sick Leave at Retirement or Death
Training/Tuition Reimbursement

Aurwn

aS

14
17

18
18
19
19
20
20
20

22
22
22
23
23

23

23
24
24

25
25
27
27
28
Section 5-8
Section 5-9

Article 6:

Section 6-1
Section 6-2
Section 6-3
Section 6-4
Section 6-5

Section 6-6

Out-of-State Vacation Recall
Uniform, Clothing and Equipment

Miscellaneous

Saving Clause

Copies of Memorandum

Seniority

Limited Duty Status

Changes in Departmental General Orders pursuant to
this Memorandum

Term and Effect of Memorandum

29
29

29
30
30
30
30

30
PREAMBLE

Whereas the well being and morale of the Sergeants of the City are benefited by providing
an opportunity to participate in the formulation of policies and practices affecting the wages, hours,
benefits and other conditions of their employment; and

Whereas the parties hereby acknowledge that the provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding (hereinafter “Memorandum”) are not intended to abrogate the authority and
responsibility of the City government provided for under the statutes of the State of Arizona or the
charter or ordinances of the City; and

Whereas the parties, through their designated representatives, met and conferred in good
faith pursuant to the Meet and Confer Ordinance in order to reach agreement concerning wages,
hours, benefits and other conditions of employment in the bargaining unit; and

Now therefore, the City of Chandler, hereinafter referred to as the “City” and CLASA,
hereinafter referred to as the “Association” having reached this complete agreement concerning
wages, hours, and working conditions for the term specified, the parties submit the Memorandum to
the Mayor and the City Council of the City of Chandler with their joint recommendation that the
body resolve to adopt its terms.
ARTICLE 1: RIGHTS
Section 1-1: Purpose / Gender

It is the purpose of this Memorandum to continue and maintain harmonious relations, cooperation,
and understanding between the City and its Sergeants; and to set forth the full and entire
understanding of the parties reached as a result of a good faith meeting and conferring regarding
wages, hours, benefits, terms and other conditions of employment of the Sergeants covered hereby,
which understanding the parties intend jointly to submit and recommend for approval and
implementation to the Mayor and City Council.

Whenever any words used herein are in the masculine, feminine, or neuter, they shall be construed
as though they were also used in another gender in all cases where they would so apply.

Section 1 — 2: City and Management Rights

The City and the City Manager’s rights are not subjugated or diminished in any way by any
expressed or implied duty or obligation to meet and confer. Retained management rights are not
subject to the grievance procedure contained in any Memorandum of Understanding, nor are they
subject to any other appeal or complaint process.

1) Subject to the terms of this MOU the City has and will continue to retain, whether
exercised or not, the unilateral and exclusive right to operate, administer, and manage its
municipal services and work force performing those services. The authority of the City
shall not be modified or limited by inference or implication.

 

  

2) Subject to the terms of this Memorandum, the exclusive rights of the City shall include,
but not be limited to;

e The right to determine the organization of City government, the purpose of each of
its departments, and the purpose and mission of its constituent agencies, boards and
commissions.

e Set standards of service to be offered to the public, and through its management

officials to exercise control and discretion over its organization and operations, to
establish rules and practices governing the conduct of Sergeants, to direct and
supervise its Sergeants and their work, to take disciplinary action, to relieve its
Sergeants from duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons, to
determine whether goods and or services shall be made.
Determine whether goods and or services shall be made, purchased or contracted for.
Determine the methods, means and personnel by which the City’s services are to be
provided, including the right to schedule, and ign work and overtime, to hire,
transfer and reassign Sergeants and to otherwise act in the interests of efficient
service to the community.

e The City reserves the right to establish and revise work schedules and work
locations; to establish, revise and implement standards for hiring and promoting
Sergeants; to determine the need for additional positions and the qualifications of
new Sergeants and to determine the qualifications for and/or the qualifications of

 

 

 
Sergeants considered for transfer and/or promotion; to evaluate and judge the skill,
ability and efficiency and general work performance of Sergeants.

e Adopt and manage its budget, provide for the funding of certain levels of service, to
add, delete, modify, or suspend certain programs, functions, divisions, and
departments as the City Council in the exercise of its legislative authority to create
and manage the City’s budget and to determine whatever action to be necessary and
appropriate.

e Take all necessary actions to maintain uninterrupted service to the community.

3) The City retains all rights not specifically limited by a Memorandum of Understanding
approved in accordance with the provisions of the Meet and Confer Ordinance.

4) The enumeration of the above rights is illustrative only and is not to be construed as
being all-inclusive.

Section 1 - 3: Rights of the Association

A. The City recognizes the Chandler Lieutenants and Sergeant Association as the sole and
exclusive Meet and Confer authorized representative, pursuant to the Meet and Confer
Ordinance for purposes of the representation regarding wages, hours, benefits and other
conditions of employment for all regular full-time Sergeants in the employee group. The
Associations shall have no rights beyond those specified in the Meet and Confer Ordinance as
amended, Title 38 of the Revised Arizona State Statute and this Memorandum.

Members of the group_ shall hereinafter be referred to as “Sergeants.”

B. Certain specified representatives of the Association have the right to paid release time herein as
follows:

1) The Association may designate up to five (5) Executive Board member representatives
and shall notify the Police Chief in writing of such designations. There shall be no
obligation on the City to change or adjust normal departmental scheduling or
assignments of personnel as a result of such designations.

2) One representative may, when the Association is designated in writing by the
Association member as his/her representative, attend mutually scheduled grievance
meetings and hearings with department and City representatives without loss of pay or
benefits. In no event shall this paid release time be used for any other purposes, such as
gathering information, interviewing the grievant/appellant or witnesses, or preparing a
presentation. The Association representative is required to obtain the permission of
his/her department supervisor to absent himself from his/her duties to attend scheduled
grievance meetings. Subject to operational needs and scheduling factors, this permission
shall not be unreasonably withheld. An Association representative wishing to enter a
work area for the purpose of investigating a formal grievance must first gain the
permission of the work area supervisor. This permission will not be unreasonably
withheld, giving proper consideration to essential work of the department and the
occupational safety of the Association representative.
C. Payroll Dues Deduction

))

2)

3)

4)

5)

The City shall deduct yearly from all (26) twenty-six checks of Association members,
the regular periodic Association membership dues pursuant to the City’s deduction
authorization form duly completed and signed by the employee and transmit such
deductions monthly to the Association no later than the fourteenth (14) day following the
end of the pay period in which the deduction occurs, along with an alphabetical list of all
Sergeants for whom the deductions have been made. Such deduction shall be made only
when the Association member’s earnings for a pay period are sufficient after other
legally required deductions are made.

Authorization for membership dues deduction herein shall remain in effect during the
term hereof unless revoked in writing by the Sergeant. The City shall accept revocation
of deductions only during the first week of January and July of the term of this
Memorandum to be effective the following payroll period. The City will notify the
Association of any revocations submitted to it.

The City shall not make any payroll deductions for Sergeants on behalf of any other
organization that purports to provide benefits similar to those offered by the designated
Association (as defined in the Meet and Confer Ordinance as amended) during the term
of this Memorandum.

It is agreed that the City assumes no liability on account of any actions taken pursuant to
this Section. The City will however, as promptly as technically possible, implement
changes brought to its attention.

The City shall, at the written request of the Association during the term of this
agreement, make changes in the amount of dues deduction hereunder for the general
membership, provided costs for implementing such changes shall be reimbursed by the
Association at actual cost incurred by the City.

D. Solicitation, Distribution of Material, and Use of Facilities and Services

))

2)

3)

The solicitation of members, dues collection and other internal Association business
shall be conducted only during non-working hours and shall not interfere with the work
process.

The Association may distribute material on the City’s premises (buildings and grounds)
before and after scheduled working hours or in a non-work area during scheduled work
hours provided that both the person distributing and the employee receiving such
material are on their own time.

The City shall provide the Association with space for one bulletin board per station for
its use in communicating with its members at mutually agreeable locations. The City
shall grant sole and exclusive use of such bulletin boards to the Association. Bulletin
boards shall not exceed 4’ x 3’ (width by height) in size.

 

The bulletin boards shall be used only for the following notices: recreational and social
affairs of the Association; Association meetings; Association elections; reports of the

7
Executive Board or committees; rulings or policies of the state or national organizations;
and legislative enactments and judicial decisions affecting public sector labor relations.
Notices shall not contain anything political; anything reflecting adversely on the City or
any of its employees; or anything that is disruptive of the City’s operations. The City
may order the removal of any posted notice on the basis that it violates the requirements
herein. The Association may dispute the order of removal by filing a grievance pursuant
to Article 2, the Grievance Procedure. Posted material will be signed by an authorized
official of the organization. The Association agrees to keep the bulletin board in good
order.

4) The Association is authorized to use mutually agreed upon non-work areas in City
facilities for pick-up by or distribution to Sergeants of the official Association literature
that is not political in nature or abusive of any person or organization. The use of
working areas or use of City equipment and information systems, for the solicitation of

, dues collection, and distribution of materials relating to other Association

shall be prohibited unless allowed by a specific Section of the Memorandum.

 

   

5) The Association President, or his/her designee, will be provided a mail slot for
department communications and may use the City's e-mail system to send e-mails to
Sergeants to announce meetings . With pre-approval from the Chief or designee, notice
of association charities and upcoming events may be sent by the email system.

E. In recognition of the mutual benefit to both the City and the Association, a Sergeant using
Association release time as defined by Articles in this Memorandum to conduct Association
business shall be accorded all insurance-related benefits. Claims made for benefits will be
reviewed on a case-by-case basis in the same manner as the claim of any other employee.

F. A member of the Executive Board of the Association, or a designated Association
representative, will, with the approval of the Police Chief or his/her designee, subject to twenty-
four (24) hours written notice in advance, be authorized to engage in Association related
activities during City work hours on a non-paid basis. Approval for use of unpaid time
hereunder shall be subject to Department operational and scheduling factors and administration
control as to usage of such time, but shall not be unreasonably withheld. There shall be no use
of official paid time for Association related activities under this paragraph.

 

G. A Sergeant may contribute up to three (3) hours per year of accrued vacation to be placed in an
Association leave time bank for use by the Association to engage in legitimate Association
business. The following conditions shall apply to the leave time bank:

1) The Association shall supply the City with a Release Hours Authorization Form, which
includes the name of the Sergeant and the hours of vacation time donated by the
Sergeant to the pool.

2) The donating Sergeant shall sign the form before submission to the City.

3) The City shall withdraw the bank hours in the 1“ pay period of July or upon promotion
date of an Officer to Sergeant.
4) The form shall be enforceable from year-to-year, and the Association President may
increase bank hours upon a written statement.

5) Charges against the Association leave time bank shall only be made when approved by
the President or Secretary/Treasurer of the Association.

6) Human Resources shall keep a record of all time donated and drawn against.

7) Any unused hours in the Association leave time bank may be carried over from one
fiscal year to the next.

8) The Association shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City against any and all
claims made and against any suits instituted against the City on account of the City
complying with any of the provision of this Section.

9) These hours may be used as follows:

a. For Executive Board members to attend meetings of the Executive Board,
meetings of the general membership, and for preparation for negotiations
pursuant to the Meet and Confer Ordinance as amended.

b. For any member designated by the President to be used for legitimate
Association purposes.

10) Approval for use of paid time hereunder shall be subject to Departmental operational
needs and scheduling factors. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. When
using such paid time, members of the Executive Board shall give at least twenty-four
(24) hours written notice in advance.

H. The Association will be allowed % hour to talk to and possibly sign new Sergeants into the
Association and to explain the rights and benefits under the Memorandum. This time will be
allotted after promotion of said Sergeants. The content of such information shall not be political
in nature, abusive of any person or the Department or disruptive of the Department’s operation.

I. It is understood by the parties that the benefits granted by this Article shall not be interpreted or
applied as requiring the employer to count as time worked, any hours or fractions of hours spent
outside the Sergeant’s work shift in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article. The employer
shall count as time worked any hours or fractions of hours spent within the Sergeants regular
work shift in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article.

J. In the interest of encouraging continuing education for Sergeants, the Department will mail to
the Association President the AZ POST calendar.

K. The Association may designate up to three (3) Sergeants to represent the Association in the
Meet and Confer process with the City. These designated Sergeants shall be granted time off
with pay for the purpose of such representation, and such times shall not be applied to bank
hours.
L.

In the event that the City alleges that the Association or a Sergeant, or the Association or a
Sergeant alleges that the City has violated a provision of the Meet and Confer Ordinance as
amended, the Association, Sergeant, or City may submit such a claim through the grievance
procedure in Article 2 of this Memorandum.

Section 1 - 4: Sergeant Rights

A.

All Sergeants shall have the right to join or not to join the Association as they individually
prefer. Sergeants have the right to participate on behalf of or engage in activities on behalf of an
Association and have the right to refrain from such activity. Sergeant all be free from any
interference, restraint, or coercion by any employee, supervisor, or manager for or against the
Association. Violations will necessitate disciplinary action.

 

Sergeants have the right to be represented by the Association and to have a member of the
Association present during the grievance and the disciplinary process. The disciplinary process
does not apply to an interview of a Sergeant during the normal course of work, counseling,
instruction, informal verbal admonishment or other routine or unplanned contact with a
supervisor.

If a Sergeant requests representation will be allowed when the member is subject of an
administrative investigation and the Sergeant reasonably believes that the interview could result
in dismissal, demotion or suspension by Professional Standards Section, or any Police
Department supervisory, who is conducting an administrative investigation. The Sergeant will
obtain the most readily available Association representative. The Association representative
will make every reasonable attempt to arrive within one (1) hour from the time the member
makes a phone call to the representative. The Association representative will attend the above
interview only as an observer. At the end of the interview, but prior to the conclusion of the
interview, the Sergeant being interviewed may privately confer with their representative. Upon
returning to the interview the Sergeant will be allowed to make a statement not to exceed 5
ssing the specific facts or policies related to the interview. A Sergeant identified
s will be given the opportunity to consult with an Association representative not
same representative as the suspected Sergeant to discuss their rights and obligations prior to the
interview. The interview session shall be for a reasonable period of time, taking into
consideration the gravity and complexity of the misconduct being investigated.

  

Any unit member who is the subject of an officer involved shooting investigation who has
discharged a weapon or was shot at or violently assaulted may request to have the administrative
interview postponed for up to 48 hours from the time of the incident. The Police Chief may
deny the request when he or she determines that delaying the interview would be detrimental to
the investigation. A unit member may waive his/her rights to make the request for
postponement of the administrative interview. In all cases, the overall mental and physical or
health of the unit member shall be taken into consideration.

A Sergeant under investigation will be notified in writing every 30 (thirty) days as to the current
status of the investigation. This will include a brief description of the number of known
witnesses still to be interviewed and other investigative processes remaining to be completed, as
well as an estimated date of completion.

10
A Sergeant has the right to present his/her own grievance in person and has the right to be
represented.

. A Sergeant covered hereunder shall, on his/her request be allowed to review his/her
departmental or divisional personnel file in the presence of an appropriate supervisor/official of
the Department within three (3) business days of the request review. Another person of his or
her choosing may accompany the Sergeant. When a City-directed work fitness/job performance
medical evaluation process is completed, the Sergeant may request copies of his or her medical
information from the City-selected physician. The City must also agree to give the City-
selected physician authorization to release any/all information to the requesting Sergeant.

. No Sergeant shall have any adverse comments entered into his/her departmental personnel file
without the Sergeant being informed by the supervisor. If the Sergeant requests, he/she may
receive a copy of the adverse comment. A Sergeant may, at his/her discretion, attach rebuttal
statements to any material contained in his/her departmental personnel file, which may be
adverse in nature.

Material purged from a Sergeant’s file in accordance with the below procedures or allegations
about a Sergeant which are unfounded, exonerated, not sustained or a policy failure will not be
used in future performance ratings or disciplinary actions.

Consistent with the requirements of A.R.S. § 39-128, the City shall maintain as part of a
Sergeant's official personnel record all documents relating to disciplinary actions, including the
Sergeant's response to the disciplinary action, and shall make such records available for
inspection and copying as required by the public records law.

Upon written request, a Sergeant may have letters of admonishment which are over three (3)
years old removed from the department working file when there have been no incidents or
problems of a similar nature within the three (3) year period immediately preceding the request.
A Sergeant may request to have letters of instruction and counseling statements which are over
one (1) year old removed from the department working file.

. A Sergeant under investigation by Professional Standards Section or a Police Department
supervisor for a disciplinary matter that may lead to a written reprimand, suspension, demotion,
or discharge, and who is interviewed, or requested to produce any documentation, shall be given
a written notice informing him of the specific nature of the investigation, his/her status in the
investigation, and all known allegations of misconduct involved in the interview of the Sergeant.
In addition, the Sergeant and/or the Police Department supervisor/Professional Standards
Section representative shall be entitled to mechanically record such interview. Should any
mechanical recordings take place, the department reserves the right to transcribe any such
interview for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of the interview and, if requested, the
Sergeant shall sign the transcription if it i urate. For any sustained allegations resulting in a
letter of reprimand or higher, the Sergeant has appeal rights under Personnel Rules or, where
applicable Title 38 of Arizona Revised Statute.

 

At the time of a scheduled interview by the Professional Standards Section, a Police Department
supervisor, or other City employee, the investigator will advise the Sergeant of all evidence
known at the time of the interview that will be used in the course of the investigation. This

11
includes any written documents, video or audio recordings, or photographs. The Investigator
will inform the Sergeant of such evidence at the time of the interview.

1) A copy of the signed and dated notice of investigation will be given to the Sergeant prior
to the beginning of the interview. The Sergeant shall have the right to retain the notice
of investigation for his/her use throughout the entire course of the interview. A Sergeant
will be provided an opportunity to make a telephone call after the issuance of the notice
of investigation to obtain an Association representative.

2) In the event a Sergeant does not record his/her interview he/she may request a copy of
the investigator’s tape(s) if the investigator records the interview (the Sergeant provides
the tape).

3) If any Sergeant is told not to speak to anyone regarding an investigation, this admonition
does not apply to speaking with an attorney functioning within the attorney-client
relationship, or with an Association representative who may discuss the matter only with
the Executive Board members. When the investigation is completed, the accused
Sergeant will be notified in writing of the findings. A Sergeant under internal or
administrative investigation may be reassigned, until the completion of the investigation.

4) If during the course of the above-mentioned investigation, information is learned
concerning additional misconduct on the part of the Sergeant being interviewed, a notice
of investigation will be issued to the Sergeant prior to the Sergeant being questioned
about the additional misconduct information.

5) Issues related to the release of a Sergeant’s home address and telephone number,
timeliness of lodging a complaint against a Sergeant, and multiple discipline arising out
of the same incident have been addressed by the adoption of general orders related to
these subjects.

6) The unit member’s immediate supervisor will normally investigate LEVEL 1
complaints, whether generated internally or externally and LEVEL II Class A “First
Violation” complaints that result from a complaint of a third LEVEL | violation within a
one-year period. The Professional Standards Section will normally investigate LEVEL
II complaints unless otherwise directed by the Office of the Chief.

The Professional Standards Section will normally investigate any complaint that
involves extensive manpower and resources that would unreasonably burden a
supervisor. Division Commanders may request the Professional Standards Section to
conduct an investigation for a variety of reasons. These requests will be routed through
the Office of the Chief.

L. The employer shall count as time worked any hours or fractions of hours spent within the
Sergeant’s regular work shift in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article, (Association
Representative) but shall not count as time worked any hours or fractions of hours spent outside
the Sergeant’s work shift.

M. A Sergeant who receives a written reprimand may request a copy of the official documentation,
if any, supporting the written reprimand.

12
N.

If a polygraph examination is required of a Sergeant, an Association representative will be
allowed to monitor and observe all preliminary and post examination interviews and the
examination from a monitoring room if available. If no monitoring room is available,
appropriate steps will be taken to video record the proceedings for the record. The results of a
polygraph or voice stress examination alone will not be the sole factor for determining
truthfulness or on which to impose disciplinary action. A copy of the examination results
including charts will be provided to the Sergeant upon request.

Once a Sergeant has been formally counseled or disciplined in accordance with General Orders
B-12, including the counseling/discipline chart, and B-13, no further investigation will be
conducted for the same allegation for the same incident except when:

a. New Information reveals additional allegations arising from or related to the same
incident.

b. The Office of the Chief requests further investigation for the integrity of the organization
and to maintain public trust.

A complaint will be treated as a delayed complaint if an allegation of non-criminal misconduct
by an employee occurred more than 120 days prior to the date of complaint.

The supervisor receiving the complaint will document the information in a memorandum. The
memorandum will be sent through the chain of command to the Professional Standards Section,
who will review and inform the Office of the Chief. A determination will be made whether or
not a formal investigation will be initiated. If an investigation is merited, the Professional
Standards Section will conduct the investigation, unless otherwise directed by the Office of the
Chief.

The Association must equally and fairly represent all Sergeants.

Section 1 — 5: Prohibition of Strike and Lockouts

A.

The Association and Sergeants covered by this Memorandum recognize and agree that
rendering of services to the community cannot under any circumstances or conditions be
withheld, interrupted, or discontinued, and to do so would endanger the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the City of Chandler.

. The Association pledges to maintain unimpaired municipal services as directed by the City.

Neither the Association, nor any Sergeant, for any reason, will authorize, institute, aid, condone
or engage in a slowdown, work stoppage, strike, or any other interference with the work and
statutory functions and obligations of the City or the Department. During the term of this
Memorandum neither the City nor its agents for any reason shall authorize, institute, aid or
promote a lockout of Sergeants covered by this Memorandum.

Should any Sergeant during the term of this Memorandum, and until such time that it is

expressly and legally rescinded breach the obligations of Section 1-5 (B), the City Manager or
his designee shall immediately notify the Association that a prohibited action is in progress.

13
D. The Association shall forthwith, through its Executive Board and other authorized
representatives, disavow said strike or other prohibited action, and shall notify in writing all
Association members and representatives of their obligation and responsibility for maintaining
compliance with this Article, including their responsibility to remain at work during any
interruption which may be caused or initiated by others. Copies of such notification shall be
delivered to the Office of the City Manager. In addition, the Association shall order all
Sergeants violating this Article to immediately return to work and cease the strike or other
prohibited activity. Such order shall be delivered both orally and in writing to all Sergeants
violating this Article with copies of the written order to be delivered to the Office of the City
Manager.

E. Penalties or sanctions the City may assess against a Sergeant who violates this Section shall
include, but not be limited to:

1) Discipline up to and including discharge.

2) Loss of all compensation and benefits, including seniority, during the period of such
prohibited activity.

F. Should the Association during the term of this Memorandum and until such time that it is
expressly and legally rescinded, breach its obligations under this Section, it is agreed that all
penalties set forth in the City Charter, shall be imposed on the Association, in addition to any
other legal and administrative remedies available to the City that in its discretion it may elect to
pursue.

G. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the City from obtaining judicial restraint or from
seeking damages from the Association, in the event of a violation of this Section.

ARTICLE 2: GRIEVANCE / ARBITRATION / LABOR MANAGEMENT

 

Section 2 —1: Grievance Procedure
A. Informal Resolution
1) As a matter of good labor-management relations the parties encourage a Sergeant who
believes that he/she has a bona fide grievance to discuss and attempt to resolve it with

his/her immediate supervisor.

2) If the above informal discussion is held and does not resolve the grievance, the Sergeant
may file a formal grievance in accordance with the following procedure.

B. Definition of Grievance
1) A grievance is a written allegation by a Sergeant, submitted as herein specified, claiming

violation(s) of the specific express terms of this Memorandum for which there is no
Merit Board appeal or other specific method of review provided by State or City law.

14
C. Procedure

Step 1

The Sergeant shall reduce his/her grievance to writing by signing and completing all
parts of the grievance form provided by the City and submits it to his/her immediate
supervisor within fifteen (15) workdays of the initial commencement of the
occurrence being grieved. The supervisor shall further consider and discuss the
grievance with the grievant and the grievant’s representative, if any, as he deems
appropriate, and shall, within five (5) workdays of having received the written
grievance, submit his/her response thereto in writing to the grievant. The parties by
written agreement may move the grievance to Step 2 of the grievance procedure.

Step 2

If the written response of the immediate supervisor does not result in a resolution of
the grievance, the grievant may appeal the grievance by signing and completing the
City form and presenting it to his/her Police Commander within five (5) workdays of
the grievant’s receipt of the supervisor’s response. The Police Commander may
investigate the grievance and may set a meeting with the grievant, and the grievant’s
designated representative, if any, and such other personnel as he deems appropriate
to consider the grievance. Within five (5) workdays of receipt of the grievance, or
within five (5) days after the grievance meeting, the Police Commander shall submit
his/her written response to the grievance to the grievant and the grievant’s
representative, if any.

Step 3

a. If the response of the second level of review does not result in resolution of the
grievance, the grievant may appeal the grievance by signing and completing the City
form and presenting it to the Police Chief within five (5) workdays of the grievant’s
receipt of the Step 2 response.

b. The Police Chief shall hold a meeting within five (5) workdays of receipt of the
grievance regarding the grievance at which the grievant shall be afforded the
opportunity to fully present his/her position and to be represented. Within five (5)
workdays of the hearing, the Police Chief or his/her designee shall submit his/her
written response to the grievant and the grievant’s representative, if any.

c. By mutual agreement, the parties may combine steps 3 and 3.5.

Step 3.5

After the Police Chief’s decision, but prior to review by the Grievance Committee or
the arbitrator, the parties involved may mutually agree to submit the grievance to the
HR Director or designee. The grievance, as originally written and the attached
response from the Police Chief must be submitted to the HR Director or designee
within five (5) workdays of receipt of the Police Chief’s answer. The HR Director or
designee shall within ten (10) workdays of the receipt of the grievance, meet with the

15
Police Chief or his/her designee and the Sergeant and his/her representative in an
attempt to resolve the grievance. The HR Director or designee shall then submit
written recommendations for resolution to the Sergeant and Police Chief within five
(5) workdays of the meeting.

Step 4

a.

If the response of the Police Chief does not result in resolution of the grievance, the
grievant may, within five (5) workdays of the Step 3 response, appeal the grievance
by signing and completing the City form and presenting it to the Grievance
Committee. The Grievance Committee shall be composed of:

Chairman — A member designated by the City Manager.
Secretary — HR Director or designee.
Member -— Association President or his/her designee.

The Grievance Committee shall schedule a hearing regarding the grievance at which
the grievant shall be afforded the opportunity to fully present his/her position and to
be represented.

If the grievant and the Association jointly so elect, in writing, within the above time
limit, in lieu of such hearing the grievance may be reviewed by an arbitrator. The
parties, or their designated representatives, shall agree on an arbitrator, and if they
are unable to agree on an arbitrator within a reasonable time, either party may
request the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to submit to them a list of
seven (7) arbitrators who have had experience in the public sector. The parties shall,
within five (5) workdays of the receipt of said list, select the arbitrator by alternately
striking names from said list until one name remains. Such person shall then become
the arbitrator. The arbitrator so selected shall hold a hearing as expeditiously as
possible at a time and place convenient to the parties, and shall be bound by the
following:

i. The arbitrator shall be bound by the language of the Memorandum and
departmental rules and regulations consistent therewith in considering any
issue properly before him.

ii. The arbitrator shall expressly confine himself to the precise issue submitted to
him and shall have no authority to consider any other issue not so submitted to
him.

iii. The arbitrator shall be bound by applicable State and City law.
iv. The Grievance Committee or the arbitrator shall submit findings and advisory
recommendations to the grievant and to the City Manager. The cost of the

arbitrator and any other mutually incurred costs shall be borne equally by the
parties.

16
v. The City Manager shall, within ten (10) workdays of the receipt of the written
findings and recommendations, make the final determination of the grievance
and submit it in writing to the grievant and his/her designated representative.

D. Time Limits

Failure of City Management representatives to comply with time limits specified in Paragraph C
shall entitle the grievant to appeal to the next level of review; and failure of the grievant to
comply with said time limits shall constitute abandonment of the grievance; except however,
that the parties may extend time limits by mutual written agreement in advance.

E. The Association may, in its own name, file a grievance that alleges violation by the City of the
rights accorded to the Association by the specific terms of Article 1 — 3 of the Memorandum.
The Association shall file such grievance at Step 3 of the Procedure. Association grievances
must be filed and signed by a Sergeant and the CLASA President, subject to the provisions of
this Article.

F. Grievances involving three (3) or more Sergeants may be filed as a group grievance by the
Association. A group grievance shall commence at Step 2 of the Procedure. Group grievances
must be filed and signed by the CLASA President filing the grievance, subject to the provisions
of this Article.

G. Employer grievances, should they occur as a result of official Association activities or actions,
including the failure to act as required under this agreement, will be presented directly to the
Association President within ten (10) days of the occurrence prompting the grievance. The
President shall in each case provide a written answer within five (5) days from receipt of the
grievance.

Section 2 — 2: Labor-Management Committee

It is understood by the parties that the benefits granted by this Article shall not be interpreted or
applied as requiring the employer to count as time worked, any hours or fractions of hours spent
outside the employee’s work shift in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article. The employer
shall count as time worked any hours or fractions of hours spent within the employee’s regular work
shift in pursuit of benefits provided by this Article.

A. There shall be a Labor-Management Committee consisting of two (2) representatives of the
Association and two (2) representatives of the City and the City’s HR Director or designee who
shall be the Chairperson. The purpose of the Committee is to facilitate improved labor-
management relationships by providing a forum for free and informal discussion of mutual
concerns and problems.

B. The Committee shall meet, when necessary, at mutually agreed upon times.

C. If the representative of the Association is a Sergeant, such representative shall not lose pay or
benefits for meetings mutually scheduled during duty time.

17
ARTICLE 3: COMPENSATION AND WAGES

 

All items in Article 3 will be eligible subjects of negotiations as part of the Compensation and Wage
reopener in the second year of the contract.

Section 3 - 1: Merit Pay

For FY 13/14, the City will fund a merit increase of up to 5% for eligible Sergeants effective on the
first day of the pay period which includes the date of the Sergeant’s current job classification or
salary review date, until the Sergeant is at the top of the pay grade.

Section 3 — 2: Supervisory Incentive Pay

A. In recognition of continuous service and overall performance, the City agrees to provide the
following supervisory incentive pay for eligible unit members:

1) On the employee’s date of classification (classification date) or salary review date
Sergeants who have five (5) years in the Sergeant classification and who meet the
additional qualifications specified in this article shall receive a supervisory incentive
payment of two (2%) percent to be paid in two (2) equal installments. This supervisory
incentive payment is not added to base pay. The employee is eligible for the first
installment during the pay period of the date of classification or salary review date and
the second installment during the pay period six (6) months after the initial payment.

 

A Sergeant who retires or resigns from City employment after receiving the first
installment of the supervisory incentive payment but before the second installment is due
shall receive the full amount of the second installment in his/her final check. The second
installment shall not qualify as compensation for the purposes of Public Safety
Retirement contributions.

A Sergeant who is promoted to another position in the City after the first installment of
the Supervisory Incentive Payment has been paid but before the second installment is
due shall receive the second installment in accordance with the payment schedule set
forth in Section 3-2 (A.1).

B. Qualifications:

1) A Sergeant must have five (5) years as a Chandler Police Sergeant or reach the top of the
Sergeant’s pay range, whichever is sooner, to be eligible to receive the Supervisory
Incentive Pay.

2) A Sergeant must have achieved the performance rating of “meets expectations” or better
in each overall job standard category on his/her latest scheduled performance evaluation
on file in the Human Resources Department.

3) A Sergeant must have performed an “added value” activity.

C. Eligible Sergeants who have earned Supervisory Incentive Pay and not at the top of the salary
range will receive merit plus Supervisory Incentive Pay not to exceed 5%.

18
In a fiscal year that merits are not funded, Supervisory Incentive Pay will be paid in accordance
with Section 3-2 (A) and (B).

Section 3 - 3: Market Salary Adjustment

Effective July 14, 2013, the Police Sergeant pay range will be increased by 0.69%. Rates of pay for
all Police Sergeants shall be increased by 0.69%.

Section 3 - 4 Total Annual Cash Compensation Survey
A. Wage increases are to be determined as follows:

1) For the purposes of this section, “Total Annual Cash Compensation” means the
following:

a. the maximum annualized base wages for an individual Sergeant at the top of the
pay range (i.e. maximum hourly rate X 2080); and

b. the annual amount paid by the City in deferred compensation, or equivalent, to an
individual Sergeant at the top of the pay range; and

c. the annual amount contributed by the City towards the retirement health savings
plan, or equivalent, for an individual Sergeant at the top of the pay range; and

d. the annual amount received as longevity pay, or equivalent, by an individual
Sergeant at the top of the Sergeant pay range.

2) Human Resources will finalize a Compensation Survey no later than August 1“ of each
year that compares Total Annual Cash Compensation for eight (8) cities: Chandler,
Gilbert, Glendale, Mesa, Peoria, Phoenix, Scottsdale and Tempe (“the Surveyed Cities’)
based on JIMS data and/or verification from the Surveyed Cities’ HR Departments. At
the conclusion of the Compensation Survey, the eight (8) cities shall be ranked in
numerical order based on Total Annual Cash Compensation with the highest being
ranked as number one (1) and the lowest ranked as number eight (8).

Human Resources shall determine the rank of the City of Chandler in comparison to the
ranking of the seven other cities. If the City of Chandler’s Total Annual Cash
Compensation is ranked at or above the fourth (4°) position in the rankings, no wage
adjustments shall be made.

If the City of Chandler’s Total Annual Cash Compensation is ranked below the Total
Annual Cash Compensation of the fourth (4") highest city in the rankings, the top of the
Chandler Sergeant pay scale shall be adjusted by the percentage required for Chandler’s
Total Annual Cash Compensation to be equal to the midpoint between the Total Annual
Cash Compensation of the third (3") and fourth (4") highest cities.

Sergeants’ wages shall be increased to correspond with any upward adjustment made to
the Sergeant salary range as a result of the annual survey. Any wage increase will
become effective on the first day of the next full pay period after the survey data has

19
B.

been accepted and signed by the Association. In the event that the survey results in
Chandler’s being ranked above the fourth 4h position as defined in this Section,
Chandler’s range will not be decreased.

Any time an adjustment is made to the maximum pay range for the Sergeant position
pursuant to this Section. The minimum pay range for the position shall be set at 5%
above Top Officer Pay.

A salary inversion exists when an employee with less seniority in a job classification earns a
higher base rate of pay for any period of time than an employee in the same job classification
with greater seniority. Effective July 1, 2013, the City will no longer address salary inversion
within the Police Sergeant job classification and Salary Review Dates will no longer be
assigned. Any employee that has an existing Salary Review Date will retain the Salary Review
Date as the effective date for future annual merit increases, Supervisory Incentive Pay, and the
completion of performance evaluations.

 

  

Section 3 - 5: Field Training Pay

Field Training Officers (FTOs) whom the department selects to conduct department-approved
Sergeant field training will receive an additional five percent (5%) of their regular rate of pay for
every day they are assigned to an officially authorized field training position.

Section 3 - 6: Interpreting and Translation Pay

A.

Sergeants who receive certification as an Intermediate level translator will receive an additional
two and one-half percent (2.5%) of their regular rate of pay for every day they are officially
certified to perform translation for the Department.

. Sergeants who receive certification as an Advanced level translator will receive an additional

five percent (5%) of their regular rate of pay for every day they are officially certified to
perform translation for the Department.

Section 3 - 7: Overtime

A.

Overtime is defined as time worked in excess of 40 hours in a 7-day work period for full-time
Sergeants. All paid leave taken in lieu of hours worked, except time off taken as compensatory
time, shall be counted as "hours worked" for purposes of overtime calculation. The "hours
worked" requirement does not apply to overtime compensation the City is obligated to pay by
the specific terms of this MOU or Department regulations (i.e., "contract overtime") for certain
activities or situations. Payment for hours worked on a holiday, as part of the regularly
scheduled hours of work, shall be compensated as provided by this rule.

Sergeants assigned to traditional patrol teams who conduct briefings shall be eligible for up to a
max of 15 minutes overtime paid at time and one-half (1.5) their regular rate of pay for actual
time worked to prepare for the briefing.

Overtime may be authorized and required by the Police Chief when it is clearly in the best
interest of the City. The Police Chief shall authorize overtime in advance unless emergency
situations preclude advance authorization.

20
D. Overtime compensation for Sergeants shall be computed in accordance with the Fair Labor
Standards Act and adjusted rate of pay including applicable shift differential, on call pay and
assignment pays. If overtime is to be paid, it must be recorded and paid, at one and one-half
(1.5) time, on the payroll immediately following the conclusion of the pay period in which the
overtime was worked. If compensatory time is to be accrued in lieu of overtime pay, it must be
accrued at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) hours of compensatory time for each hour worked.

E. The decision to pay overtime or record it as compensatory time shall be at the discretion of the
Police Chief.

F. Compensatory time shall not accrue in excess of one hundred (100) hours.
G. Accrued compensatory time shall be paid:

1) When the accrued compensatory time exceeds the maximum. Payment will be for that
amount which exceeds the maximum.

2) Upon separation for any reason, including death of the employee.
3) When authorized by the Police Chief.
4) When requested by the Sergeant in accordance with Article 3, Section 3-13.

H. The time at which a Sergeant will take compensatory time off shall be chosen by the Sergeant
with the approval of the Sergeant’s supervisor based on whether the Sergeant’s absence would
interfere with the Department’s operation.

Section 3 - 8: Court Overtime

A. When a required court appearance is scheduled, other than normal work hours, overtime is
authorized. The unit member will be credited with two (2) hours or the actual number of hours
worked, whichever is greater. When court is scheduled within two (2) hours of a scheduled
shift, then the actual time of court and preparation for court prior to shift will be paid.

1) Court time shall be continuous time compensated consistent with Article 3, Section 7.

B. For purposes of this Article the term “Court” shall be defined as including Federal District
Court, Superior Court, State of Arizona, City Court, City of Chandler, Municipal Courts in
Maricopa County, Justice Court, Federal, State, County Grand Juries, Motor Vehicle
Department hearings, and Prosecutorial and Defense interviews. It is understood that this
Article shall not apply to administrative hearings including but not limited to arbitration
hearings pursuant to the Memorandum and hearings pursuant to the C.O.C. 2-13.D.9-grievance
procedure.

Section 3 - 9: Jury Duty

When a Sergeant is called upon to serve as a juror in any court action, they will be allowed leave
from their duties without loss of pay for the time required for this service, in accordance with
Personnel Rule 15, Section 15.

21
Section 3 - 10: Call-Out Pay

A. When a Sergeant is called back to regular duty after leaving City facilities at a time other than
his/her regular assigned shift, the Sergeant will receive a minimum of two (2) hours pay at time
and one-half (1.5) the Sergeant’s base pay calculated to the nearest quarter (1/4) hour, except
that a Sergeant shall not be eligible for additional compensation during that two hour period.

1) Compensation to a Sergeant who is called out at times other than his/her regularly
scheduled shift will begin at the time the Sergeant is notified, but not to exceed 30
minutes and shall terminate 30 minutes after being relieved of duty. Where applicable,
the travel time shall be paid only if the total work and allowed time exceed the minimum
call out guarantee. Travel time shall not apply when a Sergeant is working overtime
planned in advance.

B. A Sergeant beginning an overtime period within two (2) hours or less prior to the regularly
scheduled duty reporting time will be compensated from the time the overtime period begins to
the time he is scheduled to report for duty except that a Sergeant shall not be eligible for
additional compensation during that period.

C. Holdover time, i.e., being held over on shift (no break in duty exceeding fifteen (15) minutes)
will be compensated for actual time spent in accordance with Section 3-2 of Article 3.

D. If the Sergeant is called back because of his/her own negligence the Sergeant shall not be
eligible for the two (2) hours minimum. He will only be paid for the actual time worked.

Section 3 — 11: Swing Shift and Nightshift Differential Pay

A sergeant shall receive the shift differential pay associated with a particular shift when the sergeant
actually works that shift. If a sergeant is re ned to a different shift because he or she has
suffered an on-the-job injury, the sergeant shall continue to receive the shift differential pay
associated with the shift to which the sergeant was originally assigned until the sergeant is released
to return to full duty. If a sergeant is reassigned to a different shift because of a non-job-related
injury or at the sergeant's own request, the sergeant will receive the shift differential pay, if any,
associated with the new shift.

 

A. A Sergeant shall receive mid-day shift differential of thirty cents ($.30) per hour in addition to
his/her base hourly rate of pay when working a shift, which ends between 2000 hours and 2359
hours.

B. A Sergeant shall receive swing-shift shift differential of forty cents ($.40) per hour in addition to
his/her base hourly rate of pay when working a shift, which ends between 2400 hours and 0359
hours. In FY 14/15, the swing-shift, shift differential will increase to fifty cents ($.50) per hour.

C. A Sergeant shall receive grave-yard shift differential of fifty cents ($.50) per hour in addition to
his/her base hourly rate of pay when working a shift, which ends between 0400 hours and 0800
hours. In FY 14/15, the grave-yard shift differential will increase to seventy cents ($.70) per
hour.

22
Section 3 —- 12: Deferred Compensation

The City shall contribute 1.0% of each Sergeant’s biweekly gross pay per pay period to City’s
deferred compensation plan up to the I.R.S. annual contribution limit, if the Sergeant contributes a
minimum of $10 per pay period into City’s deferred compensation plan.

Section 3 — 13: Vacation and Comp Time Buy-Backs

Sergeants shall be permitted to cash in up to forty (40) hours of vacation time, and up to forty (40)
hours of compensatory time, both to be paid at the Sergeant’s hourly rate. These buy-back options
shall be exercised only once per fiscal year. The City shall provide a means for the unit member to
submit his or her request. The payment will be made the pay period immediately following the
request. The maximum number of vacation hours eligible for cash out in FY 14/15 will increase to
fifty (50) hours.

ARTICLE 4: HOURS OF WORK / WORKING CONDITIONS
Section 4 — 1: Hours

A. The regular duty hours for a Sergeant shall be five (5) consecutive shifts of eight (8) hours in a
seven (7) calendar day workweek. These (5) consecutive shifts will be preceded and followed
by two (2) “non-work” days. Duty hours may also include a 4/10’s or 9/80’s shift. The regular
duty hours per shift shall be consecutive and may include any “briefing time” and shall include
a meal period of thirty (30) minutes as reasonable work demands allow. At times, the
department may have operational needs, which necessitate a change in current work schedules.
The department shall give a Sergeant a minimum seven (7) day advance written notice when
his/her days or hours will be changed. If this seven (7) day written notice is not given the days
or hours change will be rescheduled to allow for a seven (7) day notice period, except for
emergency situations.

B. In addition to all duties as assigned by the Police Chief or his/her designees, work hours shall
continue to include under normal conditions two (2) fifteen (15) minute rest periods as work
demands allow.

ARTICLE 5: BENEFITS

Section 5 — 1: Health Insurance

For the term of this M.O.U. the City will pay 80% and the employee will pay 20% of the cost of the
monthly premium of the City’s medical insurance benefit.

23
Section 5 — 2: Dental Insurance

For the term of this M.O.U. the City will pay one-hundred percent (100%) of the dental insurance
premium for employee only coverage; seventy percent (70%) for employee plus one and fifty
percent (50%) for employee plus two (2) coverage.

Section 5 — 3: Life Insurance

The City shall make group life insurance coverage available for every regular Sergeant who works
in a budgetary approved position for 20 hours or more per week at least equal to the Sergeant’s
annual salary. Additional life insurance coverage for the employee, spouse and dependent children
shall also be made available. The premiums for this insurance shall be paid by the City or the
Sergeant as determined by the City Council.

Section 5 — 4: Vacation Leave
Section 5-4 Vacation Leave will be opened for negotiation in the second year of the contract.

A. A full-time work schedule consists of 52 weeks a year and 80 hours of work during the pay
period.

B. Every Sergeant, who works a full-time schedule 52 weeks a year, shall be credited
vacation leave as follows for every completed pay period:

4.4 hours per pay period for the first five years of service.

5.1 hours per pay period for Sergeants with 5 or more years of service but
less than 10 years of service.

5.8 hours per pay period for Sergeants with 10 or more years of service
but less than 15 years of service.

6.6 hours per pay period for Sergeants with 15 or more years of service
but less than 20 years of service.

8.1 hours per pay period for Sergeants with 20 or more years of service.

C. Leaves of absence compensated under the Worker’s Compensation statutes shall be
considered as paid service if the absence is for no longer than one (1) year and the
employee shall continue to accrue vacation leave.

D. Sergeants who have accrued 240 hours or more of accrued and unused leave (vacation, safety
days and holiday accrual hours) and who have attained a minimum of seventeen (17) years of
City service may elect to have the additional vacation leave that he/she earns paid to them as
salary on a bi-weekly basis for the upcoming three (3) consecutive years. Once the Sergeant
elects to exercise this benefit, it must continue for the full three (3) consecutive years. A
Sergeant may draw down the current 240 hours balance.

24
Section 5 — 4A: Maximum Accrual of Vacation Credits

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. Vacation credits shall not be allowed to accumulate in excess of 240 hours, or the equivalent as
computed under the Rule for regular employees who work less than full-time but 1040 hours or
more per year in a part-time regular budgeted position, as of the last full pay period with a
payday in January.

B. Any vacation credits in excess of 240 hours, or the equivalent as computed under the Rule for
regular employees who work less than full-time but 1040 hours or more per year in a part-time
regular budgeted position, shall automatically be moved to vacation carryover balance that must
by used by June 30" of that same year. Any vacation carryover not used by June 30" will be
forfeited.

C. Employees that elect to forfeit vacation credits in excess of 240 hours or the equivalent as
computed under the Rule for regular employees who work less than full-time but 1040 hours or
more per year in a part-time regular budgeted position, in lieu of having the hours moved to
vacation carryover balance that must be used by June 30" of that same year, shall notify Human
Resources Director in writing of their request.

Section 5 — 5: Holidays

A. When possible without decreasing the effectiveness of the various municipal services, all
Sergeants, shall be allowed paid holidays as provided below:

New Year’s Day January 1
Martin Luther King, Jr. Third Monday in January
Presidents’ Day Third Monday in February
Memorial Day Last Monday in May
Independence Day July 4
Labor Day First Monday in September
Veterans’ Day November 11
Thanksgiving Day Fourth Thursday in November
Friday after Thanksgiving

Christmas Day December 25
Personal Holiday

B. When a holiday falls on Sunday, it will be observed on the following Monday. When a

holiday falls on Saturday, it will be observed on the preceding Friday.

25
C. Compensation or paid time off when not working a Holiday.

))

2)

3)

4)

When an observed holiday falls on a scheduled work day, Sergeants shall receive
paid time off equivalent to the number of hours in their regularly scheduled work
day.

When an observed holiday falls on a non-scheduled work day, Sergeants shall
receive paid time off equivalent to the number of hours in their regularly
scheduled work day on an alternate day during the pay period. When operational
requirements do not permit an alternate day off in lieu of the official holiday,
Sergeants shall receive holiday pay equivalent to the number of hours in their
regularly scheduled work day.

Sergeants who are scheduled to work at least 1040 hours per year shall be
provided holiday pay or paid time off on an alternative day during the pay period
for holidays on a prorated basis. The prorated basis shall be calculated based on
the position’s number of budgeted hours.

The Police Chief has the discretion of requiring Sergeants to return to a regular
work schedule of five (5) eight (8) hour days for the week in which a holiday
occurs if it does not affect the Sergeant’s established work period.

D. Compensation or paid time off when working a holiday.

))

2)

3)

When an observed holiday falls on a non-scheduled work day, Sergeants who are
called in or required to work on the observed holiday shall receive compensation
at one and one-half (1.5) times their rate of pay for each hour worked on a
holiday. In addition, Sergeants shall receive holiday pay equivalent to the
number of hours in their regularly scheduled work day, or paid time off
equivalent to the number of hours in their regularly scheduled work day on an
alternate day, during the pay period. Sergeants who are scheduled to work at
least 1040 hours per year and who a holiday shall be provided holiday pay or
paid time off on an alternative day during the pay period on a prorated basis. The
prorated basis shall be calculated based on the position’s number of budgeted
hours.

When an observed holiday falls on a scheduled work day, Sergeants that work on
the observed holiday shall receive holiday pay equivalent to the number of hours
in their regularly scheduled work day or paid time off equivalent to the number
of hours in their regularly scheduled work day on an alternative day during the
pay period.

When a Sergeant works on an observed holiday, the Police Chief has the
discretion to determine whether the Sergeant will receive holiday pay or paid
time off equivalent to the number of hours in their regularly scheduled work day
on an alternative day during the pay period.

26
E. Holiday Pay When Sergeant is on Leave or Separates from City Service

1) Sergeants shall receive no additional pay and shall not be charged with vacation
or sick leave time while on paid leave when a holiday occurs.

2) Sergeants must work or be on paid leave the last scheduled work day before the
holiday and the first scheduled work day after the holiday to be paid for the
holiday.

3) All Sergeants shall receive payment for holiday work on the payroll immediately
following the conclusion of the pay period in which the work was performed.

Section 5 - 6: Sick Leave

A. A full-time work schedule consists of fifty-two (52) weeks a year and eighty (80) hours
of work during the pay period.

B. Every full-time Sergeant who works a full-time schedule fifty-two (52) weeks per year
shall be credited 3.7 hours of sick leave accrual for each completed pay period. Sick
leave shall accrue with no maximum.

C. Leaves of absence compensated under Worker’s Compensation statutes shall be
considered as paid service if the absence is for no longer than one (1) year and sick leave
credits shall continue to accrue.

D. Sergeants who have accrued 1,000 hours or more of accrued and unused sick leave and
who have attained a minimum of seventeen (17) years of City service may elect to have
the additional sick leave that he/she earns to be paid to them as salary on a bi-weekly
basis for the upcoming three (3) consecutive years. Once the Sergeant elects to exercise
this benefit, it must continue for the full three (3) consecutive year period. A unit
member may draw down the current 1,000 hour balance.

 

E. The City Manager may establish policies for the conversion of a portion of employee’s
sick leave balances to either vacation credits or provide for cash payment, as appropriate.

Section 5 - 6A: Payment of Sick Leave at Retirement or Death

A. A Sergeant who has met the requirements for retirement from the City and retires shall
receive compensation for sick leave in accordance with the following schedule.
Payment will be made at the hourly base rate at time of retirement after verification that
the Sergeant has submitted a retirement application with the appropriate retirement
system agency.

B. At retirement the Sergeant will have deposited into his/her Retirement Health Saving
Account 50% of his/her unused sick leave calculated at their current hourly rate at the
time of retirement.

C. The beneficiaries of a Sergeant who dies prior to retirement shall receive compensation
for the Sergeant's accrued sick leave at the rate of fifty percent (50%) of the accrued sick

27
leave hours at the Sergeant’s current base rate and shall receive compensation for Years
of Service Pay as established by the City Manager for each twelve (12) month year of
City of Chandler Service prorated for any partial year.

D. The beneficiaries of a Sergeant who dies in the line of duty shall receive compensation
for all accrued sick leave at the rate of one hundred percent (100%) of the accrued sick
leave hours at the Sergeant’s current base rate and shall receive compensation for Years
of Service Pay as established by the City Manager for each twelve (12) month year of
City of Chandler service prorated for any partial year.

E. During the terms of this Memorandum, the City will continue its Citywide Retirement
Health Savings Plan (RHSP) for all regular, benefited employees with a contribution of
$800 for every year of City service paid into retiring employee’s RHSP account
provided they have five (5) or more years of service with the City.

Section 5 —7: Training/Tuition Reimbursement
A. Responsibility for Training
1) The City Council encourages the training and education of Sergeants. The
Human Resources Director shall assume responsibility for developing citywide
training programs for Sergeants. The Police Chief may establish department-
specific training programs.

B. Credit for Special Training

1) Participation in, and successful completion of, special job related training courses
may be considered in advancements and promotions.

C. Reimbursement for Formal Training

1) Fiscal conditions permitting, the City will assist Sergeants in their pursuit of
additional formal education from an institution in areas related to a City career
field. A policy and procedure shall be established by which tuition
reimbursement will be administered and which will reimburse Sergeants.

2) Procedures shall be established to repay the City the tuition fees upon separation
from City service within twelve (12) months of completion of the course.

D. Seminars/Workshops Training Programs
1) As fiscal conditions permit, the City supports Sergeants’ attendance in seminars
and workshop training programs as a part of their regular duties with the
approval of the Police Chief.
2) The City shall pay all fees for such programs and the Sergeant shall be provided

transportation under the administrative regulation established by Personnel Rule
4, Section 2.

28
3) If a Sergeant separates from City service within twelve (12) months of
completion of the workshop or seminar, the Sergeant may be required to
reimburse the City for the costs of those workshops or seminars that are primarily
designed to enhance s Sergeant’s career. A Sergeant normally will not be
required to reimburse the City for workshops or seminars that they are directed to
attend.

Section 5 - 8: Out-Of-State Vacation Recall

When a Sergeant is temporarily recalled to duty from out-of-state while on an authorized vacation
by order of the Police Chief, he shall be reimbursed for necessary and provable transportation
expenses as determined by the Police Chief.

Section 5 - 9: Uniform, Clothing, and Equipment

A. The Sergeant will continue to receive uniforms and $100 allowance paid the 1“ pay period of
the fiscal year and equipment through the Chandler Police Department Quartermaster system, as
outlined in General Orders.

1) The Department shall replace those items as they, in the judgment of the Department,
become unserviceable to wear or damaged in the course and scope of official duties
through the Quartermaster.

B. A Sergeant, who is required to wear civilian attire during the performance of his/her duties, will
receive a fiscal year uniform allowance of twelve hundred dollars ($1,200) in accordance with
Chandler Police Department General Orders. This payment will be made through the payroll
system. This payment will be made through the payroll system on a pro-rated bi-weekly basis.
In FY 14/15, the uniform allowance for those required to wear civilian attire will increase to
thirteen hundred dollars ($1,300).

ARTICLE 6: MISCELLANEOUS
Section 6 — 1: Saving Clause

A. If any Article or Section of this Memorandum should be held invalid by operation of law or by
final judgment of any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or if compliance with or enforcement
of any Article or Section should be restrained by such tribunal, the remainder of this
Memorandum shall not be affected thereby; and upon issuance of such final decree, the parties,
upon request of either of them, shall meet and confer and endeavor to agree on a substitution
provision or that such a substitute provision is not included.

 

B. It is recognized by the parties that this Memorandum shall be administered in compliance with
appropriate provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act as may be amended; consistent with the
provisions of this Memorandum and current overtime policies of the City of Chandler.

29
Section 6 — 2: Copies of Memorandum

Within sixty (60) days of the date that this Memorandum is adopted by the City Council, the
Association, will arrange for printing of jointly approved copies of it for furnishing one to every
Sergeant, supervisor and to management personnel. The cost of such duplication and distribution
will be paid for equally by the Association and the City.

Section 6 - 3: Seniority

A. The City shall provide the Association with a list of Sergeants showing each Sergeant’s City
employment date and badge number.

B. Seniority shall be by badge number.

C. Seniority shall be used as a factor consistent with established Merit System rules and current
practice in choice of work assignments, vacation schedules and in the determination of layoffs.

D. Should a Sergeant opening on a traditional patrol team become available due to promotion,
specialty movement, retirement, or any other cause; Sergeants may submit a memo to be placed
into that vacancy. This option is available by seniority and limited to two potential total
movements thus not including the placement of the newly promoted Sergeant. A Sergeant may
utilize this option only once during a shift cycle and no movement will occur after September
30th. If a Sergeant requests a hardship transfer, and it is approved by the Chief of Police, the
hardship transfer shall take precedence over any requests submitted by Sergeants to be placed in
the available vacancy according to seniority.

Section 6 - 4: Limited Duty Status

A Sergeant, who is injured on the job, may be assigned limited duty status by the employer. Such
assignment may be made without regard to the Sergeant’s normal assignment and shall be made
within the Police Department.

Section 6 - 5: Changes in Departmental General Orders Pursuant to this Memorandum

A. Within (90) days from the date this Memorandum is adopted by the City Council, the
Department shall print copies of those Department General Orders and Operations Orders
reflecting changes pursuant to this Memorandum. Copies of such changes shall be available to
each Sergeant on or about August | of each Memorandum year or as soon thereafter as possible.
Prior to the printing of the described changes, the Police Chief or his/her representative shall
review such changes with a representative of the Association to insure that such changes are
consistent with the specific express terms of the Memorandum.

B. During the preparation of changes to the Department’s General Orders, drafts of the proposed
changes will be staffed out to the Association.

Section 6 — 6: Term and Effect of Memorandum

A. The Memorandum shall remain in full force and effect the beginning of the 1 pay period in
July 2013 through June 30, 2015 unless a specific provision of the MOU provides otherwise and

30
thereafter shall continue in effect year-by-year unless one (1) of the parties notifies the other in
writing no later than November 1, 2014 of its request(s) to modify or terminate it.

. Except as expressly provided in this Memorandum, the City shall not be required to meet and
confer concerning any matter, whether covered or not covered herein, during the term or
extensions thereof.

. The lawful provisions of this Memorandum are binding upon the parties for the term thereof.
The Association having had an opportunity to raise all matters in connection with the meet and
confer proceedings resulting in this Memorandum is precluded from initiating any further
meeting and conferring for the term thereof relative to matters under the control of the City
Council or the City Manager.

. This Memorandum constitutes the total and entire agreement between the parties and no verbal
statement shall supersede any of its provisions.

. The City’s rules and regulations, administrative directives, departmental rules and regulations,

and work place practices shall govern employee relations unless there is a specific conflict with

a memorandum of understanding approved by the City Council pursuant to the Meet and Confer

Ordinance. Where a specific conflict exists, the Memorandum of Understanding shall govern.

A memorandum of understanding cannot contradict the Meet and Confer Ordinance.

31
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have hereunto subscribed their names this

day of.

City of Chandler

By:
Mayor

Attest:
City Clerk

Approved to form:

City Attorney

, 2013.

32

Association Representative

By:
Keith Benjamin

(SEAL)

ATTEST:
