ition caused by an accidental means which results in traumatic
damage to the COVERED PERSON’S body from an external force that is unexpected at the time, but
which occurrence was definite as to time and place. Normal and routine human movements and activities
shall not be considered accidents, even though unexpected physiological injury or damage may occur as a
result thereof. (Such as bending, stooping or lifting resulting in disc injury; or yawning that damages the
temporomandibular joint).

"ACTIVELY AT WORK" means the active expenditure of time and energy in the service of the
EMPLOYER, except that an EMPLOYEE shall be deemed actively at work on each day of a regular paid
vacation or on a regular non-working day, provided he was actively at work on the last preceding regular
working day.

"ALLOWABLE EXPENSE" relates to coordination of benefits, under Chapter 13 of this PLAN
DOCUMENT. Allowable expenses shall mean any necessary usual, customary and reasonable expenses
incurred while eligible for benefits under the PLAN, part or all of which would be covered under any of
the plans, but not including any expenses contained in the Exclusions chapter.

"AMBULATORY SURGICAL CENTER" means a specialized facility which is established, equipped,
operated and staffed primarily for the purpose of performing surgical procedures on an outpatient basis
and which fully meets one of the following two tests:

(a) It is licensed as an ambulatory surgical facility in the state in which it is located; or

(b) Where licensing is not required:

f. it is operated under the full-time supervision of a PHYSICIAN;

2. it permits surgical procedures to be performed only by PHYSICIANS who are
privileged to perform the procedure in at least one local HOSPITAL;

a it requires in all cases, except for those using only local infiltration anesthetics,
that a licensed anesthesiologist either administers the anesthetic or supervises an
anesthetist who administers it and that the anesthesiologist or anesthetist remains
present throughout the surgical procedure;

11
4. it provides at least one operating room and at least one post-anesthesia recovery
room;

5. it is equipped to perform diagnostic x-ray and laboratory examinations or has an
arrangement to obtain these services;

6. it has trained personnel and necessary equipment to handle emergencies;
he it has immediate access to a blood bank or blood supplies;
8. it provides the full-time services of one or more registered graduate nurses (R.N.)

for patient care in the operating room and post-anesthesia recovery room; and

9. it maintains an adequate medical record for each patient that contains an
admitting diagnosis that includes, except for patients undergoing a procedure
under local anesthesia, a preoperative examination report, medical history and
laboratory tests and/or x-rays, and operative report and discharge summary.

"ANNUAL MAXIMUM OUT OF POCKET" is the sum of all member cost sharing expenses including
deductibles, co-pays and COINSURANCE under the PLAN DOCUMENT, It does not include any
applicable monthly employee contributions. When the annual out of pocket is reached (which can be for
an individual or a family, cumulative) covered expenses incurred during that plan year will be paid at
100%.

Out of Pocket does not include:

* Charges beyond usual & customary fees;

* Penalties resulting from non-compliance with pre-certification;
* Charges not covered under the PLAN.

"BODY ORGAN" means the following (a) a kidney; (b) a heart; (c) a heart/lung; (d) a liver, (e) a
pancreas, when the condition is not treatable by use of insulin therapy; (f) bone marrow; and (g) a cornea.

"CALENDAR YEAR" a period of 12 consecutive months beginning with January 1 through December
31 of the same year. For new EMPLOYEES and dependents, the CALENDAR YEAR is the
EFFECTIVE DATE of their coverage through December 31 of the same year.

"CITY" means the City of San Antonio.

"CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR" means the Third Party Administrator or any CITY EMPLOYEE or
office designated to process claims under the PLAN DOCUMENT.

"COINSURANCE" is the COVERED PERSON'S obligation to pay a percentage of the costs of care in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this PLAN DOCUMENT. For example, if this plan provides
for payment of 80% of eligible medical expense, the remaining 20% is the EMPLOYEE'S obligation, and
is referred to as "coinsurance." If the plan provides for out of network payment of 60% of eligible
medical expense, the remaining 40% EMPLOYEE obligation is referred to as “coinsurance.” If the plan
provides for an in-network prescription payment of 80%, the remaining 20% is the employee's obligation
and is referred to as “co-insurance

"COMPLICATIONS OF PREGNANCY" means:

(a) conditions requiring HOSPITAL confinement (when the pregnancy is not terminated)
whose diagnoses are distinct from pregnancy but are adversely affected by pregnancy or
caused by pregnancy, such as: acute nephritis; nephrosis; cardiac decompensation;
missed abortion; and similar medical and surgical conditions of comparable severity; or

(b) non-elective caesarean section; ectopic pregnancy which is terminated; or spontaneous
termination of pregnancy which occurs during a period of gestation in which a viable
birth is not possible.

"Complications of pregnancy" does not mean: false labor; occasional spotting; physician
prescribed rest during pregnancy; morning sickness; hyperemesis gravidarum; preeclampsia; or similar
conditions associated with the management of a difficult pregnancy not constituting a nosologically
distinct complication of pregnancy.

“COPAYMENT OR CO-PAY” is the fixed dollar amount (or, in some cases, a percentage) that you
must pay to a health care provider in order to receive a specific service or benefit covered under this Plan.

"COSMETIC PROCEDURES" mean any surgical procedure or any portion of a surgical procedure
performed primarily to improve physical appearance and does not promote the proper function of the
body or treat any illness or injury.

"COVERED PERSON" means an eligible EMPLOYEE, retiree, official or eligible Dependent covered
under this Plan.

"COVERED PROVIDER" means an AMBULATORY SURGICAL CENTER, a HOME HEALTH
CARE AGENCY, a licensed HOSPICE care center, a HOSPITAL, a PHYSICIAN, a SURGEON, a
PSYCHIATRIC DAY TREATMENT FACILITY, a REHABILITATION FACILITY and a SKILLED
NURSING FACILITY, or other licensed clinician approved by the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR.

"CUSTODIAL CARE" means that type of care or service, wherever furnished and by whatever name
called, which is designated primarily to assist a COVERED PERSON, whether or not totally disabled, in
the activities of daily living. Such activities include, but are not limited to: bathing, dressing, feeding,
preparation of special diets, assistance in walking or in getting in or out of bed, and supervision over
medication which can normally be self-administered.

"DEDUCTIBLE" means the amount of Covered Medical Expenses a COVERED PERSON must incur
and pay each CALENDAR YEAR before benefits are payable under the PLAN.

"FAMILY DEDUCTIBLE LIMIT" means that, once the sum of the family deductible has been satisfied
by the cumulative Covered Medical Expenses of the eligible EMPLOYEE and one (1) or more of his
eligible dependents in a CALENDAR YEAR, no further deductible need be satisfied in that CALENDAR
YEAR for any other eligible member of the family.

13
"DENTIST" means a currently licensed dentist practicing within the scope of the license or any
PHYSICIAN furnishing dental services which the PHYSICIAN is licensed to perform.

“DIABETES EQUIPMENT" means the following:

blood glucose monitors, including monitors designed to be used by blind individuals;
insulin pumps and associated appurtenances;

insulin infusion devices; and c

podiatric appliances for the prevention of complications associated with diabetes.

aoe

“DIABETES SUPPLIES” means the following:

test strips for blood glucose monitors;

visual reading and urine test strips;

lancets and lancet devices;

insulin and insulin analogs;

injection aids; syringes;

prescriptive and non-prescriptive oral agents for controlling blood sugar levels; and
glucagon emergency kits.

mmoeaoege

"DONOR" means a person who undergoes a surgical operation for the purpose of donating a BODY
ORGAN(s) for TRANSPLANT SURGERY.

"DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT" means equipment prescribed by the attending PHYSICIAN
which meets each of the following: a) MEDICALLY NECESSARY; }) is not primarily or customarily
used for non-medical purposes; c) is designated for prolonged use; and d) serves a specific therapeutic
purpose in the treatment of any injury or illness.

“EFFECTIVE DATE”, when applied to an individual’s coverage under the PLAN, means the first day
of the individual’s coverage. The individual’s effective date may or may not be the same as the
individual's enrollment date (as “enrollment date” is defined by the PLAN).

"ELIGIBLE EXPENSE" is any expense, which is eligible for payment, in whole or in part under this
PLAN DOCUMENT.

“EMERGENCY SERVICES” Emergency Services are health care services provided in a Hospital
emergency facility or comparable facility to evaluate and stabilize medical conditions, including a
behavioral health condition, of a recent onset and severity including, but not limited to, severe pain that
would lead a prudent lay person, possessing an average knowledge of medicine and health to believe that
his or her condition, Illness, or Injury is of such a nature that failure to get immediate medical care could
result in:

1. placing his or her health in serious jeopardy;
2; serious impairment to bodily functions;
LE serious dysfunction of any BODY ORGAN or part;
4. serious disfigurement; or

3: in the case of a pregnant woman, serious jeopardy to the health of the fetus.

This definition is only for purposes of determining whether out of network emergency services will be
paid at in-network benefit levels.

"EMPLOYEE" means a person who is directly employed by the City of San Antonio and is regularly
scheduled for a full shift or schedule in like manner as other similarly situated workers in the department
or division. "Employee" shall also include employees on Worker's Compensation, Disability, or Non-
Paid status.

"EMPLOYER" means the City of San Antonio.

“FLEXIBLE SPENDING ACCOUNT (FSA)” means a tax favored account that allows employees to
be reimbursed for qualified medical expenses. FSAs are funded through voluntary salary reduction
agreements with the employer. No employment or federal income taxes are deducted from the
contribution. The employee must be an eligible individual to qualify for an FSA.

“HEALTH SAVINGS ACCOUNTS (HSA)” means a tax-exempt trust or custodial account set up with
a qualified HSA trustee to pay or reimburse certain medical expenses. The employee must be an eligible
individual to qualify for an HSA. Two eligible Police employees married to each other may each receive
the employer contribution to an HSA.

"HOME HEALTH CARE AGENCY" means an agency or organization which meets all of the
following requirements:

ql) It is licensed and primarily engaged in providing skilled nursing care and other
therapeutic services;

(2) It has policies established by a professional group associated with the agency or
organization and includes at least one physician and one registered graduate nurse (R.N.)
who provide full time supervision of such services;

(3) It maintains complete medical records on each individual;

(4) It has a full time administrator.

“HOSPICE” means an agency which:

a. is primarily engaged in providing counseling, medical services or room and board to
terminally ill persons;
b. has professional service policies established by a group associated with it. This group

must include one (1) PHYSICIAN, one (1) Registered Nurse (RN) and one (1) social
service coordinator;

c. has full-time supervision by a PHYSICIAN;

d. has a full-time Administrator;

15
provides services 24 hours a day, seven (7) days a week;
maintains a complete medical record of each patient; and
is licensed in accordance with state law.

"HOSPITAL" means only an institution constituted and operated pursuant to any applicable law,
engaged in providing, on an inpatient basis at the patient's expense, diagnostic and therapeutic facilities
for the surgical and medical diagnosis, treatment, and care of injured and sick individuals by or under the
supervision of a licensed PHYSICIAN or SURGEON and continuously providing 24-hour-a-day services
by registered nurses. The term "hospital" shall not include any institution or part thereof which is other
than incidentally a place for rest, a residential treatment center, or a nursing home or convalescent

hospital.

"INTENSIVE CARE UNIT OR CARDIAC CARE UNIT" means a clearly designated service area
which is maintained within a hospital and which meets the following tests:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

It is solely for the treatment of patients who require special medical attention because of
their critical condition;

It provides within such area special nursing care and observation of a continuous and
constant nature not available in the regular rooms and wards of the HOSPITAL;

It provides a concentration of special lifesaving equipment immediately available at all
times for the treatment of patients confined within such area; and

It provides at least one professional registered nurse who continuously and constantly
attends to the patient confined in such area on a twenty-four (24) hour a day basis; or

An alternate hospital that is approved by the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR, as long as the

cost of care does not exceed the cost of care at a HOSPITAL that substantially meets

subparagraphs (a) through (d) above, in accordance with one or more of the following

criteria:

(i) to facilitate provision of medical services by a particular PHYSICIAN;

(ii) the COVERED PERSON'S physician certifies in writing to the PLAN
ADMINISTRATOR before services are rendered that the hospital is equipped to
provide needed intensive or cardiac care;

(iii) proximity of the COVERED PERSON'S immediate family members;

(iv) the medical condition of the COVERED PERSON indicates that it would be
inadvisable to transfer to another hospital.

"LIFETIME MAXIMUM" is the cumulative maximum amount payable during the lifetime of the
COVERED PERSON, during periods of eligibility, as set forth in the Schedule of Benefits.

16
"MASTER CONTRACT" means and refers to this PLAN DOCUMENT, which sets forth the provisions
of universal applicability to the CITY'S various health benefit plans.

"MEDICALLY NECESSARY" means any care, treatment, service or supply provided for the diagnosis
and treatment of a specific illness, injury or condition which meets all of the following.

(a) The care and treatment is appropriate given the symptoms, and is consistent with the
diagnosis, if any. "Appropriate" means that the type, level, and length of service and the
setting are needed to provide safe and adequate care and treatment;

(b) It is rendered in accordance with generally accepted medical practice and professionally
recognized standards in the United States medical community;

(c) It is not treatment that is generally regarded as experimental, educational or unproven;
and

(d) It is specifically allowed by the licensing statutes that apply to the provider that renders
the service.

With respect to confinement in a HOSPITAL, "MEDICALLY NECESSARY" further means that the
medical condition requires confinement and that safe and effective treatment cannot be provided as an
outpatient.

The CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR may require satisfactory proof in writing, that any type of treatment,
service or supply received is MEDICALLY NECESSARY. The CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR may also
specifically require the prescribing physician or consulting board or committee of any facility to provide a
written analysis of the necessity and acceptability of the methods, process or procedure under this
paragraph, taking into account the criteria set forth above. The fact that a physician may prescribe, order,
recommend or approve care, treatment, service or supply does not, in itself, make them MEDICALLY
NECESSARY.
Medical necessity specifically does not include any:

(a) Repeated test which would not be necessary if initially done correctly, or is not necessary
at current intervals;

(b) Care, treatment, service or supply which is for the psychological support, education or
vocational training of the COVERED PERSON;

Criteria used in determining that a procedure is experimental includes:
(a) Whether there is an appropriate rationale for the treatment;
(b) Whether there is evidence that the treatment is effective;

(c) Whether there is evidence that the treatment is harmful;

(d) Whether the benefits justify the immediate and delayed risks of treatment;
 

 

(e) Whether the treatment has been endorsed or approved by the appropriate medical
authorities, such as the FDA, the AMA or other medical specialty societies or specialists
or whether the treatment is covered by Medicare or other public programs;

(p) Whether the device or treatment is the subject of ongoing investigation or research;
(g) Whether the treatment is legal;

(h) Whether controlled medical trials have been carried out that demonstrate the treatment's
efficacy.

"NEWBORN CARE" charges for the routine care of a newborn child, while HOSPITAL confined, are
covered by the PLAN on the same basis as an illness of such newborm child. Such charges will be
considered separate from the mother's charges and subject to the DEDUCTIBLE and the applicable
benefit percentage payable as shown in the Schedule of Benefits. All such newborn coverage shall
include circumcision. Well baby care is covered for three days after birth, before an individual dependent
DEDUCTIBLE is applicable to the newborn.

"OTHER COVERAGE" means any other contract or policy under which the COVERED PERSON is
enrolled, such as:

* Group or blanket insurance;

* Group plans, other employer plans, individual plans offered on a group basis, or other group
prepayment coverage;

* Labor management trusteed plans, union welfare plans, employee organization plans, or
employee benefit organization plans;

* Government programs, such as Medicare, or coverage required or provided by statute;
* Any group coverage of a child sponsored by, or provided through, any educational institution;
* Group arrangements for members of associations or individuals.

"OTHER COVERED PROVIDER" means a certified social worker (CSW) licensed professional
counselor (LPC), licensed occupational therapist (LOT), certified nurse midwife, licensed speech
therapist, licensed physical therapist, registered nurse, licensed vocational nurse, or licensed practical
nurse.

"PHYSICIAN OR SURGEON" means any professional practitioner who holds a lawful license
authorizing the person to practice medicine or surgery in the locale in which the service is rendered,
limited to a Doctor of Medicine (M.D.), a Doctor of Osteopathy (D.O.), a Doctor of Podiatric Medicine
(D.P.M.), a Doctor of Dental Surgery (D.D.S.), a Doctor of Chiropractic (D.C.), a Clinical Psychologist
(Ph.D), who has met the standards of the National Register of Health Service Providers in Psychology.

"PLAN" whenever used herein without qualification means this PLAN DOCUMENT.
"PLAN ADMINISTRATOR" means the City of San Antonio's designated Employee Benefits
Administrator.

"PLAN DOCUMENT" means this Master Contract and Attachment 5, which collectively provides and
defines coverage for particular EMPLOYEES and dependents.

"PLAN SPONSOR" means the City of San Antonio.

"PLAN SUMMARY" is the information provided to City EMPLOYEES concerning coverage and
benefits to assist in understanding and using available benefits. THE PLAN SUMMARY DOES NOT
DEFINE COVERAGE, WHICH IS THE SOLE PURPOSE OF THE MASTER CONTRACT. ANY
STATEMENT ABOUT COVERAGE IN THE SUMMARY IS A GENERAL INTERPRETATION
ONLY, AND IS NOT MADE FOR SPECIFIC APPLICATION TO ANY COVERED PERSON,
ILLNESS, OR EXPENSE.

"POLICE OFFICER" means any full time, permanent, paid EMPLOYEE who:
(a) Is employed by the City's Police Department;

(b) Has been hired in substantial compliance with Chapter 143 of the Local Government
Code;

(c) Has successfully completed the Police Academy; and
(d) Has received his or her certificate from the Police Chief.

"POST DELIVERY CARE” means postpartum health care services provided in accordance with
accepted maternal and neonatal physical assessments. Post Delivery Care includes parent education,
assistance and training in breast-feeding and bottle-feeding, including use of a Certified Lactation
Consultant, and the performance of any necessary and appropriate clinical tests.

"PRINCIPALLY DEPENDENT" shall have the meaning defined in Sections 151 and 152 of the
Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder.

"PSYCHIATRIC DAY TREATMENT FACILITY" means an institution which meets all of the
following requirements:

(a) It is a mental health facility which: provides treatment for individuals suffering from
acute mental, nervous or emotional disorders, in a structured psychiatric program
utilizing individualized treatment plans with specific attainable goals and objectives
appropriate both to the patient and the treatment modality of the program; and is
clinically supervised by a doctor of medicine who is certified in psychiatry by the
American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology.

(b) It is accredited by the Program for Psychiatric Facilities or its successor, or the Joint
Commission on Accreditation of HOSPITAL; and

(c) Its patients are treated for not more than eight (8) hours in any twenty-four (24) hour
period.

19
"QUALIFIED INSURED” means an individual eligible for coverage under the PLAN who has been
diagnosed with:

a. insulin dependent or non-insulin dependent diabetes;
b. elevated blood glucose levels induced by pregnancy; or
c. another medical condition associated with elevated blood glucose levels.

"RECIPIENT" means an insured person who undergoes a surgical operation to receive a BODY
ORGAN transplant.

"REHABILITATION FACILITY" means a facility that provides services of acute rehabilitation. All
services are provided under the direction of a PHYSICIAN with a specialty in rehabilitation and physical
medicine. The facility is staffed around the clock by registered nurses and it does not provide services of
a custodial nature. The facility must be Medicare certified, licensed by the State Department of Health as
a "special hospital" and accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations. It is also accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities.
"SKILLED NURSING FACILITY" means a legally operated institution, or a distinct part of an
institution, primarily engaged in providing skilled nursing care to patients recovering from injury or
illness and which:

(a) Is under the resident supervision of a PHYSICIAN or registered nurse (R.N.);

(b) Provides continuous skilled nursing care for 24 hours of every day;

(c) Requires that the health care of every patient be under the supervision of a PHYSICIAN;

(d) Provides that a PHYSICIAN be available at all times to furnish necessary medical care in
emergencies;

(e) Maintains clinical records for each patient;
(f Has an effective utilization review plan;
(g) Has a transfer agreement with at least one (1) HOSPITAL;

(h) Is not, other than incidentally, a clinic, a place devoted to care of the aged or a place for
treatment of mental disorders or mental retardation;

(i) Is not a place for CUSTODIAL CARE.

“TEMPORARY MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT" means any non-organic device used in conjunction
with the RECIPIENT's own BODY ORGAN for the purpose of sustaining a bodily function for which a
transplant has been deemed necessary by the attending physician.

"TRANSPLANT SURGERY" means the transfer of BODY ORGAN(s) from a DONOR to a
RECIPIENT.

20
"USUAL & CUSTOMARY CHARGE" means charges for MEDICALLY NECESSARY services and
supplies which would usually be provided for cases the same as or similar to the one being treated. The
Usual and Customary charge is limited to the lesser of:

(a)
(b)

The fee usually charged by the provider for similar services and supplies; and

The fee usually charged for the same service or supply by other providers who are in the
same area. "Area" means a geographical area as determined by the CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR to be significant enough to establish a representative base of charge
for the treatment. The determination of the "usual and customary" charges by the
CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR shall be based on standard profiles and statistical sampling
methods accepted in the benefits industry. Usual and customary shall be based on the
85th percentile and updated on a semi-annual basis. All charges above or beyond the
"usual and customary" charges so determined are the financial responsibility of the
COVERED PERSON. Upon request, the CITY will furnish information or assistance to
a COVERED PERSON to enable them to contest excessive charges, in accordance with
the policy of the Employee Benefits Office in effect at the time of the request.

21
CHAPTER 5 COVERED MEDICAL EXPENSES

Covered Medical Expenses shall be the portion, set forth in the Schedule of Benefits, of the usual and
customary charges for the following services, supplies, and treatment when MEDICALLY NECESSARY
and when ordered by a licensed PHYSICIAN or SURGEON. Medical expenses exceeding usual and
customary expenses covered by this PLAN will be the obligation of the COVERED PERSON.

1.

2

Daily semi-private room charge in a HOSPITAL or REHABILITATION FACILITY.
Services and supplies furnished by a HOSPITAL.

Treatment by a PHYSICIAN or SURGEON.

Treatment by any OTHER COVERED PROVIDER not related by blood or marriage.
Anesthesia and its administration.

"Surgery in mouth or oral cavity" is limited to:

(a) removal of non-odontogenic lesions, tumors or cysts;

(b) incision and drainage of non-odontogenic cellulitis;

(c) surgery on accessory sinuses, salivary glands and ducts and tongue;

(d) surgical treatment of fractures and dislocation of the jaw resulting from an
ACCIDENTAL INJURY.

Diagnostic radiology, radiation therapy and laboratory examinations.

Ambulance charges to or from the nearest medically appropriate HOSPITAL by an ambulance
service operated in accordance with State law.

Medical supplies and equipment as follows:

(a) drugs and medicines which can be obtained only by numbered prescription for the
specified illness or injury for which the patient is being treated;

(b) birth control pills, injections and medication implants are covered for EMPLOYEES and
dependent spouses only. No other contraceptive methods or devices are covered;

(c) blood and blood plasma;

22
(d) charges for drawing and storing autologous blood;

(e) prosthetic appliances such as artificial limbs or eyes, not including their replacement
except when required due to growth or development of a dependent child. After a
covered mastectomy, breast implants or prostheses are also covered. Replacement of
breast prosthesis is covered only when original prosthesis was required due to a major
catastrophic illness or injury;

(f) crutches. The rental (but not to exceed the total cost of purchase) or, at the option of the
CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR, the purchase of DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT
when MEDICALLY NECESSARY and prescribed by a PHYSICIAN for therapeutic use,
including wheelchairs, hospital beds, oxygen and equipment for its administration
including IPPB (Intermittent Positive Pressure Breathing);

(g) medical supplies such as lancets, autolets, syringes, dextrowash and dextrostix, ostomy
supplies, casts, splints, trusses and braces;

(h) orthopedic shoes when prescribed by a PHYSICIAN.

Dental treatment for fractured jaw or for injury to sound natural teeth including replacement of
such teeth within six months after the date of accident, provided that such accident occurs while
the COVERED PERSON is on the PLAN.

Expenses incurred for maternity care and services shall be covered on the same basis as for any
other illness incurred by the COVERED PERSON or the dependent spouse. There is no coverage
for expenses for maternity care and services incurred by a dependent child except for
COMPLICATIONS OF PREGNANCY which shall be treated as any other illness.

The attending PHYSICIAN shall make the determination as to whether a delivery is complicated.

Under Federal law, group health plans generally may not restrict benefits for any HOSPITAL
length of stay in connection with childbirth for the mother or newborn child to less than 48 hours
following a vaginal delivery, or less than 96 hours following a cesarean section. The 48-hour
period (or 96-hour period if applicable) begins at the time a delivery occurs in the HOSPITAL (or
in the case of multiple births, at the time of the last delivery) or, if the delivery occurs outside the
HOSPITAL, at the time a mother and/or newborn are admitted. However, Federal law generally
does not prohibit the mother’s or newborn’s attending provider, after consulting with the mother,
from discharging the mother or her newborn earlier than 48 hours (or 96 hours if applicable)
following the delivery.

If a decision is made to discharge a mother or her newborn child from inpatient care before the
expiration of the minimum hours of coverage of inpatient care as provided above, the PLAN will
provide coverage for timely POST DELIVERY CARE as defined herein, Such care may be
provided to the mother and the child by a PHYSICIAN, registered nurse or other appropriate
licensed health care provider and may be provided at the mother's home, a health care provider’s
office, a health care facility or another location determined to be appropriate under rules adopted
by the Commissioner of Insurance.

23
12.

13.

14,

NEWBORN CARE.

Services of a licensed speech therapist are covered when therapy is rendered in accordance with
PHYSICIAN’s specific instructions as to type and duration when speech was present before the
illness and/or injury, and for a child born under the plan with developmental disorder or birth
defects.

Services of a licensed physical therapist are covered only for those services that require the
technical medical proficiency and skills of a licensed physical therapist and which are rendered in
accordance with a PHYSICIAN'S specific instructions as to type and duration.

Acupuncture or hypnosis when performed by a COVERED PROVIDER and in lieu of anesthesia.

Psychiatric Conditions — To be treated as any other illness/condition requiring care, as required
by the The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA).

Chemical dependency and substance abuse will be treated as any other illness.
Voluntary sterilization is covered.
Preventive services:

a. One routine pap smear (doctor's procedure charge, lab expenses and office visit) per
CALENDAR YEAR for female COVERED PERSONS;

b. One routine mammogram per CALENDAR YEAR for female COVERED PERSONS age
thirty-five (35) and over;

c. One (1) routine physical examination per CALENDAR YEAR for each _ eligible
EMPLOYEE and dependent.

1. If performed by the EMPLOYEE’S own PHYSICIAN, covered services will be limited
to a preventative medical examination, blood chemistry profile, thyroid function (TSH),
fecal occult blood, urinalysis, electrocardiogram, body fat measurement, health risk
appraisal, stress and personality profile, and nutritional analysis, subject to the
DEDUCTIBLE and COINSURANCE as stated herein.

2. If performed at the Occupational Health Clinic, the PLAN will cover a complete blood
count, cholesterol and glucose screening; blood pressure check; height and weight
evaluation; and a health assessment questionnaire at 100%.

d. A physical examination for the detection of prostate cancer and prostate-specific Antigen
test used for the detection of prostate cancer for each male enrolled in the PLAN who is;

1. at least 50 years of age and asymptomatic; or

2. at least 40 years of age with a family history of prostate cancer or another prostate cancer
risk factor.

24
20.

21.

22.

23.

Immunizations and Vaccines

(a) Gamma globulin injections and the following immunizations for Covered Dependents
from birth through the date the child is six (6) years of age shall be covered: (a) DTP, (b) polio
(OPV), (c) MMR, (d) meningitis (HIB); (e) hepatitis B (HBV); (f) TB tine; (g) varicella; and (h)
any other immunizations as required by Texas law. After age six (6), the aforementioned
immunizations will be covered only if the dependent was covered under this PLAN before
attaining age six (6). Expenses for all covered immunizations are covered at 100%, deductible
waived. Other services provided at the same time as the immunizations, including, but not
limited to, office visit charges, shall be subject to the DEDUCTIBLE and COINSURANCE.

(b) Synagis (Palivizumab) administration for the prevention of respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV) among high risk infants meeting prescribing criteria set forth by American Academy of
Pediatrics (AAP) will be covered at 100%, deductible waived, only if such treatment is
determined to be MEDICALLY NECESSARY and prior authorization obtained on or before
administration of the first injection.

Attention Deficit Disorder- To be treated as any other illness/condition requiring care, as required
by the The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA).

Occupational Therapy.

Diabetes. Coverage shall be provided to each QUALIFIED INSURED as defined herein for:
a. DIABETES EQUIPMENT;

b. DIABETES SUPPLIES; and

6: diabetes self-management training programs as defined herein.

Self-management training programs must be provided by a health care practitioner or provider who is
licensed, registered, or certified in Texas to provide appropriate health care services related to diabetes
education. Self-management training includes:

24.

a. training provided to a QUALIFIED INSURED after the initial diagnosis of diabetes in
the care and management of that condition, including nutritional counseling and proper
use of DIABETES EQUIPMENT and supplies;

b. additional training authorized by a PHYSICIAN or other health care practitioner of a
significant change in the QUALIFIED INSURED'S symptoms or condition that requires
changes in the QUALIFIED INSURED'S self-management regime; and

c. periodic or episodic continuing education training when prescribed by an appropriate
health care practitioner as warranted by the development of new techniques and
treatments for diabetes.

Temporomandibular Joint. MEDICALLY NECESSARY diagnostic or surgical treatment of
conditions affecting the temporomandibular joint (jaw and the craniomandibular joint) resulting
from one of the following shall be covered:

a. an accident;
b. a trauma;

25
c. a congenital defect;
d. a developmental defect; or
e. a pathology.

Such coverage is subject to the same Plan provisions as for any surgical treatment including, but not
limited to, the requirements for pre-certification of benefits.

2s

26.

27,

Mastectomy. Coverage for inpatient care for a COVERED PERSON is as follows:
a. 48 hours following a mastectomy; and
b. 24 hours following a lymph node dissection for the treatment of breast cancer.

For reconstruction of the breast on which a MEDICALLY NECESSARY mastectomy has been
performed; surgery and reconstruction of the other breast to produce a symmetrical appearance;
prostheses and treatment of physical complications for all stages of the mastectomy, including
lymphedemas are covered under this Plan.

If the COVERED PERSON and the COVERED PERSON's attending PHYSICIAN determine
that a shorter period of inpatient care is appropriate, the Plan is not required to provide the
minimum hours of coverage of inpatient care stated above.

Treatment for Mental and Nervous Conditions shall be covered the same as any other
illness/condition requiring care, as required by the The Mental Health Parity and Addiction
Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA).

HOSPICE Care. HOSPICE Care is an alternative to the Hospital Confinement of a terminally ill
person. HOSPICE Benefits are available for COVERED PERSONS with a life expectancy of six
(6) months or less provided the attending PHYSICIAN approves the program. Failure to pre-
certify will result in no benefit allowances. HOSPICE Care is subject to the DEDUCTIBLES and
COINSURANCE as provided in the applicable appendix for each class of CITY EMPLOYEE,
retiree, and official.

Eligible HOSPICE Charges are charges made by a HOSPICE for:

a. room and board;

b. private duty nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a Registered Nurse
(R.N.);

c. part-time or intermittent home health aide services which consist primarily of caring for
the patient by employees of the HOSPICE;

d. social work performed by a licensed social worker, routinely provided by the HOSPICE
agency;

e. nutritional services, including, special meals, if included in the per diem;

f. emotional support services routinely provided by the HOSPICE agency, if included in the
per diem;

g. bereavement counseling sessions for eligible dependents covered under the PLAN, if
included in the per diem; and

h. drugs and medication.

26
28. Organ Transplants. If covered expenses are incurred as a result of a BODY ORGAN transplant,
the PLAN will pay the applicable COINSURANCE percentage of the Covered Expenses, as
defined herein, after the DEDUCTIBLE is applied, subject to the LIFETIME MAXIMUM benefit
and the following conditions:

a.

b.

Benefits are available for BODY ORGAN transplantation, subject to determination made
on an individualized case by case basis in order to establish medical necessity;

Benefits will be provided only when the HOSPITAL and PHYSICIAN customarily
charge a transplant RECIPIENT for such care and services;

When only the transplant RECIPIENT is a COVERED PERSON, the benefits of the
PLAN will be provided for the DONOR to the extent that such benefits are not provided
under any other form of coverage. In no such case under the PLAN will any payment of
a "personal service" fee be made to any DONOR. Only the necessary HOSPITAL and
PHYSICIAN’S medical care and services expenses with respect to the DONOR will be
considered for benefits;

When only the DONOR is a COVERED PERSON, the DONOR will receive benefits for
care and services necessary to the extent such benefits are not provided under any
coverage available to the RECIPIENT. Benefits will not be provided to any RECIPIENT
who is not a COVERED PERSON; and

When the RECIPIENT and the DONOR are both COVERED PERSONS, as provided
herein, benefits will be provided for both in accordance with their respective Covered
Expenses.

If the RECIPIENT is the COVERED PERSON and/or pursuant to the conditions set forth above, the
following coverage shall be provided:

a.

saas

The use of TEMPORARY MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT, pending the acquisition of
"matched" BODY ORGAN(s);

TRANSPLANT SURGERY of a BODY ORGAN(s) as defined herein;

Multiple transplant(s) during one (1) operative session;

Replacement(s) or subsequent transplant(s); and

Follow-up expenses for covered services, including immunosuppressant therapy.

If the DONOR is a COVERED PERSON and pursuant to the conditions set forth above, the following
coverage shall be provided:

a.
b.
c.

The acquisition of a BODY ORGAN(s) from the DONOR;

The life support of a DONOR pending the removal of a usable BODY ORGAN(s); and
Transportation of a BODY ORGAN(s). However, transportation of a BODY ORGAN(s)
shall not include transportation of a living DONOR and/or a DONOR on life support.

27
CHAPTER 6 LIMITATIONS

Benefit limitations apply to the following conditions and services:
1. Abortions

Abortions will be covered when the attending PHYSICIAN certifies that the mother's life would be
endangered if the fetus were carried to term.

2. Cosmetic Procedure

Elective procedure performed solely to improve appearance is not covered. Nor are the complications
that may arise from or are the direct result of such procedure covered. A procedure utilized as treatment
of neurosis, psychoneurosis, psychopathy, psychosis, and other mental, nervous and emotional illness will
be covered as any other illness/condition requiring care, as required by the The Mental Health Parity and
Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA). Additionally, expenses incurred for a cosmetic procedure for
the prompt repair or alleviation of damage caused solely by accidental bodily injury, or congenital defects
of children, or for the correction of a congenital anomaly in a newborn child, or for the reconstruction of
the breast on which a MEDICALLY NECESSARY mastectomy has been performed; surgery and
reconstruction of the other breast to produce a symmetrical appearance; prostheses and treatment of
physical complications for all stages of the mastectomy, including lymphedemas are covered under this
PLAN.

3, Treatment in Mouth or Oral Cavity

The care and treatment of the teeth, gums or alveolar process or for dentures, appliances or supplies used
in such care and treatment is not covered, except for charges incurred as a result of and within six months
after an accident suffered while covered hereunder for treatment of injuries to sound, natural teeth,
including replacement of such teeth, or for setting of a jaw fractured or dislocated in such accident;
provided, however, that this exclusion shall not be applicable to services and supplies rendered to a
newborn child which are necessary for treatment or correction of a congenital defect.

4. Maternity for Dependents

Maternity care and services rendered to a dependent child are limited to treatment of COMPLICATIONS
OF PREGNANCY.

5. Mental and Nervous Conditions - shall be covered the same as any other

illness/condition requiring care, as required by The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of
2008 (MHPAEA).

28
Expenses for treatment in a psychiatric day treatment facility for a mental, nervous or emotional disorder,
if the attending physician certifies that such treatment is in lieu of hospitalization, will be covered as if
incurred on an inpatient basis. Any benefits so provided shall be determined as if necessary care and
treatment in a psychiatric day treatment facility were inpatient care and treatment in a hospital; each full
day or treatment in a psychiatric day treatment facility shall be considered equal to one-half day of
hospital confinement for purposes of determining benefits and benefit maximums under the PLAN.

6. Private Room Limit
When private room accommodations have been used, charges will be reimbursed at the average semi-

private room rate in the facility. If a HOSPITAL has private rooms available only, then the maximum
eligible charge will be based on the usual and customary semi-private room charge in the community.

29
CHAPTER 7 EXCLUSIONS

Unless mandated by provisions of the Affordable Care Act, no coverage is provided under the PLAN for
services and supplies:

IT: For which the patient or EMPLOYEE has no legal obligation to pay, or for which no charge
would be made if the EMPLOYEE had no health coverage.

2. Any treatment or service rendered by a COVERED PROVIDER related by blood or marriage.

a Not MEDICALLY NECESSARY for the diagnosis and treatment of an illness or injury or which
exceed the USUAL AND CUSTOMARY CHARGES.

4, For intentionally self-inflicted injury, whether sane or insane.

Ss For diseases contracted or injuries sustained as a result of service in any branch of the armed
forces.

6. For accidental bodily injury or illness which is covered by Workers' Compensation or an

Occupational Medical Policy, or any expenses payable under compromise settlement agreements
arising from a Workers' Compensation Claim.

7. For marital, family, vocational and other counseling services, except for nutritional counseling for
diabetics.

8. For sex transformation surgery and all expenses in connection with such surgery.

9: For reversal or attempted reversal of sterilization.

10. For services, therapy and counseling for sexual dysfunction or inadequacies or for implants or
aids to sexual function except due to a disease or injury which is otherwise covered by this
PLAN.

11. Family planning, infertility treatment and services including but not limited to: artificial
insemination and personal therapy for infertility, except in-vitro coverage as allowed in the
Schedule of Benefits

30
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31,

For a dependent child's pregnancy except for complication as defined by the PLAN arising from a
dependent child's pregnancy.

For smoking cessation seminars, services, devices or medications.

For the surgery or treatment of obesity, morbid obesity, dietary control, or for weight reduction.
For nutritional supplements, including prescription and over the counter vitamins.

For exercise equipment or exercise programs.

For orthotics (arch supports, etc.) and other supportive devices for feet that are not prescribed by
a PHYSICIAN.

For air conditioners, filters, humidifiers, dehumidifiers, and purifiers.

For eye exercises, visual training (orthoptics), eyeglasses, including contact lenses, hearing aids,
or examinations for the purpose of determining visual acuity or level of hearing.

For radial keratotomy surgery and orthokeratology.

For medical, dental or surgical treatment including associated diagnostic procedures of
orthognathic conditions.

For vocational therapy.
For preparing medical reports or itemized bills.
For travel or accommodations, whether or not recommended by a PHYSICIAN.

For charges associated with non-emergency HOSPITAL admissions on either a Friday or a
Saturday unless a surgical procedure is performed within 24 hours of admission.

For special education, counseling or care for learning deficiencies or behavioral problems
whether or not associated with a manifest mental disorder or other disturbance.

For care in a health resort, rest home, nursing home, residential treatment center, or any
institution primarily providing convalescent, or CUSTODIAL CARE.

For CUSTODIAL CARE.

For any claims filed more than one (1) year from the month the covered service or supply was
provided.

For admissions aimed at primarily overcoming the after effects of a specific episode of drug
abuse (detoxification), or to keep the patient from access to drugs (maintenance care).

For sales tax, transportation, tariffs, immigration fees for international travel, or federal excise
taxes.

31
32.

33.

34.

35.

 

For routine physical examinations for eligible dependents and for eligible EMPLOYEES not
covered in Chapter 1. .

No coverage is provided for services and supplies for routine or preventative immunizations or
vaccinations except for gamma globulin injections and child immunizations.

Coverage for HOSPICE Care does not include the following charges:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)
(

nutritional services, including special means not included in the per diem;

emotional support services not routinely provided by the HOSPICE agency and/or not
included in the per diem;

bereavement counseling sessions for eligible dependents covered under the PLAN not
included in the per diem;

funeral arrangements;

pastoral counseling; and

financial or legal counseling.

Coverage for Organ TRANSPLANT SURGERY does not include the following charges:

(a)

(b)

(d)

Experimental treatment for new procedures, and treatments, services or supplies which
are still considered experimental or investigational and not "generally accepted" by the
medical profession. The judgment whether a procedure, treatment, service or supply is
experimental is based upon all of the relevant facts and circumstances, including, but not
limited to:

WPI

Approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, the American Medical
Association or the appropriate Medical Specialty Society;

Medical and scientific literature;

Scientifically demonstrated health benefits;

Safety and effectiveness compared to alternatives; and

Safety, effectiveness and benefits when used outside of a research setting;

Any animal organ or mechanical equipment, mechanical device, or mechanical organ(s),
except as provided herein;

Any financial consideration to the DONOR other than for a covered service or supply
which is incurred in the performance of or in relation to TRANSPLANT SURGERY; and

Transportation of a DONOR, except as provided herein.

32
 

 

If a COVERED PERSON under the Police Value Plan who is scheduled for inpatient surgery in a
HOSPITAL, has preoperative testing relating to this surgery performed within ten (10) days prior to the
scheduled surgery and the testing is performed at a PHYSICIAN's office, diagnostic laboratory,
ambulatory surgery center or on a HOSPITAL outpatient basis, the PLAN will pay pre-operative testing
at 100% provided:

Ne The charge for the surgery is a covered expense;

ay The tests would have been covered had the patient been confined as a HOSPITAL
inpatient;

Sy The tests are not repeated when the patient is confined for the surgery;
4. The test results are a part of the patient's medical record;
5. The surgery is performed in a HOSPITAL;

6. The service is identified as pre-admission or preoperative testing.

The DEDUCTIBLE does not apply.

This benefit is not available under the Police Consumer Driven Health Plan

33
CHAPTER 9 HOSPITAL PRE-CERTIFICATION

 

Certification of ALL non-network admissions to a HOSPITAL including admissions for rehabilitation,
treatment of mental or nervous condition, drug, alcohol or substance abuse and maternity is required prior
to or on the day of admission as an inpatient. Emergency admissions must be verified within forty-eight
(48) hours following admissions.

Certification of all non-network outpatient surgery, performed in an ambulatory surgery center or
HOSPITAL outpatient facility, is required prior to or on the day of the surgery. Emergency outpatient
surgery must be certified within forty-eight (48) hours following the surgery.

The COVERED PERSON is responsible for the certification of hospital admission and outpatient
surgery.

If Pre-Certification Authorization is not obtained the maximum benefit paid for the doctor and
HOSPITAL will be fifty percent (50%) of the usual and customary charges. The fifty percent (50%) not
reimbursed by the PLAN will not count toward satisfaction of the Plan year out-of-pocket maximum.

Pursuant to State law, the PLAN will not restrict benefits for any HOSPITAL length of stay in connection
with a mastectomy or lymph node dissection of less than 48 hours following a mastectomy or less than 24
hours following a lymph node dissection or require that a provider obtain authorization from the PLAN
for prescribing a length or stay within the above periods. Certification is required for a length of stay,
which is in excess of the above periods.

Pursuant to State law, the PLAN will not restrict benefits for any HOSPITAL length of stay in connection
with childbirth for the mother or newborn child of less than 48 hours following an uncomplicated vaginal
delivery or less than 96 hours following an uncomplicated cesarean section, or require that a provider
obtain authorization from the PLAN for prescribing a length of stay within the above periods.
Certification is required for a length of stay, which is in excess of the above periods.

34
CHAPTER 10 PREFERRED PROVIDER NETWORK

 

PREFERRED PROVIDER NETWORK

The City of San Antonio participates in a Preferred Provider Network of HOSPITALS, PHYSICIANS
and other providers that are contracted to furnish, at negotiated costs, medical care for the CITY
EMPLOYEES and their dependents. The use of a Preferred Provider may result in reduced out of pocket
expenses to the COVERED PERSON.

A current listing of the Preferred Provider Network contracting HOSPITALS, PHYSICIANS and other
providers is available from the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR by phone or internet. A COVERED
PERSON may choose any health care provider.

The CITY reserves the right to terminate or modify the Preferred Provider Network program, or any
portion thereof, at any time. In the event the CITY changes the PPO provider, the CITY will ensure that
the EMPLOYEES will not be substantially affected by a disruption of available in-network providers.

The "In-Network Benefit" level will be paid if a COVERED PERSON receives services from a Non-
Participating Provider only in the following situations:

1. EMERGENCY SERVICES.

2. Court-Ordered Dependents. If your court-ordered Eligible Dependent lives outside the service
area, and no Out-of-Area Participating Providers are reasonably available to treat the Eligible
Dependent. Contact the Employee Benefits Office for details.

3. Continuity of Care if Participating Provider Leaves the PPO Network. If your Participating
Provider leaves the PPO Network, a covered person may continue to see that Provider and receive
PPO Benefits under “special circumstances.”

4. “Special circumstance” means a condition such that a covered person’s Participating Provider
reasonably believes discontinuation of care could cause harm to that person, such as a Disability,
an acute condition, a life-threatening illness or a pregnancy that is past the 24" week. If a
COVERED PERSON’S Participating Provider makes such a request and special circumstances
exist, In-Network Benefits will continue:

(a) In the case of a COVERED PERSON who is past the 24" week of pregnancy, through the
delivery of the child, immediate postpartum care, and the follow-up checkup within the first
six (6) weeks of delivery;

35
 

(b) In the case of other special circumstances, (e.g. terminally ill), for 90 days;

(c) Ifa Participating Provider, including a facility or a specialist is not available to a
COVERED PERSON within the service area to provide MEDICALLY NECESSARY
services covered by the PLAN, the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR, approves the coverage

in advance.

36
 

Obtaining Covered Prescriptions In-Network

Retail Pharmacy - Up to a 30-day Supply

The retail network of pharmacies is available for prescriptions you need right away or for a short time
only (such as antibiotics). You can obtain up to a 30-day supply of medication from thousands of
participating retail network pharmacies nationwide. A small number of medications may be limited to a
30-day or less supply.

Mail Service Pharmacy

Prescriptions for maintenance medications or chronic long-term health conditions can be ordered through
mail order. Ordering through the mail is both a safe and easy way to receive prescriptions and save
money.

Refer to ATTACHMENT 5 for the Pharmacy Payment Schedule
Covered Items

The following items are covered under the prescription program, unless specifically listed in the
“Exclusions and Limitations” section below.

* Federal legend drugs (drugs that federal law prohibits dispensing without a prescription)

* Compound prescriptions containing at least one legend ingredient

e Insulin and diabetic supplies such as disposable needles and syringes, blood test strips, and
lancets and any other items mandated under Texas Insurance Code

* Topical acne agents through age 23 (over age 23, prior authorization required)

* ADHD/Narcolepsy drugs through age 19 (over age 19, prior authorization required)
© Oral contraceptives for EMPLOYEE or eligible spouse only

* Only prescriptions which are prescribed for the condition for which they are labeled
Exclusions and Limitations [See Chapter 7]

The following items are excluded from or limited in coverage unless mandated by provisions of
the Affordable Care Act:

* Drugs used for cosmetic purposes, including but not limited to certain anti-fungals, hair loss
treatments and those used for pigmenting/depigmenting and reducing wrinkles

* Diabetic alcohol swabs

e Fluoride supplements

e Nutritional/Dietary Supplements

* Over-the-counter medications and other over the counter items

* Vitamins

* Miscellaneous medical supplies

¢ Anti-obesity drugs

e Smoking cessation medications

e Experimental or Investigational drugs or for drugs labeled “Caution — limited by federal law to
Investigational use”

¢ Immunization agents, allergens, serums, blood or blood plasma

* Therapeutic devices or appliances, support garments or other non-medical appliances, except
those listed as covered drugs

* Coverage for prescription drug products for an amount which exceeds the supply limit (days
supply or quantity limit)

* Prescription drug products for any condition, injury, sickness or mental illness arising out of, or in
the course of, employment for which benefits are available under any workers’ compensation law
or other similar laws

« Drugs purchased during time of no coverage

© Drugs for any treatment or condition which is listed under expenses not covered in the medical
plan

« Charges to administer or inject any drug
¢ Prescription drugs that are not MEDICALLY NECESSARY

¢ Charges for delivering any drugs, except through the mail order benefit. Express or over night
delivery is at the member’s expense.

« Experimental or Investigational medications

* Prescription drugs purchased from an institutional pharmacy for use while the member is an in-
patient in that institution regardless of the level-of-care

38
« Reimbursement for prescription drugs purchased outside of your prescription drug benefit is
subject to review under the Direct Member Reimbursement Process and reimbursement may be
limited to contract rate less COINSURANCE

* Medication which is to be taken by or administered to an individual, in whole or in part, while he
or she is a patient in a HOSPITAL, extended care facility, or similar institution which operates
on its premises, or allows to be operated on its premises, a facility for dispensing
pharmaceuticals.

© Off labeled drugs

*  Penlac
Formulary Management

A Formulary is a list of medications that have received FDA approval as safe and effective, and have
been chosen for inclusion on the Formulary by a committee of PHYSICIANs and pharmacists from the
Pharmacy Benefit Management (PBM) vendor selected by the CITY to administer the prescription drug
plan. The Formulary drug list can help the member and PHYSICIAN to maximize benefits while
minimizing overall prescription drug costs to the member and the PLAN.

The PBM’s vendor committee evaluates clinical efficacy and safety of each drug and votes the drug into
one of three categories:

¢  Therapeutically Unique — Clinical effectiveness of the drug is superior to existing drugs with an
acceptable safety profile prompting automatic addition to the Formulary

«  Therapeutically Equivalent — Clinical effectiveness and safety profile are comparable to existing
drugs

¢  Therapeutically Inferior — Clinical effectiveness of the drug is no greater than existing drugs and
the safety profile is less favorable prompting automatic non-Formulary status

Products classified by the PBM’s vendor committee as therapeutically equivalent are further evaluated
from an economic perspective to determine which clinically appropriate drugs are most cost-effective for
clients. The PBM’s vendor committee evaluation is based solely on clinical criteria. It is only after the
PBM’s vendor committee clinical assessment is made that the economics of the drug are considered.

Refer to Attachment 5 for the pharmacy benefit structure. The most up-to-date Formulary guide is
available on the pharmacy benefit management vendor’s website. Additions to the Formulary are made on
a quarterly basis throughout the year with deletions most often occurring annually.

Note: Drugs listed on the Formulary may not be covered as they are subject to the City of San Antonio’s
specific plan coverages, exclusions, and limitations.

Prior Authorizations
Certain prescriptions require “clinical prior authorization” or approval from your Plan before they will be

covered. The pharmacy benefit management vendor administers the clinical prior authorization process
on behalf of the City of San Antonio.

39
If the prior authorization request is APPROVED, the pharmacy benefit management vendor’s Clinical
Service Representative contacts the person who initiated the request and enters an override into the
pharmacy benefit management vendor’s processing system for a limited period of time. The pharmacy
will then process your prescription.

If the prior authorization request is DENIED, the pharmacy benefit management vendor’s Clinical Call
Center pharmacist contacts the person who initiated the request and sends a denial letter explaining the
denial reason. This includes denials due to PHYSICIAN non-response. The letter will include
instructions for appealing the denial.

The categories/medications that require prior authorization include, but are not limited to:

¢ Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
° Narcolepsy

« Anabolic steroids (all forms)

¢  Anti-Fungals (i.e., Lamisil, Sporanox)

© Botulinum Toxins (Botox)

© Contraceptives (for dependent children)

* Crinone 8%

The criteria for the Clinical Prior Authorization programs are based on nationally recognized guidelines;
FDA approved indications and accepted standards of practice.

Please have the information listed below when initiating your request for a clinical prior authorization:

© Name of your Medication

« PHYSICIAN’S Name

« PHYSICIAN’S Phone Number

* PHYSICIAN’S Fax Number, if available
© Member ID number (from your card)

* City of San Antonio Group Number:

Age and Quantity Limitations

Some medications are subject to age and quantity limits. Your prescription will be denied at time of
purchase if it exceeds these limitations. Limitations are based on criteria developed with guidelines from
various national medical agencies and in conjunction with the pharmacy benefit management vendor’s
clinical review process.

40
Age Limitations

Certain medications having an age limitation include but are not limited to, the following health
conditions:

© Topical Acne

¢ Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

e Narcolepsy
If your prescription is “denied” due to age limitations, but you and your PHYSICIAN believe it is
MEDICALLY NECESSARY for you to take the medication to treat one of the above conditions, you

may request a clinical prior authorization. Refer to the previous section titled “Prior Authorizations” for
details.

Quantity Limitations

Certain medications having quantity limitations include but are not limited to, the following health
conditions and medications:

* Impotency

* Insomnia

* Migraine

© Butorphanol

¢ Oral Antiemetics

¢ Diflucan 150mg
If your prescription is “denied” due to quantity limitations, and you and your PHYSICIAN believe it is

MEDICALLY NECESSARY for you to take a larger quantity of the medication, you may request a
clinical prior authorization. Refer to the previous section titled “Prior Authorizations” for details.

Specialty Pharmacy

Specialty Pharmacy provides convenient, dependable access to medications for people living with
complex health conditions. The programs and services focus on injectibles and medication therapies
involving strict compliance requirements, special storage/handling/delivery, complex administration

methods, and education /monitoring/ ongoing support. These drugs are limited to a 30-day supply
regardless if dispensed at a retail pharmacy or at mail service

Certain classifications of specialty pharmacy medications will require prior authorization or approval
before they will be covered by your PLAN. Drugs include the following, but are not limited to:

* Asthma (Xolair)

« Endometriosis (Lupron)

41
* Growth Hormone Deficiency (Genotropin, Nutropin)
© Osteoarthritis ( Synvisc)

© Osteoporosis (Forteo)

e Parkinson’s Disease (Apokyn)

© Precocious Puberty (Lupron-Ped)

¢ Prostate Cancer (Lupron, Viadur)
Direct Member Reimbursement

There may be instances where you need to fill a prescription but are unable to have your claim processed
through a network retail pharmacy due to situations such as an emergency situation, or a new member
whose enrollment has not been processed. In these instances, you will be required to pay the full retail
cost of the covered medication, and then file for reimbursement.

You can receive reimbursement for covered prescriptions you've paid for under the PLAN by following
these steps:

© Pay the pharmacist the full amount of your prescription. Keep your receipt(s).
© Obtain and complete a claim form available from the COSA Employee Benefits Office.

¢ Send your completed form and itemized receipts to the pharmacy benefit management vendor.

Please note that the pharmacy benefit management vendor will reimburse you according to the PLAN’S
guidelines.

Drug Utilization Alerts at Time of Purchase

Drug Utilization Review (DUR) is an effective tool in monitoring drug use to assure that it is appropriate,
safe, and effective. At the time of purchase, the pharmacy benefit management’s vendor DUR program
monitors claim submissions across all pharmacies and PHYSICIANS, compares each claim with the
active prescriptions of individual members, and sends “flags” back to the pharmacists should any drug
utilization alerts occur. The DUR system adheres to the National Council for Prescription Drug Products
(NCPDP) DUR guidelines and monitors every prescription for numerous conditions. Examples of some
of the DUR alerts are listed below.

Drug/Drug Interaction

A drug/drug interaction is a potentially harmful result that can occur when a patient is taking two or more
drugs at the same time. The possible results of the interaction may include the increase or decrease in
drug effectiveness or an increase in the adverse effects of one or both of the drugs.

When these occur, the pharmacy benefit management vendor’s system advises the dispensing pharmacist
that the drug he/she is about to dispense may have a potentially harmful interaction with a drug the patient
is currently taking. This allows the pharmacist to use professional judgment to intervene, if necessary, to
prevent the patient from being harmed.

42
Over Utilization

The submission of prescription drug claims across all contracted pharmacies is monitored. When a
pharmacy claim request is received, the pharmacy benefit management vendor's system reviews each
patient’s drug profile, searching for a previous prescription for the same drug or its generic
equivalent. The system then applies any other parameters that have been defined to reject a claim if the
request for the medication is being submitted sooner than the PLAN recognizes as appropriate.

Therapeutic Duplication Monitoring

Duplicate therapy monitoring informs the dispensing pharmacist that the newly prescribed drug may
duplicate the therapeutic effects of another drug already prescribed for the patient. This duplication can
occur even when the two drugs are prescribed for different medical conditions.

When a duplication of therapy is detected, the pharmacy benefit manager will transmit information back

to the dispensing pharmacist, including the name of the drug that is duplicating the therapy, for further
evaluation and intervention.

43
 

 

On inpatient hospital bills under $3,000.00 the PLAN will make a cash presentation to any EMPLOYEE
who (1) detects a billing overcharge made by a HOSPITAL as a result of an inpatient confinement to any
covered family member and (2) receives a billing adjustment and (3) the PLAN realizes a savings.

Upon discharge from the HOSPITAL, simply review the bill. If there is any error, it may be in one of the
following areas:

A calculation error

A charge for service the patient did not receive.

The patient received a service but not in the quantity indicated.
Remember, take the original bill and obtain a corrected bill and present both to the CITY CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR for review and determination. The PLAN will pay the EMPLOYEE 25% of the
savings or maximum of $500, whichever is less. As an example, if an EMPLOYEE detects an incorrect

charge of $1,200 and this is confirmed, the EMPLOYEE will receive a check for 25% of the savings, or
$300 from the PLAN.
COORDINATION OF BENEFITS (COB)

 

The COB provision is designed to correct over coverage which occurs when a person has health coverage
for the same expenses under two (2) or more of the plans listed below. Should this type of duplication
occur, the benefits under this PLAN will be coordinated with those of the other plans so that the total
benefits from all plans will not exceed the expenses actually incurred.

If a COVERED PERSON’S benefits under another health plan are reduced due to cost containment
provisions, such as a second surgical opinion, pre-certification, HMO or preferred provider arrangements,
the amount of the reduction shall not be considered as an allowable expense under this PLAN.

The benefits provided by the plans listed below are considered in determining duplication of coverage:

1. This Plan;

a Any other group insurance or prepayment plan, Health Maintenance Organizations
(HMOs); etc;

By Any labor-management trusteed plan, union welfare plan, employer organization plan or

employee benefit organization plan;

4. Any government plan or statute providing benefits for which COB is not prohibited by
law.

Order of Benefit Determination

Certain rules are used to determine which of the plans will pay benefits first. This is done by using the
first of the following rules which applies:

Os A plan with no COB provision will determine its benefits before a plan with a COB
provision;
2 A plan that covers a person other than as a Dependent will determine its benefits before a

plan that covers such person as a Dependent;

45
3. Any labor-management trusteed plan, union welfare plan, employer organization plan or
employee benefit organization plan will determine its benefits before this plan;

4. When a claim is made for a dependent child who is covered by more than one (1) plan:

(a) the benefits of the plan of the parent whose birthday falls earlier in the year will
be determined before the benefits of the plan of the parent whose birthday falls
later in that year; but

(b) if both parents have the same birthday, the benefits of the plan which covered the
parent longer will be determined before those of the plan which covered the other
parent for a shorter period of time.

This method of determining the order of benefits will be referred to as the "Birthday Rule." The Birthday
Rule will be used to determine the order of benefits for dependent children in all cases except those
described below.

(c) if the other plan does not have the Birthday Rule, then the plan which covers the
child as a dependent of the male parent will pay its benefits first.

(d) if the parents are legally separated or divorced, benefits for the child will be
determined in this order:

(i) first, the plan of the parent with custody of the child will pay its benefits;

(ii) then, the plan of the spouse of the parent with custody of the child will
pay its benefits; and

(iii) _ finally, the plan of the parent not having custody of the child will pay its
benefits.

However, if there is a court decree stating which parent is responsible for the health care expenses of the
child, then a plan covering the child as a dependent of that parent will determine its benefits before any
other plan.
3 A plan that covers a person as:

(a) a laid off employee; or

(b) a retired employee; or

(c) a dependent of such employee;
will determine its benefits after the plan that does not cover such person as:

(a) a laid off employee; or

(b) a retired employee; or

46
(c) a dependent of such employee.

If one of the plans does not have this rule, and if, as a result, the plans do not agree on the order of
benefits, this rule will not apply.

6. If one of the above rules establishes the order of payment, a plan under which the person
has been covered for the longer time will determine its benefits before a plan covering
that person for a shorter time.

Two successive plans of the same group will be considered one plan if the person was eligible for
coverage under the new plan within twenty-four (24) hours after the old plan terminated. A change in the
amount or scope of benefits, or a change in the carrier, or a change from one type of plan to another (e.g.,
single employer plan to multiple employer plan) will not constitute the start of a new plan.

When the COB provision reduces the benefits payable under this Plan:
(a) each benefit will be reduced proportionately; and
(b) only the reduced amount will be charged against any benefit limits under the Plan.

The COB provision is applied throughout the CALENDAR YEAR. If there is any reduction of the
benefits provided under a specific Benefit Provision of this PLAN because of duplicate coverage, similar
benefits may be a payable later in that year if more ALLOWABLE EXPENSES are incurred under the
same Benefit Provision of this PLAN because of duplicate coverage, similar benefits may be payable later
in that year if more ALLOWABLE EXPENSES are incurred under the same Benefit Provision.
"ALLOWABLE EXPENSE" means any necessary, usual and customary item of expense at least part of
which is covered under at least one of the plans covering the person for who claim is made or service
provided, in no event will ALLOWABLE EXPENSE include the difference between the cost of a private
HOSPITAL room and a semi-private HOSPITAL room unless the patient's stay in a private HOSPITAL
room is MEDICALLY NECESSARY.

Benefits under a governmental plan will be taken into consideration without expanding the definition of
"ALLOWABLE EXPENSE" beyond the HOSPITAL, medical and surgical benefits as may be provided
by such governmental plan.

When a plan provides benefits in the form of services rather than cash payments, the reasonable cash
value of each service rendered will be deemed to be both an ALLOWABLE EXPENSE and a benefit
paid.

The PLAN has the right to release to, or obtain from, any other organization or person any information
necessary for the administration of this provision and to pay to any organization any amounts necessary to
satisfy the intent of this provision.

If the PLAN has paid any amounts in excess of those necessary to satisfy the intent of this provision, it
has the right to recover such excess from the person, to or for whom, such payments were made or from
an insurance company or organization.

When you claim benefits under the PLAN, you must furnish information about OTHER COVERAGE,
which may be involved in applying this coordination provision.

47
 

A payment made under another Plan may include an amount which should have been paid under this
PLAN. If it does, the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR may pay that amount to the organization which
made that payment. That amount will then be treated as though it were a benefit paid under this PLAN.
The CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR will not have to pay that amount again. The term "payment made"
includes providing benefits in the form of services, in which case "payment made" means reasonable cash
value of the benefits provided in the form of services.

Compliance with Cost Containment Health Plan Provisions
If the COVERED PERSON’S benefits are reduced by a health plan that has cost containment provisions,

such as a second surgical opinion, HMO, pre-certification or preferred provider arrangements, the amount
of such reduction shall not be an ALLOWABLE EXPENSE.

48
 

PROVISION FOR SUBROGATION AND RIGHT OF RECOVERY

A third party may be liable or legally responsible for expenses incurred by a COVERED PERSON for an
illness or a bodily injury.

Benefits may also be payable under the PLAN for such expenses. When this happens, the PLAN may, at
its option:

lL. Take over the COVERED PERSON’S right to receive payment of the benefits from the
third party. The COVERED PERSON will:

(a) transfer to the PLAN any rights he may have to take legal action against the third
party with respect to benefits paid by the PLAN which are subject to this
provision; and

(b) cooperate fully with the PLAN in asserting its right to subrogate. This means the
COVERED PERSON must supply the PLAN with all information and sign and
return all documents reasonably necessary to carry out the PLAN’s right to
recover from the third party any benefits paid under the PLAN which are subject
to this provision.

2 Recover from the COVERED PERSON any benefits paid under the PLAN which the
COVERED PERSON is entitled to receive from the third party. The PLAN will have a
first lien upon any recovery, whether by settlement, judgment or otherwise, that the
COVERED PERSON received from:

(a) the third party; or
(b) the third party's insurer or guarantor; or
(c) the COVERED PERSON’S uninsured motorist insurance.

This lien will be for the amount of benefits paid by the PLAN for the treatment of illness or bodily injury
for which the third party is liable or legally responsible. If the COVERED PERSON:

(a) makes any recovery as set forth in this provision; and
(b) fails to reimburse the PLAN fully for any benefits paid under this provision; then
he will be personally liable to the PLAN to the extent of such recovery up to the
amount of the first lien. The COVERED PERSON must cooperate fully with the
PLAN in asserting its right to recover.

50
 

1. Proof of Loss

Written proof of loss must be furnished to the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR within one (1) year after the
month such loss was incurred. Failure to furnish proof within the time required shall not invalidate or
reduce any claim if it was not reasonably possible to give proof within such time, provided proof is
furnished as soon as reasonably possible and in no event, except in the absence of legal capacity of the
COVERED PERSON, later than one (1) year from the month care, treatment, service or supply was first
provided for the illness or injury.

2 Legal Actions

No action at law or in equity shall be brought to recover on the PLAN unless the EMPLOYEE or retiree
has exhausted administrative remedies provided in the review and appeal process in Chapter 19.

as Examination
The CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR shall have the right and opportunity to have the COVERED PERSON
examined whose injury or illness is the basis of a claim when and so often as it may reasonably require
during pendency of a claim.

4. Conformity with Federal Statutes

Any provision of this PLAN, which on its EFFECTIVE DATE is in conflict with federal statutes, is
hereby amended to conform to the minimum requirements of such federal statutes.

5. Choice of PHYSICIAN
The COVERED PERSON shall have free choice of any PHYSICIAN, as defined in this PLAN,
practicing legally. Benefits may vary depending on the PHYSICIAN'S participation in the City's
Preferred Provider Network.

6. Entire Contract

The PLAN DOCUMENT constitutes the entire contract of coverage between the PLAN SPONSOR and
the COVERED PERSON.

51
 

7 Effect of Changes

All changes to the PLAN shall become effective as of a date established by the PLAN
ADMINISTRATOR, except that:

No increase or reduction in benefits shall be effective with respect to covered expenses incurred prior to
the date a change was adopted by the PLAN SPONSOR, regardless of the effective date of the change;
and

8. Written Notice
Any written notice required under the PLAN shall be deemed received by a COVERED PERSON sent by
regular mail, postage prepaid, to the last address of the COVERED PERSON on the records of the
EMPLOYER.

9, Clerical Errors/Delay
Clerical errors made on the records of the PLAN SPONSOR, PLAN ADMINISTRATOR or CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR and delays in making entries on records shall not invalidate covered or cause
coverage to be in force or to continue in force. Rather, the EFFECTIVE DATES of coverage shall be
determined solely in accordance with the provisions of the PLAN regardless of whether any contributions
with respect to COVERED PERSONS have been made or have failed to be made because of such errors
or delays. Upon discovery of an error or delay, an equitable adjustment of any contributions will be
made.

10. Workers' Compensation

The PLAN is not in lieu of and does not affect any requirement for coverage by Workers' Compensation
insurance.

11. Statements
(a) Not Representations

Statements made by or on behalf of any person to obtain coverage under the PLAN shall be deemed
representations and not warranties.

(b) Misstatements on Enrollment or Claim Form
If any relevant material fact has been misstated by or on behalf of any person to obtain coverage under the
PLAN, the true fact shall be used to determine whether coverage is in force and the extent, if any, of
coverage. Upon the discovery of any misstatement, an equitable adjustment of any benefit payments will
be made.

(c) Time Limit for Misstatement

No misstatement made to obtain coverage under the PLAN will be used to void the coverage of any
person which has been in force for a period of two (2) years or to deny a claim for a loss incurred or

352
disability commencing after the expiration of the two (2) year period. The provisions of this paragraph
shall not apply if any misstatement has been made fraudulently.

(d) Use of Statements

No statement made by or on behalf of any person will be used in any context unless a copy of the written
instrument containing the statement has been or is furnished to any person or to any person claiming a
right to receive benefits with respect to the person.

12, Identification Cards

Identification card(s) will be issued, which indicate coverage by the City of San Antonio Health Benefits
Program. Upon request, the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR or the City's Employee Benefits Office will
verify coverage of COVERED PERSONS. Identification cards will be for identification of COVERED
PERSONS only and do not constitute a guarantee of coverage.

13. Protection Against Creditors

No benefit payment under this PLAN shall be subject in any way to alienation, sale, transfer, pledge,
attachment, garnishment, execution or encumbrance of any kind, and any attempt to accomplish same
shall be void. If the CITY finds that such an attempt has been made with respect to any payment due or
to become due to any covered person, the CITY in its sole discretion may terminate the interest of such
COVERED PERSON or former COVERED PERSON in such payment. And in such case the CITY shall
apply the amount of such payment to or for the benefit of such COVERED PERSON or former
COVERED PERSON, his/her spouse, parent, adult child, guardian or a minor child, brother or sister, or
other relative of a dependent of such COVERED PERSON or former COVERED PERSON, as the CITY
may determine, and any such application shall be a complete discharge of all liability with respect to such
benefit payment. However, at the discretion of the CITY, benefit payments may be assigned to health
care providers.

53
 

Claim Filing

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Medical claims (doctor's visits, prescription drugs, exams, HOSPITAL, etc.)
shall be filed on a claim form available from the Employee Benefits Office or
CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR.

The claim form shall include medical bills (itemized only) and the explanation of
benefit statement (EOB) from other health insurance policies, if any. The bill
should contain the following:

(i) the official letterhead of the HOSPITAL, doctor, clinic, pharmacy, etc.
including address, phone number and tax ID;

(ii) type of service;

(iii) date of service received;

(iv) amount charged;

(v) name of patient; and

(vi) diagnosis.

Only one (1) detailed claim form must be completed per person per year, even
for different claims and/or diagnoses. Any additional claims throughout the year
may be filed on a short claim form available through the Employee Benefits
Office. If a claim is for an ACCIDENTAL INJURY, then a detailed claim form
must be completed for each accident occurrence. All items on the front of the
claim form must be completed. The blocked section regarding secondary
insurance coverage must be completed.

The original claim form with the attached bills shall be mailed to the City's
CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR.

Limitation of Liability

The PLAN SPONSOR shall not be obligated to pay any benefits under the PLAN for any claim that is not

54
S3 Time of Claims Processing

Benefits for incurred medical expenses which are covered under the PLAN will be processed immediately
upon receipt of proper written proof of loss by the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR. Any benefits payable
will be made within twenty (20) working days.

Periodic Payment: Payment of accrued periodic payments for continuing losses which are covered under
the PLAN will be made immediately upon receipt of proper proof of loss by the CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR and at the applicable time period.

4. Payment of Benefits

All benefits under the PLAN are payable to the Covered EMPLOYEE whose illness or injury or whose
covered dependent's illness or injury is the basis of a claim.

In the event of the death or incapacity of a Covered EMPLOYEE and in the absence of written evidence
to the PLAN of the qualification of a guardian for his estate, the PLAN may, in its sole discretion, make
any and all payments to the individual or institution which, in the opinion of the PLAN
ADMINISTRATOR, is or was providing the care and support of the EMPLOYEE.

Benefits for medical expenses covered under the PLAN may be assigned by a Covered EMPLOYEE to
the person or institution rendering the services for which the expenses were incurred. No assignment will
bind the PLAN SPONSOR unless it is in writing and unless it has been received by the CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR prior to the payment of the benefit assigned. The CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR
will not be responsible for determining whether any assignment is valid. Payment of benefits which have
been assigned will be made directly to the assignee unless a written request not to honor the assignment
signed by the Covered EMPLOYEE and the assignee has been received before the proof of loss is
submitted.

5; Discharge of Liability

Any payment made in accordance with the provisions of this section will fully discharge the liability of
the PLAN SPONSOR to the extent of payment.

6. Recovery of Payments
If the following circumstances apply, the PLAN SPONSOR reserves the right to deduct from any benefits
properly payable under the PLAN or recover from the Covered EMPLOYEE or assignee who received
the payment:

(a) the amount of any payment which has been made in error; or

(b) pursuant to a misstatement contained in a proof of loss; or

(c) pursuant to a misstatement made to obtain coverage under the PLAN within two (2) years
after the date coverage commences.

55
CHAPTER 17 REVIEW & APPEAL PROCESS

 

REVIEW PROCESS FOR DISPUTED CLAIMS

The review process for disputed claims shall include the following:

1

The EMPLOYEE (current or former) may request a review by writing the CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR and stating the basis for the disputed claim.

This request must be made within ninety (90) calendar days after the receipt of the original
explanation of benefits.

Upon receipt of the request, the claim will be reviewed by the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR who
will either affirm the original claim determination in writing, pay the disputed claim amount, or
request additional information necessary to make a determination.

The CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR’S decision will be sent within thirty (30) calendar days to the
EMPLOYEE along with supporting documentation setting out the basis on which the decision is
made.

Either the EMPLOYEE or the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR may request a review by Claims
Review Committee in accordance with paragraph six (6) below. The Employee’s request must be
made within fifteen (15) calendar days after the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR’S decision is
mailed.

A review may be made within fifteen (15) calendar days by a Claims Review Committee upon
the request of the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR only if new claims information is provided by the
EMPLOYEE or Retiree which was not considered before by the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR.
The Committee shall consist of the PLAN ADMINISTRATOR, a representative of the CLAIMS
ADMINISTRATOR who was not directly involved in processing the initial claim, and an
independent licensed medical reviewer of the CLAIMS ADMINISTRATOR. The decision of the
Committee will made within fifteen (15) calendar days, mailed to the EMPLOYEE and will be
deemed final and binding.

The review and appeal process in this chapter shall not be construed to supersede, and is in addition to,
any grievance procedure set forth in the Collective Bargaining Agreements between the CITY and the
San Antonio Police Officers’ Association, in regard to Police.

56
 

The CITY may amend the provisions of this PLAN, from time to time, as the need arises in order to
assure the fair and equitable administration of Benefits to be provided eligible EMPLOYEES in
compliance with the terms of the respective Collective Bargaining Agreements.

The CITY may terminate the provisions of the PLAN only during negotiations over the terms to be
contained in Collective Bargaining Agreements with the San Antonio Police Officers' Association, in
regard to Police Officers, for any period covered by a Collective Bargaining Agreement.

Nothing in the Document or any related Bargaining Agreements between the CITY and the Bargaining
Agents of the Police Officers is intended to imply vesting or irrevocable Benefits for current, active
POLICE OFFICERS beyond the provisions of the 2016-2021 Collective Bargaining Agreement between
the CITY and the San Antonio Police Officers’ Association, in regard to POLICE OFFICERS.

Termination, continuance, alteration, or any related activity on the PLAN will be determined by the
provisions of future Collective Bargaining Agreements between the CITY and the San Antonio Police
Officers' Association, in regard to POLICE OFFICERS.
ATTACHMENT 7
TEXAS CIVIL STATUTES ANNOTATED ARTICLE 6243q

ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Purpose

Sec. 1.01. Because of the lasting health consequences associated with the stressful nature of the
professions of firefighting and law enforcement, the purpose of a fund established by this Act is
to provide health care benefits for persons who retired on or after October 1, 1989, from a
municipal fire or police department to which this Act applies.

Definitions
Sec. 1.02. In this Act:

(1) "Actuary" means an actuary selected by the board to conduct an actuarial study who is a
Fellow of the Society of Actuaries, a Fellow of the Conference of Consulting Actuaries, or a
member of the American Academy of Actuaries.

(1-a) "Annual member payroll" means the amount computed on the first payroll date in June of
the applicable fiscal year that equals the product of the base pay plus additional compensation for
employment longevity paid to all members for services rendered multiplied by the total number
of payroll dates in the fiscal year.

(1-b) "Average member salary" means the amount computed on the first payroll date in June of
the applicable fiscal year that equals the quotient of the annual member payroll for the fiscal year
divided by the number of members.

(2) "Board" means the board of trustees of a fund established under Section 1.04 of this Act.

(3) "Beneficiary" means a retiree, or the spouse or other eligible dependent of a retiree, who is
entitled to receive retiree health benefits under Section 5.01(a) of this Act.

(4) "Collective bargaining agreements" means the collectively bargained agreements in effect on
January 1, 2004, between a municipality to which this Act applies and the exclusive bargaining
agents of the firefighters and police officers of the municipality under Chapter 174, Local
Government Code,

(6-a) "Master contract document" means the master contract in effect on January 1, 2004,
containing the terms and conditions of the health and medical benefits plan established under the
collective bargaining agreements.

(6-b) "Member" means a firefighter or police officer, except as provided by Section 4.011 of this
Act.

194
(6-c) "Payroll date" means the date every other week on which a municipality to which this Act
applies pays regular compensation to members.

(6-d) "Pension act" means Chapter 824, Acts of the 73rd Legislature, Regular Session, 1993
(Article 62430, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes).

(6-e) "Pension fund" means the firefighters’ and police officers’ pension fund of a municipality to
which the pension act applies.

(5) "Firefighter" means an employee of the fire department who is classified as a firefighter by
the personnel department of a municipality to which this Act applies.

(6) "Fund" means the firefighter's and police officer's retiree health care fund of a municipality to
which this Act applies.

(7) “Police officer" means an employee of the police department who is classified as a police
officer by the personnel department of a municipality to which this Act applies.

(8) "Retiree" means an individual who was a firefighter or police officer whose retirement date is
after September 30, 1989.

(10) "Years of service" means the number of full years beginning on the date the firefighter or
police officer becomes a member of the fund until the date the firefighter or police officer retires
or otherwise terminates employment as a firefighter or police officer less any service credit for
the amount of time the member is engaged in active service with any uniformed service of the
United States that the member does not purchase in accordance with Section 4.023 of this Act.

(8-a) "Retiree health plan" means the group family health plan for retirees and other beneficiaries
established by the collective bargaining agreements and the master contract document.

(9) "Trustee" means a member of the board.

Sec. 1.03. APPLICABILITY. This Act applies to a paid fire and police department of a
municipality with a population of 1,140,000 or more but less than 1,180,000.

Fund; Statutory Trust
Sec. 1.04. (a) The firefighters’ and police officers’ retiree health care fund is established for each
municipality to which this Act applies. The fund is a statutory trust and is not a subdivision of

government.

(b) The board shall administer and hold in trust the assets of the fund for the exclusive benefit of
the beneficiaries of the fund. The board may pay from the fund reasonable administrative
expenses incurred in administering the fund.

195
(c) The fund may not be diverted, transferred, or used for any other purpose inconsistent with
this Act and with the instruments governing the fund.

(d) A public or private agency, entity, or authority may not alter or impair any contract made by
the board or under the authority or direction of the board.

Exemptions

Sec. 1.05. The health benefits paid or payable by the fund are exempt from garnishment,
assignment, attachment, judgments, other legal processes, and inheritance or other taxes
established by this state.

ARTICLE 2. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

Board of Trustees

Sec, 2.01. (a) The firefighters’ and police officers’ retiree health care fund of a municipality is
governed by a board of trustees consisting of the following nine members:

(1) the mayor of the municipality or the mayor's designee;
(2) two members of the municipal governing body, appointed by that governing body;

(3) two members of the fund who are firefighters below the rank of fire chief, elected by secret
ballot by a majority of the votes cast by the members of the fund who are firefighters;

(4) two members of the fund who are police officers below the rank of police chief, elected by
secret ballot by a majority of the votes cast by the members of the fund who are police officers;

(5) a retiree representative of the fire department, elected by secret ballot by a majority of the
votes cast by the retirees of the fire department who are beneficiaries of the fund and the
surviving spouses of deceased firefighters who are beneficiaries of the fund; and

(6) a retiree representative of the police department, elected by secret ballot by a majority of the
votes cast by the retirees of the police department who are beneficiaries of the fund and the
surviving spouses of deceased police officers who are beneficiaries of the fund.

(b) The board, through its secretary, shall administer the required elections of the members and
retiree trustees. The board shall hold a runoff election between the two candidates receiving the
most votes if no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast for a trustee position. On the
executive director's certification that a candidate for trustee is eligible for office and is
unopposed for election, the board shall certify the candidate as elected to the board.

(c) The fund is independent of the control of the municipality.

Terms of Trustees
196
Sec. 2.02. (a) Subject to Subsection (a-1) the mayor of the municipality or the mayor's designee,
serves on the board for the term of the mayor's office.

(a-1) The mayor may remove and replace the mayor's designee at the mayor's discretion.

(b) The two members of the municipal governing body serve on the board for the term of the
office to which they were elected.

(c) The two members of the fund who are firefighters below the rank of fire chief serve on the
board for staggered four-year terms, with one member's term expiring every two years.

(d) The two members of the fund who are police officers below the rank of police chief serve on
the board for staggered four-year terms, with one member's term expiring every two years.

(e) The retiree representatives serve on the board for staggered four-year terms, with one
member's term expiring every two years.

Resignation or Removal of Trustees

Sec. 2.03. (a) A trustee who is a retiree or a member of the fund may resign or may be removed
by a vote of the group eligible to elect the trustee.

(b) A petition for removal under this section must be filed with the board within 45 days after the
date the first signature on the petition was obtained, A signature is not valid if it is not dated.

(c) A removal election must be held within 90 days after the date the board certifies that a proper
petition for a removal election has been signed by at least 20 percent of the persons eligible to
vote to elect the trustee. A trustee's term of service ends on the entry of an order by the board
declaring that a majority of the votes cast in a removal election under this section favor removal.

(d) On the date the board enters an order under Subsection (c) of this section, the board shall call
a special election to be held not less than 20 and not more than 30 days after that date to fill the
vacancy for the unexpired term of the trustee who was removed. The trustee who was removed is
not eligible to run in the special election but is eligible to run in all subsequent elections in which
the person is otherwise eligible to run.

Officers

Sec. 2.04. (a) The board shall elect a chair, a vice chair, and a secretary from among the trustees.

(b) The board in its discretion may elect other officers of the board. An officer may be, but is not
required to be, a trustee.

Employees

Sec. 2.05. The board may employ an executive director and staff to administer the fund.
197
 

Meetings; Quorum

Sec. 2.06. (a) The board shall hold regular monthly meetings and special meetings at the call of
the chair or on written demand by a majority of the trustees.

(b) Five trustees constitute a quorum. The board may act with the consent of a majority of the
trustees who are present at a board meeting at which a quorum is present.

Board Committees
Sec. 2.07. (a) The chair of the board may appoint committees that report to the board.
(b) Only trustees may be appointed to a committee under this section.

(c) A committee must be composed of not fewer than three and not more than four trustees,
except as otherwise specifically provided by the board.

(d) Only members of a committee may vote as committee members.

(e) The board may direct staff and advisors to assist the committees.

(f) All trustees may attend committee meetings.

(g) Members of a committee serve at the pleasure of the board.

(h) Permanent or standing committees may be appointed.

ARTICLE 3. GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES

General Powers and Duties of Board

Sec. 3.01. (a) The board has complete authority and power to:

(1) administer the fund for the exclusive benefit of the beneficiaries of the fund;
(2) order payments from the fund;

(3) independently control the fund; and

(4) conduct all litigation on behalf of the fund.

(b) The board may contract with a municipality or other entity to receive the following services:

(1) the administration of benefit claims of beneficiaries, including payment of claims from
money in the fund;

198
(2) the administration of the board's administrative expenses, including payment of the expenses
from money in the fund as approved in advance by the board; and

(3) other administrative services approved by the board.

(c) The board shall adopt rules necessary for the board's effective operation, including rules
relating to:

(1) the disbursement of the fund's assets; and
(2) the name of the board and the fund.

(d) The board shall take any action necessary to ensure that contributions to the fund and benefits
received from the fund are exempt from federal taxes and excluded from a beneficiary's taxable
income.

(e) The board shall report annually to the governing body of the municipality regarding the
condition of the fund and the receipts and disbursements of the fund.

(f) The board has full discretion and authority to administer the fund and the retiree health plan,
construe and interpret this Act and the retiree health plan, correct any defect or omission,
reconcile any inconsistency, and perform all other acts necessary to carry out the purpose of this
Act and the retiree health plan and administer this Act and the retiree health plan for the greatest
benefit of all members in a manner and to the extent that the board considers expedient.

(g) A gathering of any number of trustees to investigate, research, or review prospective or
current investments or otherwise attend to the trustees' fiduciary responsibilities, without formal
action by the trustees, is not a deliberation or meeting under Chapter 551, Government Code, and
is not required to be open to the public.

(h) The trustees of the fund are immune from liability for any action taken or omission made in
good faith in the performance of their duties for the fund.

(i) Information contained in a record that is in the custody of the fund concerning a member,
former member, retiree, deceased retiree, beneficiary, or alternate payee is confidential under
Chapter 552, Government Code. The information may not be disclosed in a form that identifies a
specific individual, unless the information is disclosed:

(1) to the individual;
(2) to the individual's spouse, attorney, guardian, executor, administrator, or conservator, or to
another person the executive director or the executive director's designee determines from

written documentation to be acting in the interest of the individual or the individual's estate;

(3) to a person authorized by the individual in writing to receive the information;
199
(4) to a government official or employee seeking the information in order to perform the duties
of the official or employee; or

(5) under a subpoena.
(j) Subsection (i) of this section does not prevent the disclosure of the status or identity of an
individual as a member, former member, retiree, deceased member, deceased retiree, beneficiary,

or alternate payee of the fund.

(k) A determination and disclosure under Subsection (i) of this section does not require notice to
the member, retiree, beneficiary, or alternate payee.

Authority of Municipality

Sec. 3.02. The municipality has the authority and power to:

(1) contract with the board, as described in Section 3.01(b) of this Act;

(2) provide services through a subcontractor in a contract under Section 3.01(b) of this Act;

(3) take any action necessary to ensure that contributions to the fund and benefits received from
the fund are exempt from federal taxes and excluded from a beneficiary's taxable income; and

(4) control the internal functions of the municipality relating to the municipality's interactions
with or activities on behalf of the fund.

Sec. 3.03. Repealed by Acts 1999, 76th Leg., ch. 52, Sec. 24(b), eff. Oct. 1, 1999,

Insurance

Sec. 3.04. (a) The board may use fund assets to purchase insurance from any insurer licensed to
do business in this state that provides for reimbursement of the fund and any trustee, officer, or

employee of the fund for:

(1) liability imposed or damages incurred because of an alleged act, error, or omission committed
in the capacity of a fiduciary, officer, or employee; and

(2) costs and expenses incurred in defense of a claim for an alleged act, error, or omission.
(b) The board may not purchase insurance for reimbursement of a trustee, officer, or employee of
the fund for liability imposed on the trustee, officer, or employee because of the person's

dishonesty, fraud, lack of good faith, or intentional failure to act prudently.

Indemnity

200
Sec. 3.05. (a) If insurance purchased by the board under Section 3.04 of this Act is unavailable,
insufficient, inadequate, or otherwise not in effect, the board may indemnify a trustee, officer, or
employee of the fund for liability imposed as damages because of an alleged act, error, or
omission committed by the person in the capacity of a fiduciary, officer, or employee and for
reasonable costs and expenses incurred in defense of a claim of an alleged act, error, or omission.

(b) The board may not indemnify a trustee, officer, or employee of the fund for liability or
expenses incurred because of the person's personal dishonesty, fraud, lack of good faith, or
intentional failure to act prudently.

(c) A trustee may not vote on a matter of the trustee's own indemnification or be counted in
determining whether a quorum is present for the vote.

(d) The board may adopt a policy establishing a method for presentation, approval, and payment
of claims for indemnification.

(e) If insurance purchased by the board under Section 3.04 of this Act is unavailable, insufficient,
inadequate, or otherwise not in effect, the board may indemnify a former trustee, officer, or
employee of the fund under this section for an alleged act, error, or omission committed by the
person in the capacity of a fiduciary, officer, or employee and for reasonable costs and expenses
incurred in defense of a claim of an alleged act, error, or omission.

(f) The board may authorize indemnification of a trustee, officer, or employee of the fund, or a
former trustee, officer, or employee of the fund under this section regardless of when the alleged
act, error, or omission occurred, provided that the person is considered liable for the alleged act,
error, or omission in relation to the person's capacity as a current or former trustee, officer, or
employee of the fund.

ARTICLE 4. MEMBERSHIP AND CONTRIBUTIONS
Sec. 4.01. MEMBERSHIP. Each member is a member of the fund.

Sec. 4.011. MEMBERSHIP OF FIRE CHIEF AND CHIEF OF POLICE. Not later than the 30th
day after the date a fire chief or a chief of police of a municipality assumes office, the fire chief
or chief of police may make an irrevocable election to not become a member of the fund or to
terminate membership in the fund by delivering written notice of such election to the secretary of
the board. A fire chief or chief of police who does not make an election under this subsection is
considered to have chosen to become or to remain a member of the fund.

Sec. 4.02. MEMBER AND BENEFICIARY CONTRIBUTIONS. (a) Subject to Section 4.022 of
this Act, there shall be deducted from each member's compensation and contributed to the fund
on each payroll date an amount equal to the member contribution amount applicable to the fiscal
year in which the payroll date occurs. The member contribution amount applicable to a fiscal
year equals the amount obtained by:

201
(1) multiplying the average member salary for the preceding fiscal year by the percentage equal
to 100 percent plus the estimated percentage increase in the annual member payroll from the
preceding fiscal year to the fiscal year as determined by the actuary;

(2) multiplying the product computed under Subdivision (1) of this subsection by the percentage
applicable to the fiscal year as provided in Subsection (b) of this section; and

(3) dividing the product computed under Subdivision (2) of this subsection by the total number
of payroll dates that occur during the fiscal year.

(b) For purposes of Subsections (a)(2) and (d)(2) of this section, the percentage applicable to
each fiscal year is:

(1) 2.0 percent for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2007, and ending September 30, 2008;
(2) 2.7 percent for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2008, and ending September 30, 2009;
(3) 3.4 percent for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2009, and ending September 30, 2010;

(4) 4.1 percent for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2010, and ending September 30, 2011;
and

(5) 4.7 percent for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2011, and all subsequent fiscal years.

(c) Subject to Subsection (e) of this section, to be eligible for health benefits under Section 5.01
of this Act, a service retiree or disability retiree who retired or retires with less than 30 years of
service, or the retiree's surviving spouse in the case of a deceased retiree, shall continue to make
monthly contributions in accordance with Subsection (d) of this section to the fund after the date
of the retiree's retirement for the lesser of:

(1) the period preceding the date the retiree becomes or would have become eligible for federal
Medicare coverage; or

(2) the period equal to 30 years less the retiree's years of service achieved on the date of the
retiree's retirement.

(d) The pension fund shall deduct the contribution required under Subsection (c) of this section
from the monthly retirement benefit payment or death benefit payment paid to each retiree or
retiree's spouse required to make the contributions, excluding payments made by the pension
fund under Section 6.12 of the pension act. The pension fund shall deduct an amount equal to the
retiree contribution amount applicable to the fiscal year in which the benefit payment occurs.
The retiree contribution amount applicable to a fiscal year equals the amount obtained by:

(1) multiplying the average member salary for the preceding fiscal year by a percentage equal to
100 percent plus the estimated percentage increase in the annual member payroll from the
preceding fiscal year to the fiscal year as determined by the actuary;

202
(2) multiplying the product computed under Subdivision (1) of this subsection by the percentage
applicable to the fiscal year as provided by Subsection (b) of this section; and

(3) dividing the product computed under Subdivision (2) of this subsection by 12.

(e) A retiree who retired under the pension act as a result of a disability, or the disability retiree's
surviving spouse in the case of a deceased disability retiree, is not required to make contributions
under Subsection (c) of this section for more than 10 years following the date of the disability
retiree's retirement.

(f) This section applies only to members who retire as a service or disability retiree after October
1, 2007, and their surviving spouses.

(g) The municipal contributions to and health benefits paid from the fund are a part of the
compensation for services rendered to a municipality to which this Act applies. This Act is
considered part of the contract of employment and appointment of the firefighters and police
officers of that municipality.

Sec. 4.021. CONTRIBUTIONS BY A MUNICIPALITY. (a) Subject to Section 4.022 of this
Act, a municipality to which this Act applies shall pay into the fund on each payroll date the
municipal contribution amount applicable to the fiscal year in which the payroll date occurs. The
municipal contribution amount applicable to a fiscal year equals the amount obtained by:

(1) multiplying the average member salary for the preceding fiscal year by the percentage equal
to 100 percent plus the estimated percentage increase in the annual member payroll from the
preceding fiscal year to the fiscal year as determined by the actuary;

(2) multiplying the product computed under Subdivision (1) of this subsection by 9.4 percent;

(3) dividing the product computed under Subdivision (2) of this subsection by the total number
of payroll dates that occur during the fiscal year; and

(4) multiplying the quotient computed under Subdivision (3) of this subsection by the number of
individuals who are members on the payroll date.

(b) The municipal contributions to and health benefits paid from the fund are part of the
compensation for services rendered to the municipality. This Act is considered part of the
contract of employment and appointment of the firefighters and police officers of that
municipality.

Sec. 4.022. MANDATORY ADJUSTMENTS TO RETIREE HEALTH PLAN
CONTRIBUTIONS, OUT-OF-POCKET PAYMENTS, AND DEDUCTIBLES. (a) Subject to
Subsection (b) of this section, if on October 1, 2017, the actuary determines and states in the then
most recent actuarial report delivered to the board that the number of years required to fully

203
amortize the unfunded liability of the fund is more than 30 years, the board shall modify the
retiree health plan as follows:

(1) the amount of the contributions in effect under Sections 4.02 and 4.021 of this Act shall be
increased by a percentage determined by the board not to exceed 10 percent on October 1 of each
year, commencing October 1, 2017; and

(2) the maximum deductibles and maximum out-of-pocket payments for each individual in a
calendar year and for each family in a calendar year set out in the retiree health plan then in
effect shall be increased by a percentage determined by the board not to exceed 10 percent on
January | of each year, commencing January 1, 2018.

(b) The board is not required to implement additional increases under Subsection (a) of this
section if the actuary determines and states in the actuarial report delivered to the board under
that subsection that the number of years required to fully amortize the unfunded liability of the
fund is 30 years or less.

(c) Except as provided by this section, the board may not change the amount of contributions to
the fund by a member under Section 4.02 of this Act or a municipality under Section 4.021 of
this Act.

Sec, 4.023. UNIFORMED SERVICE. (a) A member of the fund who enters any uniformed
service of the United States may not:

(1) be required to make the monthly payments into the fund as required by this Act while the
member is engaged in active service with the uniformed service; or

(2) lose any seniority rights or retirement benefits provided by this Act because of that service.

(b) Not later than the 90th day after the date of the member's reinstatement to an active status in a
fire or police department, the member shall file with the secretary of the board a written
statement of intent to pay into the fund an amount equal to the amount the member would have
paid if the member had remained on active status in the department during the period of the
member's absence while in the uniformed service.

(c) The member shall make the payment described by Subsection (b) of this section in full within
a period after the member's return that is equal to three times the amount of time the member was
absent, except that the maximum period for payment may not exceed five years.

(d) If the member does not comply with Subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the member loses
all credit toward the member's years of service for the length of time the member was engaged in
active service in any uniformed service.

(e) The amount of credit purchased under this section may not exceed the length of the active
service in a uniformed service required to be credited by law.

204
(f) If the member complies with this section and makes all required payments, a municipality to
which this Act applies shall make payment to the fund in an amount equal to the amount the
municipality would have paid if the member had remained on active status in the department
during the member's absence while in the uniformed service.

Rights of Beneficiaries and Members; Association

Sec. 4.03. (a) Beneficiaries and members of the fund are entitled to all rights otherwise provided
to the beneficiaries or members under any state or federal statute.

(b) This fund is intended to be a voluntary employee's beneficiary association as described by
Section 501(c), Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)), and the board has the
discretion to take any action necessary to ensure that the fund is classified as such.

ARTICLE 5, RETIREMENT HEALTH BENEFITS

Sec. 5.01. RETIREMENT HEALTH BENEFITS. (a) A person is eligible to receive health and
medical benefits under this Act in accordance with the provisions of the retiree health plan in
effect, except as otherwise provided by this Act.

(b) Health and medical benefits shall be provided by the fund to persons who are eligible to
receive them under Subsection (a) of this section, in accordance with the provisions of the retiree
health plan in effect, except as otherwise provided by this Act.

(c) The expiration of the terms, or the termination, of the collective bargaining agreements or the
master contract document has no effect on the retiree health plan or the benefits provided under
this Act.

(d) The board as it considers appropriate may modify the retiree health plan if the modifications
adopted at any regular or special meeting of the board do not, in the aggregate, increase the
fund's total actuarial unfunded liability, as determined by the actuary. The board has exclusive
authority to modify the retiree health plan.

(e) The board may discontinue benefits under this section for any person who does not make the
contributions required by Section 4.02 of this Act.

(f) On January 1, 2008, the maximum deductible for each individual in a calendar year as set out
in the retiree health plan increases from $100 or $200, as applicable, to $500, and the maximum
deductible for each family in a calendar year as set out in the retiree health plan increases from
$200 or $400, as applicable, to $1,000.

(g) The maximum out-of-pocket, including deductible, payment for each individual for each of
the following calendar years as set out in the retiree health plan increases as follows:

(1) on January 1, 2008, from $600 or $700, as applicable, to $1,500;

205
(2) on January 1, 2009, from $1,500 to $1,600;

(3) on January 1, 2010, from $1,600 to $1,700;

(4) on January 1, 2011, from $1,700 to $1,800; and

(5) on January 1, 2012, from $1,800 to $1,900.

(h) Commencing January 1, 2013, on January 1 of each year the board shall increase the amount
of the maximum deductible and out-of-pocket payments established under Subsections (f) and
(g) of this section by a percentage equal to the then most recently published annual percentage
increase in health care costs as set out in a published index selected by the actuary that reflects
annual changes in health care costs. The annual percentage increase provided for by this
subsection may not exceed eight percent.

ARTICLE 6. INVESTMENT AND FINANCIAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 6.01. Repealed by Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1415, Sec. 19, eff. October 1, 2007.

Sec. 6.02. ACCOUNTS AND FINANCIAL REPORTS. (a) Accounts of the fund shall be kept as
ordered by the board.

(b) The board shall require that monthly financial reports showing all fund receipts and
disbursements be prepared and submitted to the board.

Reserve Funds

Sec. 6.03. (a) The board shall determine a reasonably safe amount of surplus necessary to defray
reasonable expenses of the fund.

(b) All other assets shall be designated as reserve funds.

(c) Only the board may invest and manage the reserve funds. The reserve funds must be invested
and managed for the sole benefit of the beneficiaries.

Investment Powers of Board

Sec. 6.04. (a) The board shall invest the reserve funds in a manner that a prudent investor would
invest the funds, considering the purposes, terms, distribution requirements, and other
circumstances of an enterprise with a similar character and similar aims.

(b) The board shall diversify the investment of the reserve funds to minimize the risk of large
losses unless under the circumstances it is clearly prudent not to do so. In determining whether
the board has exercised prudence concerning an investment decision, the investment of all assets
of the funds, rather than the prudence of a single investment of the funds, shall be considered.

206
(c) The board may directly manage investments of the reserve funds or may choose to contract
for professional management services. If the funds own real estate, the board may, at its
discretion, establish an organization described by Section 501(c)(2) or 501(c)(25), Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to hold title to the real estate.

(d) The board has final responsibility for the investment of the reserve funds. The board may
purchase securities or engage in limited partnerships or make other investments not specifically
provided by this Act and has the authority to exercise discretion in determining the nature, type,
quality, and size of any investment consistent with the investment policies it establishes.

Professional Consultants
Sec. 6.05. (a) The board may contract for professional investment management services,
financial consultants, independent auditors, third-party administrators, preferred providers, health

maintenance organizations, attorneys, and actuaries. Only the board may enter into those
contracts. The board may establish a reasonable fee for compensation under those contracts.

(b) The board may designate its own custodian or master custodian to perform the customary
duties involving the safekeeping of the assets and the execution of transactions of either domestic
or foreign securities. The board may engage in a securities lending program consistent with the
benefits payable to beneficiaries.

Sec. 6.06. INVESTMENT CONSULTANT QUALIFICATIONS. In appointing investment
consultants, the board shall require that the investment consultant be:

(1) registered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. Section 80b-1 et seq.), as
amended;

(2) a bank as defined by that Act; or

(3) an insurance company qualified to perform investment services under the law of more than
one state,

ARTICLE 7. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
REQUIREMENTS

Ethics Policy
Sec. 7.01. (a) A trustee, the executive director, or any employee of the fund may not:
(1) buy, sell, or exchange any property to or from the fund;

(2) deal with the assets of the fund in the person's own interest or for the person's own account;
or

(3) receive any consideration from any person dealing with the fund.
207
(b) To implement Subsection (a) of this section and to strengthen the faith and confidence of the
members and beneficiaries of the fund, the board shall develop standards of conduct and
financial disclosure requirements to be observed by each trustee and by the executive director in
the performance of the board's and executive director's official duties.

ARTICLE 8. TRANSITION; EFFECTIVE DATE; EMERGENCY [REPEALED]
Secs. 8.01, 8.02. Repealed by Acts 1999, 76th Leg., ch. 52, Sec. 24(a), eff. Oct. 1, 1999.

Acts 1997, 75th Leg., ch. 1332, eff. Oct. 1, 1997. Amended by Acts 1999, 76th Leg., ch. 52, Sec.
1 to 24, eff. Oct. 1, 1999.

Amended by:

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state. tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
1, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R:S.; Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
2, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
3, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch, <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
4, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtexv/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
5, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtex/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
6, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www. legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R /billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
7, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www. legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
8, eff. October 1, 2007.

208
Acts 2007, 80th Lez, RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
9, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS.; Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
10, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
11, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
12, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS.,. Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www. legis. state. tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
13, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www. legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
14, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R /billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
15, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www. legis. state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
16, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www .legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
17, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"
href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
18, eff. October 1, 2007.

Acts 2007, 80th Leg., RS., Ch. <a target="new"

href="http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/80R/billtext/html/HB02751F.HTM">1415</a>, Sec.
19, eff. October 1, 2007.

209
 

ATTACHMENT 8
ORGANIZATIONAL CHART
SERVICE AND SUPPORT BUREAU

 

210
