COLLECTIVE BARGAL

 

ING AGREEMENT

BY AND BETWEEN
LEXINGTON-FAYETTE URBAN COUNTY GOVERNMENT
AND

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, TOWN BRANCH LODGE #83

CORRECTIONS OFFICERS AND SERGEANTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREAMBLE ......cccscssssssssssesssncsnsecsessncsnssesesnsncsesseoesnsnesessenesnsnesesscsesesnesesuenesesaesesscnesessesesecneneeneneeesees 1
ARTICLE 1 — RECOGNITION .........cccssssssssssessssssessssesessssesesscsesssnesesnesesssnesesncsesesnesesncneseeneneeneneee 1
ARTICLE 2 — SUBORDINATION .......csssssssssssssssesssesessssesesscsesssnesesnesesesnesesncsescneseeneneseeneneeneneee 2
ARTICLE 3 — LFUCG RIGHTS. .......cccssssssssessssssessssesessssesessesessssesesacsesssnesesncseeeenesesneneeesneneeneseee 2

ARTICLE 4 —- NON-DISCRIMINATION

 

ARTICLE 5 —- STRIKES, WORK STOPPAGES, AND SLOWDOWNS .........ssssssssssesseseeseseee 4
ARTICLE 6 — LODGE SECURITY .........cccssssssssssessssesessssessssesessssesesncsesseneneansncesacseencneseeneneeneseee 5
ARTICLE 7 — LODGE BUSINESS .......sssssssssssssssesssesessssesesscnessssesesnesessssesesncsesesnenstnenecseneseeneneee 9
ARTICLE 8 — SENIORITY .........ccccsssssssssssesssscsessssesssncsesneneessnesessenesesaeseseneeesnesescnesesncseeeeneseeneee 12
ARTICLE 9 — ASSIGNMENTS ......ccccsssssoesssscsssssoesssscsessenesesncnesncnesesncsessenceesacsesecneseencseeesneseeneee 13
ARTICLE 10 — PROMOTIONAL VACANCIES .......csssssssssssssssssssssssessssceesscseeesncseencseeeencneeneee 17
ARTICLE 11 — GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE .........sssssssssssssssessssesesscsesssseeesseseeeeseseencseeeencaeenee 20

ARTICLE 12 —- DIVISION ORDERS AND STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES 24

ARTICLE 13 — HEALTH AND SAFETY.........cccccssssssssssessssesessssesessesesssseeesneseseeseseeneseeeeneaeeneee 25
ARTICLE 14 — DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES .........sccssssssssssessssesessssceeseseeeeneseeseseeeeneaeeneee 28
ARTICLE 15 — PERSONNEL FILES .........cscsssssssssssssesssoesssncsesssnesesseseessncsesncseecseseeneseeesneeeeeeen 30
ARTICLE 16 — RESIDENCY. ........cccssscsssssessssesessssesssscsesssoesesncsesssnesesnesesseneeesnesesecneseeneseeeeneaeeneen 31

ARTICLE 17 —- MILITARY LEAVES ...

 

ARTICLE 18 — LEGAL PROTECTION ........cssssssssssssssessssssesssseseseseessneeessesesecnesesncseeeeneeeeneen 32
ARTICLE 19 — COURT-RELATED PAY ......ccsssssssssssssssessssesesssncsesnesesssneeesscseseeneseeneseeeeneseeneen 33
ARTICLE 20 — OVERTIME........c.cccssssssssssessssessssssesssnesesneoesesnesesssnesesnesesseneaesnesesecneaesneseeesneseeneen 34
ARTICLE 21 — ACTING PAY uu... cesccssssssessssesessssesssscsessssesesncsesssnesesnesessenceesnesesecnesesneseseeneseeneen 36
ARTICLE 22 — PAID AND UNPAID LEAVES .......cccssssssssssssesssoesesseseesssceesscseeseneseeneseeesneeeeneen 36
ARTICLE 23 —- DISABILITY LEAVE AND MODIFIED DUTY

 

ARTICLE 24 — DEATH IN THE LINE OF DUTY ........cccccsssssssessssesessseceesseseeesnesceeseeeeneneeneee 47
ARTICLE 25 - HEALTH AND WELLNESS BENEFITG.........ccccsssssssssssessssesseseseeseseeeeneneeneee 47
ARTICLE 26 — LIFE INSURANCE .......ccssssssssssssessssssesssnesssnesessssesesneseesenceesncseseenesesncseeeneeeencee 48
ARTICLE 27 — TUITION BENEFIT .........ccscssssssessssssesssoesessesesssnesesncsessssceesncseseenesesncneseeneneensee 49

ARTICLE 28 - PERSONAL PROPERTY REIMBURSEMENT

 

ARTICLE 29 — SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL .........ccscsssssssssssessssesesssseeeenenssecsesesseseseenesesncseeesseseeneee 51
ARTICLE 30 — SALARY SCHEDULE........cccssssssssssesssssoessssesessssesesseseeseseseensnceeseseencseeeeseeeeneee 51
ARTICLE 31 —- ALCOHOL AND DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE .........ccccssssscsssssssseseeeeseeeeseee 52
ARTICLE 32 — RESPONSIBLE RELATIONSHIP........sssssssssssssssessssessseesesseseeesncsesscseeesncscencee 62
ARTICLE 33 — FEDERAL OR STATE LAWS .......cccscssssssssssesseoeeessesessssceesscseesencscsncseeesncseenee 63
ARTICLE 34 — GENDER .......cccssssssssssesessesesssncsesnenesssnensssoesesneseseoeaesnesesssseeesneseescneaesncseeeencsesecee 63
ARTICLE 35 — SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT ........ccsscsssssssssssssssssessssesescseeeescseencseeesneseeneee 63

ARTICLE 36 —- MISCELLANEOUS WORKING CONDITIONS ..

 

ARTICLE 37 — TERM ...ccccssesscssssssssssncssssssesssscsesssnesssncsesenesssnesesenesesnesessenesesacsesscnesesncseeesnesesacee 64
APPENDIX A — UNIFORM DISCIPLINARY CODE ........ccsssssssssssssessssecesseseseesesescseeeeneneeneee 66
APPENDIX B — DETAILED SALARY SCHEDULE .........ccsssssssssssssssssecesssseeeesescsseseeeeneneencen 84
APPENDIX C — FOP GRIEVANCE FORM ......ccsssssssssssessssesessseesessesessssesesncseeesnesesncseeeencaeencen 85

iii
PREAMBLE
THIS COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT, entered into this___ day of
»20____, by and between the Lexington-Fayette Urban County
Government (hereinafter the “LFUCG”), and Town Branch Fraternal Order of Police Lodge No.
83, Inc. (hereinafter “Lodge”), by which said parties hereby agree upon the terms and conditions
as hereinafter set out, concerning wages, hours and working conditions of certain employees of

the Division of Community Corrections.

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION

Section 1. Pursuant to KRS 67A.6901, LFUCG recognizes the Lodge as the exclusive
collective bargaining representative of its sworn officers holding the positions of Officer and
Sergeant in the Division of Community Corrections. Non-sworn personnel, including trainees or
recruits, and sworn officers during their initial probationary periods, and sworn personnel in
grades other than Officer and Sergeant, are not included in this Agreement.

Section 2. The Lodge recognizes the Mayor’s representative and designee as the sole
representative of LFUCG for the purposes of collective bargaining negotiations.

Section 3. As used in this Agreement, unless specified otherwise, the term “member(s)”
refers to sworn employees of the Lexington Division of Community Corrections holding the
grades of Officer and Sergeant, who have completed their initial probationary period. Initial
probation period does not include promotional probation for Sergeants.

Section 4. LFUCG and the Lodge shall bargain promptly upon request by the other side
and continue for a reasonable period of time in order to exchange freely information, opinions

and proposals, and to endeavor to reach agreement on matters within the scope of representation.
Section 5. Every officer shall serve an initial probationary period of six (6) months from
the date of hire. In extraordinary circumstances, the probationary period may be extended
beyond the six (6) months not to exceed an additional six (6) month period.

Section 6. Every Sergeant shall serve an initial promotional probationary period of six
(6) months from the date of promotion and shall be included in this agreement during said
probationary period. If a sergeant is not able to complete the promotional probationary period

they shall return to officer status.

ARTICLE 2
SUBORDINATION
This Agreement shall, in all respects wherever the same may be applicable herein, be
subject and subordinate to all applicable statutes, constitutional provisions and any revisions,
amendments or newly adopted provisions to any statute or constitutional provisions in effect

upon the effective date of this Agreement or which may be hereafter enacted.

ARTICLE 3
LFUCG RIGHTS
Section 1. The inherent right to manage, direct and control working forces in all respects is
expressly reserved to LFUCG; subject, however, to such limitations as are contained in this
agreement. Exclusive rights of the LFUCG shall include, but not be limited to, any subject not
preempted by Federal and State law.
A. Determination of the organizational structure of the Division of Community
Corrections, including the existence, continuance, abolishment, restructuring, or

combining, of all bureaus, departments, units, branches, and subparts thereof.
. The right to promulgate, at its discretion, policies, rules, regulations, and Orders
which are not inconsistent with this agreement.

. The right to determine the methods, means, and personnel by which operations are to
be implemented and established.

. The right to take action as necessary to carry out the mission of the Division of
Community Corrections in an emergency.

. Assignment of personnel consistent with the provisions of this agreement
Determination of necessary qualifications, standards, and procedures, for hire and
promotion, consistent with this Agreement.

. Establishment of standards of performance and service, and taking necessary
disciplinary action subject to this Agreement.

. It is agreed and understood that the relieving or suspending of law enforcement
powers is distinct from a suspension from pay. LFUCG reserves the power to relieve
or suspend law enforcement powers during the course of an investigation or at any
time there has been an allegation or report of possible harm to the member or others.
Elimination of positions, and any consequent reductions in force or layoffs. LFUCG
shall notify the Lodge President of known reductions in force as soon as practical
after the decision to reduce the force has been made. Reductions in force, by rank,
shall be made in seniority order with the lowest senior officer being force reduced
first then moving up the seniority list until the desired reduction is completed. At the
rank of sergeant in lieu of a layoff in force reduction the sergeant shall have the right
to voluntarily demote to the rank of officer and be placed into the seniority scale to
include all time. LFUCG shall correct the voluntary demotion back to sergeant prior

to the returning of any staff.
Section 2. This agreement is not intended to restrict consultation with the Lodge
regarding matters within the right of LFUCG to determine. In fact, it is the intention of the

Lodge to work with LFUCG for the common good.

ARTICLE 4
NON-DISCRIMINATION

Section 1. Neither LFUCG nor the Lodge shall discriminate against any member
because he or she is or is not a member of the Fraternal Order of Police, nor because of lawful
Local activity or refraining there from, nor shall either party discriminate against any member on
the basis of race, color, sex, age, creed, religion, marital status, sexual orientation, national
origin, disability, political affiliation, nor any other protected class as specified by applicable
Local, State, and Federal law.

Section 2. Harassment or Disparate Treatment. LFUCG shall take reasonable measures
to prevent harassment or disparate treatment at the workplace. LFUCG shall take measures to
provide members with a venue to report harassment, disparate and differential treatment as

provided by CAO Policy 5R incorporated herein by reference.

ARTICLE 5
STRIKES, WORK STOPPAGES, AND SLOWDOWNS
Section 1. The Lodge recognizes that it is unlawful to engage in strikes and work
stoppages. The Lodge agrees that it shall neither cause nor counsel any Member to engage in,
encourage sanction or support any work stoppage, work slowdowns, unauthorized accelerated
enforcement, mass absenteeism and other concerted efforts to alter work production. In addition,

the Lodge agrees that any of the foregoing actions by members may constitute cause for their
termination, and that the Lodge shall not encourage such activity and shall take prompt and
reasonable steps to discourage same.
Section 2. Mass or concerted call-ins of sick or other leave, shall be deemed strikes or

work stoppages hereunder.

ARTICLE 6
LODGE SECURITY

Section 1. Membership in the Lodge is not compulsory. Members have the right to join
or not join and neither party shall exert pressure or discriminate against a member regarding such
matters. All members in the bargaining unit, however, shall be required to pay their fair share of
the cost of representation by the Lodge, as provided for in applicable law.

Section 2. Lodge membership dues, as authorized by members on the approved form
described in Section 3 below, or fair share fees shall be deducted monthly in an amount certified
by the Lodge. Members wishing to revoke their Lodge membership, or to join the Lodge
membership, must notify LFUCG and the Lodge expressly and individually, in writing by
certified mail. Upon such notification, LFUCG shall begin deducting membership dues or the
fair share fee hereinafter described, whichever is appropriate, from the wages of such member as
soon as practical but in no event later than the 2™ pay period following receipt of such notice.

Section 3. LFUCG agrees to deduct from the wages of any member the dues as
authorized by said member or fair share fee, as long as it is a continual or regular deduction, on a
form authorized by LFUCG and the Lodge, said deduction to occur during the second pay period
in each calendar month, pursuant to KRS 65.158. Upon request, thirty (30) days prior to the
beginning of the fiscal year, and upon request every six (6) months thereafter, LFUCG shall

transmit to the Lodge Treasurer a spreadsheet containing the list of current members together
with bi-weekly salary for each. Within fifteen (15) days the Lodge Treasurer shall return the
spreadsheet with the dues or fair share amount for each member entered therein, which shall
serve as certification of the amounts to be deducted under this section.

Section 4. Lodge membership dues, and fair share fees, shall be transmitted to the
Treasurer of the Lodge by the fifteenth 15") day of the succeeding month after such deductions
are made. The Lodge shall annually certify, in writing, the current and proper amount of its
membership dues at least thirty (30) days prior to the initial deduction, for the next twelve-month
operating cycle.

Section 5. The check-off of regular Lodge dues shall be made only on the basis of
written authorization signed by the individual employee from whose pay the dues shall be
deducted, on a form authorized by LFUCG and the Lodge. All bargaining unit members,
however, shall be required to pay their fair share of the cost of representation by the Lodge,
pursuant to applicable law and the following:

A. Employees who are included in the collective bargaining unit but who exercise their
right to decline to become members of the Lodge, shall be required to pay a fair share
fee, for cost of collective bargaining, the amount of which shall be determined as set
forth below.

B. The Lodge shall provide to all affected employees and to LFUCG at least thirty (30)
days advance written notice of the amount of the “fair share” fee together with an
accounting by an independent certified accountant setting forth the major categories
of the Lodge’s budgeted expenses and designating those expenses which are related
to bargaining, contract administration, and grievance adjustment (“chargeable”) and
those which are not germane to bargaining, contract administration, and grievance

adjustment (“non-chargeable”). The accounting and designations must be in a manner
allowing for appraisal of which portions of Lodge expenses are non-chargeable, and
should indicate the percentage proportions of total Lodge expenses devoted to
chargeable and non-chargeable purposes. The initial amount of the fair share or
service fee shall be the amount of the Lodge dues reduced by a percentage equivalent
to the percentage of the total Lodge expenses devoted to indisputably non-chargeable
purposes as determined by the certified public accountant.

C. The above described notice must also include a clear statement of the manner in
which the amount of the fair share or service fee may be challenged by affected
employees. The procedure for said challenges shall include a requirement that the
challenges be in writing and delivered to the Lodge, with a copy to LFUCG, within
thirty (30) days after receipt of the written notice described in the preceding
subsection B.

D. In the event of a challenge to the fair share fee, the Lodge shall afford the challenger a
reasonably prompt resolution of the challenge, by an impartial decision-maker who
may be an arbitrator chosen from a panel of arbitrators supplied by the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service or a similar organization of professional
arbitrators. The method of selection of the impartial arbitrator shall include a request
for a panel, and the opportunity for alternate striking between the Lodge and the
employee. All challenges to a single notice of the amount of the fair share fee shall be
decided by a single decision-maker at a single hearing.

E. In the event of a challenge, fifty percent (50%) of the fair share fee (as described in
subsection B, above) shall be placed in an escrow account by LFUCG until the

issuance of a decision by the impartial decision-maker as set forth above.
F. In the event of a challenge, the final amount of the fair share fee as determined by the
impartial decision-maker shall reflect only those expenses affirmatively related to
collective bargaining, contract administration, and grievance adjustment.

G. Upon rendering the impartial decision-maker’s decision, the disputed amounts held in
escrow shall be distributed to the challenging employee, the Lodge, or both, as
indicated in the arbitrator’s decision.

H. Provided the foregoing conditions are met, then the deduction of the initial amount of
the fair share or service fee shall be automatic following the thirty (30) day notice and
information provided for hereinabove, and shall begin thirty (30) days after the
provision of such notice regardless of whether the employee has signed written
authorization therefore.

I. The Lodge shall indemnify and save harmless LFUCG against any expense or liability,
including attorney fees that may arise out of or by reason of any action taken by
LFUCG consistent with the foregoing, in connection with a fair share fee. In the event
LFUCG should be held liable or responsible for repayment of moneys paid to the
Lodge pursuant hereto, the Lodge shall reimburse said moneys to LFUCG

J. These provisions shall be interpreted insofar as possible in a manner consistent with
applicable federal statutes or case law.

K. LFUCG shall provide the Lodge a forty-five (45) minute period during new hire

orientation to conduct Lodge related orientation.
ARTICLE 7
LODGE BUSINESS

Section 1. The Lodge may select not more than three (3) members and the Lodge
President to represent the Lodge in the negotiation of collective bargaining agreements for
Community Corrections with LFUCG during working hours without loss in compensation. The
persons so designated shall be allowed a reasonable time off, not to exceed ten (10) days each
without loss of compensation to prepare proposals, collect data, meet with counsel and/or
committee members and consultants for the purposes of expediting good faith negotiations. The
Lodge shall provide fourteen (14) days prior notice to the Director of Community Corrections of
the dates and times needed to conduct business relating to collective bargaining negotiations.
LFUCG and the Lodge may mutually agree to waive said notice. The Director of Community
Corrections shall be notified by the Lodge in writing of any substitutions or replacements of
designated persons no less than forty-eight (48) hours before each such change shall take effect.
The parties shall act in good faith to request and allow scheduled time off under this section as is
most convenient to the parties.

Section 2. One (1) paid Lodge Representative may attend grievance meetings with
Management. In addition to the Lodge Representative, one (1) additional employee as an unpaid
observer and the named grievant may attend. The attorney for the grievant may attend in place
of the unpaid observer, but at no time shall the number of Lodge representatives, including the
named grievant, exceed three (3) persons. The amount of time spent on such activities shall be
reported in writing within ten (10) days to the Director of Community Corrections.

Section 3. The Lodge may select no more than two (2) representatives who shall be
allowed to attend extraordinary as well as regular sessions of the Kentucky General Assembly

without loss in compensation. The Lodge shall submit in writing the names of its representatives
to the Director of Community Corrections not later than fourteen (14) days before the time when
the expected leave shall be taken. The Lodge shall provide written notification to the Director of
Community Corrections of any Lodge representative substitution/replacement. The amount of
time spent on such activities shall be reported in writing within ten (10) days of completion of
the term of the legislative session to the Director of Community Corrections.

Section 4. The President of the Lodge, when an active bargaining unit member of
LFUCG Division of Community Corrections or his designee shall be authorized leave to attend
conventions, seminars, meetings, and other business of the Lodge for a period of thirty (30)
calendar days with pay in one (1) fiscal year (taken in hourly increments). Above referenced
leaves, paid or unpaid, must be pre-approved by the member’s immediate commander with forty-
eight (48) hours being the standard for notification; however, it is understood that some time
parameters might be shorter on a case-by-case basis. Approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld. In addition, the President of the Lodge shall be allowed to use his accumulated
vacation or holiday leave.

Section 5. The Director shall authorize leave with pay for two (2) duly elected delegates,
who are active sworn employees of LFUCG Division of Community Corrections to attend the
Lodge’s national elections, Kentucky elections, Kentucky general membership meetings, and
Kentucky board meetings.

Section 6. Up to six (6) Lodge members who are elected board members and active
bargaining unit members of the Lodge or on the certified representative list shall be excused
without pay to attend general membership meetings, regular and special board meetings, or
representatives’ meetings, not to exceed a total of three (3) hours per person per month, provided

that forty-eight (48) hours prior supervisory notice is given.

10
Section 7. LFUCG agrees to provide the Lodge designated space on available bulletin
boards upon which the Lodge may post notice of meetings, announcements, or Lodge
information. The Lodge further agrees that it shall not post any material which would be
derogatory to any individual, LFUCG, Lexington Division of Community Corrections,
Commonwealth of Kentucky, or which constitutes campaign material for or against any person,
organization, or faction thereof. Campaign material does not include announcements or
information regarding internal campaign election meetings of the Lodge. All notices of the
Lodge shall consist of items in good grammar, taste, and shall be signed by the President of the
Lodge and/or Secretary of the Lodge. Copies of any material so posted shall be furnished to the
Director of Community Corrections or his designee at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to
posting. LFUCG may remove any material which is not authorized by the Lodge. LFUCG shall
determine the quantity and size of all bulletin boards. The locations of the bulletin boards shall
be mutually agreed upon. In addition the Lodge shall be permitted to send LFUCG email for the
exact same purposes and under the exact same restrictions it uses bulletin boards.

Section 8. The parties agree that they shall each pay one-half (1/2) cost of the printing of
this Agreement.

Section 9. The Lodge President may designate one (1) member to attend scheduled or
special meetings of the entire Urban County Council and meetings of the Public Safety
Committee. The member shall be required to use accumulated vacation or holiday leave and

shall not be absent for any period longer than required to attend the meeting.

11
ARTICLE 8
SENIORITY
Section 1. Seniority of a member shall commence on the first date of employment as a

LFUCG Division of Community Corrections Officer. No portion of this Agreement shall be
applicable to any officer who has not completed his initial probationary period. Seniority of a
Sergeant shall commence on the date of promotion to the position of the higher rank. Should a
member voluntarily demote, seniority in the lower rank shall include all time served in the higher
rank and be considered continuous as seniority in the lower rank.

Section 2. Seniority shall be considered continuous unless the member:

A. Is discharged for cause.

B. Is laid off for more than two (2) years.

C. Fails to return to work within thirty (30) days without just cause after recall
subsequent to a lay-off.

D. Voluntarily resigns, unless at the sole discretion of LFUCG, a member returns to
work within one (1) year after voluntary resignation, his or her seniority shall be
deemed continuous, less such time as he or she was not a member of the Division of
Community Corrections.

Section 3. Upon request, LFUCG shall semi-annually furnish the Lodge a seniority list

based on this Article.

12
ARTICLE 9
ASSIGNMENTS

Section 1. Bureau assignments shall be made according to the following parameters:

A. Bureau and shift bids shall be handled twice annually. The Lodge shall provide at
least a fifteen (15) day notification of the pending bid process date. Officers shall
have a minimum of fifteen (15) calendar days from the opening of the bid process to
submit their bid preferences to the Director or designee in a prescribed format. Before
the bid is conducted, the Director shall announce the number of positions available in
each classification and any special requirements for any positions concerning gender,
experience, or other matters which impact management of the detention center.

B. The officer bidding with the most seniority shall be assigned excepting exclusions
listed below:

1. Unless the Director determines that a vacancy shall not be filled, the Division shall
make bureau assignments to vacancies that occur during interim periods on a
temporary basis for a period of no longer than thirty (30) days or until a special
bid process can be arranged or the next bid process occurs, whichever time period
is shorter.

2. Administratively, the seniority rule may have to be overruled to prevent an
overload of less experienced officers or sergeants on an assignment provided such
action is taken within 72 hours (excluding weekends and holidays) of the bid
results being delivered to management. If an incident requiring this unusual

action occurs, it shall be made right as soon as practical.

13
C. The Director or designee may overrule the bid process for a legitimate managerial
reason(s) in a specific individual instance(s). Such legitimate managerial reason(s)
shall be communicated in writing to that member.

D. Regular Days off (R.D.O.’s) - R.D.O.’s for shift personnel shall be established by
seniority.

E. Unless the Director determines that a vacancy shall not be filled, a Sergeant’s
assignment vacancy occurring after the execution of this Agreement shall be posted
for a period of not less than fifteen (15) calendar days in the Division. The Sergeant
bidding on the vacancy with the most seniority in rank shall be assigned, other than
those assignments that have been deemed critical by the Director. Administratively,
the seniority rule may have to be overruled to prevent an overload of less experienced
Sergeants on a shift or assignment, or for another legitimate managerial reason. Such
legitimate managerial reason shall be communicated to the member in writing. If an
incident requiring this unusual action occurs, it shall be made right as soon as
practical or at the next bid process whichever time period is shorter.

F. In cases of “ties,” whenever two (2) or more officers have the same hire date the order
of seniority shall be determined by lottery selection. Whenever two (2) or more
sergeants have the same promotion date the order of seniority shall be determined by
earlier hire date; if a tie still exists the order of seniority shall be determined by lottery
selection.

Section 2. All positions other than those in the assignments as prescribed above shall be

filled as provided in this section.

A. A member applying for a vacancy in a part-time specialized team (i.e., Honor Guard,

and CERT) shall be selected by means of the most senior qualified bidder. Within

14
sixty (60) days of the final execution of this Agreement a list of qualifications for
these positions shall be provided to the Lodge. Current assignments to these positions
shall not be changed until vacancies occur.

B. A member applying for appointment as a Field Training Officer (FTO) shall be
selected by means of the most senior qualified bidder. Within sixty (60) days of the
ratification of this Agreement a list of qualifications for these positions shall be
provided to the Lodge. Current assignments to these positions shall not be changed
until vacancies occur.

C. All positions in A or B above shall be conspicuously posted Division-wide for a
period of no less than fifteen (15) days.

D. The Director or his designee reserves the right to appoint to the following critical
division positions without posting the vacancy: Public Information Officer, Bureau of
Professional Standards, Bureau of CAP, Bureau of Master Control/Lobby,
Classification Unit, Warehouse, Courthouse Processing, and Inmate Services Unit
and any other critical position as designated by the Director of Community
Corrections. Appointments to these critical positions shall be for one (1) year.
Incumbents are eligible to apply for re-appointment. A panel consisting of the
affected bureau manager or his designee and three (3) commanders from non-affected
areas shall review each application for appointment and shall select the best candidate
considering length of service, experience, education, training, certifications,
performance reviews, and disciplinary history. A Lodge representative may be

present to observe each panel’s deliberations.

15
Section 3. Transfers

A. The transfer of a member is the movement from one position or task assignment to
another position or task assignment within the Division. The following may be
reasons for transferring a member:

1. A voluntary request;

2. A lack of funding resulting from a loss of federal/state funds;

3. An administrative reorganization;

4. An unforeseen event or condition requiring prompt action:

5. A change in the member’s physical or mental condition;

6. The resolution of a grievance or other problem affecting the operational efficiency
of a unit or organization;

7. The need for additional personnel at a specific work site;

8. The best interests of the Division.

B. A member shall be notified by the Director of Community Corrections or designee of
the intended involuntary transfer by five (5) days written notice setting forth with
specificity the reason for said transfer, unless the Director, in his sole discretion,
declares an emergency or a member agrees to waive the five (5) days notice. The
written notification of transfer shall set forth the specific factual basis which
constitutes the reason for the transfer. A member who suffers a severe hardship as a
result of a shift change may, however, request an extension of up to fourteen (14)
days from the scheduled date of transfer. Any member subjected to a non-voluntary

transfer shall begin earning the pay of the new position at the beginning of the next

16
pay period upon being transferred whether it is a new assignment or a temporary
transfer. This pay shall remain in effect until the non-voluntary transfer is corrected.
Section 4. Trades
Members may trade regular days off or shifts within their assigned bureau with
notification to and approval of the shift commander. The trade must be completed within the
same work week and must be submitted in writing with signatures of all members involved not
later than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the trade. Any change of scheduled days off or shifts
that necessitates the utilization of overtime shall not be permitted. A member may trade regular

days off or shifts no more than three (3) days in a calendar month.

ARTICLE 10
PROMOTIONAL VACANCIES

Section 1. A vacancy shall be deemed to exist when a position in the Division is vacant
due to demotion, termination, death, resignation, retirement, promotion or creation of a new
position. If it is determined that a position shall not be filled, LFUCG shall provide written
notice to the Lodge within ten (10) days after a vacancy occurs. If written notice is not given
LFUCG shall take all necessary action to fill a vacancy within (90) days.

If a vacancy for the position of Sergeant is determined not to be filled immediately,
officers serving in this position shall receive acting pay. If a vacancy for the position of
Lieutenant is determined not to be filled immediately, Sergeants serving in this position shall
receive acting pay.

Section 2. The Director shall notify the Lodge of intent to promote within ten (10) days
after a vacancy occurs. The vacancy shall be filled within ninety (90) days of the Director’s

notice of intent to promote.

17
Section 3.

A. Applicants for the position of sergeant shall have at least two (2) years of satisfactory
(No disciplinary action higher than a written reprimand in the last calendar year)
active service as an officer on the filing deadline date.

B. An applicant for the position of lieutenant must have completed two (2) years of
satisfactory (No disciplinary action higher than a written reprimand in the last
calendar year) active service in the grade of sergeant on the filing deadline date.

Section 4.

A. Promotions to the position of sergeant shall consist of two (2) phases: an objective
written examination and an oral interview. Points given for the written exam shall be
based upon the raw score. Points given for the final oral interview shall be
determined by standardization. Criteria to be used for the standardization shall be
provided in writing to the Lodge within thirty (30) days of the ratification of this
agreement. Each shall be weighted equally. The aggregate score for promotional
purposes shall be the total of the two (2) scores.

The written examination shall be administered by the Division of Human
Resources. All applicants shall be identified by number only on the examination and
a passing score must be obtained in order to proceed. A passing score shall be 70%.

Materials important to the promotion process include Division of Community
Corrections Operational Orders, policies, rules, regulations, Standard Operating
Procedures, Training bulletins, and government regulations that are applicable to the
job.

A complete listing of the scores from the written examination shall be

completed and posted within three (3) days following the written examination.

18
Challenges to test questions shall be made within three (3) days of said posting. The
Division of Human Resources shall respond to any challenges within three (3) days of
receipt. Final scores shall be posted within seven (7) days of the examination. All
candidates that receive a passing score shall proceed to the oral interview.

B. Promotions to the position of lieutenant shall consist of two (2) phases: a training and
experience (T&E) evaluation conducted by the Division of Human Resources based
on the information provided by the applicant; and an oral interview. Points given for
the final oral interview shall be determined by standardization. Criteria to be used for
the standardization shall be provided in writing to the Lodge within thirty (30) days of
the ratification of this agreement. Each shall be weighted equally. The aggregate
score for promotional purposes shall be the total of the two (2) scores. All candidates
that receive a passing score shall proceed to the oral interview.

Section 5. Members of the Oral Interview Board shall be the same for all applicants for
any one rank. There shall be no discussion of each candidate and each candidate shall be
independently ranked by each rater.

The Oral Board shall consist of the following members:

A. The Director of Community Corrections or a Bureau Manager

B. A Sergeant or Lieutenant from the area where the vacancy exists.

C. A Lieutenant or Captain.

The Director of Human Resources or his designee and a Lodge representative may be
present during the interview process. The Director of Human Resources or his designee shall
post the oral interview scores no later than five (5) days following the completion of interviews.

Section 6. The Director of Human Resources or his designee shall compile a composite

score of the written examination and the oral interview. The composite score shall be the only

19
score used to rank candidates for promotion from the official eligibility promotion list. Upon
posting of this final list, the candidates shall be listed by name. Should the composite score of
any candidates be equal, seniority shall prevail.

Section 7. A promotional vacancy in the ranks of sergeant and lieutenant shall be filled
by one of the eligible candidates by the Director. The Director, at his discretion, may interview
the candidates. The Director’s recommendation for promotion shall be forwarded through the
appropriate channels.

Section 8. The final eligibility list of applicants for promotion to sergeant and lieutenant
shall remain in effect for two (2) years unless abolished by the Director.

Section 9. Any and all documents utilized during the promotional process, which are not
protected from disclosure by law, shall be open to inspection by the designated Lodge Counsel

upon reasonable advance notice.

ARTICLE 11
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Section 1. A grievance is a difference or dispute between a member and LFUCG
regarding the meaning, interpretation or application of the express terms of this Agreement or a
disciplinary action. The purpose of this grievance procedure is to settle all grievances as quickly
as possible to ensure efficiency and promote employee morale. Discipline greater than or equal
to a written reprimand shall be grievable. Grievances of written reprimands shall begin at Step 2
of this procedure. Grievances of a suspension or dismissal shall begin at Step 3 (Human
Resources) of this procedure as provided in Article 14. For non-grievable disciplines a letter of
disagreement may be filed by the Lodge with LFUCG and placed in the employee's file within
thirty (30) days from the date of the disciplinary action. A grievance is presented when it is

written on the form attached as Appendix D and delivered to the designated Bureau Manager

20
(Major) or designee by an official representative of the Lodge. Any dispute concerning the
interpretation or application of an express provision of this agreement shall be subject
exclusively to this grievance procedure. Only the Lodge may file a grievance as the
representative of any member(s) of the bargaining unit.

Section 2. One (1) paid Lodge representative, one (1) additional employee as an unpaid
observer and the named grievant may attend the grievance meetings. The attorney for the
grievant may attend in place if the unpaid observer, but at no time shall the number of Lodge
representatives, including the grievant exceed three (3). Unless otherwise specified, all time
limits specified herein shall be calendar days. The following rules for the presentation and
solution of grievances are prescribed:

Step 1 - Bureau Manager (Major): The grievance shall, within ten (10) days of the
grieved event, be presented to the Bureau Manager (Major) or the designated
commander, who shall meet and discuss the grievance with the Lodge
Representative within fourteen (14) days after the date presented. The Bureau
Manager (Major) or the designated commander shall give a written answer
documenting the result of the meeting to the Lodge Representative within ten
(10) days following the meeting. If the Lodge fails to file a grievance within ten
(10) days the event may not be grieved. If the Bureau Manager fails to schedule
a meeting within fourteen (14) days or fails to issue a written response within
ten (10) days of the meeting, the grievance shall be considered satisfied in favor
of the grievant.

Step 2 - Director of Community Corrections: If the Lodge is not satisfied with the
answer obtained in Step 1, the Lodge Representative may appeal in writing

within ten (10) days to the Director of Community Corrections or his designee.

21
The Director of Community Corrections or his designee shall arrange for a
meeting within fourteen (14) days and shall respond in writing to the Lodge
representative within ten (10) days of the meeting. If the Lodge fails to file an
appeal within ten (10) days the event may not be grieved. If the Director fails to
schedule a meeting within fourteen (14) days or fails to issue a written response
within ten (10) days of the meeting the grievance shall be considered satisfied in
favor of the grievant.

Step 3 - Director of Human Resources: If a mutually satisfactory settlement can not be
reached at Step 2 within ten (10) days from the receipt of the written response
from the Director or his designee, the Lodge representative and or legal
representative shall present the grievance in writing to the director of Human
Resources. The director of Human Resources or his designee shall make a
determination in writing within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the
grievance. If the Lodge fails to present the grievance within ten (10) days the
appeal to the Director of Human Resources shall be deemed waived. If the
Director of Human Resources fails to issue a determination in writing within
thirty (30) days of the presentation of the grievance the grievance shall be
considered satisfied in favor of the grievant.

Step 4 - Advisory Arbitration:

(a) If the Lodge is not satisfied with the answer obtained in Step 3, it may,
within seven (7) days after receipt of the Step 3 answer, seek arbitration by
notifying LFUCG in writing of its intent to proceed to advisory arbitration.
A panel of seven (7) names from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation

Service (FMCS), Kentucky Department of Labor or the American

22
Arbitration Association (AAA) shall be requested within seventy five (75)
days of the notification date.

(b) An arbitrator shall be selected by the Lodge and LFUCG by alternately
striking a name from the panel submitted by the Kentucky Department of
Labor, the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS) or the
American Arbitration Association (AAA) with the side striking first
determined alternately. The parties shall meet for the purpose of striking
names from the panel within fourteen (14) days of receipt by both parties of
the panel from which an arbitrator is to be selected. After an arbitrator is
selected, both parties shall use their best efforts to schedule a hearing within
a reasonable time.

(c) The expenses, wages and other compensation of any witness called before
the arbitrator shall be borne by the party calling such witnesses, and
expenses such as wages of participants, preparation of briefs and data to be
presented to the arbitrator, shall be borne by the party incurring the
expenses.

(d) The arbitrator's fee and expenses and cost of any hearing room shall be
shared equally by each party.

(e) The powers of the arbitrator are limited as follows: The arbitrator shall have
no jurisdictional right to alter, amend, modify, disregard, add to or subtract
from or change in any way any term or condition of this Agreement or to
render an award which is in conflict with any provision of this Agreement.

The arbitrator shall consider only the specific issue or issues submitted to

23
him and shall confine his decision to a determination of the facts and an
interpretation and application of this Agreement.
(f) The decision and/or the award of the arbitrator shall be Advisory.

Section 3. If a grievance is not presented within the time limits set forth in this article,
the grievance shall be considered waived. If a grievance is not appealed to the next Step within
the specified time limit or any extension thereof, it shall be considered settled on the basis of
LFUCG's last answer. LFUCG shall file a written answer to the grievance or appeal thereof
within the time limits set forth herein. The time limits in each Step may be extended by mutual
agreement of LFUCG and the Lodge representative involved in each Step. It is agreed that
grievance settlements reached at the first or second steps are not precedent setting to either party.

Section 4. The procedure contained in this article is the sole and exclusive means of
resolving all disciplinary actions and/or grievances arising under this Collective Bargaining
Agreement.

Section 5. LFUCG and its representatives agree that it shall not attempt to bring about a
settlement directly with a bargaining unit member on any grievance referred to the Lodge after it

has received notice from the Lodge that it shall be representing the bargaining unit member.

ARTICLE 12
DIVISION ORDERS AND STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
Section 1. LFUCG has the right to promulgate rules and regulations, including
disciplining members, not inconsistent with the express provisions of this Agreement.
Section 2. No changes in Operational Orders, policies, rules, regulations, Standard

Operating Procedures, and the like of the Division of Community Corrections shall be effective

24
until they have been posted on bulletin boards and forwarded to the Lodge for a period of ten
(10) calendar days prior to the effective date subject to the terms of Article 3.

Section 3. A member shall be bound by any change in Operational Orders, policies,
rules, regulations, Standard Operating Procedures, and the like, upon receipt thereof; receipt shall
be verified by signature, or via email, which the member shall be required to give upon receiving
the change.

Section 4. Prior to implementing any new work rules, policies, procedures, or standard
operating procedures LFUCG shall notify Lodge at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of the
effective date. If Lodge requests to meet over such a change within that notice period, LFUCG
and Lodge shall meet to discuss the proposed changes. Neither Lodge’s agreement nor impasse
is required before implementing any change provided LFUCG complies with this section.

Section 5. The Division shall provide all Members access to all current Operational
Orders, policies, rules, regulations, Standard Operating Procedures, and the like, including
providing an updated master copy for members to review during off-duty hours. The master copy

may not be removed from the premises.

ARTICLE 13
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section 1. The Division shall take precautions to safeguard the health and safety of
members during their hours of work and maintain standards of safety and sanitation, and the
Lodge and all members shall cooperate in all matters concerning health and safety.
Section 2. No member shall be required to work in excess of sixteen (16) hours
consecutively, provided however, a member may waive this section. When a Member is

scheduled for a detail, training, or pre-planned event outside of his or her regularly scheduled

25
tour of duty, LFUCG shall provide five (5) calendar days prior notice. This section shall not
apply in exigent circumstances as determined by the Director.

Section 3. The Division shall make available on a twenty-four (24) hour basis for use as
necessary the following equipment: Bio hazard kit items, OC canisters, and all necessary
equipment and supplies for sanitizing Division equipment. Operational facility weapons for
members authorized to use same shall be made available on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. A
member shall be permitted to obtain said equipment with the permission of the Member’s
commanding officer. All staff shall be provided with OSHA required Personal Protective
Equipment.

Section 4 Uniforms / Equipment

A. Upon initial appointment as a sworn member of the Lexington Division of

Community Corrections, Bargaining Unit members shall receive all uniforms and
equipment required to perform the Bargaining Unit members’ assigned duties as
required by the director of Community Corrections. All uniforms and any other
equipment provided by the Employer shall remain the property of the employer.

B. Bargaining Unit members shall receive a uniform allowance of Four Hundred Dollars

($400.00) per year with one-half ($200.00) being paid in January and one-half
($200.00) being paid in July for maintenance care and replacement of uniforms and
other miscellaneous items as per the Quartermaster Program as necessary due to
normal wear and tear. In addition, bargaining unit members shall be eligible to
receive replacement uniforms where the item in question has been damaged or
destroyed in the performance of the bargaining unit member’s duties and not as the
result of normal wear and tear duties. The Director of the Community Corrections or

his designee shall have complete discretion to determine whether items were

26
damaged or destroyed as a result of normal wear and tear or in the performance of the
bargaining member’s duties.

C. Beginning on July 1, 2012 LFUCG shall provide uniforms through a Quartermaster
program.

D. It is the employee’s responsibility to acquire the necessary uniform items from the
quartermaster program or otherwise and present themselves properly attired for work
under division policies. The LFUCG shall have no obligation to provide” in store”
access to members during scheduled work hours or to have any obligation to pick up
or deliver uniform items.

E. Uniform items available to employees under the quartermaster program shall be in
according to Division of Correction regulations.

F. Upon completion of the Training Academy probationary officers shall receive the
standard uniform allowance as defined in this section.

G. In the event an employee’s uniform allowance is exhausted during the fiscal year and
said employee needs or is required to purchase a uniform item(s) the employee shall
be responsible for acquiring the uniform item(s) at their own expense

H. Upon separation of employment with the Division of Community Corrections for any
reason all uniforms and official equipment provided by the Division or purchased
through the quarter master program shall be returned to the division. The value of any
items not returned shall be deducted from the employee’s final paycheck.

Section 5. Members shall be required to submit to a physical examination once every

two (2) years consisting of job related tests/examinations or as necessary to determine physical
fitness for duty. The standard for physical fitness shall be the LFUCG approved position

description for each position. Results concerning any fitness for duty issues shall be submitted

27
and disclosed pursuant to Article 15 of this Agreement. A member may elect to have the biennial
physical examination performed by his/her primary care physician, with the stipulation that the
primary care physician can perform all required tests, with a maximum reimbursement to the
member of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). A member who elects to have his/her biennial physical
examination conducted by a member’s physician shall also be required to undergo any physical

examination or test necessary to comply with state or federal law.

ARTICLE 14
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES

Section 1. It is agreed that LFUCG has a right to discipline members only for just cause.
The disciplinary code that shall be used as a guideline for this Article shall be the current
published disciplinary code for all LFUCG employees as found in the Employee Handbook. This
code is subject to amendment and/or change. A copy of the current code is appended to this
contract as Appendix A.

Section 2. Discipline of members includes oral warning, written reprimand, suspension,
or dismissal. Coaching and counseling sessions are not disciplinary actions.

Section 3. LFUCG shall not take any disciplinary action against any member for any
non-criminal act or violation after the expiration of a thirty (30) day period from the date on
which such violation or act occurred, unless it can be shown that LFUCG was not aware that a
violation or act occurred or the matter is the subject of an open investigation. Every effort shall
be made to ensure that any discipline regarding the act or violation is issued within sixty (60)
days of the act or violation.

Section 4. Disciplinary actions of suspension or dismissal shall be initiated by the

delivery of proposed disciplinary action toa member. After delivery of the proposed discipline

28
the Director or his designee shall meet with the member and, if requested, a Lodge
representative. At the meeting the member shall be advised of the level of discipline proposed to
be issued. The member and/or the Lodge representative shall be given the opportunity to present
the member’s side of the matter and any materials relating to the violation he wants the Director
to consider prior to issuing discipline. If the member does not attend the meeting with the
Director, discipline shall be issued and shall be final.

Section 5. Disciplinary Action

A. Discipline of suspension or dismissal shall be issued by the Director not later than the
time period provided in Section 3. If the member is not physically available to be
presented with the discipline, LFUCG shall issue discipline by sending a written copy
of the discipline via certified mail to member’s last provided mailing address of
record. The date postmarked shall be considered the date that the discipline was
received.

B. Upon receipt of the discipline by the member, the grievance and arbitration procedure
set forth in Article 11 (Grievance Procedure) may be invoked by the Lodge. For
suspensions and dismissals, the grievance shall begin at the level of the Human
Resources Director (Step 3 of the Grievance Procedure) and shall proceed as provided
in Article 11. For written reprimands the Grievance Procedure shall begin at the level
of Director (Step 2).

Section 6. Coaching and counseling sessions shall be removed from the member’s
record twelve (12) months from the date of the entry. Oral warnings shall be removed from the
member’s record twelve (12) months from the date of the entry. Written reprimands and
suspensions shall be removed from the member’s record twenty-four (24) months from the date

of the entry.

29
ARTICLE 15
PERSONNEL FILES

Section 1. Personnel files and any other employee files and records are the sole
responsibility of the LFUCG

Section 2. LFUCG’s responsibilities for employee files include upkeep, retention,
production, and purging of files.

Section 3. LFUCG shall maintain employee confidentiality to the full extent permitted
by law and access to a member’s personnel records shall be restricted to the following:

A. Member who is the subject of the file or authorized (in writing) representative may

review their own records upon request.

B. Member’s supervisor.

C. Director and/or designee.

D. Director of Division of Human Resources and/or designee.

E. Member of the Department of Law

Section 4. No file, record or content therein of which a member has not been previously
advised shall be utilized against the member for matters of discipline. A Member may submit
written documentation for his/her official personnel file that refutes or explains any item in the
Member’s file. The documentation shall not contain any inflammatory or derogatory statements.

Section 5. LFUCG shall follow retention schedules for employee files that comply with
applicable laws and regulations. In the event a subpoena or Open Records Request is served on
LFUCG, it shall immediately notify the member and/or the Lodge.

Section 6. Supervisors may maintain one file on each member under their direct

supervision and documents contained in the supervisory file shall not be retained after one (1)

30
year from said documentation. A Member may review his supervisory file during his regular
work shift upon request provided such review does not disrupt operations.

Section 7. Any Member may obtain a complete copy of his/her personnel file at his/her
cost without the use of the Open Records Act. The member shall also have access to any
electronic files. Except during an open investigation, no file shall be maintained about a member

without his knowledge.

ARTICLE 16
RESIDENCY

No member shall be required to live in Lexington/Fayette County.

ARTICLE 17
MILITARY LEAVES

Section 1. Members who are also Members of the National Guard, the military reserve
or any of the armed services of the United States shall be granted leaves of absence, not to
exceed twenty-one (21) calendar days per military training year (i.e. October | - September 30)
to participate in regular annual training, including fifteen (15) days leave with pay.

Section 2. A Member inducted or enlisted into active duty with the armed forces of the
United States, any reserve unit or the National Guard for a period in excess of thirty (30) days
shall be eligible for supplement pay equal to the difference between the Member’s regular salary
and his/her military pay.

Section 3. A Member inducted or enlisted into active duty with the armed forces of the

United States, any reserve unit or the National Guard for a period in excess of thirty (30) days

31
shall be eligible to continue his selected medical insurance plan at the same level of employee

contribution derived from this Agreement.

ARTICLE 18
LEGAL PROTECTION
Section 1. LFUCG shall provide for the defense of a Member in any legal action filed
against the member arising out of an act or omission occurring within the scope of his
employment. A Member shall be represented by the Department of Law, private counsel
employed through the Department of Law, or represented by separate private counsel at his own
expense, with the prior written approval of the Department of Law, when a claim is made against
him as an individual for money damages, for personal injury, or property damages resulting from
the good faith performance of his official duties, whether suit may or may not be pending on the
claim at that time, even if the claim arises from acts performed by the Member prior to the
effective date of this Agreement, and even if the claim is not presented until the Member has left

the position currently held.

Section 2. Ifa settlement of a claim is made or a judgment is rendered against a Member
and that Member was either represented by the Department of Law, private counsel employed
through the Department of Law or represented by separate private counsel at his own expense,
with the prior written approval of the Department of Law, that settlement or judgment shall be
paid by LFUCG in accordance with the procedures, discretion, and determination vested in the
Department of Law. Provided, however, LFUCG's responsibility under this Agreement to

indemnify a Member shall not include any duty to pay punitive damages.

Section 3. Upon receiving service of a summons and complaint in any action in tort

brought against him or a notice of a claim to be made, a Member shall, within five

32
(5) days of receipt, give written notice of such action, including a copy of the summons and

complaint, to the Department of Law.

Section 4. LFUCG may refuse to pay a judgment or settlement in any action against a

Member, or if LFUCG pays any claim or judgment against any Member pursuant to Section 2 of

this Article, it may recover from such Member the amount of such payment and the costs to

defend if it determines that:

A.

The Member acted or failed to act because of fraud, malice, or corruption; or

. The action was outside the actual or apparent scope of his employment; or
. The Member was willfully negligent or malicious; or

. The Member willfully failed or refused to assist the defense of the cause of action,

including the failure to give notice to LFUCG pursuant to Section 3 of this Article; or

. The Member compromised or settled the claim without the approval of LFUCG; or

. The Member obtained private counsel without the consent of the Department of Law,

in which case, LFUCG may also refuse to pay any legal fees incurred by the Member.

Section 5. No provision of this Article shall in any way be construed to abrogate the

defense of sovereign immunity, official immunity, or governmental immunity.

ARTICLE 19

COURT-RELATED PAY

Section 1. In the event that an active member is required to appear to testify in Court or

in a legislative or administrative proceeding outside of his regularly scheduled work hours, he

shall be paid a minimum of two (2) hours at the rate of 1 and ¥% times his regular hourly rate of

pay, or for the actual time spent for such appearance at the rate of 1 and ¥% times his regular

hourly rate of pay if more than two (2) hours.

33
Section 2. In order to claim pay under Section1, of this Article, the Member must
document that he was testifying as to matters involving his employment with LFUCG. Such pay
is not available when testifying about matters related to off-duty employment or other non-work
related matters.

Section 3. A Member shall be granted leave with pay, not to exceed three (3) calendar
months in any one (1) calendar year, in order to serve on a duly impaneled jury of any court.
When on jury duty, the Member must report for work if he is excused by the court for part of the
day or for one (1) or more full days. When the jury duty is over, the Member must submit a
copy of his jury duty check stubs to his supervisor who shall forward the information to the
payroll coordinator for verification that the Member served on jury duty fur the number of days

of leave that the Member was granted.

ARTICLE 20
OVERTIME

Section 1. A workday shall consist of eight (8) hours. A regular work week shall be
forty (40) hours in any calendar week. Members shall be paid overtime at the rate of one and
one-half (1 12) times their regular rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours in
any calendar week.

Section 2. Members are scheduled in advance to work a forty (40) hour schedule. The
Division may modify schedules within a scheduled work week in order to respond to disasters,
emergencies, declared by the Director, to achieve specific law enforcement objectives, or as
otherwise necessary to assure adequate staffing levels. Nothing herein shall preclude the
Division from granting a member’s request for a schedule change.

Section 3. Overtime earned shall be reported and paid in six (6) minute increments.

34
Section 4. The Division shall not change a member’s scheduled R.D.O.’s unless three
(3) days notice is given. Provided, however, this three (3) days notice shall not have to be given
if the Director, in his sole discretion, declares an emergency or a member agrees to waive the
notice.

Section 5. All members covered under this agreement shall have the right to work
overtime in not only the member’s current bureau assignment, but shall also have the right to
work any other bureaus of the facility for which they are qualified.

Section 6. Overpayment
If a member is inadvertently overpaid his salary, the LFUCG shall collect the overpayment by
deducting the amount of the overpayment from future paychecks, after notice to and opportunity
to be heard by the member. If it is determined that the overpayment was not justified, the
LFUCG shall use the following formula to collect the amount due: the total amount of the
overpayment shall be divided by the number of pay periods during which the mistake(s)
occurred. The quotient shall be deducted from the subsequent paychecks until the overpayment
is satisfied. If the member separated from service, any remaining owed amount shall be
deducted from any payout due the member upon separation. If the payout is insufficient to cover
the remaining amount, the member shall immediately pay LFUCG the difference. If a member is
inadvertently underpaid his salary, the LFUCG shall correct the mistake in the next paycheck.

Section 7. In those areas where members have scheduled R.D.O.’s, the day for
mandatory overtime shall be the second day after the return from the RDO; the day for secondary
overtime shall be the fourth day after the return from RDO. Once mandatory primary and
secondary lists have been exhausted (i.e. the member has served or been excused) any request for

subsequent call back duty if needed shall be the third day after the return from RDO.

35
ARTICLE 21

ACTING PAY

Section 1. When a Member is assigned to work in an acting capacity for more than forty

(40) hours in a position having a higher classification or pay than his regular position, the

member shall be paid at the base pay rate established for the higher classification retroactive to

the first day of assignment to that position. A Member in an acting assignment shall receive time

in service in the acting assignment which relates back to the beginning of the assignment if the

member is promoted to the position.

Section 2. A Member’s service in an acting assignment shall be memorialized and

placed into his permanent personnel file.

L

ARTICLE 22
PAID AND UNPAID LEAVES
VACATION AND HOLIDAY LEAVE
Section 1. Annual Vacation/Holidays
Effective upon ratification of this Agreement by the LFUCG, full-time members are
eligible to receive annual vacation/holiday time with pay as provided in the schedule set
forth below:

Vacation

For the first two years of the contract:

Years of service Monthly Leave Earned
1 through 10 years 8 hours / month
10 years or higher 12 hours / month

36
For the second two years of the contract:

Years of service Monthly Leave Earned
1 through 10 years 10 hours / month

10 years or higher 14 hours / month
Holidays (8 hours/day)

For the full term of the contract

Independence Day Christmas Day
Martin Luther King Jr.’s Birthday New Years Day
Memorial Day Presidents Day
Thanksgiving Day (Thursday and Friday) Labor Day

Christmas Eve Day

During the first two years of this Agreement, the following paragraph shall not be
in effect and each employee shall be granted only the above listed holidays. In addition,
at the beginning of each fiscal year, each employee shall be granted sixteen (16) hours of
swing holiday leave, which may be taken at any time during the fiscal year in accordance
with the requirements of this Agreement.

A. The following is the agreed process for requesting vacation or holiday leave time:

1. Members shall bid for assignments twice annually in January and July. The first
bid process under this agreement shall be in July 2012 and each January and July
thereafter.

2. Once Staff has been made aware of the bidding results commanders shall meet
with members according to seniority to schedule leave time in increments of one
week or more for the following six (6) months.

3. Management shall assign by seniority. Once approved there shall be no bumping

by seniority.

37
4. Members may only apply for leave time they have already accrued in their leave
bank.

5. Once accumulated, members may request additional leave time accrued
throughout the year. Such time shall be granted based on availability.

6. Management reserves the right under Article 3 to adjust or change vacations
schedules due to extreme and exigent circumstances.

B. Leave usage in less than a full week segment as outlined in Section B shall be

allowed as follows:

The employees request shall be granted/denied based on availability. A
supervisor shall not deny said request if adequate personnel are scheduled to work
their requested time frame at the time the leave request is made. All leave requested
must be within the current six month bid period. Members may only apply for leave
they have already accrued in their leave bank.

A Member may request up to four (4) hours of leave with pay to donate blood
during regular work hours at any licensed blood center certified by the Food and Drug
Administration. A Member requesting leave shall obtain approval from his Bureau
Manager or his designee prior to approval prior to the donation and must submit
verification of blood donation or deferral upon return to work. There is no limitation
on the number of times a Member may donate other than that imposed by the blood
donation centers usually no more than six (6) times per year.

The Bureau Manager, or his designee, may authorize up to four (4) hours of
personal leave with pay annually to participate in community projects that are not
directly work related. Community projects leave time cannot be accumulated or paid

out at retirement or termination.

39
Members are permitted to call in using emergency leave. Emergency leave is
limited to situations involving use of accumulated leave to handle an unforeseen
personal matter which is not covered by sick leave. An unforeseen personal matter is
one that the member could not have reasonably foreseen, and which was created by
an unavoidable situation less than twenty four hours before the beginning of the shift
on which the leave is needed. The member must have sufficient accumulated vacation
or holiday leave to request use of emergency leave. A member may not request
approval for leave that he has not yet accumulated for the pay period. The member
shall use the same call in procedure as is in effect for sick leave. Emergency leave is
limited to not more than 16 hours per calendar year.

C. Annual vacation/holiday accrual is cumulative to the extent set forth herein. Accrued
annual vacation/holiday cannot exceed two hundred sixty-four (264) hours and any
vacation/holiday in excess of this amount must be taken by December 31 of any
calendar year. Upon separation of service (i.e. retirement, termination, resignation), a
Member shall be entitled to receive reimbursement for accrued annual
vacation/holiday. Payment for vacation/holiday shall be based on the Member's
regular rate of pay.

Section 2. Vacation and holiday leave may be taken in six (6) minute increments,
consistent with the KRONOS system

Section 3. If the LFUCG deducts leave usage from a members leave bank, and
the member is entitled to have that leave restored, the LFUCG shall restore the leave

within two pay periods of the decision to restore.

40
IL.

LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY

Leave of absence may be granted to maintain continuity of service instances
where unusual and avoidable circumstances require a member’s absence. Leaves are
granted on the assumption that the Member shall be available to return to regular

employment when the conditions nec

 

itating the leave permit.

The duration of each leave shall depend upon each circumstance and the
recommendation and approval of the Director of Community Corrections, but shall not
exceed one-hundred and eighty (180) days. The leave of absence is considered a
privilege. Granting of leaves of absence shall be administered with utmost discretion,
taking into account the Member’s service record and the circumstances necessitating the
request. Intended period of absence from work must be indicated.

Never shall a leave of absence be authorized to permit a member to engage in
gainful employment other than mandatory military service. When the need to be absent
is known, the Member shall be expected to advise the Director of Community
Corrections in writing at the earliest possible time. Absence without reason may result in
disciplinary action. The giving of false reasons for an absence shall result in disciplinary
action. Leaves of absence shall not interrupt service time. The member shall be returned
to the same or equal employment, unless circumstances of the agency have so changed as
to make it impossible or unreasonable to do so. Leave of absence shall be without pay
and benefit accrual, other than for military leave, a condition precedent to a request for a
leave of absence requires a Member to have exhausted all vacation, holiday, and

approved sick leave benefits.

41
il.

SICK LEAVE

Section 1. Sick leave with pay shall be granted to a Member when he is unable to
perform his duties because of his sickness or injury or that of an immediate family
member. The immediate family member for the purpose of this section shall include
parents, spouse, and children. Sick leave may be taken in six (6) minute increments,
consistent with the KRONOS system.

Section 2. A Member who is unable to report for duty because of illness, injury,
prescribed medication or treatment shall immediately notify his commanding officer or
other competent authority as designated by the Bureau/Unit Commander upon
determining the need to be absent from duty. This notification should be made at least
one (1) hour prior to the scheduled reporting time.

Section 3. Medical Statement

A Member who is absent from work for three (3) or more consecutive work days,
or where the Bureau/Unit Commander has reasonable suspicion to believe an abuse of
sick leave may be occurring, may be required to provide a medical statement from his
treating physician substantiating his need for leave.

Proof of abuse of paid sick leave privileges may constitute grounds for
disciplinary action including dismissal.

Section 4. Sick leave shall be accrued at a rate of eight (8) hours per month. Sick
time may be accumulated up to six hundred (600) hundred hours. Once a Member has
accrued six hundred (600) hundred hours of sick time, any amount of time exceeding the
six hundred (600) hundred hour cap shall be paid to the member at his regular rate of pay,

by separate check, on the second pay period in January of each calendar year.

42
Iv.

Section 5. Members who have accumulated more than 480 sick hours are
permitted to participate in the LFUCG sick bank program, contributing up to 40 hours to
a fellow employee in need.

FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE (FMLA)

Any Member who has been on the payroll at least one (1) year and who has
worked twelve hundred fifty (1250) hours during the calendar year may be entitled to up
to twelve (12) weeks of leave (or 480 hours) in a twelve (12) month period under the
Family and Medical Leave Act. This time shall cover the birth of a child for the mother
or father, or placement of a child in the home through foster care or adoption. The
Member must use all accrued sick, vacation and/or holiday leave, after which the
remaining leave shall be without pay.

BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

Section 1. A Member shall be able to use up to three (3) days of Bereavement
Leave time for a death for the following listed immediate family members. Bereavement
Leave shall be treated as a permitted absence without loss in pay for purposes of
arranging or attending funeral services or settling an estate. Additional time for
bereavement leave may be granted using sick, holiday, or vacation time when
bereavement leave has been exhausted. Bereavement Leave may be used in hourly
increments and is not required to be taken consecutively. Bereavement leave shall be
granted for the following family members: Parents, Step-parents, Spouse, Spouse’s
Parents, Children, Step-children, Foster children, Siblings, Step-siblings, Half-siblings,
Brother-in-law, Sister-in-law, Grandparents, Spouse’s grandparents, Grandchildren, and

Great-Grandparents.

43
Section 2. A Member shall be able to use up to one (1) day of Bereavement
Leave time for a death of the following: Aunt, Uncle, First Cousin, Niece, or Nephew
(this does not include “in-law” or “step-relationships”).

Section 3. Bereavement leave is not subject to schedule adjustment.

ARTICLE 23

DISABILITY LEAVE AND MODIFIED DUTY

connected incident must notify their immediate supervisor as soon as practicable after the
incident occurs. The supervisor shall complete the appropriate form. It is the responsibility of a
member to advise the Director through the appropriate chain of command of an inability to
perform all job functions required of active duty status. If a competent medical authority
determines that a member can perform substitute work (modified duty), the member must work
in a modified duty capacity, if so assigned, unless he is in an FMLA status.

Section 2. If the member is medically required to be absent from their job duties and
cannot perform substitute work (modified duty) as a result of a service-connected injury or
illness, the member must complete a Disability Leave Request Form and submit it to the Director
through the chain of command for submission to the Director of Human Resources within ten
(10) work days of the incident.

Section 3. The completed Disability Leave Request form must have the following
documentation attached:

A. A copy of the corresponding First Report of Injury or IIIness ([A-1); and

B. A written statement from a competent medical authority as to the member’s specific

diagnosis, treatment plan, and your current work activity status.

44
Section 4. Any member who suffers an injury or illness as a result of a service connected

injury or illness

 

shall be granted, upon proper investigation and authentication, leave equal to full
pay for a period up to twelve (12) months from the date of injury or illness.

The disability leave payable shall be supplementary to any worker’s compensation
income benefits to which the Member is eligible, but in no case should payments exceed the
difference between the Member’s worker’s compensation benefits and his average weekly
earnings as defined in KRS 342.140.

Section 5. An injured or ill member shall initially be placed on their own accumulated
sick leave, or if sick leave is not available, on vacation or holiday leave for all absences from
scheduled work time. Upon an investigation and authentication that the member’s injury or
illness is the result of a service-connected incident, all sick, vacation, or holiday leave hours that
have been used as a result of the injury or illness shall be reinstated. It is the member’s
responsibility to submit a new Disability Leave Request form with the required supporting
documents if the medical authority states that he is unable to perform work in any capacity, past
the date for which the disability leave status has been granted. Disability leave status can only be
granted for a period of up to twelve (12) months for each injury or illness except as provided in
Section 11.

Section 6. If, during a disability leave, a competent medical authority determines that the
member can perform substitute work (modified duty), he must work in a modified duty capacity,
if so assigned, unless he is ina FMLA status. Any return to work is based on a medical
statement as to their work limitations, and they must submit the statement to their immediate
supervisor for appropriate job assignment.

Section 7. A member can remain in a modified duty status for a period of no more than

twelve (12) months for each injury or illness, and must submit a statement from a competent

45
medical authority regarding his work activity status during each thirty (30) day period. If the
member is on either modified duty status or disability leave status, they must submit a doctor’s
statement releasing them to full work activities before the member can return to their regular
duties.

Section 8. When the member has been granted disability leave status, he must refund to
LFUCG the amount equal to any Workers Compensation wage payments made to him as a result
of the injury or illness in order to be eligible for disability leave status. Any time over ninety
(90) days that is spent on disability leave status shall not count toward the member’s vacation
accrual rate nor shall he accumulate sick leave or vacation leave during such absence from duty.
When an official LFUCG holiday occurs, the member shall receive holiday pay but not disability
leave pay for that day.

Section 9. If the competent medical authority determines that the member has a
permanent disability, the member shall apply, if eligible, to the County Employees Retirement
System for disability retirement benefits or apply for alternative LFUCG employment. Failure to
apply for disability retirement benefits or alternative employment shall terminate the member’s
disability leave status short of the twelve (12) months and he may resign or his employment shall
be terminated.

Section 10. All substitute modified duty assignments as a result of a work related injury
or illness shall be made within the Division of Community Corrections, and must conform to the
medical instructions indicated on the medical report authorizing the members leave status.

Section 11. The total time in modified duty and disability combined shall not exceed
twelve (12) months for the same injury or illness except that this may be extended at the
discretion of the Director for up to an additional six (6) months if there is a definitive return to

work date provided by the treating physician.

46
ARTICLE 24
DEATH IN THE LINE OF DUTY

Section 1. In the event that a member dies as a result of service connected cause, the
LFUCG shall pay to the beneficiary designated by the Member or, in the event there is no
designated beneficiary, to the Members estate, the sum of one-hundred-thousand dollars
($100,000.00) subject to applicable withholdings, if any. The payment shall be made in a lump
sum, a portion of which shall be paid to a funeral home chosen by the beneficiary or estate to
cover funeral and burial expenses unless waived by the beneficiary or estate. The payment
provided for in this Article shall be in addition to any applicable pension benefits, any Workers

Compensation income benefits, and any Social Security benefits which may be due.

ARTICLE 25
HEALTH AND WELLNESS BENEFITS

Section 1. Effective as of the execution of this Agreement, employees may elect to be
covered by the health insurance plans offered by LFUCG. The options available to employees
shall include those plans, benefits, and contributions offered by LFUCG

Section 2. Each Member may elect to be covered by the health insurance plans, dental
insurance, vision and other plans offered by LFUCG. Any premiums in excess of LFUCG
monthly contributions shall be paid by the employee through equal pay period contributions.
Effective upon implementation, LFUCG shall contribute $430.74 per month on behalf of each
employee enrolled in the flexible benefit program. In year two of the contract LFUCG shall
contribute $455.74 per month on behalf of each employee enrolled in the flexible benefit

program and in year three and four of the contract, LFUCG shall contribute $480.74 on behalf of

47
each employee enrolled in the flexible benefit program. LFUCG benefit contribution may be
combined by employees to purchase benefits.

Section 3. If an employee opts not to enroll in the Flexible Benefit Plan or LFUCG
monthly contributions exceed premium cost, LFUCG shall contribute the same monthly
contributions as set forth herein or the excess contributions, whichever is applicable, to the
employee’s deferred compensation accounts. However, members must provide proof of alternate
medical insurance coverage to request this provision.

Section 4, The Lodge shall provide a representative to sit on any group or committee
that LFUCG may create related to health care costs and benefits.

Section 5. Any member passing away whether on duty or not, shall have all vacation and
holiday time paid out at their current rate of pay. These funds upon death shall be paid to the
beneficiary listed by the member. If a member has at least five years of service, accumulated

sick leave shall be paid out in the same manner.

ARTICLE 26
LIFE INSURANCE
The LFUCG shall provide all members with a group life insurance plan that contains the
following provisions:
A. $25,000.00 payment upon death of the insured.

B. $25,000.00 accidental death and dismemberment insurance.

48
ARTICLE 27
TUITION BENEFIT

Section 1. Members, with at least one year of Community Corrections service, shall
receive reimbursement for the cost of tuition and books for up to $1,200.00 per year upon
verification of successful completion of coursework at a grade of “C” or better for undergraduate
courses or at a grade of “C” or better for graduate course work and submission of applicable
receipts at an accredited college, university or facility of higher education. Course taken must be
job related or as verified as part of a degree program related to Government, Public Safety,
Corrections or other Law Enforcement related career field. Verification required for
reimbursement shall include transcripts and receipts delineating actual costs.

Section 2. Request for reimbursement must be submitted within thirty (30) days of
completion of the course to be eligible for reimbursement.

Section 3. Except as provided in Section 4, below, any member who participates by use
of the tuition benefit shall be required to continue employment with LFUCG for eighteen (18)
months from the last date of reimbursement unless he repays LFUCG for any funds received for
the tuition benefits under this Article within that eighteen (18) month period. It is agreed that
such payment shall be deducted from the final payout to the employee if not otherwise arranged.

Section 4. The parties agree that tuition benefits for members who enroll at Midway
College in its Business Administration associate degree program may be provided by direct
payment by LFUCG to Midway College. In the event a member who so enrolls fails to complete
the degree program or fails to continue employment with LFUCG for two (2) years after earning
the degree, the member shall be responsible for payment to LFUCG of the amount of tuition
benefits paid to Midway College. It is agreed that such payment shall be deducted from the

final payout to the employee if not otherwise arranged.

49
ARTICLE 28
PERSONAL PROPERTY REIMBURSEMENT

A member shall be reimbursed by LFUCG for certain personal property damaged or
destroyed while in the performance of an official action. A member who receives payment under
this Article must seek restitution for any property for which payment was made. Failure to
pursue restitution may result in requiring the member to reimburse LFUCG for any payment and
may make the member ineligible to make any further claims under this Article. If restitution or
other recovery is received, the amount(s) shall be paid in full to LFUCG. LFUCG reserves the
right as an alternative to payment under this Article to provide a comparable replacement for any
damaged or destroyed property. LFUCG further reserves the right to deny payment if the
members negligence resulted in the damage or destruction of his property.

Personally owned items (i.e. watches, eyeglasses, contact lenses, dental equipment etc.)
shall not be reimbursed for more than $200.00 per item. Payments under this Article shall be
limited to $500.00 per occurrence with a maximum of $1000.00 per calendar year, except that
personally owned firearms may be reimbursed for replacement value. This coverage shall only
apply to items not covered by the Division of Risk Management policy. The limits contained
herein may be increased for exceptional circumstances at the discretion of the Director of

Community Corrections.

50
ARTICLE 29
SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL
Members permanently assigned to second and third shift assignments shall receive shift

differential for all hours worked as follows:

Shift Amount
Second $0.50 / hour
Third $1.00 / hour

Entitlement to shift differential is based solely on actual permanent assignment, and is not
triggered by hours worked on overtime or regular duty. Shift differential shall be applied for
those members permanently assigned to second or third shift for all time worked, including any

overtime.

ARTICLE 30
SALARY SCHEDULE

The pay schedules for the bargaining unit, attached hereto as Appendix B and Appendix
C, shall be effective beginning upon implementation of this agreement. During the first two years
of this agreement, members shall remain at their current step. In year three and four of the
agreement the schedules shall increase by $400 each year and each member shall advance on
their step schedule. For Officers, members shall be placed at their appropriate pay based upon
years of service as an officer.

Bargaining unit members holding the rank of Officer shall move into the next higher year
of the schedule on their job date as an Officer of Community Corrections. Members holding the

rank of Sergeant shall move into the next higher year of the schedule based upon their date of

51
promotion to Sergeant. Upon promotion to Sergeant, the bargaining unit member shall be placed

at the starting pay established for Sergeants on Appendix C.

ARTICLE 31
ALCOHOL AND DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE

The Lodge and LFUCG agree to maintain a drug free workplace. The public has a right to
expect public safety employees to be both physically and mentally prepared to assume their duties
at all times, free from serious impairments which result from the use of controlled substances,
alcohol, and other forms of drug abuse.

The Director of Human Resources shall be responsible for the administration of and
establishing the operational procedures necessary to implement this policy.
IL CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT:

Adherence and compliance to this article including but not limited to the rules,
regulations, policies and procedures shall be a condition of employment with the LFUCG

Il. SCOPE:

A. Alcohol - Scope and Defined
Reporting to work or having at any time during the work day, a detectable odor of an
alcoholic beverage on his/her breath, which results ina BAC of 0.02% or above,
shall cause the employee to be disciplined up to and including dismissal.

B. Legal Drugs - Scope and Defined
Any controlled substance or chemical legally obtained and used for the purpose, and
in the amounts medically recommended in expressed written instructions, of the
manufacturer.

C. Illegal Drugs - Scope and Defined
1. Any drug as defined by federal or state controlled substances statutes (KRS
218A.080) of which cannot be obtained legally.

2. Any drug as defined by federal or state controlled substances statutes of which

cannot be obtained legally, without being prescribed by a duly licensed physician
or health care worker authorized to dispense drugs.

52
il.

3. Any drug which has been legally obtained by prescription, but which is used or
distributed by one whose name does not appear on the prescription container or
not used in the prescribed manner by the person whose name appears on the
prescription container.

4. Any combination of alcohol and legal or illegal drugs shall be classified as illegal
when the used intent is for misuse or abuse.

DEFINITIONS: (All definitions are for the purpose of this policy)

A.

Accident — Any occurrence of events which leads to property damage, physical
injury, or death.

Actual Physical Control — A term referring to driver's or operator's physical position
and capabilities which permit someone to control, manipulate, readily set into motion
or operation or utilize vehicles, machinery or equipment.

Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) - A scientific metric measurement of alcohol from a
specific measured sample of breath expressed in percentage form. BREATH: A
volume of breath expressed in terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath.

Blood Alcohol Test (BAT) - A medically acceptable procedure or scientifically
approved instrumentation test to determine the content of alcohol in the blood.

Chain of Custody - The ability to identify each person or facility who has control of
a sample at any given time from the time the sample is taken until a final disposition
occurs.

Drug Paraphernalia - Any item used for administering, packaging or transporting
illegal drugs.

Drug Test - Tests scientifically designed and medically approved, that determine the
presence of drugs in the body.

Drugs - Any chemical substance that adversely alters a mind or body function when
entering the body.

Employee — Refers to those members who are covered under this contractual
agreement.

Evidential Breath-Testing Devices (EBTs) - A specifically designed device,
approved by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), used by
acertified breath-alcohol technician, following specific breath-testing procedures, in
the collection and analysis of breath samples to determine the BAC level.

Integrity Checks - A fail safe mechanism, built into the urinalysis/urine drug screen,

which measures the level of certain elements normally found in the body that become
abnormal when a urine sample to be tested is diluted or altered.

53
Iv.

. Medical Staff - Authorized personnel qualified by license or certification to perform

medical procedures.

. Medical Review Officer (MRO) - A licensed (doctor or doctor of osteopathy)

specifically authorized, appointed and approved by the LFUCG, who is responsible
for receiving results generated by the authorized and approved LFUCG drug and
alcohol testing program laboratory. The MRO shall have knowledge of substance
abuse disorders and have appropriate medical training to interpret and evaluate an
individual's confirmed positive test results, together with the employee's medical
history and any other relevant biomedical information.

. Positive Drug Screen - The results of an approved medical or scientific test, properly

reviewed and approved by a MRO, that reveal the presence of an illegal substance in
the human body, as defined in VIII, “Testing Safeguards, Terminology and
Guidelines.”

. Reasonable Suspicion - Whether a reasonable, prudent individual, trained in the

symptoms of drug or alcohol abuse would believe, based upon observation, that
someone was under the influence of drugs or alcohol; or that based on observation or
information that drugs and/or alcohol is being used or stored on LFUCG property.

. Substance(s) - As used in this context, a substance is any chemical compound that

shall adversely alter the mind or body function when entering the body.

. Testing facilities - Any physical area contracted by the LFUCG and designed to

accurately administer scientific and medically approved tests.

. Urinalysis/Urine Drug Screen - Urine samples are screened for specified drugs

and/or their metabolites utilizing enzyme immunoassay (EIA) using defined cutoffs.

1. Those urines found to be positive by the EIA methodology are then confirmed by
gas chromatography mass spectroscopy (GCMS).

2. All urine drug screens and confirmations are to be conducted by a laboratory
recognized and approved by the College of American Pathologists (CAP) or
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (hereafter referred
to as SAMHSA) (Formerly: National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA)).

EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (EAP):

 

The LFUCG has established and maintains an EAP which informs employees of the
dangers of alcohol and drug abuse and offers assistance to employees seeking help for
alcohol or drug abuse, and the personal and emotional problems associated with abuse.

A. Members Who Seek Assistance - PRIOR TO NOTIFICATION OF TESTING:

At any time prior to testing, an employee may acknowledge his or her drug or alcohol
abuse and secure a leave of absence to undergo rehabilitation in a certified program.

54
An admission of substance abuse, including alcohol, shall not subject the employee to
disciplinary action providing the aforementioned process is followed and the
employee successfully completes the rehabilitation program.

After acknowledgment of substance abuse involving the workplace, refusal to commit
to and successfully complete an authorized rehabilitation program shall be grounds
for discipline.

Should the employee commit to rehabilitation, a determination shall be made by the
EAP, the Director of Human Resources and the Director of Community Corrections
as to whether the employee can remain on the job in a current or available substitute
duty capacity during rehabilitation, performing duties that pose no risk to fellow
employees, property, or the general public or whether the employee must take a leave
of absence or sick time during rehabilitation.

B. Leave During Treatment:
There shall be two (2) types of treatment plans for LFUCG employees:

1. In-patient followed by Outpatient Phase: The in-patient phase shall be charged
as sick leave or other leave, if such is available. If sick or other leave has been
exhausted, their status shall be changed to leave of absence without pay.

2. Outpatient Phase Only: Normally, the employee shall return to work at his
normal or alternate duties. However, if the EAP Representative recommends
other duties during this phase, then provisions shall be made.

C. Medical Insurance:
The cost of rehabilitation shall be provided by the LFUCG to those employees who
are covered by the government's medical insurance, but only to the extent of
applicable coverage which exist at the time of any claim. Employees are responsible
for all costs not covered by the employee’s medical insurance.

PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR:

The following behavior and activities are prohibited under this article and may subject
the employee to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal.

A. Use, possession, distribution, or sale of alcohol, illegal drugs or drug paraphernalia or
the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of controlled
substances on government property or within government vehicles.

 

B. Being impaired anytime during the work day, as a result of using, alcohol, illegal
drugs, misusing a legally prescribed drug, or any chemical substance, is prohibited
behavior.

55
VI.

C. Members who are called to report back to duty are forbidden to report to their work

site or job if impaired, and shall immediately, via telephone, notify their supervisor of
such.

D. Being impaired at any time while operating a government owned vehicle as a result of

using alcohol, an illegal drug, illegal use of a legally prescribed drug, or any chemical
substance is prohibited behavior.

E. Operating or performing any safety sensitive function with a BAC of 0.02% or above,

or being impaired at any level by any drug. At no time shall a member work
displaying the odor of alcoholic beverages on or about his person.

F. Ingesting any alcoholic substance prior to post-critical incident testing after a Critical

Incident or using of any drugs prior to post-critical incident testing after a Critical
Incident without medical authorization or under medical treatment.

G. Storing in a locker, desk, vehicles, or other places on government premises any illegal
drug, drug paraphernalia or alcohol which use or possession is unauthorized.

 

H. Refusing to provide a blood, urine, saliva or breath sample for testing when required
by reasonable suspicion, post critical or for authorized random testing.

I. Switching or altering any submitted specimen for testing.

J. Testing positive for drugs or alcohol.

K. Refusing to complete a laboratory chain of custody form after providing a laboratory
specimen for testing.

L. Failure to report to the employee's immediate supervisor and/or Director, the use of
any legal drug which may adversely alter the employee's behavior, physical or mental
ability.

EMPLOYEES’ REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES:

A. LEGAL DRUGS:
Prior to ingesting any legal drug, it shall be the sole responsibility of the employee to
inquire from the attending physician, pharmacist, or health care provider, if the legal
drug may limit or impair their ability to perform the duties of his/her position in any
way.

 

Employees who have knowledge or have been informed, that the use of any legal
drug may present a safety risk, shall immediately report such drug use to their
immediate supervisor to determine job related consequences.

Should any legal drug adversely alter the senses of or prevent the employee from

performing the job duties in a safe and productive manner, it shall be the
responsibility of the employee to notify his/her immediate supervisor, advising them

56
VII.

Vill.

of the limitations the legal drug poses. Supervisors who are aware of such a situation
are to instruct the employee to report performance problems to the Major (or in his
absence, the highest ranking command staff).

The Director of Community Corrections, or his designee, and the Director of Human
Resources, or his designee, shall then determine if the employee can safely and
effectively perform the assigned job duties while taking the legal drug. If it is
determined that the employee cannot perform the job duties safely and effectively, the
employee may be required to take a leave of absence, sick time or assigned other
duties to be determined by the Director and the Director of Human Resources or
designee.

In cases of an unexpected adverse reaction to any legal drug while at work, the
employee, without delay, shall immediately notify his immediate supervisor.

All employees who have an unexpected adverse reaction to any legal drug shall,
without delay, safely cease operating vehicles where continued operation while
impaired may be inherently dangerous, and shall immediately notify their immediate
supervisor.

No supervisor or Director may assign, direct, or order an impaired employee to
continue operating a vehicle or equipment, or performing a safety sensitive function.

B. ALCOHOL/DRUG RELATED ARREST OR SUMMONS:
Employees arrested or summoned for violation of any law or ordinance pertaining to
the illegal manufacturing, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of alcohol, or
legal or illegal drugs shall immediately report such arrest or summons to the Director,
who shall in turn report same to the Director of Human Resources or designee.

Employees shall immediately report any arrest or summons for violation of any law
relating to the use or possession of alcohol to their Director, who shall report same to
the Director of Human Resources or designee.

Such employees shall further be obligated to keep the Director apprised of the court
status and final disposition of the case. Failure to report such violation may be
considered grounds for dismissal.

REFUSAL TO SUBMIT TO A PROPER REQUEST FOR TESTING:

For the purposes of detecting alcohol and illegal drug use/abuse, drug or breath alcohol
test (BAT) shall be requested. All tests shall be done in accordance with current
applicable statutory or case laws to protect each employee’s constitutional rights.
Refusal to submit to a drug or BAT, under these stipulations, shall be immediate grounds
for dismissal.

TESTING SAFEGUARDS, TERMINOLOGY AND GUIDELINES:

 

Alcohol and Drug Screening shall be conducted under the following circumstances:

57
A. Drug Tests and Cutoff Levels

RANDOM TESTING FOR ALL CDL PERSONNEL — Random testing for sworn

personnel that are CDL holders and who utilize that license for LFUCG shall be tested
under both the five (5) panel, as required by DOT (Department of Transportation), and
shall also be tested under the nine (9) panel.

The five panel drug test shall test for:

Drug

Amphetamines
Amphetamine
Methamphetamine

Cannabinoids
Carboxy — THC

Cocaine
Benzoyulecgonine

Opiates
Codeine
Morphine

Phencyclidine

Screening Limit

1000 NG/ML

50 NG/ML

300 NG/ML

2000 NG/ML

25 NG/ML

Confirmation Limit

500 NG/ML
500 NG/ML

15 NG/ML

150 NG/ML

2000 NG/ML

2000 NG/ML
25 NG/ML

RANDOM TESTING; REASONABLE SUSPICION TESTING; AND ALL POST-
CRITICAL INCIDENT TESTING - shall have a nine panel drug test which tests for:

Drug
Amphetamines

Barbiturates
Benzodiazepines
Cannabinoids
Cocaine
Methadone
Opiates
Phencyclidine
Propoxyphene

Screening Limit

1000 NG/ML
200 NG/ML
200 NG/ML
100 NG/ML
300 NG/ML
300 NG/ML
300 NG/ML
25 NG/ML
300 NG/ML

58

Confirmation Limit
500 NG/ML

200 NG/ML
200 NG/ML
15 NG/ML
150 NG/ML
300 NG/ML
300 NG/ML
25 NG/ML
300 NG/ML
B. Testing Safegaurds
All testing shall conform to Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service
Administration (SAMHSA) drug testing protocol.

C. Reasonable Suspicion Testing (RST)
Employees shall be tested for drugs or alcohol when reasonable suspicion exists to
determine if the employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. The basis for
the decision shall be documented, in writing, by supervisory personnel or by medical
personnel. A determination shall be based upon observation and documentation of
one or more of the following:

 

1. Detection of an alcoholic substance emitting from the employee's breath.

2. Observation(s) of the employee's speech being unusually slurred or noticeably
different without a proper medical reason being given.

3. Observation(s) of the employee's actions or conduct as being noticeably different
or impaired and not consistent with normal conduct and without proper
explanation.

4. Observation(s) that the employee's appearance, in conjunction with the above,
indicates that the employee is impaired.

5. A pattern of abnormal conduct or erratic behavior.
6. Observable phenomenon, such as direct observation of drug or alcohol use or

possession and/or physical symptoms of being under the influence of a drug
and/or alcohol.

 

At the request of the Director or the Director of Human Resources or designee, the
observed employee may be required to submit to an independent blood/breath/urine
test to determine if the employee is impaired. The requested testing is to be done by a
designated medical facility within two (2) hours—but no later than eight (8) hours—
after observation.

D. Post-Critical Incident Testing (PCI)
1. Any employee, who is involved in any of the following, shall immediately notify
their supervisor to confirm if the employee shall be tested.
a. an accident while operating a Division assigned vehicle, with property
damages of $5,000.00 or more;
b. a work related accident or incident resulting in any fatality;
c. awork related incident or accident involving any injury requiring emergency
treatment;
d. a work related incident involving property damage of $5,000.00 or more; or,
e. a work related incident or accident with a combination of vehicle and property
damages of $5,000.00 or more.

59
IX.

2. Such testing shall be conducted by a designated medical facility within two (2) to
eight (8) hours of the incident.

3. Nothing in this section contravenes the right of LFUCG to require testing after a
critical incident, injury or accident, based on reasonable suspicion as provided in
Section C above, regardless of the nature of the incident or injury, or the amount
of damage.

E. Random Testing (RAN)
Random Testing means that drug tests are unannounced and that through a random
selection process all employees have an equal chance of being selected. The
following are pools for random selection:

1. An employee selected for random testing through the use of the random selection
procedures specified within this article shall be subjected to testing of his blood,
breath or urine, for the presence of alcohol and/or drugs within his system.

2. During ANY random testing, if a medical staff member of an approved medical
facility detects an employee to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs, the
employee may be required to submit to additional blood or breath testing prior to
submission of the urine specimen, for the purpose of establishing their BAC.

3. Employees who have reported to any approved medical facility for testing under
this policy and are obviously impaired and have a confirmed BAC test result of
0.02% or above, shall be immediately reported by the medical facility to the
Director of Human Resources (or designee) and the MRO.

Confirmed positive test results and the corresponding documentation shall be
forwarded by the medical facility to the MRO for review and investigation.

CONFIDENTIALITY:

For the purposes of implementing the provisions of this Article, each employee who
undergoes drug testing shall execute a medical release in order for the employer to obtain
the results of the drug screening testing. Except as otherwise provided by state or federal
law with regard to communicable diseases, or without further authorization of the
employee, the releases referred to in this Article shall authorize only the release of the
examination results to the drug screening test results. No other medical finding may be
released without the express written permission of the employee. Information including
test results obtained on individuals as part of this drug and alcohol abuse policy shall be
treated confidentially and shall be disclosed only after express written consent is
submitted and approved by the LFUCG to those having a legitimate need to know. No
tests for medical conditions shall be run on samples provided for drug screening. Any
medical condition inadvertently identified by drug screening shall remain confidential
and shall not be reported to the LFUCG

 

60
XI.

XII.

RANDOM SELECTION PROCEDURES:

A. The Division of Human Resources, or its designee, shall initiate, maintain, and update
computer files containing the following information:

Employee numbers
Employee names
Employee SSN's
Employee’s Division

PYeNr

B. The Division of Human Resources, or its designee, utilizing random selection
procedures, shall generate lists of random names from the select pools. A Letter of
Notification, addressed from the Director of Human Resources, or his designee, shall
be forwarded to the appropriate employee. The Director shall receive a separate
memorandum identifying the name of the employee who has been selected.

C. An employee must take a photo identification and the Letter of Notification to the
nearest testing facility within two (2) hours of being notified of their random
selection.

D. Employees who are on vacation, off-duty, or on sick or disability leave, shall not be
called in from that status. Within twenty-four (24) hours of the employee's return to
duty, the Division of Human Resources, or its designee, shall resubmit the Letter of
Notification to the employee. The employee shall be instructed to report with a valid
official photo identification and the Letter of Notification to the designated testing
facility within two (2) hours.

TESTING FACILITIES:

The Division of Human Resources shall provide a list of testing facilities to the Lodge
and shall also notify of any changes in testing locations or procedures as soon as
reasonably possible.

DISCIPLINARY ACTION:

Any employee who violates any provision of this Article shall be recommended for
disciplinary action in the following manner:

A. Drugs

Use of, possession of, or a positive drug screen and confirmation of the presence of
an illegal drug, shall result in recommendation for dismissal.

61
B. Alcohol
1. Under The Influence: With a BAC of 0.04% or above:

lst Offense: Any employee reporting to work and/or operating or in actual
physical control of a government owned/leased vehicle or equipment shall

be recommended for dismissal.

2. Impairment: With a BAC of 0.02% but less than 0.04%:
a. Ist Offense: Suspension without pay from LFUCG duties for 160 hours.

Mandatory evaluation by the EAP for alcohol dependency.
Satisfactory completion of a program for alcohol abuse counseling and
rehabilitation and/or other professional treatment which has been

recommended and approved by the EAP Coordinator.

b. 2nd Offense: Shall be recommendations for dismissal by the LFUCG

XIII. SEARCHES:

LFUCG reserves the right to conduct searches of LFUCG owned property including, but

not limited to, lockers, desks and government owned/leased vehicles. Employees shall be

expected to cooperate in conducting the searches.

Searches of employees and employees' personal property located on government

property, including automobiles, shall only be conducted upon probable cause that the

employee is under the influence of illegal drugs or alcohol, or that illegal drugs or alcohol

is being kept on personal property, which is located on government property.

ARTICLE 32
RESPONSIBLE RELATIONSHIP

The LFUCG and the Lodge recognize that it is in the best interest of both parties, the
employees, and the public that all dealings between them be characterized by mutual
responsibility and respect. To ensure that this relationship continues and improves, the LFUCG
and the Lodge and their respective representatives at all levels shall apply the terms of this

contract in accordance with the language contained therein and consistent with the Lodge’s

status as exclusive bargaining representative of all employees in the unit. The grievance and

62
arbitration provision shall be the sole remedy for all grievances which are qualified subject

matter for arbitration.

ARTICLE 33
FEDERAL OR STATE LAWS

If any provision of this Agreement, or any amendments thereto, or application of the
provisions of said Agreement and amendments to any employee, groups of employees, or
circumstances are rendered invalid or inappropriate by any Federal or State Law, or by the final
determination of any Court, Board, or Authority of competent jurisdiction, or should the National
Labor Relations Board, as a result of any proceedings, hold any employee included within the
bargaining unit not properly included within such unit, the remainder of said Agreement or
amendments or the application of such provisions to an employee, groups of employees and
circumstances other than those as to which it is held invalid or inappropriate, shall not be

affected thereby.

ARTICLE 34
GENDER
Any and all reference in this Agreement to the masculine gender shall be deemed to refer

to either female and/or masculine gender as the case may be.

ARTICLE 35
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT
LFUCG shall continue to allow secondary employment based on applicable law, judicial

precedent and policies and guidelines of the Division consistent therewith.

63
ARTICLE 36
MISCELLANEOUS WORKING CONDITIONS

Section 1. There shall be no restriction on the reasonable use of a cell phone while on
break or the reasonable use of government email for personal communication.

Section 2. Any member required by his job duties to obtain and maintain a CDL shall be
provided with sufficient time to prepare for and take all required examinations with no loss in
compensation. LFUCG shall pay all fees related to the application or renewal of the license.
Members required to maintain a CDL shall receive CDL compensation equal to that provided to
other LFUCG employees.

Section 3. It is agreed that LFUCG shall meet with the Lodge at reasonable times upon

request to discuss issues regarding working conditions.

ARTICLE 37
TERM
Section 1. This Agreement shall be for four (4) years from except as

otherwise agreed in this Agreement.

Section 2. This Agreement shall automatically be renewed from year to year thereafter
unless either party shall notify the other in writing at least one hundred and twenty (120) days
prior to the expiration date of this Agreement that it desires to terminate, amend, or modify this
Agreement. In the event that such notice is given, negotiations shall begin not later than ninety

(90) days prior to the expiration date.

Section 3. This Agreement shall continue in full force and effect upon expiration pending
ratification of a successor collective bargaining agreement or impasse of the parties after good

faith negotiations.

64
AFFIRMATION
Pursuant to Kentucky Revised Statutes, the Lexington-Fayette Urban County Government and
the Fraternal Order of Police Lodge #83, do sign and acknowledge that through the collective
bargaining process this Collective Bargaining Agreement has been mutually agreed upon.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have affixed their signatures this XX day of XXX, 2012.

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, LEXINGTON-FAYETTE URBAN COUNTY
LODGE #83 GOVERNMENT
BY: BY:
KEVIN JOHNSON, PRESIDENT JIM GRAY, MAYOR
BY: BY:
VICTORIA WHITE, CHIEF LESLIE JARVIS, CO-CHIEF NEGOTIATOR
NEGOTIATOR
BY:
EDWARD GARDNER, CO-CHIEF
NEGOTIATOR

65
APPENDIX A — UNIFORM DISCIPLINARY CODE

The LFUCG has established the Uniform Disciplinary Code to provide consistent rules
governing performance and work behavior expected from employees at all levels. The Uniform
Disciplinary Code outlines the penalties and remedial administrative action for various types of
work deficiencies and undesirable behavior.

The following pages contain a copy of the Uniform Disciplinary Code. It is your responsibility
to read and become familiar with its contents. Contact your immediate supervisor or the
Division of Human Resources if you have questions about the Uniform Disciplinary Code.

The following pages reflect the Code as revised on 11/23/83, 02/07/84, 09/23/88, 01/02/91,
11/11/93, and 01/01/2003.

UNIFORM DISCIPLINARY CODE GUIDELINES FOR URBAN COUNTY
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES

Introduction

These Guidelines outline standard ranges of penalties for work deficiencies and
undesirable conduct on the part of LFUCG employees. Commissioners and directors periodically
should review compliance with these Guidelines to ensure that all supervisors are being
consistent in taking disciplinary action and that you are aware of the Uniform Disciplinary Code.
Directors are to furnish a copy of these Guidelines to each employee and supervisor. Questions
that are not answered in the Guidelines or by your supervisor should be directed to the Division
of Human Resources.

The Uniform Disciplinary Code applies to every LFUCG employee at all levels,
including administrators, managers and supervisors. It does not apply to probationary or other at-
shall employees hired by the Mayor or Council. (Supervisors may consult these Guidelines to
discipline employees not covered by the Code but they are not required to do so.) There are
additional operational rules outlined in General Order 73-2/E for the Division of Police and in
Sections 23-41 through 23-44 of the Code of Ordinances for the Division of Police and the
Division of Fire & Emergency Services, which, under specific circumstances, may prevail over
these Guidelines. The Disciplinary Code, these Guidelines and the operational rules cited above
should be applied in each situation. In the event any section of the Guidelines conflicts with the
provisions of KRS 95.450 or KRS 15.520, the statutes shall prevail. Additionally, penalties
imposed on exempt employees must be adjusted so as not to violate the Fair Labor Standards
Act.

 

General Guidelines

It is difficult for the Code and Guidelines to be all inclusive or to assign an appropriate penalty to
every offense or work deficiency. For example, “Leaving the work station without authorization”
may be a short or a lengthy absence from the workstation. A short absence in one division could
be catastrophic, while in another division it would be an annoyance. In each case, supervisors
must rely on their judgment as experienced administrators to arrive at the proper disciplinary
action. The guidelines also provide more severe penalties for multiple offenses, which if

66
considered alone, would result only in lesser penalties. Finally, at management’s discretion, a
pattern of offenses over a period of time which resulted in oral warnings or written reprimands
for each offense when considered alone may support a suspension or dismissal when considered
together. However, reprimands or suspensions that are five (5) years old or older should not be
used in imposing current disciplinary action.

Rules regarding call-in, absenteeism, emergency leave, and similar division policies should be
established by the Division Director and applied consistently to each employee within the
division. Division policies, with periodic updates, are to be submitted to the Division of Human
Resources for review prior to implementation to ensure general compliance with the Disciplinary
Code and Guidelines. It is not necessary for division policies to be the same for each division.

Workload and other factors vary from division to division or even within a division, and these
factors should be considered when divisional policies are established. For example, emergency
leave may be more limited within one division than in another because of the type and nature of
services provided and the availability of staff. Policies within a division must be applied
similarly for employees in similar situations. Penalties recommended in these guidelines must be
applied similarly to employees with similar violations.

The recommended discipline is to be used as a guide and is not intended to be mandatory or all
inclusive. The appropriate disciplinary action shall be determined after the supervisors have
carefully considered the circumstances of each case. The immediate supervisor or superior
manager in the employee’s immediate chain of command should initiate disciplinary action. If a
supervisor has a complaint against an employee outside of his chain of command, the supervisor
should submit this complaint to the Division Director for whom the employee works. If that
Division Director takes no action, then the supervisor who initiated the complaint may request an
investigation by the Division of Human Resources. The Division of Human Resources shall
investigate the complaint and consult the Division Director to whom the employee is assigned
before making any recommendation for discipline. Additionally, Pursuant to KRS 67A.280 and
KRS 95.450, anyone may file charges against any civil service employee with the Civil Service
Commission or against any sworn personnel (Police or Fire) with the Urban County Council.

   

 

Definition of Disciplinary Actions

The degree of discipline administered in any given situation depends on the severity of the
infraction. Each Division Director should evaluate the circumstances and facts of the offense and
select the most suitable form of discipline. The levels of progressive discipline are:

Oral Warning

e An oral warning should be used for relatively minor offenses. Supervisors should inform
the employee in private that they are administering an oral warning and that the employee
is being given an opportunity to correct identified work or behavioral problems.

e All conversations with employees about their work performance do not have to be
conducted as oral warning sessions. It may be appropriate to hold coaching and
counseling sessions with employees to review job expectations and standards, when new
programs are started, or when existing programs are reorganized. Coaching and
Counseling sessions should not be viewed as disciplinary in nature.

   

 

67
Written Reprimand

¢ Written reprimands are imposed when the employee disregards an oral warning or for
more severe first offenses.

e A classified civil service employee may not be reprimanded more than two (2) times
within twelve (12) months unless charges are filed with the Civil Service Commission.

Suspension Without Pay

e A suspension is imposed for severe infractions of rules or standards or for violations
occurring after the employee has received oral warnings or written reprimands and has
failed to correct the error or to improve his behavior. This discipline should be applied
after a thorough evaluation of the circumstances by the supervisor and those in the
employee’s chain of command.

e All suspensions are without pay.

e The supervisor shall notify the Division of Human Resources before issuing any
suspension and shall coordinate suspensions of exempt employees with the Division of
Human Resources.

e The guidelines impose suspensions in terms of “hours” in order to address workdays
longer than eight (8) hours.

e Acclassified civil service employee may not be suspended for more than 160 consecutive
work hours or 240 non-consecutive work hours within twelve (12) months unless charges
are filed with the Civil Service Commission.

e The supervisor should attempt to make the employee’s return to the job after a suspension
as dignified as possible.

 

Dismissal

A dismissal is reserved for the most severe violations of the Uniform Disciplinary Code or other
Urban County Government policies, for cases in which an employee refuses to correct behavior
despite prior disciplinary action or for cases where an employee commits more than one type of

serious infraction. This punishment represents the supervisor’s judgment that the employee

cannot be rehabilitated into a productive employee. It also has the most serious repercussions for

the employee in terms of future employment.

68
Disciplinary Procedures

Classified Civil Service Employees — Divisions Without Discipline Review Boards

Oral Warning

After discussing the oral warning with the employee in private, the supervisor and the
employee should sign the written record of the oral warning. Copies of the oral warning
should be given to the employee and the Commissioner of the Department. The original
should be placed in the oral warning file in the Division of Human Resources, where it
shall remain for 12 months. It shall then be destroyed if no further infractions have been
committed. There is no appeal to the Civil Service Commission for an oral warning. The
oral warning file in the Division of Human Resources is separate from the employee’s
personnel file and is the official record of such disciplinary records. The oral warning file
can be used if the employee files a formal grievance or complaint about the oral warning.
If the circumstance causing the oral warning is not corrected, the employee shall be
subject to more severe disciplinary measures.

Written Reprimand

The supervisor should prepare a written reprimand form explaining the occurrence. The
supervisor should then present the facts of the incident and his recommendation for
discipline to his superior in the chain of command. The reviewing superior may agree or
disagree with the recommendation. In all cases, the facts of the offense and the
recommended discipline should be presented to the division director before any discipline
is imposed. The supervisor should discuss the offense with the employee and should
consider the employee’s explanation of the event before any final action is taken. The
written reprimand form, which is to be signed by the Commissioner and Division
Director, should be presented to and signed by the employee. A copy of the written
reprimand form is to be given to the employee and the Commissioner and the original
form is to be sent to the Division of Human Resources and placed in the employee's
personnel file. Written reprimands may be appealed to the Civil Service Commission.
Unless reversed by the Commission, they remain permanent records in an employee’s
file.

 

 

Suspension Without Pay

Before issuing a suspension, the supervisor should assemble the facts supporting the
suspension and discuss the events with the employee. The supervisor should then review
the action with his superiors (as outlined above in the written reprimand section) and
determine the length of the suspension. The supervisor should then inform the employee
of the disciplinary action, making certain that the employee is aware of the reasons for
the action. The original disciplinary action form, signed by the Commissioner and
Division Director, is to be sent to the Division of Human Resources and placed in the
employee’s personnel file. A copy is to be given to the employee. Suspensions may be
appealed to the Civil Service Commission. Unless reversed by the Commission, they
remain permanent records in an employee’s file.

  

69
Dismissal

Before recommending the dismissal of an employee, the supervisor must discuss the
action with appropriate superior officials. Specific charges for dismissal are to be
prepared by the Department of Law in consultation with the supervisor or his superior.
Except in unusual circumstances, an employee should be given the option to resign rather
than face charges. If the employee refuses to resign, the supervisor should commence
action by filing the charges with the Mayor and placing the employee on suspension
without pay. Except in situations where a threat to supervisors or other employees exists,
the employee may not be suspended from duty until charges are filed.

Classified Civil Service Employees — Divisions With Discipline Review Boards

Each department may create a Discipline Review Board pursuant to the guidelines
established in the appropriate CAO Policy. When a supervisor believes that an employee
has committed a violation of the Uniform Disciplinary Code, the supervisor shall submit
a request for discipline to the Review Board on a form supplied by the Board. The Board
shall hear cases involving written reprimands and suspensions of 160 hours or less.
Supervisors may issue oral warnings in the manner described above. Requests for
dismissal shall not be heard by the Board and shall be sent to the Department of Law.

The request for discipline form submitted to the Discipline Review Board shall include:
Nature of the alleged violation; Date and time of the alleged violation; Identity of the
alleged violator; Evidence to support the accusation; and Identity of the complainant.

The Discipline Review Board shall hear testimony from the supervisor, the employee and
other witnesses, if necessary, and review written or other evidence. The supervisor and
the employee shall speak for themselves and shall not be allowed any other
representative.

After hearing the evidence, the Discipline Review Board shall make a recommendation to
the supervisor on whether the employee should be disciplined and, if so, the appropriate
level of discipline. This recommendation is not binding on the supervisor. If the
supervisor imposes discipline, the employee may appeal it to the Civil Service
Commission. The recommendation of the Discipline Review Board may be placed in
evidence before the Civil Service Commission.

Division of Fire & Emergency Services and Division of Police

The procedures outlined in the above section apply to sworn employees of the Division of Fire &
Emergency Services and the Division of Police. Disciplinary action shall be imposed, however,
only pursuant to KRS 95.450 (Police and Fire) and KRS 15.520 (Police).

70
Disciplinary Actions

1a. Driving An Urban County Government Vehicle While Under The Influence Of
Alcohol; After Ingesting Illegal Drugs; Or While Using Prescription Or Non-Prescription
Drugs That Impair Efficient Operation Of The Vehicle:

Definition: This offense prohibits driving a vehicle or operating equipment owned by the Urban
County Government while under the influence of alcohol, after ingesting illegal drugs, or while
using prescription or non-prescription (over-the-counter) drugs that impair the efficient operation
of the vehicle or equipment.

Comment: The supervisor should follow the procedures and impose the penalties adopted in the
Drug and Alcohol Free Workplace Policy.

1b. Failure To Report A Suspended Or Revoked Driver's License:

Definition: This offense occurs when an employee who may be required at any time to drive an
Urban County Government vehicle fails to notify his supervisor within twenty-four (24) hours of
the employee losing his driving privileges for any reason.

1c. Driving An Urban County Government Vehicle With A Suspended Or Revoked
Driver's License:

Definition: This offense occurs when an employee operates an Urban County Government
vehicle while his driver’s license is suspended or revoked. Driving under these circumstances is
illegal and exposes the Urban County Government and the employee to additional liability in the
event the employee is involved in an accident.

Comment: This rule should be explained to any employee who may be called upon to drive an
Urban County Government vehicle.

2. Stealing Or Theft:

Definition: Employee shall use Urban County Government property only for its intended
purposes in accordance with established government or divisional procedures and shall not take
any Urban County Government equipment or property for personal use or sale. Evidence of theft
shall be turned over to the Division of Police for investigation, and prosecution shall be pursued.

Comment: Supervisors should notify the police immediately in case of theft or suspected theft.
3. Intentional Or Deliberate Destruction Or Unauthorized Use of Urban County
Government Property:

Definition: Employees shall utilize Urban County Government property only for its intended
purpose in accordance with established government or divisional procedures and shall not
intentionally abuse, damage or lose through negligence any Urban County Government
equipment or property.

71
4. Use Of, Possession Of, Or Positive Test For Illegal Drugs While On The Job;
Reporting To Work After Ingesting Illegal Drugs; Or Conviction For Possession Of, Or
Trafficking In Illegal Drugs:

Definition: This offense deals with use or possession of illegal drugs on the job or behavior by
an employee which gives a supervisor reasonable cause to believe that an illegal drug is present
in an employee’s system. This rule does not include medications prescribed to and properly
taken by an employee because of a medical condition if the use of the prescribed medication has
been properly reported to a supervisor. If the prescribed medication has a negative side effect, it
is the employee’s responsibility to tell a supervisor before the employee is assigned any duties.

Comment: If the employee’s behavior indicates that the employee has ingested drugs, the
supervisor should follow the procedures and impose the penalties adopted in the Alcohol and
Drug Free Workplace Policy. Employees who leave their workstation to consume drugs shall be
subject to the severest discipline.

5. Use Of, Possession Of, Or Positive Test For Alcohol While On The Job:

Definition: This offense deals with drinking on the job or behavior by an employee which gives
supervisors reasonable cause to believe that the employee has been drinking alcoholic substances
during or before reporting to work. This rule does not include medications containing alcohol
which are prescribed to and properly taken by an employee because of a medical condition if the
use of the prescribed medication has been properly reported to a supervisor. If a prescribed
medication has a negative side effect, it is the employee’s responsibility to tell a supervisor
before the employee is assigned any duties.

Comment: Dismissal shall be recommended for employees who are sentenced to serve jail time
for offenses attributable to intoxicating substances (including alcohol or public intoxication, or
driving under the influence). Supervisors should follow the procedures and impose the penalties
adopted in the Alcohol and Drug Free Workplace Policy. Employees who leave their workstation
to consume alcohol shall be subject to the severest discipline.

6a. Violent Behavior, Throwing Objects Toward Or At Others, Verbal Threats, Or
Fighting On The Job (With Weapon):

Definition: A “weapon” is an instrument or anything that can be used to injure or harm a person,
whether or not the instrument or thing was designed to be used for that purpose. This offense
includes, but is not limited to:

1. Fighting with a weapon;

2. On duty possession of a weapon;

3. On duty possession of an object which could be used as a weapon, which has no
relationship to the employee’s duties, and which is unnecessary on the work site, or is
unnecessary for the effective and efficient performance of the job (for example, a
baseball bat, brass knuckles, tasar unit);

4. Using objects or equipment that are necessary for the performance of the job as a weapon
(for example, using a crowbar or tire iron as a weapon rather than as a tool);

5. Making verbal threats while in possession of a weapon; or

 
 

 

72
6. Throwing objects at or in the direction of others.

Comment: The supervisor shall take immediate action in the event of a fight without
endangering himself or others. In serious cases, the Division of Police should be called to assist
the supervisor.

6b. Violent Behavior Or Fighting On The Job (Without Weapons):

Definition: This offense includes, but is not limited to:
1. Fist fights or similar physical conduct;
2. Horse play which causes or has the potential of causing injury; or
3. Any intentional pushing, shoving, hitting, or bumping;

with or without verbal threats, which could or does result in harm to another employee or which
disrupts the effectiveness and efficiency of the workplace.

Comment: In addition to disciplinary action, the employees involved shall submit to an
evaluation by the L.F.U.C.G. EAP counselors. After the EAP evaluation, the counselor shall
provide the Human Resources director with a statement certifying that the employee has been
evaluated and is fit to return to work. The employee shall attend such additional EAP sessions as
are recommended by the Counselor. All parties involved in violent behavior may be subject to
the same discipline depending on the circumstances.

 

6c. Verbal Threats Or Harassing Statements:

Definition: This offense includes, but is not limited to:

1. Statements, including written or e-mail statements, that seriously alarm, annoy,
intimidate or harass a person or which could cause a reasonable person to suffer mental
distress; or

2. Oral threats to commit any act likely to result in substantial damage to property.

Comments: “Joking” references to shooting others, “going postal” or “blowing people away”
shall be taken very seriously and shall result in disciplinary action. The supervisor shall take
immediate action when situations of this type develop. In addition to disciplinary action, the
employee shall be required to be evaluated by EAP counselors. After the sessions, the EAP
counselor shall provide the Human Resources Director with a statement certifying that the
employee has been counseled and understands appropriate workplace behavior.

7. Leaving Assigned Work Station Without Authorization:

Definition: This offense occurs when an employee leaves the workstation without permission. It
includes leaving the workstation to conduct personal business, but does not include absence due
to a valid emergency if the employee ensures that his duties shall be covered and notifies a
supervisor.

  
 

Comment: Emergency situations may arise, such as an accident or sudden illness in the
employee’s immediate family. If the employee’s immediate supervisor is not available, the
employee must notify the next ranking superior. In all emergency cases, leave should be granted

73
unless there is evidence of prior abuse. Where a follow up leave slip is required by the
supervisor, the employee should be so notified in writing within three (3) days of the absence.

8a. Insubordination:

Definition: This offense involves behavior or statements, which reflect an employee’s refusal to
be supervised including, but not limited to, direct refusal to obey a supervisor’s work related
order or failure to follow directions and instructions. This rule also includes failure to follow
instructions which have been adequately explained; repeated occurrences of poor decision
making which lead to the redoing of work; consistent failure to meet assignment deadlines; or a
pattern of incorrect work that results in disruption of the operation of the unit or impairment of
its effectiveness and efficiency.

Comment: Supervisors should be sensitive to the difference between a “bad attitude”,
insubordination and inefficient work. Inefficiency, when not corrected after being brought to the
employee’s attention, may become insubordination.

8b. Malicious Behavior Or Deliberate Behavior Which Affects The Efficient And
Effective Performance Of The Job:

Definition: This offense includes any malicious behavior, regardless of its effect on the
efficiency or effectiveness of the workplace, or any deliberate behavior that disrupts the
workplace. It can include, but is not limited to, malicious practical jokes; knowingly spreading
false rumors; sabotaging projects or other employees’ work; or constant teasing of another
employee.

Comment: Supervisors should establish and maintain a professional level of behavior for each
work unit.

8c. Misconduct:

Definition: This offense is general in nature and applies when the actions of an employee do not
fit within any other specific category. It may be used alone or in conjunction with other
infractions. It should be used when an established Government, department or division policy or
procedure does not contain a specific penalty.

Comment: Supervisors should educate employees to realize that they may be disciplined for
their actions even if every possible improper act or infraction is not separately listed in the
Uniform Disciplinary Code.

8d. Inefficiency:

Definition: This offense involves the failure, neglect or inability of the employee to perform his
assigned duties or the performance of his assigned duties in an inappropriate, inadequate or
unsuitable manner. This would include spending their time in excessive personal conversations,
either on the phone or with others; taking excessive breaks; pushing work assignments off on
others; or engaging in any other activity that could cause them to neglect or be inattentive to their
duties. As with insubordination, this rule also includes failure to follow instructions which have

74
been adequately explained; repeated occurrences of poor decision making which lead to the
redoing of work; consistent failure to produce work that is error free; the use of poor judgment;
lack of timelin nd failure to meet assignment deadlines; or a pattern of incorrect work that
results in disruption of the operation of the unit or impairment of its effectiveness and efficiency.

 

Comment: Although insubordination and inefficiency are similar in some respects they have an
important distinction. An insubordinate employee is one who intentionally refuses to obey or
comply with an order of a superior. An inefficient employee is one who is not able (rather than
unwilling) to obey or comply with the orders of a supervisor or to otherwise perform his assigned
duties.

9. Sleeping On The Job:

Definition: An employee must remain alert at all times, especially while operating equipment.
Sleeping during duty hours (except for sworn Fire & Emergency Services personnel assigned to
a fire station) is strictly forbidden.

10a. Vehicle Or Equipment Accidents Involving More Than $1,000 Damage Where
Employees Are At Fault Due To Negligence Or Carelessness:

Definition: Employees are required to operate Urban County Government vehicles and
equipment in a safe, prudent and responsible manner consistent with all local and state laws and
all relevant Government, department or division policies. An employee who fails to operate a
vehicle or equipment safely, legally or consistent with government, department or division
policies and incurs more than $1,000 damage is subject to disciplinary action. Any employee
involved in a vehicle accident where the property damage exceeds the amounts established in the
Alcohol and Drug Free Workplace Policy shall be subject to a post critical incident drug test.

Comment: The employee must ensure the safe operation of all vehicles and equipment to which
he is assigned. Employees not familiar with proper vehicle or equipment operating procedures
must inform their supervisor and ask for training and supervision. The supervisor should provide
training when the employee is first assigned to a vehicle or equipment and again as needed. If the
vehicle or equipment is not operating properly, the employee should inform his supervisor so
that proper measures can be taken to avoid an accident. Restitution shall be based on fair market
value of necessary repairs or replacements.

10b. Minor Traffic Violations In Urban County Government Vehicles Or Any Vehicle Or
Equipment Accidents Involving Less Than $1, 000 In Property Damage Where
Employees Are At Fault Due To Negligence Or Carelessness:

Definitions: These violations may include, but are not limited to, speeding, driving left of the
centerline, failing to yield the right-of- way, or accidents, which result in less than $1,000
damage to vehicles or equipment. Careless use of vehicles or equipment, such as power tools or
grounds — keeping equipment, which results in damage to the vehicle or equipment or other
property, is also covered by this rule. Restitution shall be based on fair market value of necessary
repairs or replacements.

75
11. Absent Without Approved Leave:

Definition: The offense occurs when an employee fails to report for duty, to call—in as required
by Government, department or division policy, or does not have sufficient leave to cover an
absence. The difference between being Absent Without Approved Leave (“AWOL”) and being
tardy is discussed in Item E. 14. [Note: Once all approved leave is exhausted, the employee
shall be marked AWOL. There is no approved payroll designation of “absent no pay.”]

Comment: Each situation should be handled on an individual basis and division directors are
responsible for establishing call-in and emergency leave procedures for their divisions. After
review and approval by the Division of Human Resources, a copy of the division call-in and
emergency leave procedures should be given to each employee.

An employee who is reported AWOL shall not accrue vacation and sick time for the entire
calendar month. Each AWOL on each “work day” is a separate occurrence. A supervisor should
investigate each situation prior to marking an employee AWOL.

Non-exempt employees do not receive pay for time they are AWOL and may be subject to
disciplinary action. Exempt employees may also be subject to disciplinary action under this
policy.

Employees held in jail may request administrative leave under Sections 21-33 and 21-37 of the
Code of Ordinances, which may or may not be granted depending upon Government, department
and division policies and the circumstances. Employees who exhaust all administrative leave
under Sections 21-37 shall be AWOL and subject to dismissal.

11b. Absent Without Approved Leave for 2 or More Days in a Row:

Definition: This offense covers those situations where an employee fails to report to work for 2
or more days in a row.

Comment: Employees who are AWOL 2 or more days in a row are subject to more severe
discipline.

12. Excessive Use Of Sick Leave:

Definition: This offense occurs when an employee fails to provide a medical doctor’s excuse for
excessive use of sick leave. Excessive use of sick leave includes:
a. Consistent use of sick leave on the first or last day of the employee’s work week;
b. Consistent use of more sick leave than is earned in a pay period or use of sick leave on a
sporadic basis especially on the first and last day of the employee’s work week;
c. Depleting sick time balances requesting leave without pay for sickness when no chronic
ailment has been diagnosed.

Comment: One warning sign of abuse of sick leave is low sick leave balances maintained by

long-term employees. Sick leave is not a vested right like vacation and holiday leave and its use
is limited to its intended purpose. If a pattern of abuse is detected, a supervisor may require the

716
employee to present a medical doctor’s excuse for all sick leave requests (Section 21-34 of the
Code of Ordinances). There are legitimate situations, however, where an employee may use all
sick leave because of a chronic illness and must apply for leave without pay. If it is determined
that a low sick leave balance is justified and the employee is performing in a satisfactory manner,
the supervisor should examine the situation carefully before taking any disciplinary action.
Additionally, a supervisor may request that the employee be examined by an Urban County
Government selected physician if questions exist as to the employee’s ability to perform the
duties of his job. The Director of Human Resources should be contacted to arrange for a medical
examination.

13a. Failure To Observe Safety Procedures; Failure To Wear Protective Clothing —
(Class A — Serious — Life Threatening):

13b. Failure To Observe Safety Procedures; Failure To Wear Protective Clothing —
(Class B— Less Serious Non — Life Threatening):

Definition: These violations include, but are not limited to, removal or destruction of safety
devices; failure to keep equipment and work areas clean; failure to report unsafe working
conditions; or failure to wear safety clothing (for example, hard hats, safety glasses, steel — toe
shoes, seat belts).

 

Comment: Each division should have safety rules or procedures identifying Class A (serious)
and Class B (less serious) rules. Safety rules should be approved by the safety coordinator in the
Division of Risk Management and explained to employees. Employees should receive a copy of
the division’s safety rules. The division should require employees to sign a form stating that they
have received a copy of the safety rules issued by Risk Management and a list of the division’s
safety rules. The division may periodically update its rules and have employees acknowledge in
writing that they understand the safety rules and regulations.

  

14. Excessive Tardiness:

Definition: This offense includes a pattern of tardiness that interferes with the operation of the
unit. Generally, a first offense occurs when an employee is late two (2) or more times in any one
pay period. However, in some divisions less frequent tardiness may justify disciplinary action
(for example, divisions running 24-hour coverage or those where work crews leave a central
location). A tardy employee whose actions result in overtime payments to other employees may
receive more severe discipline, depending on the circumstances.

Comment: Employees who call — in and are excused for legitimate emergencies should not be
considered tardy. Each division should establish a call — in and tardiness policy and copies of the
policy should be given to each employee. The policy should be submitted to the Division of
Human Resources for review and approval prior to issuance.

Discipline should not be imposed until the existence of a tardiness problem is identified. In most
ingle tardy arrival should not result in discipline. Each division is responsible for
establishing a time frame for being tardy rather than AWOL; however, if an employee is absent
for more than thirty (30) minutes, then he is AWOL rather than tardy.

 

 

77
15. Failure To Submit Required Or Completed Reports Or Forms:

Definition: Forms and reports that are part of an employee’s job duties must be submitted in
accordance with established Government, department or division procedures.

16. Gambling On The Job:

Definition: The offense of gambling defined as staking or risking something of value upon the
outcome of a contest, game, gaming scheme, or gaming device which is based upon an element
of chance, in accord with an agreement or understanding that someone shall receive something
of value in the event of a certain outcome. A contest or game in which eligibility to participate is
determined by chance or the ultimate winner is determined by skill shall not be considered
gambling. Gambling is a prohibited non-work related activity. Personnel in the Division of
Community Corrections shall be subject to dismissal for a first offense of gambling.

78
UNIFORM DISCIPLINARY CODE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

la Occurrence Driving an Urban County Government vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol; after ingesting illegal
drugs; or while using prescription or non-prescription
drugs that impair efficient operation of vehicle.

1* Occurrence See the Alcohol and Drug Free Workplace Policy.
1b Occurrence Failure to report a suspended or revoked driver’s
license.
™ Written reprimand (employees must report suspended or
revoked driver’s license to supervisor within 24 hours).
am 80—160 hours suspension, depending on circumstances.

1c Occurrence Driving an Urban County Government vehicle with a
suspended or revoked license.

1* Occurrence 80—160 hours suspension.
2"? Occurrence Dismissal.

2 Occurrence Stealing or theft.

1* Occurrence 80—160 hours suspension.
2"? Occurrence Dismissal.

3 Occurrence Intentional or deliberate destruction or unauthorized
use of Urban County Government property.

1* Occurrence Restitution and 80—160 hours suspension or dismissal.
2™ Occurrence Dismissal.

4 Occurrence Use of, possession of, or positive test for illegal drugs
while on the job; reporting to work after ingesting
illegal drugs; or conviction for possession of or
trafficking in illegal drugs.

1" Occurrence See the Alcohol and Drug Free Workplace Policy.

5 Occurrence Use of, possession, or positive test for alcohol while on
the job.

1* Occurrence See the Alcohol and Drug Free Workplace Policy.

6a Occurrence Violent behavior, throwing objects toward or at others,
verbal threats or fighting on the job (with weapon).

1" Occurrence Dismissal.

6b Occurrence Violent behavior or fighting on the job (without
weapon).

1* Occurrence 40—160 hours suspension, plus sessions with EAP

 

79

 
 

Counselors and a statement indicating the employee has
been counseled and is fit to return to work, or dismissal
depending on circumstances or threat.

 

 

2"? Occurrence

Dismissal.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6c Occurrence Verbal threats or harassing statements.

1“ Occurrence Written reprimand or 8—120 hours suspension, plus
sessions with EAP counselors and a statement indicating
the employee has been counseled and is fit to return to
work, or dismissal depending on circumstances or threat.

2™ Occurrence 128—160 hours suspension, plus sessions with EAP
counselors and a statement indicating the employee has
been counseled and is fit to return to work, or dismissal
depending on circumstances or threat.

3" Occurrence Dismissal.

7 Occurrence Leaving assigned work area without authorization.

1* Occurrence Written reprimand or 40—120 hours suspension,
depending on circumstances.

2™ Occurrence 128—160 hours suspension or dismissal.

3™ Occurrence Dismissal.

8a Occurrence Insubordination.

1* Occurrence Oral warning, written reprimand or 8—120 hours
suspension, depending on circumstances.

2™ Occurrence 128—160 hours suspension or dismissal, depending on
circumstances.

3™ Occurrence Dismissal.

8b Occurrence Malicious behavior or deliberate behavior, which

affects the efficient and effective performance of the
job.

 

1* Occurrence

Oral warning, written reprimand or 8—120 hours
suspension, depending on circumstances.

 

id
2" Occurrence

128—160 hours suspension or dismissal, depending on
circumstances.

 

 

 

rd
3™ Occurrence

 

 

 

80

 
 

8c

Occurrence

Misconduct

 

1* Occurrence

Oral warning, written reprimand or 8—120 hours
suspension, depending on circumstances.

 

id
2" Occurrence

128—160 hours suspension or dismissal, depending on
circumstances.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3™ Occurrence Dismissal.

8d Occurrence Inefficiency

1* Occurrence Oral warning, written reprimand or 8—120 hours
suspension, depending on circumstances.

2™ Occurrence 128—160 hours suspension or dismissal, depending on
circumstances.

3" Occurrence Dismissal.

9 Occurrence Sleeping on the job

1* Occurrence Written reprimand or 40—80 hours suspension, depending
on circumstances.

2™ Occurrence 88—160 hours suspension or dismissal, depending on
circumstances.

3" Occurrence Dismissal.

10a Occurrence Vehicle or equipment accidents involving more than
$1,000 where employees are at fault (due to negligence
or carelessness).

1“ Occurrence Oral warning, written reprimand, 40—120 hours
suspension or dismissal, depending on circumstances, and
restitution up to $1,000.

2™ Occurrence 128—160 hours suspension or dismissal, depending on
circumstances, and restitution up to $1,000.

3™ Occurrence Dismissal.

10b Occurrence Minor traffic violation in Urban County Government

vehicle during any calendar year or any vehicle or
equipment accident involving less than $1,000 in
property damage where employees are at fault (due to
negligence or carelessness).

 

1* Occurrence

Oral warning or written reprimand, depending on
circumstances, and restitution up to $1,000.

 

id
2" Occurrence

48—120 hours suspension and restitution up to $1,000.

 

 

 

rd
3™ Occurrence

 

Dismissal.

 

81

 
 

lla

Occurrence

Absent without approved leave.

 

ot
1" Occurrence

Written reprimand or 24—40 hours suspension.

 

id
2" Occurrence

48—160 hours suspension.

 

3" Occurrence

Dismissal.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11b Occurrence Absent without approved leave for more than two days.
1* Occurrence 48—160 hours suspension.
2"? Occurrence Dismissal.
12 Occurrence Excessive Use of sick leave.
1* Occurrence Written reprimand or 8—40 hours suspension.
2™ Occurrence 48—120 hours suspension.
3" Occurrence Dismissal.
13a Occurrence Failure to observe safety procedures or to wear
protective clothing (Class A serious — life threatening).
1* Occurrence 8—40 hours suspension.
2™ Occurrence 48—120 hours suspension.
3" Occurrence Dismissal.
13b Occurrence Failure to observe safety procedures or to wear
protective clothing (Class B less serious — non-life
threatening).
1* Occurrence Written reprimand.
2™ Occurrence 8—40 hours suspension.
3™ Occurrence 48—120 hours suspension.
4" Occurrence Dismissal.
14 Occurrence Excessive tardiness.

 

ot
1" Occurrence

Oral warning or written reprimand, depending on
circumstances.

 

id
2" Occurrence

Written reprimand or 8—40 hours suspension, depending
on circumstances.

 

rd
3™ Occurrence

48—120 hours suspension, depending on circumstances.

 

 

 

4" Occurrence

 

Dismissal.

 

82

 
 

15

Occurrence

Failure to submit required or completed reports or
forms.

 

1" Occurrence

Oral warning or written reprimand, depending on
circumstances.

 

2"? Occurrence

Written reprimand or 24—40 hours suspension, depending
on circumstances.

 

rd
3™ Occurrence

48—120 hours suspension, depending on circumstances.

 

rh
4" Occurrence

 

 

16

Occurrence

Gambling on the job.

 

1" Occurrence

Oral warning, written reprimand or 24—80 hours
suspension, depending on circumstances. Sworn
employees of the Division of Community Corrections shall
be dismissed.

 

id
2" Occurrence

88—160 hours suspension or dismissal.

 

 

 

3" Occurrence

 

 

 

83

 
APPENDIX B —- DETAILED SALARY SCHEDULE

Correetions - Ist Year

Officers

981

Sergeants

982

Correetions - 2nd Year

Officers

981

Sergeants

982

Correetions - 3rd Year

Officers

981

Sergeants

982

Corrections - 4th Year

Officers

981

Sergeants

982

Annual
Bi-Weekly
Hourly

Annual
Bi-Weekly
Hourly

Annual
Bi-Weekly
Hourly

Annual
Bi-Weekly
Hourly

Annual
Bi-Weekly
Hourly

Annual
Bi-Weekly
Hourly

Annual
Bi-Weekly
Hourly

Annual
Bi-Weekly
Hourly

Detailed Salary Schedule

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ste
Entry-1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 it 2 3 14 15 16
29,835.880 30,043,880 30,277.80 30,537.880 30,927.880 31,447,880 32,097,880 32,877,880 33,787.880 34,957,880 36,387.880 38,077.880 40,027,880 42,107.80 44,447,880 47,298.780
1,147,534 1,155,534 1.164.534 1,174,534 1.189.534 1,209.5341,234.534 1.264.534 1,299,534 1,344,534 1,399,534 1.464.534 1,539,534 1,619.534 1,709,534 1,819,184
14.344 14.444 14.557 14.682 14.869 15.119 15.432 15.807 16.244 16.807 17.494 18307 19.244 20.244 21.369 22.740
Entry-1 2 3 4 3 6 7 8 9 10 1
48,244.560 48,727.120 49,209.680 49,692.240 50,174.800 50,657.360 51,139.920 51,622.480 52,105,040 52,587.600 53,070.160
1,855.560 1,874.120 1,892.680 1,911.240 1,929.800 1,948.360 1,966.920 1,985.480 2,004.040. 2,022.60 2,041.160
23.195 23.427 23.659 23.891 24.123 24.355 24.587 24.819 25.051 25,283 25.515
Detailed Salary Schedule
Ste
Entry-1 2 3 4 5 6 1 8 9 10 i 2 1B 14 15 16
29,835.880 30,043,880 30,277.80 30,537.880 30,927.880 31,447.880 32,097.880 32,877,880 33,787,880 34,957.80 36,387.880 38,077.80 40,027.880 42,107.80 44,447.880 47,298.780
1,147,534 1,155,534 1,164.534 1,174,534 1.189.534 1,209.5341,234.534 1,264.534 1,299.534) 1.344.534 1,399.534 1.464.534 1,539.5341,619.534 1,709.534  1,819.184
14.344 14.444 14.557 14.682 14.869 15.119 15.432 15807 16.244 16.807 «17.494 18307 19.244 20.244 21.369 22.740
Entry-1 2 3 4 3 6 7 8 9 10 i
48,244.560 | 48.727.120 49,209.680 49,69. '50,174.800 50,657.360 51,139.920 51,622.480 52.105.040 52,587.600 53,070.160
1,855.560 1,874.120 1,892.680 1,911.240 1,929.800 1,948.360 1,966:920 1,985.480 2,004.040 2,022.60 2,041.160
23.195 27 23.659 «23,891 24.123 24.355, 24.587 24.819 25.051_—-25.283 25.515
Detailed Salary Schedule
Ste
Entry-1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 i 2 1B 14 5 16
30,235.880 30,443,880 30,677.80 30,937.880 31,327,880 31,847.880 32,497.880 33,277.880 34,187,880 35,357.80 36,787.880 38,477.80 40,427,880 42,507.80 44,847.880 47,698.780
1,162,918 1,170.9181,179.918 1,189,918 1,204,918 1,224.918 1,249.918 1,279.918 1,314.918 1,359.918 1,414.918 1.479.918 1,554.918 1,634,918 1,724.918 — 1,834.568
14.536 14.636 14.749 14.874 15.061 15.311 15.624 15.999 16.436 16.999 «17.686. 18.499 19.436 20.436 21.561 22.932
Entry-1 2 3 4 3 6 7 8 9 10 1
48,644.560 49,127,120 49,609.680. 50,092.240 50,574.800 51,057.360 51,539.920 52,022.480 52,505.040 52,987.600 53,470.160
1,870,945 _1,889.505 1,908.065 1,926.625 1,945.1851,963.745 1,982.305  2,000.865 2,019.425 2.037.985 2,056.545
23.387 23.619 23.851 24.083. 24.315 24.547 = 24.779 25.011 25.243 25.475 25.707
Detailed Salary Schedule
Ste
Entry-1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 10 i 12 ey ia 5 16
30,635.880 30,843,880 31,077.80 31,337,880 31,727.880 32,247.880 32,897.880 33,677.880 35,757.880 37,187.80 38,877.880 40,827.80 42,907.880 45,247.80 48,098.780
1,178,303 1,186.303 1.195.303 1,205.303 1,220.303 1,240.3031,265.303 1.295.303 1,330.303 1.375.303 1,430.303 1.495.303 1,570.3031,650.303 1,740,303 1,849,953
14.729 14.829 14.941 15.066 15.254 15.504 15.816 16.191 16.629 17.191 17.879 18.691 19.629 20.629 21.754. 23.124
Entry-1 2 3 4 3 6 7 8 9 10 i
49,044.560 49,527.120 50,009.680 50,492.240 50,974.800 51,457.360 51,939.920 52,422.480 52,905.040 53,387.600 53,870.160
1,886.329  1,904.889 1,923.49 1,942,009 1,960.569 1,979.129 1,997.689 2.016.249 2,034.809 2,053.369 _2,071.929
23.579 23.811 24.275 24.739 24.971 25.203 25.435 25.667 (25.899

 

 

84

 

 

 

 
APPENDIX C

8280

 

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

P.O. Box 8280
Lexington, KY 40533-

GRIEVANCE REPORT FORM

Town Branch FOP Lodge #83, Inc

 

GRIEVANCE RECEIVED BY

DATE

 

GRIEVANCE NO.

 

 

 

ABOVE SECTION FOR FOP REPRESENTATIVE USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

IMMEDIATE SUPERVISOR AT TIME OF INCIDENT

 

PLEASE PRINT OR TYPE
NAME OF GRIEVANT EMPLOYEE NUMBER
GRIEVANT HOME ADDRESS NUMBER AND STREET CITY STATE ZIP
HOME PHONE WORK PHONE EMAIL
RANK

 

GRIEVANCE FIRST DISCUSSED WITH

 

DATE

 

ARTICLE AND SECTION NUMBER OF CONTRACT VIOLATION

 

STATEMENT OF GRIEVANCE (GIVE TIMES, DATES, WHO, WHAT, WHEN, WHERE, WHY, HOW) BE SPECIFIC.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(CONTINUE ON SEPARATE PAGE IF NECESSARY)

 

REMEDY REQUESTED

 

 

 

 

GRIEVAN’ NATURE

 

 

 

DATE

 

TIME

 

85

 
 

GRIEVANT MUST PROVIDE A COPY OF THIS FORM TO THE FOP REPRESENTATIVE IMMEDIATELY
FORM MUST BE GIVEN TO A BARGAINING AGENT OFFICER IT IS THE GREIVANT’S RESPONSIBILITY TO ASSURE THE FORM IS.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RECEIVED
STEP ONE
DATE RECEIVED DATE OF MEETING DATE OF RESPONSE (SEE
ATTACHED)
SIGNATURE
STEP TWO
DATE RECEIVED DATE OF MEETING DATE OF RESPONSE (SEE
ATTACHED)
SIGNATURE
STEP THREE
DATE RECEIVED DATE OF MEETING DATE GF RESPONSE (SEE
SIGNATURE
STEP FOUR

 

DATE RECEIVED

 

DATE OF MEETING.

 

DATE OF RESPONSE (SEE
ATTACHED)

 

SIGNATURE

 

Below Section For FOP Bargaining Agent Use Only

 

RECOMMENDATIONS OF GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

DATE,

FINAL DISPOSITION OF GRIEVANCE

 

 

 

DATE,

GRIEVANT NOTIFIED BY

METHOD OF NOTIFICATION

 

 

86

 
