CT 10017 BAS EOS 7

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE
CITY OF CLEVELAND
AND
CLEVELAND POLICE PATROLMEN'S ASSOCIATION

(C.P.P.A)

NON-CIVILIAN PERSONNEL

Effective April 1, 2013 through March 31, 2016
TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PAGE
PURPOSE... sessssessessessecssessessessessessessessssssussessussseessussssesessessusseseussusausesecuecusenssucenecnesseeneesessueenessnees 1
WITNESSETA ssvssascossasscesssaassavevnsvosresswsensscunesasvszesvorsnsresaasnssiasnessinenssessenubesssstneatssesuesvesseeseenepes craven 1
ARTICLE I RECOGNITION...
ARTICLE Tl UNION SECURIT Wiss scsisssnsssscscsvorsscvescssvessasevssussnerecsescntsrseruraasncsssnesoneeseeeenscenssneneneens 2
ARTICLE Tl CHECK-OFF o....scescessessessecsessessecsessessessscsesasesssesecsnssucsncsucsncsessessucssnnsesensenenneeneessness 2
ARTICLE IV MANAGEMENT RIGHTS. wd
ARTICLE V EMPLOYEE RIGHTS AND REGULATIONS ........0000/ Deano dS 6 TERING TTERTRER Fea 5
ARTICLE VI BULLETIN BOARDS \ csssssscerssssnecsssecerecsssenestsunesscenscapeeneeneanerteqnrrnettecorsenetencesonerserse 6
ARTICLE VII LISTING OF NEW EMPLOYEES, RULES AND ORDERS,
PERSONAL SERVICE RECORDS.....ccscessssssssseseessesseesesseessessessesnesnsensseesesanenseneennenneenensetaeeseee 7
ARTICLE VUIT BILL OF RIGHTS ssscscsccsssccssestsnsscosnsessossensoneeseenseasersencoaneesenscevenerseteprseereeereneeaeseees 8
ARTICLE IX LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE ......csssssssssssssssesssenssnseeeeetenneenseneenseneaee ll
ARTICLE X PRIOR RULES AND ORDERS .....ceseesssssessseseesnesnesesneeeenennenentenentensnneenenneensenenee 11
ARTICLE XI HOURS, OVERTIME, COURT-TIME, COMPENSATORY TIME,
LUNCEL BREAK ..........ssssssssssssssssoeesseessueesecussossovsossoseosouseaditndi5s2 5: S0202 SAT BUETaRACEN Nabe oad aNaEEAAbSE 12

Work Schedule and Pay Period
10-Hour Shifts.
Shift Bids ....
Work and Lunch Breaks

 
 
 
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  

Call-In Pay ..
Off-Duty Arrest ileal
Court Time...

Holiday Pay....
Marksmanship ‘Compensatory Time ‘Award
Compensatory Time Off.
Family Day ...
Voluntary Compensatory Time Buy Out
Method of Compensation...
FLSA Compensatory Time Buy Out
ARTICLE XII FURLOUGH ...eecescesessssessessecseessesssesseesecseeseesneaseneesesaeeneeneeaeensenseneeneensensanseaseneeees 21

Sick

Accrual of Leave.
Conditions of Sick Leav

Conti
Fune

Family and Medical Leave Act.
Military Leav@scisassucasecssonenss

 
  
  
  

agious Disease
ral Leave .....

ARTICLE XIV HOLIDAYS ......sssssssssssssssssssssesesosseneseasssansensssessscssensteceseensseneansnscerecersseoesesenessooes 28
ARTICLE XV TERMINATION BENEFITS ......ccsssssssessesesseseseeereeeseeneneeneneenensenenessesesneaeeneseenaes 29
Retirement...

Resignation .

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Gun Purchase for Retirees . 30
Demise . 230
Layoff... wed
Dismissal...

ARTICLE XVI LONGEVITY PAY ...essssssssssssssessssesssesssesssesseessensscssccenesencssseesuessueessennsecnsenseensens 31

ARTICLE XVII UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

ARTICLE XVII INSURANCE........cccssssssonssssssansisssitsesnsssavennseosuensiaanscscnsesctsntsustencaseerenesennenrernetne 32

Hospitalization/Surgical........sssesssssessssseeseessssseseesssssssscssssccsssusceessnneecesnnsseesnnneeessnnneecsnnetssseesss 2

 

 

 

ARTICLE XIX PARKING RIGHTS sccsssssssesssssssesessvscsseassossssrasneensossevensersereeteterecerseeon

ARTICLE XX ASSIGNMENTS AND TRANSFERS. ......cccseesssssseessseseeseeeenerneeeseesseesseesnseseeesess 35
ARTICLE XXI HAZARDOUS DUTY INJURY .....csssessessessssnersestensceseneencensensensensenrensensenseseenes 40
ARTICLE XXII GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

ARTICLE XXIII BINDING ARBITRATION OF IMPASSE ISSUES. .....ecsseesesseesseessseesses 45
ARTICLE XXIV NO STRIKE - NO LOCKOUT........scssssssssseseeeseneesseneeseensenrenneeresessessseessnesaes 46
ARTICLE XXV LEGALITY AND SEPARABILITY

 

ii
ARTICLE XXVI COMPENSATION ....ssssssssessssrsssssessssesssessssescsssesessnecssseccsssecssseccasecsansessnvessaess 48

  
 
 
 
 
 

Salaries .....cceeccssecsesssessesseseseesessssnesecnesseenessesseessesseeneseeaneeneeneess 48
Automatic Progression. 49
Trainees........... 49
Shift Differential 50
Field Training Officers ..
SR Cars
ARTICLE XXVII PENSION “PICK UP” PAYMENTS ......ssesssssstsssssseeesecseeeseecneesneenseensennenees 51
ARTICLE XXVIII LEGAL REPRESENTATION OF OFFICERS ......ssessssssssseseseseesseeseeseeeneaees 52

ARTICLE XXIX SUSPENSIONS FROM DUTY

ARTICLE XXX MILEAGE

 

 

 

 

ARTICL!
ARTICLE. AXE CONTRACT DURATION scsscscoascoseatstonssstessresrsavesnvsisvennscnoevenssotaversnovtentaesusad 58
EXHIBIT A PERSONNEL UNDER THE CONTROL OF THE RADIO DISPATCHER
SHALL. ssesesssssssssecssneessseessssessssessseeesssseessecssssseessssssnecssnessssecessseessneccusncsssecsasecssnecssneessneenseeeases 60
EXHIBIT B SPECIAL PROTOCOL FOR OFFICERS ASSIGNED TO SR CARS... 62
EXHIBIT C SPECIAL PROTOCOL LETTER........ceescessssssssssssssssssssssesseessecseecseesscestesseeseeeseesees 63
BXEIBIT D PLEX SHIP TS pe.:cesssnesseccneere wminenionnni man wari M TEETER 65
EXHIBIT E ORGANIZATION OF THE 4TH PLATOON .....ssescsssessssescsseeesssesessecssneessreenseeesneese 68
EXHIBIT F EXPERIMENTAL DISTRICTS/PROJECTS ........000 70
EXHIBIT G DRUG: TESTING c sicsssncssovovesssvves ionsnansasvisasvesessucovnssanssarenrtsasnanexsestasssgani casesasessoseees 71
EXHIBIT H CITY OF CLEVELAND MEDICAL INSURANCE PLAN DESIGN .......seesseeees 79
EXHIBIT THIGH DEDUCTIBLE PLAN susan menace enccmanornonemscsmensnnemnennneansats 82
ADDENDA sszesscssusensosanssseconasusecsasusvessstsatvisssisennasbinievee centensvansensnsenosnoessauennsennssesesencesecanssansenseenses 84

 

*Assignments related to Administration and bargaining committee duties
*Requests of patrol officers for football games

*Police-Traffic Controllers

iti
*Police Review Board

*Apreement on Safety Vest Program for Cleveland Police Officers

*Settlement Agreement - Civilianization

*Transmittal of Labor Agreement

iv
PURPOSE

This Contract sets forth the basic terms of agreement between the City of Cleveland,
hereinafter referred to as the “City,” and the Cleveland Police Patrolmen's Association,
hereinafter referred to as “CPPA,” regarding employment of employees in the CPPA bargaining
unit for the purpose of assuring that the operation and services of the City of Cleveland will be

conducted efficiently and effectively.

WITNESSETH

The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations and/or interest arbitration which
resulted in this Contract each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and
proposals with respect to any subject or matter not removed by law or regulation from the area of
collective bargaining and that the understanding and agreements arrived at by the parties after the
exercise of those rights and opportunities are set forth in this Contract. Therefore, the parties
voluntarily waive the right to demand new proposals on any subject or matter, not included
herein, during the term of this Contract, even though such subject matter may not have been
within the knowledge or contemplation of either or both of the parties at the time they negotiated
or signed this Contract. If an agreement is reached between the CPPA and the City, any such
supplemental agreement shall be in writing and subject to the prior approval of the Executive

Board of the CPPA and the City or their respective designated representatives.

ARTICLE I
RECOGNITION

(dd) City of Cleveland hereby recognizes that the Cleveland Police Patrolmen's

Association is the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for all persons employed in the rank of
Patrol Officer and/or apprentices by the City of Cleveland, Division of Police, Department of
Public Safety, for the purpose of bargaining with respect to wages, hours of work, and other
conditions of employment. The City shall not negotiate with any other employee organization
concerning bargaining rights for the classifications of Patrol Officer and/or apprentices. (City

will recognize a separate exclusive unit of Radio Dispatchers).

ARTICLE II
UNION SECURITY

(2) Effective April 1, 1995, it having been determined that at least 85% of the eligible
employees in the bargaining unit of the CPPA are members of the CPPA, then the City agrees
that all employees in the CPPA bargaining unit shall thereafter be either members of the CPPA
or be required to pay a fair share fee to the CPPA as a condition of continued employment in
accordance with the terms of Revised Code 4117.09(C), which will be remitted by the City to the
CPPA in accordance with the statute. As provided by that statute such fair share fee requirement
shall not be effective until at least sixty (60) days following the beginning of employment or
completion of the probationary period, whichever is less. It is further provided that an employee
who has completed his/her probationary period, and is not a member of the CPPA as of
October 1, 1983, and who does not become a member of the CPPA by March 31, 1984, shall not

be required to pay the fair share fee under this provision.

ARTICLE Il
CHECK-OFF

(3) The City will deduct regular initiation fees, monthly dues and yearly increases

from the pay of employees in the bargaining unit covered by this Contract upon receipt from the
Union of individual written authorization cards voluntarily executed by an employee for that
purpose and bearing his signature. Provided, that:

(a) An employee shall have the right to revoke such authorization by giving
written notice to the City and Union during the thirty (30) day period preceding the termination
of this Contract.

(b) The City's obligation to make deductions shall terminate automatically
upon timely receipt of revocation of authorization or upon transfer to a job classification outside
the bargaining unit.

(c) The Union will indemnify and save the City harmless from any action
growing out of deductions hereunder and commenced by an employee against the City (or the
City and Union jointly).

(d) The City will not make any deductions for dues and/or initiation fees for
any employee organization, except as is provided by court orders in effect on the day of
execution of this agreement.

(e) The Union must provide the City with at least thirty (30) days advance

notice of any change in the fair share fee amount or other voluntary contribution amounts.

ARTICLE IV
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

(4) Except as expressly limited by the terms of this Contract, any and all rights
concerned with the management of the Division of Police are the exclusive and sole

responsibility of the employer. It is further recognized that the City has the right to:
(a) Determine matters of inherent managerial policy which include, but are
not limited to, areas of discretion or policy such as the functions and programs of the City,
standards of services, its overall budget, utilization of technology, and organizational structure;

(b) Direct, supervise, evaluate or hire employees and to determine when and
under what circumstances a vacancy exists;

(c) Maintain and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of governmental
operations;

(d) Determine the overall methods, process, means, or personnel by which
governmental operations are to be conducted;

(e) Suspend, discipline, demote or discharge for just cause, layoff, transfer,
assign, schedule, promote, or retain employees;

@® Determine the adequacy of the work force;

(g) Determine the overall mission of the City as a unit of government;

(h) Require employees to use or refrain from using specified uniforms or
other tools of duty;

jw Privatize or subcontract services consistent with the attached settlement
agreement;

q@ Effectively and efficiently manage the work force; and,

(k) Take actions to carry out and implement the mission of the City as a unit
of government. The City reserves the right to implement new or revised existing policies which
do not conflict with the express terms of this Contract.

(5) Notwithstanding §4117.08 of the Ohio Revised Code, the Employer is not

required to bargain on any subjects — including, but not limited to, those enumerated above —

4
reserved to and retained by the City under this Article. Therefore, the CPPA agrees that, during
the life of this Agreement, the City shall have no obligation to bargain collectively with respect
to the exercise of any rights reserved to and retained by it pursuant to either Section 4117.08(C)

of the Revised Code or pursuant to this Article of this Agreement.

ARTICLE V
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS AND REGULATIONS

(6)(a) The City recognizes the right of patrol officers to be free to join the CPPA, to file
grievances, to give testimony in grievance proceedings, and to hold office in the organization.
Therefore, the City agrees that there shall be no discrimination, interference, restraints, coercion,
or reprisal by the City, or any agent thereof, against any patrol officer because of CPPA
membership or because of any lawful activity in an official activity in an official capacity on
behalf of CPPA.

(b) The City and the CPPA hereby reaffirm their commitments, legal and
moral, not to discriminate in any manner relating to employment on the basis of race, color,
creed, national origin, age, sex, or disability.

(c) The City recognizes the right of the CPPA to select local officers and
alternates to represent the employees on grievances arising under the Contract. A local officer or
alternate, shall be permitted to investigate and process a grievance within his own location as
provided in the Grievance Procedure during his working hours without loss of regular (straight-
time) pay, such activity taking into consideration and with proper regard for the department's
operational needs and requirements. Within the time limits set forth in the Grievance Procedure,
meetings shall be scheduled at times mutually convenient and acceptable to the City and the

CPPA.
(d) | Two additional members of the CPPA Bargaining Committee shall be
granted time away from duty, without loss of straight-time pay or benefits, in order to attend
negotiation sessions related to a successor collective bargaining agreement. The Union may
request additional time away from duty for these two members, without loss of straight-time pay
or benefits, for the purpose of preparing for the negotiation sessions. Such requests shall not be
unreasonably denied.

(e) The CPPA shall provide the City an updated list of its officers and

Bargaining Committee members.

ARTICLE V1
BULLETIN BOARDS

(7) | The City agrees to provide the CPPA with locked and glass enclosed bulletin
boards at mutually selected locations, but not less than one per district, and the Justice Center,
provided that:

(a) All notices and materials posted on the bulletin boards must be signed by
the President or the First or Second Vice President of the CPPA and must pertain to organization
business.

(b) No notice of a political or personal nature directed toward an institution or
other City employee may be posted.

(c) Upon request from the Safety Director or the Assistant Safety Director, the
CPPA shall remove any notice or other material which the City believes violates Paragraphs (a)

or (b) herein.
ARTICLE VII
LISTING OF NEW EMPLOYEES, RULES AND ORDERS
PERSONAL SERVICE RECORDS

(8) The City will furnish the CPPA with a list of all new employees with the Division
of Police indicating their starting date of employment. Upon the employees’ completion of the
training period, the City will furnish the CPPA with a list of the duty assignments of new
employees.

(9) All rules, special orders, general police orders, permanent transfers and details
shall be issued in written form and a copy shall be sent to the CPPA no later than the date of
issue, or the next day if necessary. All permanent transfers, unless of an emergency nature, shall
be issued to the patrol officers transferred at least seven (7) calendar days, before such transfers
are to take effect.

(10) Operational needs allowing, a patrol officer, upon reasonable request and during
normal business hours, shall be permitted to review his personal service record. For the purpose
of this Contract, the personal service record of a patrol officer shall be limited to attendance
records and evaluations, his medical bureau records including any medical (non-psychological)
evaluations, disciplinary hearings and charges, letters of reprimand and letters of commendation.
Verbal disciplinary warnings and disciplinary written reprimands shall be removed from a
Police Officer's record after six (6) months, but all other disciplinary actions or penalties will be
removed after two (2) years from the date the discipline was administered.

(11) | Whenever the City produces documents pursuant to a public records request, the
City shall provide the subject patrol officer a copy of all documents produced when the public
records request involves five (5) or fewer officers. When the request involves more than five (5)
officers, the Union shall be provided a copy of all documents provided. The City shall provide

7
said copies to the patrol officer or Union at the same time said records are provided to the

requestor.

ARTICLE VIL
BILL OF RIGHTS

(12) Bargaining unit members shall be entitled to the following rights:

(a) _ A bargaining unit member who is questioned as a suspect or a witness in
an internal investigation ordered by the Chief of Police or his designee, shall be advised of the
nature of the internal investigation prior to such questioning, and shall ultimately be advised in
writing as to the disposition of such investigation.

(b) Whenever any bargaining unit member is subjected to interrogation by any
departmental personnel for reasons that could lead to disciplinary action, and/or criminal
charges, or as a witness only, the bargaining unit member shall be apprised of the nature of the
investigation prior to questioning.

(c) Questioning or interviewing of a bargaining unit member in the course of
an internal investigation will be conducted at hours reasonably related to a shift, unless
operational necessities require otherwise. Interrogation sessions shall be for reasonable periods
of time and time shall be provided for rest periods and attendance to physical necessities. A
copy of any tape, transcript or written statement made pursuant to an administrative investigation
(such as a Form-1 statement) shall be provided to the patrol officer immediately following such
questioning or interviewing unless it is a result of a criminal investigation.

(d) The bargaining unit member's home address and photograph shall not be

given to the press or news media without the member's express consent, subject to the public
records laws of Ohio. If any of the aforementioned are leaked to the media, it will not negate the
department's right to proceed with the matter at hand.

(e) Complaints against a bargaining unit member, when designated by the
Chief to be unfounded, shall not be included in his personal file, and shall not be used in any
subsequent disciplinary proceeding or in making promotion decisions.

(ff) Before a bargaining unit member may be charged with insubordination or
like offense, for refusing to answer questions or participate in an investigation, he shall be
advised that such conduct may be the basis for such a charge.

(g) Evidence obtained in the course of an internal investigation through the
use of administrative pressure, threats, coercion, or promises, shall not be admissible in any
subsequent criminal action.

(h) In a criminal investigation, interview, or interrogation, the bargaining unit
member shall be provided the same constitutional and statutory safeguards afforded to all
citizens.

@ In the event that formal disciplinary action before the Chief of Police or
the Safety Director is taken against a bargaining unit member, the bargaining unit member shall
have the right to request the presence of legal counsel and/or one representative from the official
recognized union when such action is taken, and the attorney and/or representative shall have the
right of cross-examination. In a disciplinary hearing before the Chief of Police the bargaining
unit member may have a representative present selected by the Union.

q) The attorney for the City and the attorney representing a bargaining unit
member who has been charged with disciplinary rules violations, or the bargaining unit member

himself if not represented by counsel shall provide each other, prior to commencement of

9
disciplinary hearings before the Director of Public Safety, with a list of all persons who will
testify at the hearing, and shall provide an opportunity to review any written, factual statements
concerning the subject matter of the hearing; provided, that such disclosure will not compromise
any criminal or internal investigation or compromise a promise of confidentiality previously
given to such witness. The City shall provide the bargaining unit member, prior to hearing, with
copies of his own written statements or reports regarding the matter that is the subject of the
hearing. Failure to comply with the terms of this provision will not affect the validity of any
discipline imposed. Both parties agree that they will have a reasonable postponement of the
hearing to exchange the information, subject to the above restrictions on disclosure.

(kK) If any of these procedures are alleged to be violated, such allegations shall
be subject to the grievance procedure beginning at the Labor Relations Manager's level of
Step 3-A.

ad In such cases where the administrative investigation is initiated without a
citizens’ complaint, and the investigation could not lead to criminal charges, the City shall not
bring administrative charges later than one (1) year after the date within which the Chief had
knowledge of the alleged violation. If the administrative charges are not brought within one (1)
year, the accused member may be ordered to respond to the complaint and to the investigation,
but shall not be subject to disciplinary action. The City may be granted an additional ninety (90)
days for good cause shown.

(m) All complaints filed by a citizen against bargaining unit members shall be
submitted by the complainant in his or her own handwriting and signed. When a complaint is
filed more than six (6) months after the date of the alleged event, and the complaint could not

lead to a criminal charge, the accused bargaining unit member may be ordered to respond to the

10
complaint and to the investigation, but shall not be subject to disciplinary action for that
complaint. Copies of all such complaints shall immediately be provided to the bargaining unit
member when the officer is asked to respond. In those cases where the complainant is illiterate,
tape recordings of the complaint shall be made and retained on file, and the officer shall be given
the opportunity to listen to the tape when asked to respond.

(n) When a bargaining unit member requests union representation with
respect to disciplinary action against him, he shall be permitted to call one of the officers detailed

to full-time Union duty.

ARTICLE IX
LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

(13) The Director of Public Safety, shall chair a Labor Management Committee
composed of two (2) representatives selected by the CPPA and two (2) representatives selected
by the Director of Public Safety, one of whom shall be the Chief of Police or his designee. This
Committee shall meet on the call of the Director of Public Safety but at least once every three (3)
months, and the Committee will also meet within ten (10) days of any written request of the
CPPA for a meeting, if such special requests have been no more frequent than once every four

(4) months.

ARTICLE X
PRIOR RULES AND ORDERS

(14) The City agrees that as of the date of the execution of this Contract, any orders,
rules or regulations issued by the Division of Police, the Chief of Police, or the Safety Director
which are in conflict with any part of this Contract, are hereby repealed and of no force and

effect.
11
ARTICLE XI
HOURS, OVERTIME, COURT-TIME
COMPENSATORY TIME, LUNCH BREAK

 

 

(15)(a) Work Schedule and Pay Period. The City shall schedule officers according to
operational needs on work shifts with regular starting and quitting times; provided that, if still in
effect, the Fourth (4th) Platoon shift may begin on or after 4:00 p.m. in the First, Second, Third,
Fourth and Fifth Districts. The City shall notify a patrol officer at least seven (7) calendar days
in advance of any permanent change affecting his regular work rotation shifts and shall not rotate
shifts more often than once per month, except for the annual shift rotation adjustment in the
month of May. Any regularly scheduled day off (“V-Day”) worked by an employee shall be
compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2)times the employee's hourly rate. Salary
compensation will be for 2,080 hours worked in each calendar year. Employees shall receive
one twenty-sixth (1/26th) of their annual salary every two (2) weeks and there shall be twenty-
six (26) pay periods every calendar year.

(b) For officers assigned to a ten-hour shift, they will have 157 days off
(currently referred to as V-days), except during a leap year when the number of V-days will
be 158.

(c) For officers assigned to an eight-hour shift they will have 105 days off
(currently referred to as V-days), except during a leap year when they will have 106. The current
practice of adjusting for V-days at the end of the year will be maintained for both eight-hour and
ten-hour shifts.

(d) 10-Hour Shifis. Contingent upon mutual agreement of the parties, ten
hour shifts may be implemented on A Platoon in basic patrol and for one or more specialized
units. For ten-hour shifts and subject to the City’s ability to modify start times set forth below,

12
B Platoon early cars will start at 1400 hours and late cars will start at 1500 hours. C Platoon cars
will start at 2200 hours. The following range of start times for those in basic patrol on ten-hour
shifts shall be adhered to by the City.

A Platoon — 0500 to 0900

B Platoon — 1400 to 1800

C Platoon — 1800 to 2200
The City shall have the right to adjust shifts within these parameters. However, start times can
be changed no more often than bi-monthly [sixty (60) days] for those in basic patrol on ten-hour
shifts, and the City shall notify a patrol officer at least seven (7) calendar days in advance of any
change of his normal starting time.

For employees assigned to ten-hour shifts, the following will be the work-day to off-day
cycle.

4 on 4 off = 8 days

5 on3 off = 8 days

5 on 3 off = 8 days

5 on 3 off = 8 days

5 on 4 off = 9 days

4 on 4 off= 8 days, then repeat from the top.
This cycle must be implemented in a fashion that is consistent with the workweek overtime
limitations identified in the FLSA and which does not create built-in overtime.

For purposes of determining shift differential for those officers on basic patrol, the start
times will be consistent with the ranges specified above (A Platoon 0500-0900, B Platoon 1400-

1800 and C Platoon 1800-2200). A Platoon will continue on the eight-hour shift schedule with
13
starting times of 0630 and 0730, subject to the City’s right to modify starting times as set forth
above.

(e) Shift Bids. Shift bids will be one time every November 1* for the next
calendar year. The shift bids go into effect on or about January 1‘ of the following year. Shift
bids will be based on seniority.

(69) Work and Lunch Breaks. The work day for the employees shall consist of
eight (8) hours of work or ten (10) hours of work with a designated starting and quitting time.
Each employee shall be entitled to one (1) thirty (30) minute break for lunch during each eight
(8) hour shift, one forty-five (45) minute break during each ten-hour shift, and a fifteen (15)
minute break for each four (4) hours of work thereafter that is contiguous to his shift. The breaks
listed above will be taken at a time consistent with the operational needs of the Department and
no patrol officer may take a break until properly relieved. Where a patrol officer has requested
and not received the thirty (30) minute or forty-five (45) minute lunch break during an eight hour
or ten-hour shift, that officer shall receive thirty (30) minutes of straight time compensation.
Also, where an officer has requested and not received the fifteen (15) minute break for each four
hours worked thereafter that is contiguous to his shift, that officer shall receive fifteen (15)
minutes of straight time compensation.

(g) Overtime. The City shall be the sole judge of the necessity for overtime.
The hourly rate for overtime and other premium compensation shall be computed by dividing the
employee's annual salary by two thousand eighty hours (2,080) per year. For employees
assigned to a seven (7) day work period, all hours in excess of forty (40) hours in a work period
shall be compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the employees hourly rate. For

all employees assigned to an eight (8) day work period, all hours in excess of forty-eight (48)

14
hours will be compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the employee's hourly
rate. All hours worked in excess of eight (8) hours per day for employees assigned to eight-hour
shifts shall be considered overtime and compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times
the employee's hourly rate. All hours worked in excess of ten (10) hours per day for employees
assigned to ten-hour shifts shall be considered overtime and compensated at the rate of one and
one-half (1-1/2) times the employee’s hourly rate. All paid holiday hours falling on a regularly
scheduled shift and paid vacation hours shall be considered hours actually worked for the
purpose of determining overtime. Paid sick leave and compensatory time off shall not be
counted for the purpose of determining overtime. There shall be no pyramiding of overtime or
other premium pay compensation, and overtime shall be computed on the basis of whatever total
overtime hours are greater for the week, either on a daily or weekly basis, but not both.

(h) Call-In Pay. An employee required to report to work for reasons other
than court appearances, prosecutor reviews, matters involving the City Law department or other
court related or judicially related matter, when the time required is not contiguous to his/her
scheduled time of work, then the employee shall be guaranteed a minimum of four hours work,
compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the employee's regular rate of pay.

jw An employee called for jury duty shall be determined to be on a tour of
duty and will be compensated for the jury duty. To be eligible for such pay, the employee must:

@ present verification of his/her call to jury duty; and,
(ii) surrender the compensation received from the Court for jury duty
to the City Treasurer.

G) The granting of overtime for phone calls or any other communication

received while off-duty shall be governed by the nature and length of the communication. No

15
compensable overtime is due if the communication is a result of an officer's error or oversight.
This would include an officer's failure to return car keys or other equipment to its proper
location. Overtime for communications received while off-duty are compensable only if the
communication is relating to a Division of Police matter, from a prosecutor or from a supervisor
with the commander's permission. A communication is compensable only to the extent that the
communication is at least 15 minutes in duration. Communications that are 15 to 30 minutes in
duration shall be compensated at 30 minutes at premium pay, 31 to 60 minutes at 1 hour of
premium pay and going forward in increments of one-half hour.

(kK) Off-Duty Arrest Pay. Any officer who makes an off-duty arrest, not
including arrests which are made while engaged in private security work, shall receive a
minimum of three (3) hours of pay at time and one-half. The arresting officer shall be
responsible for completing all required paper work.

ad Court Time. When an employee is required to remain at work after the
normal quitting time of his/her regular shift in order to make a court appearance, prosecutor
review, or continued presence in a court-related matter, the employee will be paid the overtime
rate of pay for the actual time worked in excess of the employee's normal shift as provided in
paragraph (g) above. If an employee is called in when he/she is not regularly scheduled to work
and at a time not contiguous with his/her regular shift for a court appearance, prosecutor review,
or other court related matter, the employee shall be paid for a minimum of three (3) hours work
at one and one-half (1-1/2) times the regular hourly rate, provided that Third Platoon Officers (as
defined in GPO 10-80) who must make a court appearance on a day on which the employee
works a tour of duty shall be guaranteed pay for a minimum of four (4) hours of work at one and

one-half (1-1/2) times the regular hourly rate.
16
(m) Holiday Pay. Employees who work on holidays shall be paid at the rate of
one and one-half (1-1/2) times the regular hourly rate on the following basis: Twelve (12) hours
of straight time compensation for each eight (8) hour holiday shift actually worked and fifteen
(15) hours of straight time compensation for each ten (10) hour shift actually worked.
Employees not working on a holiday shall receive eight (8) hours of straight time compensation.
However, effective January 1, 2011, employees assigned to 10-hour shifts who actually use’ their
floating PH days shall receive ten (10) hours of compensation for each floating PH day used. All
other banked holidays and banked floating holidays will continue to be paid at eight (8) hours.

(n) Marksmanship Compensatory Time Award. Members will receive
compensation upon achieving a specified degree of proficiency with each of their Department
issued weapons — handgun and patrol rifle (if issued). There are three (3) levels of proficiency
with the first level marksman, being satisfactorily performed by meeting the State of Ohio
standards set forth in R.C. 109.801. Thereafter, the proficiency levels of Sharpshooter and
Expert will be based upon current standards of proficiency of the Cleveland Police Academy as
required by the office of the Chief of Police.

PROFICIENCY COMPENSATION

Marksman Two days (16 hours) of compensation
Sharpshooter Three days (24 hours) of compensation
Expert Four days (32 hours) of compensation

The City shall maintain the current practice of providing ammunition for primary
weapons. In addition, the City shall provide ammunition for the yearly qualification for state
certification of secondary weapons up to a maximum annual cost of fifty thousand dollars

($50,000).

17
(0) Compensatory Time Off. Requests to use any accrued compensatory time

shall be granted in accordance with the following minimum requirements:

Seven percent (7%) of the personnel assigned to the administrative unit as
reflected in the daily duty assignments report (form C of C 1-2108) shall be
granted compensatory time off upon request. Sick leave taken in excess of 7% of
these daily duty assignments shall be deducted on a one for one basis from this
minimum for the next day. Bridge days are not subject to this cancellation
provision. Employees on HDI or ODI will not be counted in the application of
this formula. (For example, 45 officers assigned to Shift A equals three (3)
guaranteed compensatory days off if there are three (3) or less officers off on sick
time, not including those officers on HDI/ODI. However, if four (4) officers are
off on sick time, not including those officers on HDI/ODI, the Division may
cancel one (1) guaranteed compensatory day off on the next day.

When determining the percentage of allowable compensatory days off, the total
shall be naturally rounded to the nearest whole number (i.e: x.499 and less
rounded down; x.500 and above rounded up).

Requests for compensatory time under this formula shall be given priority as
follows:

a. Bridge Days

b. Family Days

c. Compensatory Minus 8’s/10’s

18
e Other than cancellations due to the 7% sick leave formula, granted compensatory
time off may only be cancelled for the same conditions under which furlough may
be cancelled.

e Personal Holidays are not compensatory time and will be granted pursuant to
Article XIV of the CBA.

e At management’s discretion, additional compensatory days off may be granted.
(p) Family Day. Employees may request a day off for graduation, wedding or

religious ceremony or similar family event, and will give at least thirty (30) days written notice
of said request to the Department. Such day off shall be granted in accordance with paragraph
(0) above and employees shall use their accumulated compensatory time for the day off. Each
employee shall be limited to two (2) Family Days per calendar year.

(q) Voluntary Compensatory Time Buy Out. The City shall budget
$250,000.00 in each calendar year covered by this Contract, for employees to cash out their
accumulated compensatory time under a formula to be agreed upon between the City and the
Union.

@) Method of Compensation. Overtime resulting from hours worked in
excess of forty hours in a seven (7) day work period and forty-eight (48) hours in an eight (8)
day work period is, however, subject to the overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Premium pay (time and one-half) shall be paid in cash for any overtime earned for working
extended tours, worked V-days (WDO’s), worked furlough days (WFD’s), call in pay, X-time,
overnight stays, court time and at-home calls compensable under Paragraph 15(j).

The City may compensate by either cash or compensatory time on a uniform basis

for all members of the bargaining unit for the following circumstances:

19
* Missed lunches (No Lunch pay)

* Holiday pay

¢ Field Training Officer pay (FTO pay)

¢ Training pay

¢ Marksmanship award

° Furlough conversion

° V-day conversion

¢ Personal Holiday conversion

¢ Marching time
In those circumstances where employees are eligible to earn compensatory time, the City’s
election of the payment of compensatory time or cash shall be done no more often than quarterly
(every three months).

The City reserves the right to buy down part or all of the compensatory time of
the employees, provided that this election may only be done on a uniform basis for all members
of the bargaining unit. Any payments made from the compensatory time bank shall be paid at
the officer’s current rate of pay at the time of such payment or at the rate of pay, pursuant to
Article XV, at the time of separation from employment.

(s) FLSA Compensatory Time Buy Out. All compensatory time currently
maintained in the FLSA compensatory time banks shall be cashed out based on the hourly rate
paid to each individual in the paycheck received by them for the pay period including April 17,
2008 and paid to the individual members at those values over five years in equal annual
installments commencing on or before November 1, 2008 and thereafter on or before November
1% of 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012. Employees retiring during this five-year payout period shall

20
have their FLSA compensatory time paid out at the time(s) directed by the CBA in Article XV.
The City’s obligations under this paragraph shall survive the expiration of the 2007-2010

Agreement.

ARTICLE XII
FURLOUGH

(16) All regular full-time employees shall be granted the following vacation leave with

full pay for each year based upon their length of City service as follows:

Years of Service Vacation
After 1 year 2 weeks
After 8 years 3 weeks
After 12 years 4 weeks
After 22 years 5 weeks

There will be fifty-two (52), one-week furlough periods, scheduled during each calendar
year. One week of furlough is defined as forty (40) hours. Furloughs will be selected on a
seniority basis. Patrol Officers may take their earned furlough by selecting consecutive furlough
weeks or by selecting separate one-week furlough periods. There will be an even distribution of
personnel among the fifty-two (52) furlough periods. The same number of patrol officers shall
be on furlough during each of the furlough periods unless mathematically impossible. In the
latter event, the rule shall be maintained as ideally as possible.

The administration of vacations (including eligibility requirements) shall be in
accordance with the following rules and regulations established by the Office of Personnel
Administration and the CPPA:

(a) Any employee who has completed one (1) year of continuous employment

by December 31, of the previous year, shall receive two (2) weeks vacation.

21
(b) Any employee who has completed less than one (1) year of continuous
employment by December 31, of the previous year, shall receive one (1) work day off for each
month worked prior to December 31, of the previous year, but not to exceed two (2) weeks.
New employees whose starting day is prior to the sixteenth (16th) of the month shall be credited
with one (1) day of vacation for that month.

(c) Any employee who has completed eight (8) years of continuous
employment by December 31, of the previous year, shall receive three (3) weeks vacation during
every year thereafter.

(d) Any employee who has completed twelve (12) years of continuous
employment by December 31, of the previous year, shall receive four (4) weeks vacation.

(e) Any employee who has completed twenty-two (22) years of continuous
employment by December 31, of the previous year, shall receive five (5) weeks vacation.

® For vacation purposes, an employee's continuous employment is defined
as the period of time during which he is continuously listed as an employee on the rolls of the
City, including authorized paid leaves of absence.

(g) Time in authorized leave of absence (off payroll) shall be deducted for
purposes of computing the amount of employment.

(h) An employee who is on leave of absence without pay for a period totaling
more than thirty (30) calendar days in any calendar year, shall earn vacation leave at the rate for

which he is eligible based on length of service as follows:

Less than eight (8) years 1 day per month, not to exceed
service two (2) weeks

Eight (8) years, but less 1-1/2 days per month, not to
than twelve (12) years exceed three (3) weeks

22,
service

Twelve (12) years, but less 2 days per month, not to exceed
than twenty-two (22) years four (4) weeks
service
Twenty-two (22) years 2-1/2 days per month, not to
service exceed five (5) weeks
@ An employee may use any vacation leave earned prior to December 31, of

the preceding year. Vacation leave being earned currently in any calendar year may not be used
until after December 31, of that year, except in the year in which employee terminates his

employment.

0) Bridge Days. Subject to Paragraph 15(0), upon request, employees on
eight-hour shifts shall be granted up to two (2) bridge days per furlough week, deducted from
compensatory time, which must be used between a vacation day and a furlough day to “bridge”
the time off. Upon request, employees on ten-hour shifts shall be granted up to one (1) bridge

day per furlough week under the same conditions as for the eight-hour employees.

ARTICLE XIII
SICK LEAVE, CONTAGIOUS DISEASE.
FUNERAL, MATERNITY, MILITARY

 

 

(17) Sick Leave. For all purposes of Sick Leave a work day is defined as an eight (8)

hour day or a ten (10) hour day.
(a) Accrual of Leave. All regular full-time employees of the bargaining unit
shall be credited with Sick Leave at the rate of ten (10) hours per month or one hundred-twenty
(120) hours per year. Unused Sick Leave shall be cumulative and available for future use. Sick

Leave accumulation shall be unlimited for full-time patrol officers from and after May 1, 1973.

23
An employee who voluntarily leaves the service of the City and is off the payroll for
ninety (90) days or more loses any Sick Leave which he may have accrued during the time of his
employment. Should such employee be rehired within ninety (90) calendar days he shall receive
acredit for any Sick Leave which he previously accrued.

(b) Conditions of Sick Leave.

@ Patrol Officers shall not be paid Sick Leave unless they notify their
supervising officer and/or Medical Bureau of the Department at least one (1) hour before the
employee's scheduled starting time on the first day of the absence on account of sickness.

(ii) The Medical Bureau and/or the Personnel Department may require
a written statement from the employee justifying the request for paid Sick Leave and/or a
certificate from a licensed physician verifying the nature of the claimed sickness or injury
provided that such a medical certification must be submitted for any sickness or injury extending
beyond three (3) days. The validity of all medical excuses and certifications are subject to
review by the Medical Bureau of the Department and if refused by the Medical Bureau, the
matter shall be subject to the Grievance Procedure. Falsification of either a written signed
statement, request for Sick Leave pay, or a licensed physician's certificate shall be grounds for
disciplinary action including dismissal.

(iii) The Police Division will not require a patrol officer to obtain a release
from the Medical Bureau to return to duty if the sick leave absence is three (3) days or less
during the previous fifty-two (52) weeks, provided that the Police Division may notify a patrol
officer that he or she will be required to report to the Medical Bureau after a day of sick leave at
any time. Employees who report to the Medical Bureau consistent with applicable rules, but are

not seen by a doctor or designee, will not be charged sick time for that day.

24
(iv) If the CPPA bargaining unit absentee ratio is maintained at four
percent (4%) or less for a continuous six (6) month period, then employees who are absent on
sick leave for ten (10) days or less during the previous fifty-two (52) weeks will not be required
to obtain a medical release from the Medical Bureau prior to returning to duty. The City will
calculate the absentee ratio for each six (6) month period and give the CPPA the results. This
provision shall become inapplicable if the absentee ratio exceeds four percent (4%) over a six (6)
month period and the stricter provision of (iii) above shall apply. The Personnel Department
may require an employee to justify any claimed sickness or illness and to be examined by the
Medical Bureau and a medical examination must be obtained in all cases for a sickness or illness
extending beyond three (3) days. In the event of any on-duty or off-duty injury resulting in time
lost from work, an employee must receive a medical examination by the Medical Bureau before
returning to work.

(v) Sick Leave with pay shall be granted only for (1) actual sickness or
injury, (2) confinement by reason of a contagious disease, (3) visit to a doctor or dentist for
medical or dental care, or (4) serious illness of a member of the employee's immediate family
(emergency).

(vi) Sick Leave with pay shall not be granted for any sickness resulting
from moral turpitude, intoxication or use of narcotics, except that Sick Leave will be granted for
treatment or rehabilitation as approved by the Medical Bureau on the same basis as granted for
any other illness. Moreover, employees are prohibited from engaging in strenuous or physical

secondary employment (e.g. private security, physical labor) while on a sick leave.

25
(vii) New employees will accumulate Sick Leave credit, but cannot use
Sick Leave until the satisfactory completion of the initial probationary period of ninety (90)
days.

(viii) The policy of restricting officers to their homes during periods of
extended recuperation is rescinded. Any officer affected by the rescission of this policy shall be
granted a release from the recuperation restriction upon appearing before the Safety Medical
Coordinator for a medical evaluation of their injury or illness. The Medical Bureau shall devise
a release form for use in this process. This policy shall not apply to any officer who strikes off
on the sick list for short term recuperative periods in cases where the officer has had a history of
sick leave usage suggesting a pattern of abuse or where the officer is suspected of engaging in
secondary employment while on sick leave.

(ix) A patrol officer shall have an opportunity to present an explanation
challenging any claim of suspected sick leave abuse. Any unresolved disputes shall be subject to
the grievance procedure.

(18) Sick Time Donation. An employee who is suffering from a serious medical
condition as defined by the FMLA; who has exhausted all of his/her sick, furlough,
compensatory and holiday time; and who is not on any step of the sick-abuse policy, may submit
a written request for sick leave donations from other sworn police officers.

In response to a request for sick leave from an eligible employee, an employee may
donate, in writing, sick leave up to a maximum of one hundred-twenty (120) hours. Donating
employees must have a minimum balance of one hundred-twenty (120) hours of sick leave
immediately following the donation. Employees cannot contribute more than one hundred-

twenty (120) hours of sick leave in total donations per calendar year.

26
The CPPA will indemnify and hold the City harmless from any action emanating from
sick leave donations.

(19) Contagious Disease. In the event a patrol officer is found to have been exposed to
an active infectious disease in the course or scope of his employment, the City shall inform the
officer of such exposure as soon as the City acquires such knowledge and will bear the cost of
medical treatment and/or prevention for the officer and members of the officer's family so
exposed. The City shall grant medical leave to such an officer under the provisions of
“Hazardous Duty Injury.”

(20) Funeral Leave. Patrol Officers shall be allowed time off for funeral leave in
accordance with past practice in the Division as contained in the presently existing Division of
Police Manual of Rules and Regulations, Section 1801, 1804, Page 55.

(21) Family and Medical Leave Act. As appropriate, the City will designate an
employee's use of paid and unpaid time as family medical leave consistent with the Family
Medical Leave Act and with current City sick leave and leave of absence policies.

(22) Military Leave. A patrol officer shall be granted an extended leave of absence
without pay for military duty in accordance with law, and after discharge, shall be restored to
employment with the City, upon request, in accordance with law. Patrol Officers who are
drafted or who enlist shall be granted a one (1) day leave of absence with pay for the purpose of
taking a military physical. Upon return from military leave, an employee will be reinstated at the
current applicable rate of his classification in accordance with law and the provisions as set forth
herein. A patrol officer who is temporarily called to active duty (e.g. summer training) shall be
granted a leave for the duration of such active duty and shall be paid the difference between his

regular pay and his total military pay (upon receipt of a service pay voucher) for a period not to

27
exceed thirty-one (31) days in any calendar year, and further, shall accumulate vacation and sick
leave with pay credit during the period of such leave. Patrol Officers on military leave who
thereafter return to employment with the City shall receive retirement credit for all time spent in

active military service.

ARTICLE XIV
HOLIDAYS

(23) All regular full-time employees shall be entitled to eleven (11) paid holidays

(inclusive of the two (2) floating holidays) as follows:

New Year's Day Good Friday

Dr. Martin Luther King Day Labor Day
President's Day Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day Christmas Day
Independence Day

Employees are entitled to two (2) floating holidays in each calendar year which will be
given to the employee at his request and upon giving five (5) days notice to the Department. If
the operating needs of the Department cannot be met because there are too many requests for a
specific day, the requests will be honored in accordance with seniority.

Effective in 2011, 10-hour employees using their floating holidays will be paid for ten
(10) hours for each floating holiday used. All other “banked” holidays and “banked” floating
holidays will continue to be paid at eight (8) hours.

To be entitled to holiday pay, an employee must be on the active payroll (ie. actually
receives pay) on the last regular work day before and the first regular work day after the holiday
unless absent because of bona fide illness or injury or funeral leave, but in no case shall an
Employee receive holiday pay if he receives no pay during the holiday week (regardless of the

cause of absence).

28
If a holiday falls on a patrol officer's regularly scheduled work day, but his unit is
scheduled to close on such holiday, the patrol officer shall be offered an opportunity to work in

another unit which is not scheduled to close.

ARTICLE XV
TERMINATION BENEFITS

(24) A Patrol Officer shall receive the following treatment on certain fringe benefits
during the last three (3) years prior to retirement if the Patrol Officer designates such three (3)
year period at about the time of the furlough selection. It is understood that a Patrol Officer may
only designate one such three (3) year period. However, with the approval of the Chief, Patrol
Officers will be permitted to enjoy termination benefits beyond the designated three (3) year
period. Such approval shall not be unreasonably denied.

(a) All overtime shall be paid in accordance with contract specifications for
overtime worked and shall be included in the Patrol Officer's pay period in which such overtime
is worked.

(b) Holiday pay shall be paid to the Patrol Officer in the pay period in which
the holiday falls. If the holiday falls during the Patrol Officer's furlough, one (1) extra day's pay
will be added to the pay period. If the Patrol Officer works on the holiday, he/she shall receive
full premium pay in the same pay period.

(c) After twenty-two (22) years of service, a Patrol Officer, with the approval
of the Chief of Police, may work his/her furlough at straight time and be paid for it in the same
pay period in which the furlough was worked. If the Patrol Officer exercises this option, no
compensatory time may be used by the officer as vacation time off during the work period that
this option is exercised.

29
(25) Retirement. A patrol officer who retires is eligible and shall be compensated
accordingly for all of his accumulated overtime, compensatory time and holiday time due at the
time of termination at his current rate of pay. He shall also be compensated for any unused
furlough time, including any pro rata furlough pay due for the current year at his current rate of
pay. Upon retirement, a patrol officer shall have the right to convert his accumulated sick leave
into a cash bonus at the rate of one (1) day's pay for each three (3) days of unused accumulated
paid sick leave. The pay rate shall be set by the same thirty-six (36) month average used under
the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund.

(26) Resignation. A patrol officer who resigns is eligible and shall be compensated
accordingly for all of his accumulated overtime, compensatory time, holiday time, and
accumulated furlough time, including pro rata of pay.

(27) Gun Purchase for Retirees. A member of the bargaining unit who has twenty-
three (23) years of service in the department and has reached the age of forty-six (46), may
purchase his/her .9 mm handgun at the agreed upon fair market value. In addition, those officers
who have more than one weapon may purchase any or all of those additional weapons at the then
fair market value. Said purchase may be made via cash or deducted from the member's annual
clothing allowance.

(28) Demise. Upon the demise of a patrol officer his estate shall be eligible for all of
the benefits listed under Retirement. Such compensation will be made upon written request by
the Executor or other duly authorized person handling the estate.

(29) Layoff. A patrol officer who is laid off shall be compensated for all unused
compensatory time, overtime, holiday time and furlough time, including pro rata furlough for the

current year, at his current rate of pay.

30
(30) Dismissal. The same schedule of compensation applies as in Resignation, with

the exception of pro rata furlough.

ARTICLE XVI
LONGEVITY PAY

(31) Patrol Officers shall be compensated for longevity tenure according to the

following schedule:

After 5 years $300.00
After 10 years 475.00
After 15 years 575.00
After 20 years 700.00
After 25 years 800.00
ARTICLE XVII
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

(32) Each patrol officer, with more than one (1) year of seniority, shall receive a
uniform clothing allowance of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Effective in 2015, the clothing
allowance shall be increased to four hundred dollars ($400.00). Distribution of this allowance
will be on or about July 1, and otherwise in accordance with present procedures. Effective in
2011, employees who will achieve seven (7) or more years of employment as a police officer
(including time in the academy) in the year the election is made, shall, at the employee’s option,
be paid this annual uniform allowance in cash. This cash distribution shall be paid on or before
March 1. Newly-hired patrol officers shall receive three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).

The City shall assume all costs in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for new,
individual uniform items which are mandatory requirements for duty and which exceed that
amount.

(33) In addition to the above, each patrol officer shall receive an annual five hundred

fifty dollar ($550.00) maintenance allowance payable on March 1, of each year. Effective in
31
2011, this amount shall be increased to six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00). Effective in 2015
this amount shall be increased to seven hundred dollars ($750.00). If the patrol officer retires

during the year on a date other than the payment dates, he shall receive a pro rata maintenance

payment.

ARTICLE XVII
INSURANCE

(34) Hospitalization/Surgical. The City agrees to provide single or family coverage,
whichever is applicable, for each eligible employee enrolled in any of the health coverage plans
for the term of the Labor Contract under the terms and conditions set forth in this Article. There
shall be no duplicate coverage if both spouses are on the City's payroll. The CPPA agrees that its
President will participate in a city wide Management-Labor committee to examine the health
coverage contracts in effect providing health benefits and to explore ways to reduce the costs of
health benefits to the City and to consider alternative ways to provide the health benefits for City
employees.

(35) Health Care Benefits. Effective through November 30, 2015, the City will
maintain the healthcare benefits and employee premium contributions currently in effect.
Effective December 1, 2015, the City will provide health insurance benefits as summarized in the
attached Medical Insurance Plan Design (Exhibit H).

Furthermore, on the aforementioned plans, dependent coverage shall be limited to
members of the employee's immediate family (i.e., spouse and children).

Effective December 1, 2015, all members shall contribute on any hospitalization/medical
plans offered by the City and such contributions shall be deducted from the member's wages as
follows:

32
Single — 17% of premium (non-wellness); 13% of premium (wellness)

Family — 16% of premium (non-wellness; 12% of premium (wellness)

Health care deductions of one-half the above amounts shall be made the first two pay
periods of each month.

“Premium” for employee contributions is defined as the cost or the fully-insured
equivalent-rate of hospitalization, prescription drugs, vision and dental.

The City will continue to provide the opportunity to enroll in any available alternative
hospitalization/medical plans.

The City shall have the right to change insurance carriers or change to/from a self-insured
model provided that benefit levels remain substantially the same.

For all mental, nervous, and substance abuse treatment, in-patient and out-patient
coverage shall be that set forth as part of the health care insurance plan selected by the employee.

The prescription program shall be that set forth as part of the health care insurance plan
selected by the employee.

The City shall have the discretion to implement and offer a voluntary, optional high-
deductible hospitalization plan for employees with benefit levels as outlined in Exhibit1. If so

implemented and elected, the premium rates shall be as follows:

WELLNESS NON-WELLNESS
Individual Family Individual Family
Coverage Coverage Coverage Coverage

Employee Premiums
(including Rx, dental 8% 8% 12% 12%
and vision coverage)
To satisfy the “wellness” requirements and be eligible for the reduced premium

contributions, the employee must complete annually a health-risk assessment and have

33
participated once annually in a biometric screening. The screening can be attained either through
a program offered by the City, at its option, or by the employee through an annual physical
conducted by a physician. The screening shall require the following measurements:

Height

Weight

Body mass index (BMI)

Waist circumference

Blood pressure

The screening shall also require a blood sample to measure:

Total cholesterol

High-density lipoprotein (HDL)

Glucose

Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (available only with the fasting test)

Triglycerides (available only with the fasting test)

The City shall establish the initial deadline in 2015 on which employees must satisfy the
wellness survey/screening requirements. The City shall provide no less than thirty (30) days’
advance notice of said deadline. Until such deadline is set, the “wellness” premium contribution
rates shall apply.

No later than 150 days prior to expiration, the parties shall convene a labor management
committee with no more than three (3) representatives from each party in order to discuss the
possible application of health-oriented results to the Wellness Initiatives in the next contract.

(36) Life Insurance. During the term of this Contract, the City shall provide all
members with Group Insurance in the amount of Fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00).

(37) Dental Insurance. The City shall continue to provide all members with a dental

insurance package which shall include orthodontist benefits. The benefit package and the

insurance carrier shall be subject to approval of the City and the Union.

34
(38) Vision Insurance. The City shall provide a vision insurance plan for employees.
ARTICLE XIX
PARKING RIGHTS

(39) The patrol officers of the CPPA bargaining unit who are regularly employed at
the Justice Center and City Hall shall continue to be entitled to Parking Privileges at the Willard
Park Garage as long as such garage is open. If the City institutes a monthly parking fee for all
City employees, and the monthly parking fee exceeds twenty-five dollars ($25.00), the excess
will be paid out of the Safety Forces Budget. Officers requested for Court testimony or similar
short-time official City business will continue to be given free parking.

(40) CPPA members shall get free parking if other City Hall employees get free
parking.

(41) Employees who can be identified and who fail to pay tickets/fines on City
vehicles, authorize the City to deduct the amount of the fines from their pay once all

administrative appeal process(s), if applicable, have been exhausted.

ARTICLE XX
ASSIGNMENTS AND TRANSFERS

(42) Effective upon execution of this Contract and excluding those basic patrol officers
who are listed as being on light or restricted duty, all First Class Patrol Officers shall be eligible
for assignment and transfer in accordance with the following procedures:

Terms used in this contract are defined as follows:

(a) Basic Patrol are those patrol officers assigned to a District whose

assignment is to patrol a zone or sector, either in a vehicle or on foot.

35
(b) Seniority is the date of employment in the Police Department or the date
of re-employment in such cases.

(c) Transfers from one district to another district or from a specialized unit to
a district shall be considered interdistrict transfers. Interdistrict transfers shall be made only into
the basic patrol section of a district.

(43) The following procedure applies to interdistrict transfers.

(a) An officer desiring an interdistrict transfer shall submit a Form 1 written
request, indicating the district to which a transfer is sought. Nothing contained herein shall
preclude a patrol officer, who would otherwise qualify, from waiving his/her right to bid. Such
waiver will not affect his/her written bid for future assignments open to the bidding process.

(b) When the Chief of Police, or his designee determines that a vacancy exists
in a district, the vacancy shall be posted in each district and the Justice Center for a ten (10) day
period prior to filling the vacancy.

(c) The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall fill one half (4) of such
interdistrict vacancies without regard to seniority, and the remaining one half (%) of such
interdistrict transfers shall be filled by transferring the First Class Patrol Officer(s) with the most
seniority desiring such transfers. If there are an insufficient number of officers requesting a
transfer, the Chief of Police will fill any remaining vacancies.

(44) | The following procedures apply to assignments within each District.
The District Commander, or his designee, will transfer patrol officers to District non-
basic patrol vacancies in accordance with the following bid procedure:

(a) The District Commander shall post a list of the minimum qualifications

and objective criteria to be considered and required in filling the positions. The posting

36
requirement shall be for each separate unit and no two or more units shall be merged in one
posting. The officer with the most seniority who meets the minimum qualifications, as
determined by the District Commander, or his designee, will be detailed to the position. One-
half (2) of all Detective Unit vacancies, one-half (¥%) of all Traffic Car vacancies, one-half (%)
of all Strike Force vacancies, and one-half (4) of all Downtown Safety Patrol vacancies shall be
transferred by seniority. For the duration of this Agreement, one-third (1/3) of all Vice Unit
transfers shall be transferred by seniority. And all other vacancies in the District shall be filled
by selection of the District Commander.

(b) The selected bidder will be detailed to the position for a period of one
hundred-twenty (120) days. If prior to the end of the one hundred twenty (120) days the patrol
officer does not like the new assignment, he may voluntarily return to his original tour of duty.
If during the one hundred-twenty (120) days the District Commander or his designee determines
that the patrol officer is not performing satisfactorily, he will be called in not later than the
sixtieth (60") day of the detail period and any shortcomings then known will be explained to the
patrol officer. If at the end of the one hundred-twentieth (120%) day, in the opinion of the
District Commander or his designee, or his designated representative, the patrol officer is still not
performing satisfactorily, the patrol officer may be returned to his original tour of duty.

(c) It is agreed that the first time a patrol officer bids and is returned to his
original assignment, the patrol officer shall have no recourse to the Grievance Procedure. If,
however, a patrol officer is rejected for a permanent assignment after being detailed for a trial
period on a subsequent bid, he may appeal the decision through the grievance/arbitration
procedure and such rejection must be for good and sufficient cause, provided that no arbitrator
shall have power to substitute his or her judgment for the professional judgment of the District

37
Commander as to whether the patrol officer has the qualities and performance level required for
successful and efficient police work in a particular assignment.

(45) The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall assign patrol officers to vacancies in
accordance with the following bid procedure:

(a) The Chief of Police shall post a list of the minimum qualifications and
objective criteria to be considered and required in filling the position. This posting requirement
shall be for each separate unit and no two or more units shall be merged in one posting. The
Chief of Police may transfer or assign patrol officers to one-half (%) of the vacancies without
regard to seniority, except that the Chief of Police may fill all vacancies in the Narcotics Units,
and the Organized Crime-Intelligence Unit without regard to seniority. With respect to the other
one-half (%) of the vacancies, the officer with the most seniority who meets the minimum
qualifications, as determined by the Chief of Police, or his designee, will be given priority for the
position.

(b) The selected bidder will be detailed to the position for a period of one
hundred twenty (120) days. If prior to the end of the one hundred twenty (120) days the patrol
officer does not like the new assignment, he may voluntarily return to his original tour of duty.
If during the ninety (90) days the Chief of Police or his designee, determines that the patrol
officer is not performing satisfactorily, he will be called in not later than the sixtieth (60") day of
the detail period and any shortcomings will be explained to the patrol officer. If at the end of the
one hundred twentieth (120") day, in the opinion of the Police Chief or his designee, or his
designated representative, the patrol officer is still not performing satisfactorily, the patrol officer

may be returned to his original tour of duty.

38
(c) It is agreed that the first time a patrol officer bids and is returned to his
original position, the patrol officer shall have no recourse to the Grievance Procedure. If,
however, a patrol officer is rejected for a permanent assignment after being detailed for a trial
period on a subsequent bid, he may appeal the decision through the grievance/arbitration
procedure and such rejection must be for good and sufficient cause, provided that no arbitrator
shall have power to substitute his or her judgment for the professional judgment of the Chief of
Police as to whether the patrol officer has the qualities and performance level required for
successful and efficient police work in a particular assignment.

(d) Administrative positions and assignments to the Mayor's staff, the Safety
Director's staff, City Council, and the Chief's staff may be selected by the Chief of Police
without using the above bid procedure.

(46) Involuntary transfers out of a district or unit shall be made on the same seniority
basis that applies to transfers into the district or unit. If a patrol officer is involuntarily
transferred, and requests the reason for such transfer, the reason will be given by the Department
within five (5) working days of the date of transfer.

(47) Effective with the date of the Contract it is agreed that details shall be limited to
ninety (90) days and if they are to extend beyond that period they will become subject to the
transfer provisions of the Contract. This provision is not to affect the special details to the
Mayor's office and to the President of City Council.

(48) No employee shall be assigned/transferred to a unit/platoon where another
immediate family member (as defined in funeral leave provision/GPO) is assigned and the

possibility exists that the family member would have direct or indirect management oversight

39
over that employee. The Chief or his designee and one representative from the Union will meet

to discuss the transfer of personnel who are assigned in violation of this provision.

ARTICLE XXT
HAZARDOUS DUTY INJURY

(49) The policy of the Division of Police, Department of Public Safety, City of
Cleveland regarding “Hazardous Duty Injury” is as follows:

(a) Because of the hazardous nature of active police duty, days lost by a patrol
officer herein defined, due to a hazardous duty injury, shall not affect normal biweekly salary,
accumulated sick time, holiday, accumulated overtime, accumulated furlough time, and vacation
days. Nor shall a patrol officer be deprived of any other benefit because of hazardous duty injury
so determined by the Safety Director and confirmed by the Medical Director and/or the officer's
private physician and any time lost due to such an injury shall not affect the formula for sick
leave conversion at the time of retirement.

(b) “Hazardous duty injury” is defined as injury resulting from active police
duty, either on or off regular tours of duty, such duty including but not limited to apprehension or
attempted apprehension of suspects, active participation in the prevention of crimes, and pursuit
of suspects. Employees injured while performing work in the service of another employer are
not eligible for hazardous duty pay and benefits. However, injuries incurred by an officer
responding to criminal activity unrelated to the secondary employment fall within the definition
of “hazardous duty injury.”

(c) It is mutually agreed that a patrol officer is prohibited from engaging in or
accepting secondary employment during the period of time in which the provisions of the above
paragraph are in effect.

40
(d) Injuries which are incurred on regular tours of duty while patrol officers
are engaged in supportive duty or engaged in work which is incidental to active police duty are
compensable through the Ohio Bureau of Workers' Compensation.

(e) Any dispute arising out of the interpretation or application of this policy is
subject to the Grievance Procedure.

(63) The City may require periodic examinations to determine the continued
extent of incapacity. After an employee has been on hazardous duty injury status for six (6)
months, a complete medical diagnosis report shall be made by the Police Surgeon as to when the
employee can return to normal duty. In making such diagnosis, the Police Surgeon shall review
all medical records of the employee, and any reports of the employee's own physician(s)
regarding his medical condition. If the employee will never be able to return to normal duty,
then application will then be made for a disability retirement pension.

(g) While both the City and the Union acknowledge that there are no
permanent restricted duty assignments available, the Safety Department may, at its option,
designate certain assignments as temporary restricted duty assignments from time to time to
which an eligible employee may be assigned. The assignment of said employees is the sole
responsibility of the City based upon the Medical Bureau's examination results.

(h) After an employee has been on Hazardous Duty Injury status for two (2)
years, the employee shall apply for a permanent disability retirement pension or return to normal
duty with the department.

@ The employee shall remain on Hazardous Duty Injury status until the

disability pension is effective.

41
ARTICLE XXII
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

 

 

 

(50) It is mutually agreed that the prompt presentation and settling of grievances is to

 

the benefit of both the City of Cleveland and the members of the bargaining unit. Discipline
shall fall under the grievance procedure and shall be based upon internal investigation within the
Department of Public Safety.

(51) The term “grievance” shall mean any dispute arising out of or connected with the
subject matter of this Contract or the interpretation, application or enforcement of any of its
terms.

Step 1. A grievance must be reduced to writing within seven (7) calendar days after the
event or knowledge of the event giving rise to said grievance. A member having a grievance
shall, accompanied by a representative of the Union, present the grievance to the Commanding
Officer of the Administrative Unit. The grievance shall be signed by both the grievant and a
Union representative, and shall set forth in detail the appropriate facts and requested remedy and
relief. A copy of all grievances and answers are to be filed with the Chief of Police and the
Union. A member shall be entitled to have a meeting on the grievance within seven (7) calendar
days of the time the written grievance is submitted to the Commanding Officer of the
Administrative Unit, if the member requests a meeting. If the member does not request a
meeting, the grievance shall be answered in writing within seven (7) calendar days. If the
member requests a meeting, the Union President or a designee may be present with the member
at the meeting. The Chief of Police will designate an appropriate representative at the meeting,
and will give the grievant a written answer to the grievance within seven (7) calendar days after

the meeting.

42
Step 2. If the grievance is not satisfactorily settled at Step 1, said grievance may, within
seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the Step 1 answer, be appealed to the Chief of Police.
The Police Chief and/or the designated representative of the Department shall meet with the
President or Vice President(s) of the Union within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of written
appeal and shall render an answer in writing within seven (7) calendar days.

Step 3. If the grievance is not satisfactorily settled at Step 2 the Union may, within seven
(7) calendar days after receipt of the Step 2 answer, appeal in writing to the Safety Director. The
Director or his designee, which may include representatives of the Department of Personnel,
shall meet with the Union President, or designee, within twenty (20) calendar days after the
grievance is submitted to the Director. The Safety Director, or designee, shall provide the Union
with an appropriate written answer within twenty (20) calendar days and will institute any other
appropriate procedures or hearings as required by the City Charter and applicable law.

Step 3-A. If the grievance is not satisfactorily settled in Step 3 then the Union may,
within seven (7) calendar days after the Step 3 answer, refer said grievance with all lower-level
history to the Labor Relations Manager for review. Failure to so attach the history will result in
suspension of the answer date until the history is provided. A written answer to the grievance
shall be given to the Union President, personally or by mail, within twenty (20) calendar days
after the grievance is submitted to the Labor Relations Manager or his designee.

All grievances involving the payment of wages may be filed at Step 3-A.

Step 4. If any grievance is not satisfactorily settled by the Safety Director or pursuant to
Step 3-A, the Union, and only the Union, may submit the matter to arbitration within thirty (30)
calendar days after the receipt of the answer. The Union shall notify the American Arbitration

Association and the City at the same time of its intent to appeal the grievance. The arbitrators

43
shall be chosen in accordance with the rules of the American Arbitration Association. The fees
and expenses of the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the City and the Union. Further, the
aggrieved member, his representative, and any necessary witnesses shall not lose any regular
straight-time pay for time off the job while attending an arbitration proceeding.

In the event a grievance goes to arbitration, the arbitrator shall have jurisdiction only over
disputes arising out of grievances as to the interpretation and/or application and/or compliance
with the provisions of this Contract, including all disciplinary actions and in reaching his
decision, the arbitrator shall have no authority (1) to add or subtract from or modify in any way
any of the provisions of this Contract; (2) to pass upon issues governed by law, (3) to make an
award in conflict with law. The arbitrator shall issue a decision within thirty (30) calendar days
after submission of the case to him.

The Grievance Procedure set forth in this Contract shall be the exclusive method of
reviewing and settling disputes between the City and the Union and/or between the City and a
member (or members), and all decisions of arbitrators shall be final, conclusive, and binding on
the City, the Union, and the members. A grievance may be withdrawn by the Union at any time
and the withdrawal of such grievance shall not be prejudicial to the filing of future grievances,
even if on the same subject matter.

A policy grievance which affects a substantial number of employees may initially be
presented by the Union at Step 2 of the Grievance Procedure.

The time limits set forth in the Grievance Procedure shall, unless extended by mutual
written agreement of the City and the Union, be binding, and any grievances not timely

presented, or timely processed thereafter, shall not be considered a grievance under this Contract

44
and shall not be arbitrable. Any grievance not timely processed by the City at any of the
preceding steps may be placed by the Union in the next Step.
Calendar days as provided within the Grievance Procedure shall not include Saturdays,

Sundays or Holidays.

ARTICLE XXII
BINDING ARBITRATION OF IMPASSE ISSUES

(52) Not less than ninety (90) days before the expiration of this Contract and any re-
opener provided herein the City and the CPPA shall begin negotiation and shall negotiate for a
period of at least sixty (60) days. After sixty (60) days either party can demand final and binding
arbitration, by written notice to the other, of all issues on which they are at impasse in
accordance with the following procedures:

(a) Each party shall appoint an arbitrator and those two (2) arbitrators shall
agree on a third arbitrator within five (5) days, or they shall select a third impartial arbitrator by
the strike-off method from a list of seven (7) furnished by the American Arbitration Association.

(b) Five (5) days after the third impartial arbitrator has been selected the
parties shall submit their final offer on each issue which is at impasse to the arbitration panel.

(c) The arbitration panel may hold hearings, receive evidence or
documentation, and call witnesses in accordance with the arbitration rules of the American
Arbitration Association.

(d) After receiving whatever evidence the parties wish to submit, the
arbitration panel shall select the final offer of one (1) of the parties on each of the impasse issues

and shall issue an award incorporating all of these selected final offers, without modification.

45
(e) In reaching its decision, the arbitration panel shall give weight to the
following factors:

@ Past collectively bargained agreements, if any, between the parties;

(ii) | Comparison of the issues submitted to final offer settlement
relative to the employees in the bargaining unit involved with those issues related to other public
and private employees doing comparable work, giving consideration to factors peculiar to the
area and classification involved;

(iii) The interests and welfare of the public, the ability of the public
employer to finance and administer the issues proposed, and the effect of the adjustments on the
normal standard of public service;

(iv) _ The lawful authority of the public employer;

(vy) The stipulations of the parties;

(vi) Such other factors, not confined to those listed in this section,
which are normally or traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of the issues
submitted to final offer settlement through voluntary collective bargaining, mediation, fact-
finding, or other impasse resolution procedures in the public service or in private employment.

(f) Each party shall bear the expense of its own arbitrator and the parties shall
split the expense of the third impartial arbitrator, and all other expenses of the arbitration

proceeding, other than the expenses of their own witnesses and/or counsel.

ARTICLE XXIV
NO STRIKE - NO LOCKOUT

(53) The parties to this Contract, having provided for a grievance and arbitration

procedure to settle all disputes between them during the term of the Contract, and, having further
46
provided for the arbitration procedure to resolve any impasse issues arising from the next
negotiation, hereby agree that:

(a) The CPPA shall not, directly or indirectly, call, sanction, encourage,
finance, and/or assist in any way nor shall any employee instigate or participate directly or
indirectly, in any strike, slowdown, walkout, concerted “sick” leave, mass resignation, work
stoppage, picketing, job action or interference of any kind with any operation or operations of the
City. Violations of this promise by any employee(s) shall be proper cause for discharge or other
disciplinary action by the City.

(b) The CPPA and all of its officers or stewards (directors) shall at all times
cooperate with the City in continuing operations in a normal manner and shall actively
discourage and endeavor to prevent or terminate any violation. In the event any violation occurs,
the CPPA shall immediately notify all employees that the strike, slowdown, walkout, concerted
“sick” leave, mass resignation, work stoppage, picketing, job action or interference of any kind
with any operation or operations of the City is prohibited and is not in any way sanctioned or
approved by the CPPA. Furthermore, the CPPA shall also immediately advise all employees to
return to work at once.

(c) The City shall not lock out any employees for the duration of this

Contract.

ARTICLE XXV
LEGALITY AND SEPARABILITY
(54) It is the intent of the City and the CPPA that this Contract comply, in every
respect, with applicable legal statutes, charter requirements, governmental regulations which

have the effect of law, and judicial opinions, and if there be a final determination by proper

47
judicial authority that any provision of this Contract is in conflict with law, that provision shall
be null and void and shall not affect the validity of the remaining paragraphs of this Contract. In
the event of an unlawful determination, the City and the CPPA shall meet within thirty (30) days

for the purpose of negotiating lawful alternative provisions.

ARTICLE XXVI
COMPENSATION

(55) Salaries. Retroactive to on or about April 1, 2013, there shall be a one percent
(1.0%) wage increase. Retroactive to on or about April 1, 2014, there shall be a two percent
(2.0%) wage increase. Retroactive to on or about April 1, 2015, there shall be a two percent
(2.0%) wage increase. The annual salary of all patrol officers for the periods indicated upon

passage of the applicable ordinance, shall be as follows:

 

April 1, 2013 - 1.0%

 

 

 

 

Bi-Weekly

Annual Rate Rate Hourly Rate
Patrol Officer | - Maximum $56095.2900 $2157.5111 $26.9689
Patrol Officer | - 1 Year (-250.00) $55845.2900 $2147.8957 $26.8487
Patrol Officer | - Start (-250.00) $55595.2900 $2138.2803 $26.7285
Patrol Officer II $50782.7200 $1953.1815 $24.4148
Patrol Officer III $49015.2800 $1885.2030 $23.5650
Patrol Officer IV $47754.6000 $1836.7153 $22.9589
Police Trainee $10.50 $10.50 $10.50
April 1, 2014 - 2.0%

Bi-Weekly
Annual Rate Rate Hourly Rate

48
Patrol Officer | - Maximum $57217.2000 $2200.6615 $27.5083

Patrol Officer | - 1 Year (-250.00) $56967.2000 $2191.0461 $27.3881
Patrol Officer | -Start (-250.00) $56717.2000 $2181.4307 $27.2679
Patrol Officer II $51798.3700 $1992.2450 $24.9031
Patrol Officer III $49995.5900 $1922.9073 $24.0363
Patrol Officer IV $48709.6900 $1873.4496 $23.4181
Police Trainee $10.50 $10.50 $10.50

 

 

April 1, 2015 - 2.0%

 

Bi-Weekly
Annual Rate Rate Hourly Rate
Patrol Officer | - Maximum $58361.5400 $2244.6746 $28.0584
Patrol Officer | - 1 Year (-250.00) $58111.5400 $2235.0592 $27.9382
Patrol Officer | -Start (-250.00) $57861.5400 $2225.4438 $27.8180
Patrol Officer II $52834.3400 $2032.0900 $25.4011
Patrol Officer III $50995.5000 $1961.3653 $24.5171
Patrol Officer IV $49683.8800 $1910.9184 $23.8865
Police Trainee $10.50 $10.50 $10.50

 

 

Wage increases shall be effective: (a) during the pay period in which April 1“ falls if
April 1 falls in the first week of a pay period; or (b) during the pay period following the pay
period in which April 1* falls if April 1“ falls in the second week of a pay period.

(56) Automatic Progression. Patrol Officers who are at the minimum salary for Patrol
Officer I, shall be entitled to receive a two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) increase after they
have served one (1) year in the Patrol Officer I rank, and a two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
increase after they have served two (2) years in the Patrol Officer I rank.

(57) ‘Trainees. Trainees may be hired by the City under a special expedited training
program not to exceed a twenty-two (22) week period, unless State law requires a longer training
period, in which case the Union will be notified prior to extending the training period beyond
twenty-two (22) weeks. Trainees shall be paid at a rate of $10.50 per hour or the existing “living

wage” rate, whichever is greater.

49
Upon the completion of the training course said trainees shall attain the rank of Patrol
Officer IV for a thirty six (36) week period. Trainees shall receive all benefits provided for in
the Contract from date of hire. After completion of the fifty-two (52) weeks provided for in this
paragraph, progression through other ranks shall continue at one (1) year intervals in accordance
with past practice.

(58) Shift Differential. All employees shall receive an hourly shift differential of
thirty-five cents (35¢) per hour worked when employed on the Second Platoon, thirty-five cents
(35¢) per hour worked when employed on the Third Platoon; and forty-seven cents (47¢) per
hour worked when employed on the Fourth Platoon.

For purposes of determining the appropriate Shift Differential and Court premium pay
only, the “starting time” listed at/during the below times shall designate the respective platoon
and applicable premium rate for employees assigned to eight-hour shifts.

1* Platoon = From 0500 hours (5:00 a.m.) To 1159 hours (11:59 a.m.)

2"4 Platoon = From 1200 hours (12 noon) To 1759 hours (5:59 p.m.)

4" Platoon = From 1800 hours (6:00 p.m.) To 2129 hours (9:29 p.m.)

3" Platoon = From 2130 hours (9:30 p.m.) To 0459 hours (4:59 a.m.)

For purposes of determining the appropriate Shift Differential and Court premium pay only, for

employees assigned to ten (10) hour shifts the “starting time” listed at/during the below times

shall designate the respective platoon and applicable premium rate.

A Platoon — from 0500 hours (5:00 a.m.) to 0900 hours (9:00 a.m.)

B Platoon — from 1400 hours (2:00 p.m.) to 1800 hours (6:00 p.m.)

C Platoon — from 1800 hours (6:00 p.m.) to 2200 hours (10:00 p.m.)

50
(59) Field Training Officers. Patrol Officers designated to act as Field Training
Officers shall, as a minimum requirement, be in the rank of Patrol Officer I or Patrol Officer II,
and if assigned to an eight (8) hour shift shall be entitled to receive an additional one and one-
half (1-1/2) hours of compensation for days in which they act in that capacity. Patrol Officers
assigned to a ten (10) hour shift shall receive an additional two (2) hours of compensation for
days in which they act in that capacity. The Chief of Police or his designee, shall fill one-half
(4) of Field Training Officer assignments without regard to seniority and the remaining one-half
(4) of such assignments shall be filled by assigning the Patrol Officer I or II with the most
seniority desiring such assignment. (Pursuant to the bid procedures identified in Article XX).

(60) SR Cars. The City shall have the right to make reasonable and safe use of SR car

assignments as set forth in Exhibits A, B and C of this Agreement.

ARTICLE XXVII
PENSION “PICK UP” PAYMENTS

(61) Within a reasonable period from the ratification of this Contract, the City shall
“pick up” and pay the members' contribution to the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund. The
members’ gross salary shall be reduced by the full amount of said contribution. The member
contributions which are “picked up” by the City shall be treated in the same manner as
contributions made by members prior to the commencement of the “pick up” program and will,
therefore, be included in “compensation” for the purposes of the Ohio Police and Fire Pension
Fund benefit calculations, and for the purposes of the parties in fixing salaries and compensation
of members as set forth in this Contract. The City's contribution to the Ohio Police and Fire
Pension Fund will be calculated on the full salary of members before the pick-up is deducted
from gross salary.

51
ARTICLE XXVIII
LEGAL REPRESENTATION OF OFFICERS

(62) The City shall provide the legal defense of, shall assume the litigation costs for,
and shall indemnify any officer in any civil action or civil claim for any judgment or settlement,
except as herein limited, arising out of any alleged act or omission which occurred or allegedly
occurred while the officer was acting within the course and scope of his duties as an officer,
unless:

(a) The Director of Law has good cause to believe that the acts or omissions
were manifestly outside the course and scope of his employment or official duties;

(b) The Director of Law has good cause to believe that the officer or
employee acted with malicious purpose, or in bad faith at the time of the alleged act or omission
or thereafter, or in a wanton and reckless manner;

(c) The Director of Law has good cause to believe that the officer was
performing services for another employer at the time the incident allegedly occurred;

(d) The civil claim, action or proceeding, including disciplinary proceedings,
was brought by, or at the request of, the City or any of its officials, against the officer;

(e) The officer fails to comply with the conditions of his defense as prescribed
herein; or

(fh A final judgment against the officer includes punitive or exemplary
damages, in which case the City shall, at the election of the officer continue to represent the
officer in all proceedings subsequent to trial; but, should the final judgment include punitive or
exemplary damages, the City shall not provide indemnification for those damages; nor shall the

City provide indemnification for claimant's attorney's fees which are based solely on an award of

52
punitive or exemplary damages against the officer; however, by separate ordinance, Council
may, at its discretion, expressly authorize payment of such punitive or exemplary damages or
claimant's attorney's fees.

If any of the foregoing (a) through (e) apply, the officer shall not be entitled to either a
defense or to indemnification provided by or at expense to the City, except as specified in
paragraph 65.

(63) The continuing duty of the City to defend or indemnify the officer under this
Contract shall be conditioned upon:

(a) Delivery by the officer to the Director of Law a written request to provide
legal defense together with the original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice,
demand or pleading within seven (7) days after the officer is served with such document;

(b) The continuing full cooperation of the officer in the defense of such action
or proceeding, and in defense of any action or proceeding against the City based upon the same
act or omission, and in the prosecution of any appeal.

(64) | Other than as specified above, the officer shall be entitled to be represented by the
Department of Law unless the Director of Law determines prior to or during the pendency of a
civil lawsuit that a potential conflict of interest could result, or that it is in the best interests of the
officer, City of Cleveland, or — in a case with multiple defendants — any other defendant, that
the officer be represented by counsel other than the Director of Law or any of its Assistants. In
such case, the Director of Law may elect to tender the defense of the officer to private counsel
selected by the Director of Law upon such conditions and attorney's fees as the Director of Law
deems appropriate in the particular case. In such case, the City will pay the reasonable cost of

attorney's fees and expenses of the selected private attorney. Any indemnification of an officer

53
represented by private counsel shall be subject to all limits upon indemnification of an officer
represented by the Department of Law.

(65)(a) If the Director of Law elects to decline representation of an officer under the
circumstances described in 62(a) and the trial court, either judge or jury, by written judgment
order or answer to special interrogatory to the jury, expressly finds that the officer was acting
within the course and scope of his employment and official duties, then the City shall indemnify
and pay reasonable attorneys' fees and costs, subject to the limitations of paragraph 66.

(b) If the Director of Law elects to decline representation of an officer under
the circumstances described in 62(b) and the officer through counsel engaged at the officer's
expense, obtains a final, unappealed judgment in favor of the defendant officer, then the City
shall pay the reasonable cost of attorney's fees and expenses incurred by the officer in his
successful defense.

(66) The total amount of indemnification to which the City is obligated to pay on
behalf of one or more officer defendants or potential defendants arising out of a transaction or
occurrence, which is the subject matter of allegations against the officer and/or co-defendants,
shall be limited to the lower of either One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00), or the amount of any
deductible, self-insured retention, or uninsured primary level, under any policy of insurance paid
by the City which provides coverage for the transaction or occurrence.

(67) These provisions for defense and indemnification shall not be construed to impair,
alter, limit, or modify the rights and obligations of the City or any officer under any policy of
insurance. Nor shall the benefits of these provisions be construed to affect, alter, or repeal any

section of the Workers' Compensation Law.

54
(68) These provisions shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate, or restrict any immunity or defense to liability available to the City or officer or any
other benefit provided by law to the City or officer. The benefits of these provisions shall apply
whether or not the officer is sued in an individual or representative capacity and whether or not
the officer is still employed by the City; provided, however, that the acts of the officer
complained of must have been committed during the course of and as a result of his employment
by the City.

(69) An officer may at any time elect, at his own expense, to be represented by private
counsel selected by the officer in lieu of representation by the Director of Law, or counsel
selected by the Director; however, by electing to be represented by such private counsel, the
officer waives all right to a defense and indemnification by or at the expense of the City under
this Contract.

(70) The City shall indemnify the defense costs (in accordance with the limitations
below) of an officer prosecuted and not found guilty of a violation of City, State, or Federal law,
arising out of an alleged act or omission which occurred or allegedly occurred while the officer
was acting within the course and scope of his/her duties as an officer. The City's defense
obligations shall be subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in this Article. The City
shall not be obligated to pay defense fees in excess of the following amounts:

Murder — Homicide $10,000
Other major felonies 7,500

Minor Felonies 5,000
Misdemeanors 2,500

35
ARTICLE XXIX
SUSPENSIONS FROM DUTY

(71) The Chief of Police may suspend an officer for ten (10) days or less for
disciplinary reasons. If the Chief recommends a greater penalty, then the Director of Public
Safety will hear the disciplinary charge filed against the officer and render judgment on such
charge and set the disciplinary penalty, if any. The Director of Public Safety is responsible for
more severe disciplinary penalties and he shall hear such matters as soon as practicable following
their filing. All decisions of the Director of Public Safety shall be subject to the Grievance
Procedure beginning at Step 3-A.

In addition to the Chief, a Deputy Chief can conduct a pre-disciplinary hearing and make
recommendations to the Chief regarding discipline up to and including a ten (10) day suspension.

(72) In the event that administrative charges are brought against an officer by the Chief
of Police and such charges arise out of the same facts and circumstances which are also the
subject of a criminal indictment or criminal complaint pending against the officer, then the
following procedures shall apply:

(a) If the criminal indictment or criminal complaint alleges a violation of a
misdemeanor offense, then the officer can be reassigned pending resolution of the criminal
charges.

(b) If the criminal indictment or criminal complaint alleges a violation of a
felony offense then the officer shall be relieved of duty without pay and the administrative
hearing continued pending resolution of the criminal charges. The officer shall continue to
participate in any health care benefits offered by the City, and may draw upon his accumulated

compensatory time during the period of continuance. As soon as practicable following

56
resolution of the criminal charges, the administrative hearing shall be reconvened and the
administrative charges disposed of in accordance with the judgment of the Director of Public
Safety. If the Director of Public Safety does not sustain the administrative charges, then the
officer shall be returned to duty and made whole.

(73) Nothing in this article shall be construed as precluding the preference and hearing
of administrative charges alleging violation of the Civil Services rules or the manual of rules and
regulations of the Division of Police, even though such administrative charges may arise out of
the same facts and circumstances which are the subject of a criminal proceeding. No arbitrator
or other party shall substitute his judgment for the judgment of the Chief of Police or the
Director of Public Safety in applying the provisions of this article.

(74) In the event that administrative charges are filed against an officer by the Chief of
Police and such charges do not give rise to a criminal indictment, then the charges shall be
disposed of by the Director of Public Safety within ninety (90) days of their filing, unless

extended by mutual agreement; otherwise the charges shall be automatically dismissed.

ARTICLE XXX
MILEAGE

(75) | When a patrol officer is required to use his personal automobile for a SWAT call-
up, a Hostage call-up, for the Bomb Squad or for the shooting team, the City shall reimburse the

officer at the rate of twenty-one cents ($.21) per mile.

57
ARTICLE XXXI
EDUCATION INCENTIVE

(76) | Employees will be provided the opportunity to have part or all of their tuition
reimbursed for successful completion of approved educational courses in the area of career
enhancement. Money for such reimbursement will be provided from the Law Enforcement Trust

Funds at the annual rate of 2% of the yearly revenues of those funds.

ARTICLE XXXII
CONTRACT DURATION

(77) This Contract shall be effective from the date of the conciliation award
(September 22, 2015), and shall remain in full force and effect until March 31, 2016 or as
amended or modified as hereinafter provided. Negotiations on the provisions of this Contract
shall begin no later than ninety (90) days prior to March 31, 2016, provided either party has
notified the other party in writing of its desire to terminate and/or modify the terms herein not
sooner than December 1, 2015. In the event that either party desires to terminate this Contract,
written notice must be given to the other party not less than three (3) months prior to the desired
termination date which cannot be sooner than March 31, 2016.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereunto set their hands this day of

» 2015

CITY OF CLEVELAND CLEVELAND POLICE PATROLMEN’S
ASSOCIATION

 
WISNS
Deborah Southerington, Director
Department of Human Resources

He d. st M/5L15
Nycole ‘est, Labor Relations Manager

Department of Human Resources

1604-12-12
9.23.2015

59

)

Thomas Lascko, 2™ Vice President

ip

 

 
4.76

4.77

4.78

4.79
4.80

4.81

4.82

4.83

4.84

4.85

EXHIBIT A
PERSONNEL UNDER THE CONTROL OF THE
RADIO DISPATCHER SHALL:

Patrol the territory to which they are assigned and perform such other duties as
may be directed to them.

Remain in the territory to which they are assigned. If they are required to leave
their territory for reasons of police necessity, they shall notify the radio
dispatcher.

Acknowledge and accept all calls directed to them by the radio dispatcher unless
directed otherwise by a field supervisor and use time announcements from the
radio dispatcher for their official reports and duty reports when applicable.

Respond to all calls by stating their radio call number and location.

Immediately report arrival time to the radio dispatcher upon arriving at the
location of a radio assignment.

Advise the radio dispatcher of their activities, the progress of any investigation
and the preliminary descriptions of any person, property and motor vehicles
wanted in connection with the investigation.

Promptly notify the radio dispatcher when they have completed an assignment.

Promptly notify the radio dispatcher of all traffic signal malfunctions, damaged or
missing signs and devises, and dangerous street and sidewalk conditions found to
exist or which result from traffic accidents. Radio dispatchers shall immediately
notify the appropriate city department to arrange for safety measures.

Notify the radio dispatcher and their superior officer when they return to their
headquarters for any reason, including to report off duty.

Notify their superior officer and the radio dispatcher when they resume their
normal patrol duties.

Respond to urgent and emergency assignments in their immediate vicinity without
being assigned by the radio dispatcher.

While en route to court and other non-emergency assignments, respond to any
urgent or emergency incidents when no other radio cars are available.

Advise the radio dispatcher immediately of any incident, event or occurrence
which may indicate the beginning of a riot, disaster, catastrophe or other police
incident of a serious nature.

60
4.86 When assigned in an actual emergency, function under the control of the field
commander in any phase of mobilization as provided for in current operational
plans.

61
EXHIBIT B
SPECIAL PROTOCOL FOR OFFICERS
ASSIGNED TO SR CARS

The following principles shall apply only to personnel working in zone cars staffed by
less than two officers, and hereafter denominated as SR cars.

1.

Dispatch of an SR car plus a backup is regarded as equivalent to the dispatch of a
single zone car staffed by two (2) officers.

SR cars may be dispatched on any call for service where all available information
indicates there is no inherent danger to the safety of the officers. Although not
inclusive the following types of assignments shall not be assigned to SR cars.

Crime in progress - suspect on the scene
Hold up alarms

Domestic violence - suspect on scene
Fight in progress/ gang fight/ racial
Large rowdy crowd

Person with weapon

Probate warrant execution

Police officer in trouble

On calls for service where available information indicates an inherent danger to the
officer, a backup unit shall be dispatched. A backup unit shall also be sent on any call upon the
request of the primary unit or supervisor.

3.

Under no circumstances shall an officer in an SR car stop a vehicle without
notifying the dispatcher as to the location and license number of the vehicle, nor
shall he leave the vehicle to check out persons or suspicious circumstances
without giving the dispatcher his location.

It shall not be considered to be insubordination for an officer assigned to an SR
car to decline to respond to a dispatch without backup where the officer has
reasonable fear that responding without backup will subject the officer to personal
danger greater than that inherent in the occupation. An officer so declining a
dispatch shall advise the dispatcher and the officer's supervisor, shall prepare to
respond and shall respond immediately upon the arrival of backup.

On any dispatch of an SR car plus backup, it shall not be considered to be
insubordination or neglect of duty for the officer assigned to the SR car, prior to
arriving at the scene or at the scene itself, to meet with the backup unit before
taking any action that would subject the officer to risk of personal harm.

62
EXHIBIT C

SPECIAL PROTOCOL LETTER

April 1, 1995

Mr. Robert Beck

President

Cleveland Police Patrolmen's Association
1303 West 58th Street “
Cleveland, Ohio 44102 ~

Dear Mr. Beck:

This letter is intended to confirm certain understandings
concerning the operation of the @ifferential police response
program under this Agreement.

The differential response program will utilize both zone cars
and single response cars (SR cars}, staffed by two (2) and one
officers respectively; in basic patrol activities. Personnel
assigned to SR cars will be under the supervision of a Sergeant or
other superior officer and perform the duties set forth in Section
4.75 to 4.86 inclusive of the Manual of Rules, subject to the
provisions of the Special Protocol for officers assigned to SR
cars. A copy of the relevant Sections of the Manual of Rules and
the Special Protocol are attached as Exhibits A and B.

The objective of the differential police response program is
to improve productivity and the quality of service provided to
citizens, with a primary Consideration always being the safety of
the Patrol Officers.

63
To further these objectives, SR cars shall not constitute more
than sixty percent (60%) of all: patrol cars deployed in any twenty-
four (24) hour period. SR cars will be staffed by volunteers to
the extent possible. When assignments to SR cars are necessary,
preference will be given to senior officers consistent with the

operational needs of the department, 2 reer
Very truhky youys,
4

_ Michae? R. White, Mayor
City of Cleveland

64
EXHIBIT D
FLEX SHIFTS

INTRODUCTION

In the last several years the Cleveland Police Department has taken steps to improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of our patrol officers in responding to the calls for service from the
citizens of Cleveland. The original implementation of the One-officer SR Car and the
restructuring of the sizes of the various platoons have reflected steps to this goal. The next step
in this process is the introduction of Flex Scheduling of hours to the Fourth Platoon. It is another
step to improving the delivery of services to the public.

BACKGROUND

At present, we have a uniformed Fourth Platoon in each of the Six Patrol Districts.
Historically, the Ist, 2nd, 4th, Sth and 6th Districts have had this platoon operate from 1900
hours (7:00 p.m.) to 0300 hours (3:00 a.m.) in the Winter months and 2000 hours (8:00 p.m.) to
0400 hours (4:00 a.m.) in the Summer months. The exception to this procedure has been the 3rd
District which due to the large business district and relatively small number of dwellings has
operated their extra platoon from 1000 (10:00 a.m.) to 2000 (8:00 p.m.).

The original intent of the 4th platoon is two-fold: first, to provide additional units in
operation during the peak hour of calls for service, which usually occur late during 2nd platoon
hours and early 3rd platoon hours; second, to overlap the shift change between 2nd and 3rd
platoons, in order to maintain the level of units on the street during the shift change.

Flex Shifts is a proposal to maximize the amount of units in service during the period
when the maximum number of calls are received. By analyzing which eight hour tour can best

cover the most service calls, we are placing our units where they are most needed. The flex shift

65
starting times and assignments for the Fourth Platoon will be posted 7 days before the month's
tour of duty begins and such starting times may be different on the different days of the week so
that the tours of duty will more efficiently and effectively handle the work load.
CRITERIA

There are several variables that have an important effect on our calls for service and
which will have the same effect when we schedule starting times for the 4th platoon. Seasonal
adjustments in scheduling in the Northern Ohio area are a necessity due to the extreme
fluctuations of our weather. An example of this principle can be demonstrated when comparing
the calls for service in the Winter to the Summer. Winter calls for service come more frequently
from 1700 hours (5:00 p.m.) to 2200 hours (10:00 p.m.), while Summer peaks for calls for
service come more frequently from 2000 hours (8:00 p.m.) to 0400 hours (4:00 a.m.).

Fluctuations in calls for service due to the weekend nights of Friday and Saturday is
another consideration when scheduling Flex Shifts starting times. On these days, it would
require later starting times in order to cover more of the workload extending into the 3rd platoon
hours, which is projected to occur from past experience. However, in the same week schedule,
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday may require earlier starting times to best fit the
service workload.

These reasons for fluctuations in starting times are not limited, but others may be
considered due to police emergencies, unforeseen situations, and the increase in data with the

new CAD system being proposed.

66
FIELD PLANNING UNIT
(IMPLEMENTATION)
The Field Planning Unit under the Deputy Chief of Field Operations shall conduct the

statistical analysis required on calls for service to determine the most productive starting times
for the 4th Platoon. This process estimates the number of units required to handle the amount of
assignments received to achieve a certain standard of selective proficiency. Flex shift starting
times would be determined and approved prior to the implementation process and in advance of
scheduling any 4th Platoon personnel. Input will be received from supervisory officers, patrol
officers, and union representatives in connection with this Flex Shift project and be evaluated

accordingly.

67
EXHIBIT E
ORGANIZATION OF THE 4TH PLATOON

 

 

 

 

The parties agree that upon implementation of the ten-hour shifts for the B and C

 

Platoons, the 4" Platoon for the basic patrol shall be eliminated. The elimination of the 4"
Platoon shall have no application to shift differential/court time pay provisions in Article 26.
However, in the event the ten-hour shifts are not maintained following the trial periods, the 4
Platoon shall be reinstated and subject to the following conditions.

The present staffing requirements for the 4th Platoon will remain. However, this platoon
will now require that (a minimum of 65% of personnel be selected on the basis of seniority.)
These assignments will be considered permanent, but will be rebid every six months. The
remaining required personnel will come from the day platoon and night platoon. These positions
will be filled by those officers who volunteer and are selected by seniority. Remaining vacancies
of the 4th Platoon will be selected in the order of reverse seniority. Non-voluntary selections to
the 4th Platoon will be given only one starting time throughout their temporary assignment to the
platoon.

Flex shift starting times and assignments for the 4th Platoon will be posted seven days
before the month's tour of duty begins, excluding Police Emergencies. Police officers from other
than the permanent roster of the 4th Platoon who have more than two weeks scheduled furlough
time in the month of selection will be excluded from volunteering, or being non-voluntarily
assigned during that month. The starting times for the various days in the week may vary within
the time limits set out in the next sentence and they shall be posted seven (7) days before the
month's tour of duty begins, excluding special operational details and emergencies. Starting
times for the 4th Platoon, excluding the Third District, will be between 4:00 p.m. (1600 Hrs.) and

68
8:00 p.m. (2000 Hrs.). For the Third District, starting times will be between 9:00 a.m. (0900

Hrs.) and 1:00 p.m. (1300 Hrs.).

69
EXHIBIT F
EXPERIMENTAL DISTRICTS/PROJECTS

It is anticipated that during the life of this Contract, the Cleveland Police Department
may conduct several operational research projects. These projects may require selecting a
specific District to participate in the program. Cooperation between management, Union, and
affected personnel in the District selected will be essential to the successful completion of the
research goals. It is agreed that any possible conflicts with the labor agreement will be discussed
with the CPPA and be mutually agreed on before implementation of a procedure which may
adversely affect any of their membership in an experimental district/project.

During the life of the 2001-2004 Agreement, the Union and the City agree to mutually
research and develop a pilot ten (10) hour shift program, which can only be implemented upon

agreement of both parties.

70
EXHIBIT G
DRUG TESTING

qd) Policy Statement: Both the Union and the City recognize that illegal drug usage
and workplace alcohol abuse/misuse as a threat to the public’s safety and welfare as well as to
the employees of the Police Division. Thus, the Division will take the necessary steps, including
drug and alcohol testing, to maintain a drug/alcohol free workplace. The goal of this policy is
Education, Prevention and Rehabilitation, rather than termination.

(2) Definitions:

(a) “Tllegal Drug” means any controlled substances as defined in the Ohio
Revised Code, including cannabis.

(b) “Tllegal Drug Usage” means the use of cannabis or any controlled
substance which has not been legally prescribed and/or dispensed, or the abusive use of a legally
prescribed drug.

(c) “Drug Test” means a _ urinalysis test employing the gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) utilizing urine samples collected according to
chain of custody procedures which are consistent with the United States Health and Human
Services (HHS) guidelines, shall be followed for all samples taken.

(d) “Misuse of Alcohol” means the use or possession of ethyl, methyl or
isopropyl alcohol in violation of this policy.

(e) “Alcohol Test” means a test selected and certified under Federal
Standards. An initial positive level of .03 grams per 210L of breath shall be considered positive
for purposes of authorizing the conduct of the confirming alcohol test. If initial screen results are
negative, i.e., below the positive level, testing shall be discontinued, all samples destroyed and

71
records of the testing expunged from the employees personnel file. Only employees with screen
test results that are positive on the initial screen shall be subject to confirmation testing for
alcohol. With respect to confirmation testing, a positive alcohol level shall be .03 grams per
210L of breath. If confirmatory breath testing results are negative, i.e., below the positive level,
all records of the testing shall be expunged from the employee's personnel file.

(3) Notice and Education of Employees Regarding Drug/Alcohol Testing: There will
be a ninety (90) day education and information period prior to the testing under this policy for
employees, except that prior policies governing the use of reasonable suspicion, the testing of
cadets and testing under consent forms shall remain in effect during this period. All employees
will be informed of the Division's drug/alcohol testing policy. Employees will be provided with
information concerning the impact of the use of drugs/alcohol on job performance. In addition,
the employer will inform the employees of the manner in which these tests are conducted, the
reliability of these tests performed, under what circumstances employees will be subject to
testing, what the tests can determine and the consequences of testing positive for illegal drug use
and alcohol abuse/misuse. All new employees will be provided with this information when
initially hired. No employee shall be tested under this policy until this information has been
provided.

(4) Basis for Ordering an Employee to be Tested for Drugs/Alcohol: Employees may
be tested for drugs/alcohol abuse/ misuse during working hours under the following conditions:

(a) “Reasonable Suspicion.” That there is reasonable suspicion that the
employee to be tested is using or abusing illegal drugs or misuse of alcohol while on-duty. Such
reasonable suspicion must be based on objective facts or specific circumstances found to exist

which present a reasonable basis to believe that an employee is using or abusing drugs or

72
misuses of alcohol. Two examples of where reasonable suspicion shall be deemed to exist are
where there has been a serious on-duty injury to an employee or another person, the cause of
which is otherwise unexplained, and where an employee, while driving a City vehicle, becomes
involved in a traffic accident which results in physical harm to persons or property, where the
circumstances raise a question as to the existence of illegal drugs/alcohol abuse/misuse. A
supervisor ordering an employee to take a drug/alcohol test shall give the employee, the Union
and the Chief of Police, in writing, his/her “reasonable suspicion” reasons prior to ordering the
test.

The City and the Union realize that there are duty related activities that certain employees
must perform (such as narcotics, vice and undercover operations, etc.) that may conflict with this
policy. Employees who are engaged in these Departmentally authorized enforcement activities
shall not be subject to the full scope of this policy.

(b) “Random Testing.” Employees, during their normal tour of duty, are
subject to Random Drug/Alcohol Testing, effective after the employee education process (as
stated above) is completed. The annual number of such random tests shall not exceed twenty-
five percent (25%) of the employees covered by this contract as of April 1, of any given year.
Such test shall be reasonably spread throughout the year. Employee(s) notified of their selection
for random/drug alcohol testing shall proceed immediately to the collection site. An employee
who is on a regularly scheduled V-Day, furlough Day, already absent due to illness or injury, on
Compensatory Time Off (approved before the employee was scheduled for testing) or under
subpoena from a Court, shall be excused from testing, but will remain subject to future random

testing.

73
(c) Prior to assignment to units with a high potential for exposure to
controlled substance abuse and such assignments are to: Narcotics Units, Organized Crime
Units, District Vice Units, District and BOSO Strike Force Units, Bomb Squad, S.W.A.T.,
Forensic Laboratory Unit, Aviation Unit, and Harbor Unit.

(d) Upon return to duty after an absence for an unexplained illness or from a
thirty (30) day or more disciplinary suspension, or upon reappointment to the Division.

(e) Upon return to duty after participation in a substance abuse rehabilitation
program, regardless of the duration of the program, the employee shall be required to undergo
three (3) urine tests within the one-year period starting with the date of return to duty.

® During the six (6) month probationary period after leaving the Training
Academy.

(g) Where personal injury of property damage of $1,000.00 or more occurs as
a result of a work-related accident, or for any use-of-deadly force incident.

Prior to obtaining a drug/alcohol test from an employee as set forth in sections (a)
through (g) above, the City shall instruct the employee that the results of the drug/alcohol test
may be used for discipline, up to and including termination.

(5) Urine Samples: Samples for drug/alcohol testing employees shall occur in a
medical setting and conform to (HHS) guidelines. The testing procedures should not demean or
embarrass or cause physical discomfort to the employee tested.

Each step in the collecting and processing of the urine specimens shall be documented to
establish procedural integrity and the chain of evidence.

The employee will complete a form indicating the use of all drugs currently being taken
and identify the prescribing physician.

74
The employee designated to give a sample must be positively identified prior to any
sample being taken.

Specimen samples shall be sealed, labeled and checked against the identity of the
employee to ensure that the results match the employee tested. Samples shall be stored in a
secure and refrigerated atmosphere until tested or delivered to the testing lab.

An employee shall be entitled to the presence of a Union Representative before testing is
administered.

(6) Testing Procedure: The laboratory selected by the City to conduct the analysis
must be experienced and capable of quality control, documentation, chain of custody, technical
expertise, and demonstrated proficiency in urinalysis testing. The testing process phase shall
consist of a two-step procedure.

(a) Initial screening step, and
(b) Confirmation step.

The urine sample is first tested using a screening (EMIT) testing procedure. A specimen
testing positive will undergo an additional confirmatory test employing the gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS). An initial positive report will not be considered
positive, rather it will be classified as confirmation pending. Where a positive report is received,
urine specimens shall be maintained under secured storage for a period of not less than one qd)
year. Any sample which has been adulterated or is shown to be a substance other than urine
shall be reported as such. All test results shall be evaluated by suitable trained medical or
scientific personnel prior to being reported. All unconfirmed positive test records shall be
destroyed by the laboratory. Test results shall be treated with the same confidentiality as other

employee medical records. Test results used as evidence for disciplinary action shall be treated

15
with the same confidentiality. Any employee who tests positive for drugs and/or alcohol will be
given the opportunity to review the tests and, if desired, a reasonable opportunity to rebut the
results.

(7) Disciplinary Action: Employees who, as a result of being drug tested are found to be
using illegal drugs may be subject to discipline up to and including termination. An employee
who tests positive for the first time for alcohol and who cooperated and fulfilled the obligations
under (9), Voluntary Participation in a Dependence Program, may be disciplined. The scope of
such discipline shall be determined on a case by case basis, but shall not exceed three (3)
working days. An employee who tests positive for alcohol, for a second time (within a two (2)
year period of the first positive test), may be disciplined up to and including termination. The
scope of such discipline shall be determined on a case by case basis. Employees must take part
in the Voluntary Dependency Program in order to take advantage of the foregoing limitations on
discipline.

Voluntary submission to a program can be considered prior to imposition of a
disciplinary penalty. Employees who are found to be abusing drug(s) which have been legally
prescribed shall be allowed to enter a substance abuse rehabilitation program and shall not be
terminated on the first instance of illegal drug use.

Refusal to submit to a drug/alcohol test, or the adulteration of, or switching of a urine
sample may also be grounds for discipline up to and including termination.

(8) Right to Appeal: An employee disciplined as a result of a drug/alcohol test has the
right to challenge such discipline beginning at Step 3-A of the Grievance Procedure.

(9) Voluntary Participation _in_a Dependency Program: Employees who are
drug/alcohol dependent are encouraged to voluntarily seek professional assistance through a

76
treatment program supervised by the Medical Director and members of the Employee Assistance
Unit. Voluntary assistance should be sought before the drug/alcohol abuse affects job
performance or endangers fellow employees or members of the public.

(a) Participation in the Employees Assistance Program is voluntary and
strictly confidential. Under provision of GPO 25-85, neither the City Administration, the
Division of Police, nor any unit or entity within, shall have access to the program's files and
records. However, the Chief of Police or his designee of the Medical Unit shall be advised when
an employee is hospitalized or is an out-patient as part of drug dependency rehabilitation. Also,
upon written request of the participating employee, efforts at rehabilitation will be divulged on
his/her behalf in cases of disciplinary action.

(b) Should permission to return to duty following rehabilitative treatment be
granted, the employee shall be required to actively continue in a recognized drug/alcohol
treatment program monitored by the Employees Assistance Unit and/or Medical Unit and shall
be required to undergo three (3) urine tests in a one (1) year period from the date or return to
duty.

(c) If an employee who has returned to duty following rehabilitative treatment
again uses illegal drugs/alcohol who has been suspended in connection with a second positive
alcohol test (within a two-year period) the Chief of Police shall have the sole discretion in
determining whether the employee involved shall again have additional rehabilitative treatment.

(d) Illegal drug use or participation in any drug abuse rehabilitation program
will not preclude disciplinary action against an employee for any rule violation even though such
tule violation may have been connected in part with drug abuse, and/or even if the rehabilitation

program is voluntarily undertaken.

77
(10) Conflict with other Laws: This policy in no way is intended to supersede any
existing State or Federal Laws or waive any constitutional rights that an employee may be

entitled to under the State or Federal Constitutions.

78
EXHIBIT H
CITY OF CLEVELAND

MEDICAL INSURANCE PLAN DESIGN

COMPREHENSIVE MAJOR MEDICAL PPO PLAN (PLUS)

Annual Deductible:

Comprehensive Major Medical:
(Co-Insurance percentage)

Co-Insurance Annual Out-of-Pocket
Maximum (Excluding Deductible):

Doctor and other Office visits:
--Specialists:

Use of Emergency Room:

Wellness/Preventive Services:

Routine Physical Exam (One exam
per benefit period):

Well Child Care Services including
Exam and Immunizations (to age nine,
limited to a $500 maximum per benefit
period):

Well Child Care Laboratory Tests (to
age nine):

Routine Mammogram (One, limited

to an $85 maximum per benefit period):

Routine Pap Test and Exam (One per
benefit period):

79

In-Network

$500 single
$1,000 family

90% - 10%

$1,250 single
$2,500 family

$20.00 Co-pay
$30.00 Co-pay

$100.00 Co-pay

(Co-pay waived if admitted)
Non-Emergency use $100.00
Co-pay plus 90% Co-
Insurance

$20.00 office visit Co-pay,
not subject to deductible

$20.00 office visit Co-pay,
not subject to deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible
Routine EKG, Chest X-ray, Complete
Blood Count, Comprehensive Metabolic
Panel and Urinalysis (Ages nine and over,
one each per benefit period):

CA 125 (cancer screening), Cholesterol
Screening (Ages nine and over, one each
per benefit period):

Routine PSA Test:
Routine Endoscopic Services (including
Colonoscopy) and Colon Cancer Screening

(Age over 50, one each per benefit period):

g. Out-of-Network varies by standard carrier design.
I. HMO

The City will provide not less than two (2) HMO options.

a. Co-Insurance percentage:

b No deductible:

c. Co-Insurance Annual Out-of-Pocket
Maximum:

d. Doctor and other treatment visits:

e. Use of Emergency Room:

80

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

In-Network

90% - 10%

$1.250 single
$2,500 family

$20.00 Co-pay

$100.00 Co-pay (Co-pay
waived if admitted)
Non-Emergency use: $100.00
Co-pay plus 90% Co-
Insurance
IV. PRESCRIPTION DRUG

a. Co-Pays:
Generic (mandatory) $10.00
Name Brand, Formulary $25.00
Name Brand, Non-Formulary $40.00
b. Mandatory Generic Requirement - Mandate individual’s use of generic drugs

where available; if individual chooses Name Brand Formulary or Name Brand
Non-Formulary when generic is available, individual pays the applicable Name
Brand Formulary or Name Brand Non-Formulary co-pay plus the difference
between the Generic and Name Brand costs.

Note: Coverage levels for out-of-network services will be as established by the carrier.

81
 

EXHIBIT I

 

 

 

HIGH DEDUCTIBLE PLAN

Annual Deductible:

Comprehensive Major Medical:
(Co-Insurance percentage)

Co-Insurance Annual Out-of-Pocket
Maximum (Excluding Deductible):

-- Doctor and other Office visits:
-- Specialists:

Use of Emergency Room:

Wellness/Preventive Services:

Routine Physical Exam (One exam
per benefit period):

Well Child Care Services including
Exam and Immunizations (to age nine,
limited to a $500 maximum per benefit
period):

Well Child Care Laboratory Tests (to
age nine):

Routine Mammogram (One, limited

to an $85 maximum per benefit period):

Routine Pap Test and Exam (One per
benefit period):

82

In-Network

$1000 single
$2000 family

80% - 20%

$2000 single
$4000 family

$20.00 Co-pay
$40.00 Co-Pay

$100.00 Co-pay
(Co-pay waived if admitted)

Non-Emergency use
$100.00 Co-pay plus 80%
Co-Insurance

$20.00 office visit Co-pay,
not subject to deductible

$20.00 office visit Co-pay,
not subject to deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible
Routine EKG, Chest X-ray, Complete
Blood Count, Comprehensive Metabolic
Panel and Urinalysis (Ages nine and over,
one each per benefit period):

CA 125 (cancer screening), Cholesterol
Screening (Ages nine and over, one each
per benefit period):

Routine PSA Test:
Routine Endoscopic Services (including

Colonoscopy) and Colon Cancer Screening
(Age over 50, one each per benefit period):

g. Out-of-Network varies by standard carrier design.

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

Note: Coverage levels for out-of-network services will be as established by the carrier.

83
ADDENDA

Assignments related to Administration and bargaining committee
duties

Requests of patrol officers for football games

Police-Traffic Controllers

Police Review Board

Agreement on Safety Vest Program for Cleveland Police Officers
Settlement Agreement - Civilianization

Transmittal of Labor Agreement

84
 

 

 

April 1, 1995

Mr. Robert Beck

President

Cleveland Police Patrolmen's Association
1303 West 58th Street

“Cleveland, Ohio 44102

Dear Mr. Beck: : -

The Department will assign the President of the CPPA and two
other Patrol Officers designated by the President of the CPPA to
perform, on a full-time basis, dut¥es related to the administration
of this Contract by the CPPA, and the handling of matters of mutual
concern to the Department and the CPPA.: It is understood that’
these three individuals shall be included in the five (5) members”
of. the bargaining committee for which the Department will grant
time awey from duty pursuant to Article V; paragraph 5(d) of the

Contract.

   

R. WKite, Mayor
Cleveland
- April 1, 1995

Mr. Robert Beck

President

Cleveland Police Patrolmen's Association
1303 West 58th Street

Cleveland, Ohio . 44102

Dear Mr. Beck:

‘ This will confirm that it is the intention of the City, unless
and until it is prevented from doing so by a final arbitration or
court decision binding. upon the City,’ to continue its present
policy for requesting patrol officers to work overtime for police
purposes at football games of the Cleveland Browns Football Club
held at Cleveland Municipal Stadium during the term’ of the Labor
Agreement.

CITY OF CL ‘LAND

 

By:
Michael White, Mayor

 
April 1, 1995

Mr. Robert Beck, President

Cleveland Police Patrolmen's Association
1303 West S8th Street

Cleveland, OH 44102

Dear Mr. Beck:

As a result of the hearing before the Civil Service Commission
on September 21, 1987, and a Subsequent investigation, the
Commission promulgated a revised ich description for Police-Traffic
Controllers as follows:

 

Typical Tasks. Under supexvision, Traffic-Controllers write
parking tickets and call for the towing of vehicles from public
throughways and lands. Perform impound unit work. Direct
vehicular traffic and perform crowd and traffic control for special
events (races, parades, “pall.-games, etc.) arid perform related
duties as required, Employees are prohibited from performing
criminal investigations or exercising their authority on privately-
~ owned premises. .

 

The City agrees that it will not seek to amend the above job
* description or change the job duties of Police-Traffic Controllers
during the term of the Labor Agreement.

 

Michael 2. White, Maydr
April i, 1995

The undersigned parties te this Agreement agree that the
Police Review Board cannot require the Chief of Police or the
Safety Director to #ct in violation of the terms of this agreement.

LUG: A oD

Robert Beck, President
Cleveland Police Pa cee s
Association

  

City of Cleveland

 
AGREEMENT ON SAFETY VEST PROGRAM
FOR CLEYELAND POLICE OFFICERS
May 30, 1996

The Ciry of Cleveland and representatives of che Fraternal Order of Police (FOP) and
Cleveland Police Pacrolman’s Association (CPPA) have reached agreement on the
following components of a program to provide body armor vests to all Cleveland
Police Officers: ..

* All Officers who have contact with the public will be required to wear the
vests.
e Vests will first be provided to patral officers and their supervisors, 2s well-as to

police cadets. A mutually agreed co schedule will be developed to provide
vests to all other officers.

® ° Iristhe intent to complete the vest program within the next two (2) years,
However, if for reasons beyond che City's control chatis not possible, the
program will be completed in no more than three years,

e+ Discipline for not wearing a vest when required will be levied in a fair and
equitable manner. Documentation will be made of even the first failure co
wear a vest when an officer is required to do so.

e Whether or not officers are wearing their vests, if they should be injured
whilé performing their duties for the Police Division, they will retain their full
rights co Workers’ Compensation payments, Hazardous Dury Injury payments,
and al] benefits to which they would otherwise be entitled. .

° The vests will be replaced on a schedule to be agreed on by the Safety
Director, the Chicf of Police, and the leadership of the FOP and the CFPA.

° In its negotiations with the manufacturer selected to provide the finast qualicy
vests, the City will make every effort to have that manufecturer provide
quilted liners at no additional cost.

 

William™. Denthan
Safecy Director

 

Rocey Foliucro
Chief of Police

 

Ch benshegreemans(wepsee)
, ETTLEMENT REE!

 

Settlement Agreement is by and between the Cleveland
Police Patrolmen’s Association (“the CPPA”), on behalf of itself
and the members of the bargaining unit it represents, and the City
of Cleveland (“the City”) and is entered into for the purpose of
settling and resolving all matters and issues related to and

involved in the case of the Cleveland Police Patrolmen’s Associa-

Common Pleas Court

 

it is agreed as

 

Case No, CV-280730 ("the Lawsuit”).

follows:

 

1. Dispute Resolution Process for Civilianizati

iatives by the City to replace Patrol

   

rm

employees, the following procedure shal

imely implementation of such

  

disputes, and to resolve any disputes

 

a. Notice of anges: The process described herein

itiated by written notice ("the Notice”) from the

 

City to the CPPA of the City’s intent to replace Patrol

jan employees. Such notice shall list the

 

positions affected, the incumbents’ names, the

 
 

classizications of the civilian employees who would be
assuming the positions, and the job descriptions of the
tions that would be filled by the civilian employees.

B. Demand for Barga 2 Arbitrati Informa-

gion: Within fourteen (14) calendar days after the delivery

 

 

of the Notice, the CPPA may demand bargaining over the
decision and effects of the changes described in the Notice,
and may request a list of potential arbitrators from the

American Arbitration Association. During that fourteen (14)

 

day time period, the CPPA may submit a request to

zmation concerning the civilianization initia-

 

e. Response to Information Request: The City shall

respond to such recuest for information

  

(30) calendar days after receipt

provide such information as is relevant

and not overly

 

dential or priv.

 

 

Ow-up requests for formation necessary to

ou
&
a
Qe
o
og
Qo
o
a
©
ny
oO
Pr
es

the negotiation process and responses thereto may be made

 

Guring the Negotiation Period identi
ad. Negotiation Period: After submission of the City’s
response to the information request to the CPPA, the City and

2
the CPPA shall meet and bargain over the decision and effects
of the civilianization initiative. such bargaining shall be
concluded not jater’ than thirty (30) calendar Gays after
submission of the City’s response ;to the information request,
and in any event not later than seventy-four (74) calendar
days after delivery of the Notice.

e. Arbitration: Upon receipt of a panel of arbitrators
from the American Arbitration Association, the parties shall
promptly select an arbitrator according to the Association’s

have been unable to

u

then-applicable rules. If the partie

 

reach agreement dur ng the negotiation periad described above,

 

s shall schedule an arbitration hearing on an

bitrator selected is unable to

 

hearing within thirty (30) calendar days of

cf the negotiation period, the American

 

itration Association shall be instructed by the parties to

 

consider that arbitrator stricken from the original panel and
to select another arbitrator according to the parties’
original responses. The arbitrator shall have thirty (30)
calendar days from the close of the hearing to issue his or

her award on the outstanding issues.
f£. Author bis bi ox: In any arbitration that
arises under this Settlement Agreement, the arbitrator shall
have no authority to modify the terms of the collective
bargaining agreement between the CPpPA and the City ("the
Collective Bargaining Agreement”) or the tems of this
Settlement Agreement. In that proceeding, the arbitrator
shall approve the civilianization initiative Proposed by the
City if that initiative is reasonably likely to lead to more

icient and/or appropriate use of police bersonnel, it is

 

e

 

mot contrary to the terms of Collective Bargaining

ment Agreement, and it is not arbi-

 

Agreement or this Sett
trary, capricious, or in bad faith. Should the arbitrator
find that any aspect of the cit

to satisfy these requirements,

 

 

the aspect that is rejected, and the remai

initiative shall be approved.

If a dispute exists, the arbitrator shall also determine
whether or not the City has Proposed reasonable steps, which
.@re@ consistent with the normal police functions of Patrol
Officers, the then-existing operations of the City, and the
City’s determination of a need for more efficient and/or

appropriate use of police personnel, to address any signifi-

4
cant adverse consequences of the initiative on bargaining unit
members. In addressing the effects of the civilianization
‘initiative, the City will take appropriate and reasonable
steps to ensure that both Patrol Officers and the newly
assigned civilians perform work reasonably consistent with

icers will not be assigned

 

their job descriptions, Patrol Oo

  

to supervise or to engage in a formal trai Ng program for the
newly assigned civilian employees (except as Dart of Police

the confidentiality concerns of Patrol

 

 

arly sensitive

 

ficers (such as personal, undercover, or s

the arbitrator. finds

 

will not be compromised,

 

ascnable steps to address

 

thet the City has not proposed r:

 

cant adverse consequences of the initiative as de-

 

 

scribed above, the arbitrator shall & such steps as he or

  

she deems reasonable and consistent

forth above.

g- Exclusive Procedure: This procedure shall be the

exclusive method of resolving any and all disputes between the

 

nization initiatives.

 

CPPA and the City concerning any ci

2. Bargaining Unit Work. Work that is currently assigned to

Patrol Officers in the bargaining unit represented by the CPPA
which requires the carrying of a firearm shall not be transferred
to civilian employees.:

Bs Yo Layoff Na Civilianization, No Patrol o.

 

cers

 

shall be laid off or reduced below ful ~time employment as a result
of civilianization initiatives or the transfer of work to civilian

employees.

4. Withdrawal of Pending Grievances. All pending grievances

concerning or arising out of previous civilianization initiatives

 

iawn, Patrol Officers displaced by pre

 

civilianization initiatives will be given first o portunity to fill

openings posted pursuant to Article XX¥ of the Collective Bargain: ng

 

cers in the unit from which each such

 

Agreement for Patrol
Patrol Officer was displaced. Such Patrol Officers may exercise

g for which they are

 

the first posted openi.

 

they do not exercise this right at thet time,
theiz right to special preference for such opening shall be waived.

n

 

The City will continue to observe the terms of its implementati

 

lianization initiatives.

m of the agreements

 

5. issal of Lawsuit, In considerati
contained herein, the case of evela Poli Patrolmen'
Association v. Michael] RB. White Mavor of Cleveland identified
above shall be dismissed with prejudice as fully settled and

6
resolved. The CPPA shall not itself,

file any claim

er in concert with others,

in any forum challenging the civilianization
initiatives

implemented prior to this date or which were the
subject of the lawsuit

6.

 

Duration. This Settlement Agreement shall be immediately
fective upon execution and shall then become part of the
Collective Barcaining Agreement that succeeds the one that will
expire on March 31, 1998.

Iv

IS SO AGREED:

IN WITNESS WHEREOF,

this

the parti

ies have her
day of hpi

eunto set their hands
, 1998.

 
