CT pool WF ols FOAL

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT

BETWEEN

THE CITY OF CLEVELAND
AND

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE,
LODGE NO. 8

Effective April 1, 2013 through March 31, 2016
TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

PAGE
PURPOSE .....ccsssssssssessssssssssvcevcssesessesssesnecsneesecsnccsnecsecasesecsesnecsusaesaenscaestucseee auecessnesenessseneseeaseneaeecnees 1
WITNESSETH ....ssscssssssssssssesessesscenecsessessasessesssssusesecassanesussucsncauensecneaneeueense auneascnasssesseesseneaceesseaseess 1
ARTICLE I RECOGNITION..
ARTICLE IIT MANAGEMENT RIGHTS.......scsssssssssessesssessesssscesecsceneensenesne aeeassareesecaeenseneneenessneavens 3
ARTICLE III UNION SECURITY ....scsssesssesssesssssnsensenssssenssnesscenecucseeneesscaneaeeacssessnsesesecseeaseeeaseesesee 5
CHECK-OFF .
UNION BUSINESS. ......cssssssssessssssssessssssesscesecssecsecsssueesesnsesensesseneeneeseeneenessesussusesnesnseneasensneeseneanes 7
ARTICLE IV BILL OF RIGHTS .......ccsssesssessessssssscsesnessscsceneensesesseenseneeneenee asssssessanensesnenseesassasaeneeee 7

 

ARTICLE V LABOR/MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE .
ARTICLE VI PROTECTION OF PROPERTY AND SECURITY ...e.scessesssssessessseesneessesessneneess ll
ARTICLE VII OVERTIME .....ccsssssssssssessssssesssensssnssesasesseacsnesuesucenasesscsuecacesceaeeneseaseseeneensseenssetenss 11

 

ARTICLE VII COURT TIME
ARTICLE IX SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL ......sccsssessssssssssssecsesstesseesecnessesssnsstecssnessuscssnesaseanesseaneeneess 17

 

ARTICLE X NON-DISCRIMINATION

ARTICLE XI REPRIMAND.....ccscsssssssssessesssssseenscnsssnssecsesscssesesnessesucanencnsenesesussuessncensseeneenenseneases 18
ARTICLE XII FURLOUGH ......cccscssssssssssessesseesessnseseesseneeseseasencenensenessesacsnecascensseaseseesereaneescacenees 19
ARTICLE XIII SICK LEAVE.....cssccssessssstssscseessessecssesecseeseenenesneesesesseneenessessnnesessusesseaeneaneessersesen 19
SICK LEAVE BANK ....csccssessesssesssssssssssesssecsseccsnecsscssscsecesecssesucenecatecaesnecccesesssnecaseenecseeaseeseesees 21
FUNERAL LEAVE ....essssssssssssessssessessseesseessecssscssnecsecauecsscenecscenessenneennessesunsasssssecaneeseensenseesenee 22

 

FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT..

 

ARTICLE XIV HOLIDAYS .....cccssessssssssessessteseesecssesscescessseesnssesnenesacacenecsuenesnesnsssussseeeceseasensasencees 23
BRIDGE DAYS... cesssssssssssssssessesssssssnsssssscesecsesaressesussucassnesensesussesscevensssseescasenucssstansasenseneaseetsnes 23
FAMILY DAYS...

ARTICLE XV GUN PURCHASE ....cssscsssesssesssssssseessessecseesneenessceseesnecarscasenscssecssseessecsseenssacsseessess 24
TABLE OF CONTENTS

PAGE

ARTICLE XVI LONGEVITY uoeessssessssesssssessssesssnsssessssssessssessanssssesssseessecsnen secesscessanccssssesssanessseaees 24
ARTICLE XVII CLOTHING ALLOWANCE/MAINTENANCE .....cssssesessssesssssesesssnecsseneesscenees 24
ARTICLE XVIII INSURANCE ...sesssssssssessssesssssesssseresssnesessnecssecssvecsseeenecse seascessssecssssesessesssnaseeen 25
HEALTH COVERAGE ...wscssssssssssssssesssseesssesssssescssssecesssesssseessueessecsascesecea sesseecassusssssneesssvesseeenees 25
Hospitalization/Surgical ..........sscsssssssessesssessseessseesseesneesssssecesessscsesasease seesecsesstessesssessseesessesne 25
Health Care Benefits ........ssscssssecssesssssessssessssssesssssessssesssssessnecssecesecessete sessecsessereesssecssusesteneases 25

27

Life Insurance oo... ceccsecssecsssesssssnesssecssessscssscsasesssesssecsusssecssessesacsnsses snesavecssessusesnsecseteanensees

 

Dental Insurance ...

Vision Insurance ....cssscscessessesseessesessesseesessesseesesssessesssssscsessseasseesecessnssee sesssseessesareascansesesaseeeses

 

ARTICLE XX GRIEVANCES.
ARTICLE XXI IMPASSE ARBITRATION.....ccssssssssesssesssesseessesseesssseeaseene ssseesetseseesssesssesssessessens 33

 

 

ARTICLE XXIII MILEAGE...

ARTICLE XXIV PENSION (“PICK UP”) PAYMENTS...sessssssssssssessseessvesosssceesseeessssecssnessuennes 36

ARTICLE XXV MARKSMANSHIP AWARD ....ssssssssssssssreesessseessersseessne sessenssnsecesserecnsneesneeeases 36

ALLOWANCES.

ARTICLE XXVI PRIOR RULES AND ORDERS .....ccsscesssssssssssssesseessessessctssctscsseesssesnecensesseensens 37

ARTICLE XXVII REVIEW OF PERSONAL RECORDS.......ccsesssssssseessstessessseesseeesseeseeensenseene 37

ARTICLE XXVIII SENIORITY - LAYOFFS wu....cesssecssesssesssesssssessessessssssasecssccurseasensecaneeeeeenens 38

ARTICLE XXIX TRANSFERS ...ssssssssssssssssessssesssssssssssssssecssessnsenseensecssvessncanesanecssecessnneetsnseenaees 38
Details ....c.scececcessesssessesssesssesersssessessseseseescseessssesssessnesssseasesecsuseaesseesesneceesscssassssecssessseseneeaneese 39
District Basic Patrol Transfers ............scsssessssssssessessseecsseseesssesecseeseesessscsnssssssseessiessesseeeseensees 39
Notice of Transfer... cesessscssessesscssssssessesssesseeessesssesseesseesessesssessessecsessnessressecssnesseessesseenes 40

ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS

PAGE

Postings for Specialized Units .........ssssccssessssssssssessssecscssseesssstesssssesssecs sunseasecsseessnesssuecessseeseees 40
ARTICLE XXX TERMINATION BENEFITS.......sssscssssssssssccssssesesssssscerss essuecsssvecsssusessssssseessssees 40
Retirement.......cccsecsssesssescssssesssssvecssssesssseessunssssscsssasessenscsssvecsssnessuesueasesssssessessnessseessssvecaseese 42

 

LayOf. ..csssssssescsssesssssecsssssssessscsssssasecsssssssccssssssessssnsesssssnesessssnuueceersueeeea sesssscessusecessessseesssseseess 43

  

ARTICLE XXXII VOLUNTARY COMPENSATORY TIME BUYOUT PROVISION...

ARTICLE XXXIV LEGAL REPRESENTATION AND INDEMNIFICATION OF
OFFICERS ......esscsssssssssssesssssseessecssecsssoneessecsnecsassesessnssacseassancnnsencceceneecanessnessass 46

 

 

ADDENDUM A SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY ...
ATTACHMENT 2 SIDE LETTER WAGE INCREASES ....sscssssessssssssesssssseesnseeseecsucessunesssneeess 60

 

ADDENDUM C HIGH DEDUCTIBLE PLAN.
ADDENDUM D CITY-DEFINED WELLNESS INITIATIVES o.ssscsssecescssccsssecssessssscessecessses 66

iti
CITY OF CLEVELAND - FRATERNAL ORDER OF
POLICE, LODGE NO. 8

CONTRACT

PURPOSE
This Contract is made between the City of Cleveland (hereinafter referred to as the
“City”), and the Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge No. 8 (hereinafter referred to as the “F.O.P.”).
The purpose of this Contract is to provide a fair and responsible method for enabling the
supervisory officers on the Cleveland Division of Police, as covered by this Contract, to
participate through F.O.P. representation, where necessary, in the establishment of wages, terms
and conditions of employment and to establish a procedure for the resolution of all differences
between the parties. Members, as used in this Contract, shall mean all members of the
bargaining unit.
WITNESSETH
The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which resulted in this Contract each
had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with respect to any
subject or matter not removed by law or regulation from the area of collective bargaining and
that the understanding and agreements arrived at by the parties after the exercise of those rights
and opportunities are set forth in this Contract. Therefore, the parties voluntarily waive the right
to demand new proposals on any subject or matter, not included herein, during the term of this
Contract, even though such subject matter may not have been within the knowledge or

contemplation of either or both of the parties at the time they negotiated or signed this Contract,
This agreement shall not be modified and no supplemental agreement shall be entered into

without the approval of the parties.

ARTICLE I
RECOGNITION

The F.O.P. is recognized as the sole and exclusive representative for the supervisory
police officers in the following classifications, ranks and/or positions for the purpose of
establishing wages, hours, and other conditions of employment. The F.O.P.'s exclusive
bargaining unit includes the supervisory classifications, ranks and/or positions listed below in the
Division of Police, and the City will not recognize any other Union or Association of members
as the representative for any police officers within such classifications, ranks and/or positions:

(a) Sergeant

(b) Lieutenant

(c) Captain

(d) Traffic Commissioner

(e) Commander of Police, except for the two (2) Commanders assigned to the
positions of Bureau of Human Resources and Executive Assistant to the

Police Chief.

The Commanders of Police represented by the F.O.P. serve at the pleasure of the Mayor,
and their removal from the position of Commander of Police is governed exclusively by §116 of
the Charter of the City of Cleveland, and such removal from office shall not be subject to the
grievance procedure set forth in Article XX of the F.O.P. contract; provided that officer(s) in the
promoted ranks of Sergeant, Lieutenant or Captain shall not be terminated, laid off or demoted
by reason of the termination and subsequent reversion in rank of any Deputy Chief of Police or

Commander of Police pursuant to City of Cleveland Charter §116.
The Commanders of Police represented by the Union shall be salaried and shall not be
entitled to any overtime or straight time payments for work in excess of eight (8) hours per day
or forty (40) hours per week notwithstanding the overtime provisions contained in Article VIII of
the Contract, but the practice of accruing compensatory time shall contimue for the Commanders
of Police who are represented by the F.O.P. and the Commanders of Police and Deputy Chiefs of
Police who are not represented by the F.O.P., and the parties hereto agree that they will support
any necessary ordinances to permit pay-out of such compensatory time as may be needed to
permit such pay-outs.

The City agrees that a member of the bargaining unit will be assigned as a Benefits
Officer for the duration of the collective bargaining agreement. The City agrees to assign a
member of the bargaining unit to the Employee Assistance Unit.

The City agrees to effectuate promotions within one hundred twenty (120) days of the
creation of a vacancy.

The above shall constitute the F.O.P.'s bargaining unit for the term of this Contract and
shall retain, at a minimum, the historic sixteen percent (16%) differential between the ranks. All
positions, ranks, and classifications not specifically stated herein as being included in the

bargaining unit shall be excluded from the bargaining unit.

ARTICLE I
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Section 1
The Union recognizes the City as the body of authority solely vested with the right to run

the City. It shall have the right to take any action it considers necessary and proper to effectuate
any management policy, expressed or implied, except as expressly limited under this Agreement.
Further, the City has no duty to bargain over its decisions which are permitted under this Article.

Section 2

Except as limited under this Agreement, the City's management rights include, but are not
limited to, the right to:

(a) Determine matters of inherent managerial policy which include, but are not
limited to, areas of discretion or policy such as the functions and programs of the City, standards
of service, its overall budget, utilization of technology, and organizational structure;

(b) Direct, supervise, evaluate or hire members and to determine when and under
what circumstances a vacancy exists;

(c) Maintain and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of governmental
operations;

(d) Determine the overall methods, process, means, or personnel by which
governmental operations are to be conducted;

(e) Suspend, discipline, demote or discharge for just cause, layoff, transfer, assign,
schedule, promote, or retain members;

() Determine the adequacy of the work force;

(g) Determine the overall mission of the City as a unit of government;

(bh) Require members to use or refrain from using specified uniforms or other tools of
duty;

r6) Privatize or subcontract services;

G) Effectively and efficiently manage the work force.

4
(k) _ Take actions to carry out and implement the mission of the City as a unit of
government. The City reserves the right to implement new or revised existing policies which do
not conflict with the express terms of this Contract.

Section 3

Notwithstanding §4117.08 of the Ohio Revised Code, the City is not required to bargain
on any subjects — including, but not limited to, those enumerated above — reserved to and
retained by the City under this Article. Therefore, the Union agrees that, during the life of this
Agreement, the City shall have no obligation to bargain collectively with respect to the exercise
of any rights reserved to and retained by it pursuant to either Section 411 7.08(C) of the Revised

Code or pursuant to this Article of this Agreement.

ARTICLE It
UNION SECURITY

The F.O.P., having demonstrated that at least 85% of the eligible members in the
bargaining unit of the F.O.P. are members of the F.O.P., then the City agrees all members in the
F.0.P. bargaining unit shall hereafter be either members of the F.O.P. or be required to pay a fair
share fee to the F.O.P. as a condition of continued employment in accordance with the terms of
RC. 4117.09(C). As provided by that statute such fair share fee requirement shall not be
effective until at least sixty (60) days following the beginning of employment or completion of
the probationary period, whichever is less. It is further provided that a member who has
completed his/her probationary period, and is not a member of the F.O.P. as of October 1, 1983,
and who does not become a member of the F.O.P. by March 31, 1984, shall not be required to

pay the fair share fee under this provision.
CHECK-OFF

The City will deduct regular initiation fees, assessments, fair share fees where
appropriate, and monthly dues from the pay of members in the bargaining unit covered by this
Contract upon receipt from the F.O.P. of individual written authorization cards voluntarily
executed by the member for the purpose and bearing his/her signature, or in the matter of fair
share fee, written verification by the F.O.P. of non-membership of a bargaining unit member.
Provided, that:

(a) | Amember shall have the right to revoke such dues by giving written notice to the
City and F.O.P. during the thirty (30) day period preceding the termination of this Contract.

(b) The City's obligation to make deductions shall terminate automatically upon
timely receipt of revocation of authorization or upon transfer to a job classification outside the
bargaining unit.

(c) The F.O.P. will indemnify and save the City harmless from any action growing
out of deductions hereunder and commenced by a member against the City (or the City and
F.O.P. jointly).

(@) All deductions under this section, accompanied by an alphabetical list of all
members for whom deductions of dues or fair share fees have been made, shall be transmitted to
the F.O.P. no later than the fifteenth (15th) day following the end of the pay period in which the
deduction is made, and upon receipt, the F.O.P. shall assume full responsibility for the

disposition of all funds which have been deducted and transmitted to the F.O.P. in accordance

with this provision.
(©) The City will not make any other deductions for dues and/or initiation fees for any
employee organization, except as are provided by court orders in effect on the day of execution
of this agreement.

() The F.O.P. must provide the City with at least thirty (30) days advance notice of
any change in the fair share fee amount or other voluntary contribution amounts.

UNION BUSINESS

The President of the F.O.P. or in his/her absence or unavailability, his/her designee for
such purposes, shall be entitled to a reasonable amount of time for the purposes of conducting
the City business of the F.O.P.

The City agrees to provide the Union with a bulletin board at each police district and
major units/departments at the Justice Center. Said bulletin board shall be constructed in such
manner as to be enclosed with a glass/plexiglass front and capable of being locked. Only notices
pertaining to organization or departmental business as it relates to the Union will be posted. All
notices posted will have attribution by an authorized Union representative. The City can remove

any materials inconsistent with this provision after notifying the Union.

ARTICLE IV
BILL OF RIGHTS

Bargaining unit members shall be entitled to the following rights:

(a) In a criminal investigation, interview, or interrogation, the member shall be
provided the same constitutional and statutory safeguards afforded to all citizens.

(b) A bargaining unit member who is questioned as a suspect or a witness in an

internal investigation that could lead to criminal and/or departmental charges, ordered by the
Chief of Police or his designee, shall be advised of the nature of the internal investigation prior to
such questioning, and will ultimately be advised as to the disposition of such investigation.

(c) Any employee who is the subject of an investigation and who has been subjected
to verbal questioning or the submission of written reports shall be notified within ten (10) days of
a determination that the investigation is not going forward.

() Questioning or interviewing of a member in the course of an internal investigation
will be conducted at hours reasonably related to a shift, unless operational necessities require
otherwise. Interrogation sessions shall be for reasonable periods of time, and time shall be
provided for rest periods and attendance to physical necessities.

(e) The member's home address and photograph shall not be given to the press or
news media without the member's express consent. If any of the aforementioned are leaked to
the media, it will not negate the Division’s right to proceed with the matter at hand.

@) Complaints against a member, when designated by the Chief to be unfounded,
shall not be included in the member's personnel file, and shall not be used in any subsequent
disciplinary proceeding or in making promotion decisions.

(g) Before a member may be charged with insubordination or like offense, for
refusing to answer questions or participate in an investigation, he/she shall be advised by a
Supervisory Officer that such conduct may be the basis for such a charge.

(h) _ Evidence obtained in the course of an internal investigation through the use of
administrative pressure, threats, coercion, or promises, shall not be admissible in any subsequent

criminal action.
@ In the event that formal disciplinary action, before the Safety Director or the Chief
of Police, is taken against a member, the member shall have the right to request the presence of
legal counsel and/or one representative from the officially recognized F.O.P. when such action is
taken, and the attorney and/or representative shall have the right of cross-examination. In a
disciplinary hearing before the Chief of Police the member may have a representative present
selected by the F.O.P.

Gg) The attorney for the City and the attorney representing a bargaining unit member
who has been charged with disciplinary rules violations, or the bargaining unit member himself
if not represented by counsel, shall provide each other, prior to commencement of disciplinary
hearings, with a list of all persons who will testify at the hearing, and shall provide copies of
factual statements concerning the subject matter of the administrative charges of witnesses who
actually testify at the hearing; provided, that such disclosure of witnesses or statements will not
compromise any criminal or internal investigation or compromise a promise of confidentiality
previously given to such witness. The City will provide the bargaining unit member, prior to
hearing, copies of his/her own written statements or reports regarding the matter that is the
subject of the hearing. Failure to comply with the terms of this provision will not affect the
validity of any discipline imposed. Both parties agree that they will have a reasonable
postponement of the hearing to exchange the information, subject to the above restrictions on
disclosure.

(k) _ If any of these procedures are alleged to be violated, such allegations shall be
subject to the grievance procedure beginning at Step 3 or Step 3-A. If a decision has not been

rendered after the expiration of a thirty (30) day period, the Union shall request in writing that a

9
decision be issued within ten (10) days. The City will be provided up to an additional ten (10)
days upon request.

qa All complaints filed by a citizen against a bargaining unit member shall be
submitted by the complainant in the complainant's own handwriting and signed. When a
complaint is filed more than six (6) months after the date of the alleged event, and the complaint
could not lead to a criminal charge, the accused member may be ordered to respond to the
complaint and to the investigation, but shall not be subject to disciplinary action for the
complaint. Copies of all such complaints shall be immediately provided to the bargaining unit
member when he or she is asked to respond. In those cases where the complainant is illiterate,
tape recordings of the complaint shall be made and retained on file, and the bargaining unit
member shall be given the opportunity to listen to the tape recording when asked to respond if he
or she requests. This does not preclude the police officer assigned to the Complaint Unit from
summarizing the essence of the complaint.

(m) _ In such cases where the administrative investigation is initiated without a citizens'
complaint, and the investigation could not lead to criminal charges, the City shall not bring
administrative charges later than six (6) months after the date within which the Chief had
knowledge of the alleged violation. If the administrative charges are not brought within six (6)
months, the accused member may be ordered to respond to the complaint and to the
investigation, but shall not be subject to disciplinary action. The City may be granted an
additional ninety (90) days for good cause shown.

(n) | When a member requests F.O.P. representation with respect to disciplinary action

against him/her, he/she shall be permitted to call one of the elected officers of the F.O.P.

10
(0) In addition to the Chief, a Deputy Chief can conduct a predisciplinary hearing and
make recommendations to the Chief regarding discipline up to and including a ten (10) day

suspension.

ARTICLE V
LABOR/MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

There shall be a Labor-Management Committee, consisting of the Personnel Director, or
Director of Labor Relations, Safety Director, Chief of their designees, and three (3)
representatives of the F.O.P. This Committee shall meet at least once every three (3) months at
the request of either party, for the purpose of discussing and attempting to resolve any mutual,

work-related problems. Requests to meet shall be in writing.

ARTICLE VI
PROTECTION OF PROPERTY AND SECURITY

Each supervisory officer shall be assigned his/her own personal locker which shall be
his/her sole responsibility to clean and maintain, and no other member of the City shall be
permitted access to such personal locker without the said supervisory officer assigned to the

locker being present at such inspection.

ARTICLE VII
OVERTIME

(a) The work day for member shall consist of eight (8) hours or ten (10) hours of
work with a designated starting and quitting time. The normal work year is defined as a yearly
average of two thousand eighty (2,080) hours per year. The normal pay period shall be eighty

(80) hours of pay so that members shall receive one twenty-sixth (1/26) of their annual salary

11
every two weeks. The hourly rate for overtime compensation is established by dividing the
member's annual salary by two-thousand eighty (2,080) hours per year.

(6) — The City shall be the sole judge of the necessity for overtime. For members
scheduled to a seven (7) day work period, all hours in excess of forty (40) hours in that work
period will be compensated at a rate of one and one-half (1 4) times the member's regular rate of
pay. For all members scheduled to an eight (8) day work period, all hours in excess of forty-
eight (48) hours during that work period will be compensated at a rate of one and one-half (1 4)
the member's regular rate of pay. All work in excess of the regular eight (8) hours or regular ten
(10) hours worked shall be overtime and shall be compensated at the rate of time and one-half
(14) of the member's regular rate of pay.

(c) For officers assigned to a ten-hour shift, they will have 157 days off (currently
referred to as V-days), except during a leap year when the number of V-days will be 158.

(d) For officers assigned to an eight-hour shift they will have 105 days off (currently
teferred to as V-days), except during a leap year when they will have 106. The current practice
of adjusting for V-days at the end of the year will be maintained for both eight-hour and ten-hour
shifts.

(e) 10-Hour Shifts. The City shall implement 10 -hour shifts for sergeants and
lieutenants assigned to the B and C Platoons in basic patrol. Contingent upon mutual agreement
of the parties, ten hour shifts may be implemented on A Platoon in basic patrol and for one or
more specialized units. For ten-hour shifts and subject to the City’s ability to modify start times
set forth below, “B” platoon shift coverage would be from 1300 to 2300 for sector 1 and 1500 to

0100 for sector 2. “C” platoon shift coverage will be from 2000 to 0800, with the following start

12
times, 2100 for sector 1 and 2200 for sector 2. The following range of start times for those in
basic patrol on ten-hour shifts shall be adhered to by the City.
A Platoon — 0500 to 0900
B Platoon — 1300 to 1800
C Platoon — 1800 to 2200
The City shall have the right to adjust shifts within these parameters. However, start
times can be changed no more often than monthly [thirty (30) days] for those in basic patrol on
ten-hour shifts, and the City shall notify an employee at least seven (7) calendar days in advance
of any change of his/her normal starting time.
For employees assigned to ten-hour shifts, the following will be the work-day to
off-day cycle.
4 on 4 off = 8 days
5 on 3 off = 8 days
5 on 3 off = 8 days
5 on 3 off = 8 days
5 on 4 off = 9 days
4 on 4 off= 8 days, then repeat from the top.
This cycle does not represent a “work period” for the purposes of FLSA. (29 U.S.C.
207(k)).This cycle must be implemented in a fashion which does not create built-in overtime.
For purposes of determining shift differential for those officers on basic patrol,
the start times will be consistent with the ranges specified above (A Platoon 0500-0900, B

Platoon 1300-1800 and C Platoon 1800-2200). A Platoon will continue on the eight-hour shift

13
schedule with platoon coverage at 0600 to 1400 for sector 1, and 0800 to 1600 for sector 2,
subject to the City’s right to modify starting times as set forth above.

(f) Shift Bids. Shift bids will be one time every November 1“ for the next
calendar year. The shift bids go into effect on or about January 1* of the following year. Shift
bids will be based on seniority.

(g) All paid holiday hours and paid vacation hours shall be counted as hours worked
for the purpose of computing overtime. Sick leave and compensatory time taken shall not be
counted for the purpose of determining overtime. There shall be no pyramiding of overtime or
other premium pay compensation, and overtime shall be computed on the basis of whatever total
overtime hours are greater for the week, either on a daily or weekly basis, but not both.

() — A method of compensation shall be in the manner and fashion specified below, at

the election of each member:

(1) By paying current straight time in salary for the period worked with one-
half (4) time being credited to accumulated compensatory time if
applicable; or,

(2) _ By crediting time and one-half (1 4) or straight time, if applicable, to
accumulated compensatory time.

The election made by each member as to the method and fashion in which overtime
compensation is to be issued binds and requires each member to accept overtime in a manner
consistent with said election for one three (3) month period effective January Ist, April 1st, July
1st and/or September Ist of each year. Each member shall make his quarterly election in writing
by January Ist of each respective year and records of such election will be kept and maintained

at the District level and the Chief's Office.

14
@ A member of the bargaining unit, who has 22 years of service in the Division and
has reached the age of 45, may elect to have overtime compensation thereafter paid in salary.
@) Members who work on Holidays provided by the Contract shall be compensated

for said work on the following basis:

@ Twelve (12) hours, compensatory time shall be added to the member's
compensatory time for each eight (8) hour Holiday worked; or,

Gi) Fifteen (15) hours, compensatory time shall be added to the member’s
compensatory time for each ten (10) hour shift actually worked; or

(ii) | A member who does not work on a holiday shall receive eight (8) hours of
straight time compensation.

(k) Compensatory time off shall be granted in accordance with operational needs and
upon reasonable request by the member requesting said time. Request for use of accumulated
compensatory time will be considered and granted on the basis of seniority within the work unit.

@ Jury Duty. A member called for jury duty shall be determined to be on a tour of
duty and will be compensated for the jury duty. To be eligible for such pay, a member must:

@ present verification of his/her call to jury duty.

(i) surrender amount received as jury duty to the Treasurer of the City of
Cleveland.

(m) Any member required to work a regularly scheduled day off, i.e, vacation or
furlough day, shall be compensated at time and one-half his/her regular rate of pay.

(n) Call-Back Pay. Any member required to report back to duty, for other than a
normally scheduled tour of duty at a time not contiguous to his/her regular schedule shall be
guaranteed a minimum of four (4) hours compensation at time and one-half (14) the member's

regular rate of pay. The City shall not be permitted to change a member's regular work schedule

15
for the purpose of circumventing this section. Call-in pay shall not apply to SWAT call-ins
which are cancelled within fifteen (15) minutes of the initial call-in.

(0) The granting of overtime for phone calls or any other communication received
while off-duty shall be governed by the nature and length of the communication.

No compensable overtime will be paid if the communication is a result of an officer's
error or oversight. This would include an officer's failure to return car keys or other equipment
to its proper location.

Overtime for communications received while off-duty are compensable only if the
communication is relating to a Division of Police matter and comes from a supervisor with the
commander's permission, or comes from a prosecutor.

A communication is compensable only to the extent that the communication is at least 15
minutes in duration. Communications that are 15 to 30 minutes in duration shall be compensated
at 30 minutes at premium pay, 31 to 60 minutes at 1 hour of premium pay and going forward in
increments of one half hour.

(p) Sector supervisors assigned to an 8-hour shift shall receive one (1) hour of
compensatory time, and sector supervisors assigned to a 10-hour shift shall receive one and one-
half (1/4) hours of compensatory time, per tour of duty for performing the responsibilities of a
supervisory training officer when a patrol officer in that sector, who is within the original six (6)

month probationary period works that same tour of duty.

16
ARTICLE VII
COURT TIME

When an employee is required to remain at work after the normal quitting time of his/her
regular shift in order to make a court appearance, prosecutor review, or continued presence in a
court-related matter, the employee will be paid the overtime rate of pay for actual time worked in
excess of the employee's normal shift. If an employee is called in when he/she is not regularly
scheduled to work and at a time not contiguous with his/her regular shift for a court appearance,
prosecutor review or other court related-matter, the employee shall be paid for a minimum of
three (3) hours work at one and one-half (114) times the regular hourly rate, provided that Third
Platoon and Fourth Platoon Officers who must make a court appearance on a day on which the
employee works a tour of duty shall be guaranteed pay for a minimum of four (4) hours of work

at one and one-half (114) times the regular hourly rate.

ARTICLE IX
SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL

All members shall receive an hourly shift differential of 35¢ per hour worked when
employed on the Second Platoon, 35¢ per hour worked when employed on the Third Platoon;
and 47¢ per hour worked when employed on the Fourth Platoon.

For the purposes of determining Shift Differential and Court pay the “starting time” listed
at/during the below times shall designate the respective platoon and applicable premium rate for
employees assigned to eight-hour shifts:

1st Platoon = From 0500 hrs. to 1159 hrs.
2nd Platoon = From 1200 hrs. to 1759 hrs.

4th Platoon = From 1800 hrs. to 2129 hrs.
3rd Platoon = from 2130 hrs. to 0459 hrs.

17
For the purposes of determining the appropriate Shift Differential and Court premium pay only,
for employees assigned to ten (10) hour shifts the “starting time” listed at/during the below times
shall designate the respective platoon and applicable premium rate.

A Platoon — from 0500 hours (5:00 a.m.) to 0900 hours (9:00 a.m.)

B Platoon — from 1300 hours (1:00 p.m.) to 1800 hours (6:00 p.m.)

C Platoon — from 1800 hours (6:00 p.m.) to 2200 hours (10:00 p.m.)

ARTICLE X
NON-DISCRIMINATION

Both the City and the F.O.P. hereby reaffirm their commitments, legal and moral, not to
discriminate in any manner relating to employment on the basis of race, color, creed, national

origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or age.

ARTICLE XI
REPRIMAND

All disciplinary actions or penalties will not be considered after two (2) years from the

date of the action.
Employees will be subject to immediate discharge for, including but not limited to, the
following offenses: 1) accumulation of (two) 2 OVI convictions within two (2) years, and 2)

conviction for drug related offenses.

The Chief or designated Deputy Chief can administer discipline up to, and including, ten

(10) day suspensions.

18
ARTICLE XII
FURLOUGH

All members shall be granted the following vacation leave with full pay for each year

based upon their length of City service as of December 31 of the previous year as follows:

Years of Service Vacation
After 1 year 2 weeks
After 8 years 3 weeks
After 12 years 4 weeks
After 22 years 5 weeks

There shall be fifty-two (52) one-week furlough periods scheduled during each calendar
year. One week of furlough is defined as forty (40) hours. Furlough periods will be selected in
each rank on a seniority basis, as determined by the Chief of Police in order to assure the proper

functioning of the Division.

ARTICLE XIII
SICK LEAVE

(a) Accrual of Leave

All regular full-time members in the bargaining unit shall be credited with Sick
Leave at the rate of ten (10) hours per month or one hundred-twenty (120) hours per year.
Unused Sick Leave shall be cumulative and available for future use. Sick Leave accumulation
shall be unlimited for full-time members. A member who leaves the service of the City, and is
rehired within ten (10) years, may receive credit for any sick leave previously accrued.

(b) Conditions of Sick Leave

 

(1) Members shall not be paid Sick Leave unless they notify their supervising
officer or designee at least one (1) hour before the member's scheduled starting time on the first

day of the absence on account of sickness.
19
(2) | The Medical Unit and/or the Personnel Unit may require a written
Statement from the member justifying the request for paid Sick Leave and/or a certificate from a
licensed physician verifying the nature of the claimed sickness or injury provided that such a
medical certification must be submitted for any sickness or injury extending beyond three (3)
days. The validity of all medical excuses and certifications are subject to review by the Medical
Unit of the Division and if refused by the Medical Unit, the matter shall be subject to the
Grievance Procedure. Falsification of either a written signed statement, request for Sick Leave
pay, or a licensed physician's certificate shall be grounds for disciplinary action including
dismissal.

(3) The Division of Police will not require a member to obtain a release from
the Medical Unit to return to duty if the sick leave absence is three (3) days or less during the
previous twenty-six (26) weeks, provided that the Division of Police may notify a member that
he or she will be required to report to the Medical Unit after a day of sick leave at any time.

If the F.O.P. bargaining unit absentee ratio is maintained at 4% or less for a
continuous six (6) months period, then members who are absent on sick leave for ten (10) days
or less during the previous fifty-two (52) weeks will not be required to obtain a medical release
from the Medical Unit prior to returning to duty. The City will calculate the absentee ratio for
each six (6) month period and give the F.O.P. the results. This provision shall become applicable
if the absentee ratio exceeds 4% over a six (6) month period and the stricter provision above
shall apply. Further, the Personnel Unit may require a member to justify any claimed sickness or
illness and to be examined by the Medical Unit, and a medical examination/teview must be

obtained in all cases where there has been an illness or sickness extending beyond three (3) days.

20
In the event of any on-duty or off-duty injury resulting in time lost from work, a member must
receive a medical examination/review by the Medical Unit before returning to work.

(4) Sick Leave with pay shall be granted only for (1) actual sickness or injury,
(2) confinement by reason of a contagious disease, (3) visit to a doctor or dentist for medical or
dental care, or (4) serious illness of a member or a member's immediate family (emergency).
This includes temporary disabilities, such as pregnancy and childbearing.

(5) Sick Leave with pay shall not be granted for any sickness resulting from
intoxication or use of narcotics, except that Sick Leave will be granted for treatment or
rehabilitation as approved by the Medical Director on the same basis as granted for any other
illness.

(6) The policy of restricting members to their homes during period of
extended recuperation is rescinded. This policy shall not apply to any member who strikes off
on the sick list for short term recuperative periods in cases where the member has had a history
of sick leave usage suggesting a pattern of abuse or where the number is suspected of engaging
in secondary employment while on sick leave.

(7) Members are prohibited from engaging in strenuous or physical secondary
employment (¢.g., private security, physical labor), while on a sick leave or medical leave.

(8) A member who fails to report back to work at the end of a leave of
absence shall be considered to have voluntarily resigned.

SICK LEAVE BANK

An employee who is suffering from a serious medical condition as defined by the FMLA;

who has exhausted all of his/her sick, furlough, compensatory and holiday time; and who is not

21
on any step of the sick-abuse policy, may submit a written request for sick leave donations from
other sworn police officers.

In response to a request for sick leave from an eligible employee, an employee may
donate, in writing, sick leave up to a maximum of one hundred-twenty (120) hours. Donating
employees must have a minimum balance of one hundred-twenty (120) hours of sick leave
immediately following the donation. Employees cannot contribute more than one hundred-
twenty (120) hours of sick leave in total donations per calendar year.

The FOP will indemnify and hold the City harmless from any action emanating from sick
leave donations.

FUNERAL LEAVE

In the event of the death of a father, father-in-law, mother, mother-in-law, brother, sister,
husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandchild or child of an
officer, such officer shall be allowed time off with pay to arrange for and attend the funeral of
the deceased. The time allowed shall not extend beyond five (5) days if the funeral occurs in the
State of Ohio, and up to seven (7) days if the funeral occurs outside the State of Ohio. Upon
request of the officer, a commanding officer may grant additional time, drawn against
accumulated overtime. In the event of the death of an officer or retired officer, a funeral detail
will be provided upon request.

FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT

 

As appropriate, the City will designate an employee's use of paid and unpaid time as
family medical leave consistent with the Family Medical Leave Act and with current City sick

leave and leave of absence policies.

22
ARTICLE XIV
HOLIDAYS

All regular full-time members shall be entitled to eleven (11) paid holidays as follows:

New Year's Day Good Friday

Dr. Martin Luther King Day Labor Day
President's Day Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day Christmas Day
Independence Day

Members are entitled to two (2) floating holidays in each calendar year, one of which is in honor
of Police Memorial Day, which will be given to the member upon request and where five (5)
days’ notice has been provided to the Division. If the operating needs of the Division cannot be
met because there are too many requests for a specific day, the requests will be honored in
accordance with seniority. Holiday compensation and/or allocation will be in accordance with
the provisions of Article VII {(k).

If a holiday falls on a member's regularly scheduled work day, but his/her unit is
scheduled to close on such holiday, the member shall be offered an Opportunity to work in
another unit which is not scheduled to close.

BRIDGE DAYS

PH days and/or compensatory time can be used as a “bridge” day. Up to one (1) bridge
day for employees on ten-hour shifts and up to two (2) bridge days for employees on eight-hour
shifts may be used in conjunction with furloughs. These requests will not be denied except in
instances that would cause the denial of furlough.

FAMILY DAYS
Members may request two (2) days off per year for graduation, wedding, or religious

ceremony or similar family event, and will give a thirty day notice of said request to the

23
Division. Such request shall be granted unless a conflict exists with emergency operational

needs of the Division and the member shall use his/her compensatory time for the day off.

ARTICLE XV
GUN PURCHASE

(a) A member of the bargaining unit who has 23 years of service in the Ohio Police &
Fire Pension Fund and has reached the age of 46, may purchase their primary City-issue handgun
at the agreed upon fair market value (not to exceed the maximum limit of the Clothing

Allowance). Said purchase may be made via cash or deducted from the member's annual

clothing allowance.

ARTICLE XVI
LONGEVITY

Members shall receive longevity pay on March 31st of each calendar year in accordance

with the following schedule:
After 5 years $300.00
After 10 years 475.00
After 15 years 575.00
After 20 years 700.00
After 25 years 800.00

ARTICLE XVII
CLOTHING ALLOWANCE/MAINTENANCE

 

Any member, upon promotion, shall receive an additional uniform promotion allowance,
payable in cash, in the amount of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00), payable immediately
upon promotion. Members entering the bargaining unit by being promoted to sergeant shall be

entitled to this additional uniform promotion allowance.

24
Effective in 2015, each member, with more than one (1) year of seniority, shall receive an
annual uniform clothing allowance of Four Hundred Dollars $400.00. The distribution of this
allowance will be in accordance with present procedure. The City shall assume all costs in
excess of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for new, individual uniform items which are
mandatory requirements for duty and which exceed that amount.

Effective in 2015, in addition to the above each member shall receive a Seven Hundred
Fifty Dollars ($750.00) per year maintenance allowance on March 1*' of each year. If the
member retires during the year on a date other than the payment dates, he/she shall receive a pro

rata maintenance payment.

ARTICLE XVI
INSURANCE

HEALTH COVERAGE

Hospitalization/Surgical. The City agrees to provide single or family coverage,
whichever is applicable, for each eligible member enrolled in any of the health coverage plans
for the term of the Labor Contract under the terms and conditions set forth in this Article. There
shall be no duplicate coverage if both spouses are on the City's payroll. The Union agrees that its
President will participate in a city wide Management-Labor committee to examine the health
coverage contracts in effect providing health benefits and to explore ways to reduce the costs of
health benefits to the City and to consider alternative ways to provide the health benefits for City
employees.

Health Care Benefits. Through March 31, 2015, the City shall provide healthcare

benefits consistent with the plan descriptions attached to the 2010-2013 Agreement. Effective

25
April 1, 2015 (or as soon as practical thereafter), the City will provide health insurance benefits
as summarized in the attached description (Addendum B). Dependent coverage shall be limited
to members of the employee's immediate family (i.e., spouse and children).

Employee monthly contributions shall be maintained through March 31, 2015 and
deducted from the member’s wages as follows:

Individual Family
Coverage Coverage

MMO Plus $52.50 $105
HMO Health Ohio $62.50 $125
Kaiser $67.50 $135

Effective April 1, 2015, employee contributions shall be deducted from the member’s

wages as follows:

Non-Wellness Rate Wellness Rate
Single 17% of premium 13% of premium
Family 16% of premium 12% of premium
The City reserves the right, per its discretion, to institute an optional high deductible plan
for employees wherein premium contributions shall be deducted from the member’s wages as

follows:

Non-Wellness Rate Wellness Rate
12% of premium 8% of premium

To qualify for the Wellness Rates, members must satisfy the wellness obligations set

forth in Addendum D.

Health care deductions of one-half the above amounts shall be made the first two pay

periods of each month.

26
The City shall have the right to change insurance carriers or switch to and from self-
insured to fully insured, provided that benefit levels remain substantially the same. The City
shall provide no less than forty-five (45) days’ advance notice to the Union of any such change.

For all mental, nervous, and substance abuse treatment, in-patient and out-patient
coverage shall be that set forth as part of the health care insurance plan selected by the employee.

The prescription program shall be that set forth as part of the health care insurance plan
selected by the employee.

Life Insurance. During the term of this Contract, the City shall provide all members with
Group Insurance in the amount of $15,000.00.

Dental Insurance. The City shall continue to provide all members with a dental insurance
package which shall include orthodontist benefits. The benefit package and the insurance carrier
shall be subject to approval of the City and the Union.

Vision Insurance. The City shall implement a vision insurance plan for employees.

The City shall have the right to change insurance carriers provided the City first convenes
a Health Care Committee in which all unions are given an opportunity to be represented. The
City shall negotiate through that Health Care Committee over the change in carriers before

implementing any changes in insurance carriers.

ARTICLE XTX
HAZARDOUS DUTY INJURY

The policy of the Division of Police, Department of Public Safety, and City of Cleveland

regarding Hazardous Duty Injury is as follows:

27
(a) Because of the hazardous nature of active police duty, days lost by an officer
herein defined, due to a hazardous duty injury, shall not affect normal bi-weekly salary,
accumulated sick time, holiday, accumulated overtime, accumulated furlough time, and vacation
days. Nor shall an officer be deprived of any other benefit because of hazardous duty injury so
determined by the Safety Director and confirmed by the Medical Director and/or the officer's
private physician and any time lost due to such an injury shall not affect the formula for sick
leave conversion at the time of retirement.

(b) “Hazardous duty injury” is defined as injury resulting from active police duty,
either on or off regular hours of duty, such duty including but not limited to apprehension or
attempted apprehension of suspects, active participation in the prevention of crimes, and pursuit
of suspects. Employees injured while performing work in the service of another employer are
not eligible for hazardous duty pay and benefits.

(c) It is mutually agreed that an officer is prohibited from engaging or accepting
secondary employment during the period of time in which the provisions of the paragraph are in
effect.

(d) _ Injuries which are incurred on regular tours of duty while officers are engaged in
supportive duty or engaged in work which is incidental to active policy duty are compensable
through the Ohio Bureau of Workers’ Compensation.

(e) Any dispute arising out of the interpretation or application of this policy is subject
to the Grievance Procedure.

) The City may require periodic examination to determine the continued extent of

incapacity. After a member has been on hazardous duty injury status for six (6) months, a

28
complete diagnostic report shall be made by the Medical Director as to when the member can
return to normal duty. If the member will never be able to return to normal duty, then
application will be made for a disability retirement pension.

(g) In the event a member is found to have been exposed to an active infectious
disease in the course or scope of employment, the City shall inform the member of such
exposure as soon as the City acquires such knowledge, and will bear the cost of prevention for
the member of the member's family so exposed. The City shall grant medical leave to an officer
under the provisions of this Article.

(h) — While both the City and the Union acknowledge that there are no permanent
restricted duty assignments available, the Department of Public Safety may, at its option,
designate certain assignments as temporary restricted duty assignments from time to time to
which an eligible member may be assigned. The assignment of said members is the sole
responsibility of the Employer based upon the Medical Unit’s examination results.

@ After a member has been on Hazardous Duty Injury status for two (2) years, the
member shall apply for a permanent disability retirement pension or return to normal duty with
the Division.

0) The member shall remain on Hazardous Duty Injury status until the disability

pension is effective.

29
ARTICLE XX

GRIEVANCES
Section 1 Every Employee shall have the right to present his/her grievance in

accordance with the Procedures provided herein, and shall have the right to be represented by an
F.O.P. representative at all stages of the Grievance Procedure.

Section 2 A grievance is a dispute regarding the application or interpretation
of an express provision contained in this Agreement or dispute concerning the disciplining of an
employee. However, all employees will be disciplined in accordance with the present rules and
regulations of the Division of Police. Grievances involving suspension. of more than ten (10)
days, demotion or discharge shall be appealed directly to Step 3A within ten (10) working days
after the Safety Director has issued his decision if applicable.

All grievances shall include the name and position of the grievant; the identity of the
provisions of this Agreement involved in the grievance, the time and place where the alleged
events or conditions giving rise to the grievance took place; the identity of the party responsible
for causing said grievance, if known to the grievant; and a general statement of the nature of the
grievance and the remedy sought by the grievant. The Grievance Procedure shall not be used for
the purposes of adding to, subtracting from or altering in any way, any of the provisions of this
Agreement.

Section 3 All grievances shall be handled in accordance with the following
steps of the Grievance Procedure.

Step 1 All grievances must be initiated in writing within seven (7) calendar days
after the event giving rise to the grievance. A member having a grievance shall submit his

grievance for deposition by the Commanding Officer in charge of his Unit. A member shall be
30
entitled to have a meeting on his grievance within seven (7) calendar days of the time that he
submits the written grievance to the Commanding Officer, if he requests a meeting. If the
member does not request a meeting, the grievance shall be answered within seven (7) calendar
days. If the member requests a meeting, he may have the President of the F.O.P. with him at the
time of the meeting. The Commanding Officer will give the grieving member a written answer
to his grievance within fourteen (14) calendar days after the meeting.

Step 2 If the member is not satisfied with the answer, he may, within seven (7)
working days after receiving the answer, appeal his/her grievance in writing to the Chief of
Police, or his designee, who will hold a meeting with the F.O.P. within seven (7) days after
receiving the grievance appeal. The Chief of Police will give an appropriate written answer
within seven (7) working days and will institute any other procedures or hearings as required by
the City Charter and applicable law in accordance with the situation.

Step 3 If the grievance is not satisfactorily settled at Step 2 the Union may, within
seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the Step 2 answer, appeal in writing to the Safety
Director. The Director or his/her designee shall meet with the Union President, or designee,
within twenty (20) calendar days after the grievance is submitted to the Director. The Safety
Director, or designee, shall provide the Union with an appropriate written answer within twenty
(20) calendar days and will institute any other appropriate procedures or hearing as required by
the City Charter and applicable law.

Step 3A If the grievance is not satisfactorily settled in Step 3, then the
Union shall, within seven (7) calendar days after the Step 3 answer, submit said grievance with

all lower level history to the Labor Relations Manager. The Labor Relations Manager shall meet

31
with the Union President or his/her designee within ten (10) calendar days after the grievance has
been submitted. A written answer to the grievance shall be given to the Union President,
personally or by mail, within twenty (20) calendar days after the grievance is heard at Step 3A.

Step 4 If the grievance is not satisfactorily settled by the Labor Relations
Manager, the F.O.P. may, within thirty (30) calendar days after the receipt of his/her answer,
submit the matter to arbitration. The F.O.P. shall notify the American Arbitration Association
and the City at the same time of its intent to appeal the grievance. The arbitrators shall be chosen
and the arbitration conducted, in accordance with the rules of the American Arbitration
Association.

Section 4 In the event a grievance goes to arbitration, the arbitrator shall
have jurisdiction only over disputes arising out of grievances as to the interpretation and/or
application and/or compliance with the provisions of this Contract, including all disciplinary
actions and in reaching his decision, the arbitrator shall have no authority (1) to add or subtract
from or modify in any way the provisions of this Contract; (2) to pass upon issues governed by
law; or (3) to make an award in conflict with law. The Arbitrator shall issue the award no later
than sixty (60) days following the hearing or the filing of post-hearing briefs, where applicable.
Any arbitrator failing to adhere to this time frame can be rendered ineligible from hearing future
grievances between the parties during this Agreement upon the request of either party. The fees
and expenses of the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the City and the F.O.P. Furthermore, the
aggrieved member, his/her representative, and any necessary witnesses shall not lose any regular

straight-time pay for time off of the job while attending an arbitration proceeding.

32
Section 5 The Grievance Procedures set forth in this Contract shall be the
exclusive method of reviewing and settling disputes between the City and the F.O.P. and/or
between the City and member, and all decisions of arbitrators shall be final, conclusive, and
binding on the City, the F.O.P. and the member. A grievance may be withdrawn by the F.O.P. at
any time and the withdrawal of such grievance shall not be prejudicial to the filing of future
grievances, even if on the same subject matter.

The time limits set forth in the Grievance Procedure shall, unless extended by mutual
written agreement of the City and the F.O.P., be binding, and any grievances not timely
presented, or timely processed thereafter, shall not be considered a grievance under this Contract
and shall not be arbitrable. Any grievance not timely processed by the City at any of the
proceeding steps may be immediately referred by the F.O.P. to the next level.

Calendar days as provided within the Grievance Procedure shall not include Saturdays,
Sundays or Holidays.

Section 6 A grievance relating to a single common issue or event covered by
this contract and affecting more than one bargaining unit member may be filed as a policy
grievance and shall be filed at Step 2 of the procedure. At the minimum the policy grievance
shall set forth the facts upon which it is based, including the provision of the labor agreement

allegedly being violated, the date and time of the occurrence and the relief or remedy desired.

ARTICLE XXI
IMPASSE ARBITRATION

Ninety (90) days before the expiration of this Contract, the City and the Union shall begin

negotiation and shall negotiate for a period of at least sixty (60) days. After sixty (60) days

33
either party can demand final and binding arbitration by written notice to the other, of all issues
on which they are at impasse in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) _ Immediately following the declaration of impasse by either party, the parties shall
begin the selection process of an impartial arbitrator by the strike-off method from a list of seven
(7) furnished by the American Arbitration Association.

(b) Five (5) days after the impartial arbitrator has been selected the parties shall
submit their final offer on each issue which is at impasse to the arbitrator.

(c) The arbitrator may hold hearings, receive evidence or documentation, and call
witnesses in accordance with the arbitration rules of the American Arbitration Association.

(d) After receiving whatever evidence the parties wish to submit, the arbitrator shall
select the final offer of one of the parties on each of the impasse issues and shall issue an award
incorporating all of these selected final offers, without modification.

(©) Inreaching a decision, the arbitrator shall give weight to the following factors:

1. Past collectively bargained agreements, if any, between the parties;

2. Comparison of the issues submitted to final offer settlement relative to the
members in the bargaining unit involved with those issues related to other public and private
members doing comparable work, giving consideration to factors peculiar to the area and
classification involved.

3. The interests and welfare of the public, the ability of the public employer
to finance and administer the issues proposed, and the effect of the adjustments on the normal
standard of public service;

4, The lawful authority of the public employer;

34
5. The stipulations of the parties;

6. Such other factors, not confined to those listed in this section, which are
normally or traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of the issues submitted to
final offer settlement through voluntary collective bargaining, mediation, fact-finding, or other

impasse resolution procedures in the public service or in private employment.

ARTICLE XXII
NO STRIKE - NO LOCKOUT

The parties to this Contract, having provided for a grievance and arbitration procedure to
settle all disputes between them during the term of the Contract and, having further provided for
the arbitration procedure to resolve any impasse issues arising from the next negotiation, hereby
agree that:

(a) The F.O.P. shall not, directly, or indirectly, call, sanction, encourage, finance,
and/or assist in any way nor shall any member instigate or participate directly or indirectly, in
any strike, slowdown, walkout, concerted “sick” leave, mass resignation, work stoppage,
picketing, job action or interference of any kind with an operation or operations of the City.
Violations of this promise by any member(s) shall be proper cause for discharge or other
disciplinary action by the City.

(b) ‘The F.O.P. and all of its officers shall at all times cooperate with the City in
continuing normal operations and shall actively discourage and endeavor to prevent or terminate
any violation. In the event any violation occurs, the F.O.P. shall immediately notify all members
that the strike, slowdown, picketing, work stoppage, concerted “sick” leave or other interference

at any operation or operations of the City is prohibited and is not in any way sanctioned or

35
approved by the F.0.P. Furthermore, the F.O.P. shall also immediately advise all members to

return to work at once.

The City shall not lock-out members for the duration of this Contract.

ARTICLE XXIII
MILEAGE

When a member is required to use his/her personal automobile for a SWAT call-up, a

Hostage call-up, or for the shooting team, the City shall reimburse the member for mileage at the

applicable IRS rate.

ARTICLE XXIV

PENSION (“PICK UP”) PAYMENTS

Within a reasonable period from the ratification of this Contract, the City shall “pick up”
and pay the members' contribution to the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund. The members’
gross salary shall be reduced by the full amount of said contribution. The member contributions
which are “picked up” by the City shall be treated in the same manner as contributions made by
members prior to the commencement of the “pick up” program and will, therefore, be included
in “compensation” for the purposes of the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund benefit
calculations, and for the purposes of the parties in fixing salaries and compensation of members
as set forth in this Contract. The City's contribution to the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund

will be calculated on the full salary of members before the pick up is deducted from gross salary.

ARTICLE XXV
MARKSMANSHIP AWARD

Members will receive at their choosing, either compensatory time or pay allowance upon

achieving a specified degree of proficiency with their Division issued weapon. The allowance
36
has three (3) levels of proficiency with the first level marksman, being satisfactorily performed
by meeting the State of Ohio standards set forth in R.C. 109.801. Thereafter, the proficiency
levels of Sharpshooter and Expert will be based upon current standards of proficiency of the

Cleveland Police Academy as required by the office of the Chief of Police,

ALLOWANCES
Marksman Two days (16 hours) Compensatory time or pay.
Sharpshooter Three days (24 hours) Compensatory time or pay.
Expert Four days (32 hours) Compensatory time or pay.

There shall be no pyramiding of this benefit. The total number of hours which can be

attained per member in any one year is limited to 32 hours.

ARTICLE XXVI
PRIOR RULES AND ORDERS

Any orders, rules or regulations issued by the Division of Police, the Chief of Police, or
the Safety Director which are in conflict with any part of this Contract, are hereby repealed and

of no force and effect.

The City will send a copy of all Divisional General Police Orders promulgated by the

Chief of Police to the F.O.P. Office.

ARTICLE XXVII
REVIEW OF PERSONAL RECORDS

 

Operational needs allowing a member, upon reasonable request and during normal
business hours, shall be permitted to review his/her personal service record in the presence of
supervision. For the purpose of this Contract, the personal service record of an officer shall be

limited to attendance records and evaluations, his/her Medical Unit records dealing with medical
37
examinations, disciplinary hearings and charges, letters of reprimand and letters of

commendation.

PUBLIC RECORDS REQUEST. Whenever the City produces documents pursuant to a
public records request, the City shall notify the subject officer and the F.O.P. of the public
records request. The City shall provide the member and the F.O.P. the following information

upon request: who requested the records, what documents were provided, and the date that the

documents were requested.

ARTICLE XXVIII
SENIORITY - LAYOFFS

 

In the event of a layoff, members shall be laid off in accordance with their classification
seniority, and if recalled, they shall be recalled in reverse order of seniority.
If amember is recalled from layoff, but-refuses the job, he/she shall be removed fromthe

layoff list and forfeit all seniority rights, including recall rights.

ARTICLE XXIX
TRANSFERS

Anticipated assignments for all supervisory positions within the District Basic Patrol
Section, except Commanders, shall be posted at least fourteen (14) days prior to filling said
positions, except in an emergency. Members may submit a written request for transfer
consideration.

The City agrees that no supervisor shall be assigned/transferred to a unit/platoon where
another immediate family member is assigned and the possibility exists that he/she would have

direct or indirect management oversight over that family member. The Chief or his designee and

38
one representative from the Union will meet to discuss the transfer of personnel who are
assigned in violation of this provision.

Details, Details to the District Basic Patrol and Specialized Units shall be limited to one
hundred eighty (180) days. Such details may be extended beyond one hundred eighty (180) days

in emergency situations.

District Basic Patrol Transfers. One-half of all transfers to districts, including district-to-

 

district transfers, in the uniform patrol section, shall be at the sole discretion of the Chief of
Police, regardless of any written request and not subject to the Grievance/Arbitration provisions
of this Contract. In the remaining one-half of these transfers, seniority shall be the basis upon
which transfers are made. Provided that the transfers shall be subject to the following alternate
selection procedures:

(a) Transfers shall be made in a separation of rank basis, beginning with the rank of
Captain, and descending through the ranks of Lieutenant and Sergeant.

(b) The Chief shall have the first selection for the rank of Captain, seniority shall
have the second, and shall alternate thereafter.

(c) Should the transfer process for Captain end with a seniority selection, then the
Chief shall have the first selection for Lieutenant and seniority shall alternate. Should the
Captain transfers end with a Chief's selection, then seniority shall have the first selection for
Lieutenant and the chief's selection shall alternate. The same process shall occur from
Lieutenant to Sergeant.

(d) The transfer process for the next succeeding set of transfers shall begin where the
preceding set of transfers ended, i.e.:

39
(1) If the preceding transfers ended with a Chief's selection, then the next
succeeding set of transfers shall begin with a Seniority selection and vice versa.

Nothing in this section shall affect the Chief's right to transfer members other than those
addressed in this section; or to prevent transfers based on cause.

Notice of Transfer. The City agrees that the Division shall give members seven (7) days
advance notice of all transfers unless emergency condition prevents such notice.

Postings for Specialized Units. Anticipated assignments in specialized units outside of
the District Basic Patrol section (except Commanders) shall be posted at least seven (7) days
prior to filling said positions, except in an emergency. This provision does not pertain to intra-
district assignments. Prior to filling any position in a specialized unit or district support unit, all
applicants who meet the minimum qualifications as posted for the position, shall be, at the least,
entitled to a personal interview with an interview panel which shall make recommendations to
the Chief. The Chief shall make the selection from among the entire pool of qualified applicants.

Assignments to the specialized units shall be for a maximum of five (5) years. These

assignments can be extended by the Chief for operational need.

ARTICLE XXX
TERMINATION BENEFITS

 

A member shall receive the following treatment on certain fringe benefits during the last
three (3) years prior to retirement if the member designates such three (3) year period at least
three (3) months prior to the start of the three (3) year period. It is understood that a member

may only designate one such three (3) year period.

40
(a) All overtime shall be paid in accordance with contract specifications for overtime
worked and shall be included in the member's pay period in which such overtime is worked
regardless of FLSA standing.

(b) Holiday pay shall be paid to the member in the pay period in which the holiday
falls. If the holiday falls during the member's furlough, one extra day's pay will be added to the
pay period. Ifthe member works on the holiday, he/she shall receive full premium pay in the
same pay period.

(c) | A member who has elected to participate in this termination benefit program may
elect to receive additional longevity benefits, in lieu of the furlough benefits described in Article
XII, during each of three (3) years included within the termination benefit program period,
subject to the following provisions:

(i) Prior to the furlough selection process for each year of the three (3) years
included within the termination benefit program period, the member shall notify
the Police Personnel Unit that he/she desires to receive additional longevity
benefits, rather than the furlough benefits, for the coming year.
(ii) The member shall be entitled to additional longevity benefits in
accordance with the following schedule:

Years of Service Additional Longevity Benefit

After 22 years 200 hours of pay computed at the
member's base rate.

(iii) | A member who elects to receive the additional longevity benefits shall be

paid the additional benefit amount at the time the member receives his/her regular

longevity payment.
41
(iv) If a member elects to receive additional longevity benefits, the member
may not use compensatory time for paid leave or vacation time off during the year
for which the additional longevity benefit has been elected.

(@) With the approval of the Chief, members will be permitted to enjoy termination
benefits beyond the designated three (3) year period. Such approval shall not be unreasonably
denied.

(e) After twenty-two (22) years of service, a member, with the approval of the Chief,
may work his or her furlough at straight time and be paid for it in the same period in which the
furlough was worked. If the member exercises this option, no compensatory time may be used
by the member as vacation time off during the work period that this option is exercised.

Retirement. A member who retires is eligible and shall be compensated accordingly for
all of his/her accumulated overtime, compensatory time and holiday time due at the time of
termination at his/her current rate of pay. He/She shall also be compensated for any unused
furlough time, including any pro rata furlough pay due for the current year at his current rate of
pay. Upon retirement, a member shall have the right to convert his/her accumulated sick leave
into a cash bonus at the rate of one (1) day's pay for each three (3) days of unused accumulated
paid sick leave. The pay rate shall be set by the same thirty-six (36) month average used under
the Ohio Police & Fire Pension Fund.

Resignation. A member who resigns is eligible and shall be compensated accordingly for
all his/her accumulated overtime, compensatory time, holiday time, and accumulated furlough

time, including pro rata of pay.

42
Demise. Upon the demise of a member, his/her estate shall be eligible for all of the
benefits listed under Retirement. Such compensation will be made upon written request by the
Executor or other duly authorized person handling the estate.

Layoff. A member who is laid off shall be compensated for all unused compensatory
time, overtime, holiday time, and furlough time, including pro rata furlough for the current year,
at his/her current rate of pay.

Dismissal. The same schedule of compensation applies as in Resignation, with the
exception of pro rata furlough.

Payment of Accumulated Time. Rather than receiving payment for all accumulated time
owed at or around the time of retirement, any member who is retiring can request that all
accumulated time owed be paid out in equal, annual installments for up to three years following
the member's retirement. The City reserves the tight to discontinue this deferred payment

practice, with prior notice to the Union, for any employees not already participating in it.

ARTICLE XXXI
LEGALITY AND SEPARABILITY

 

It is the intent of the City and the F.O.P. that this Contract comply, in every respect, with
applicable legal statutes, charter requirements, governmental regulations which have the effect of
law and judicial opinions, and if there be a final determination by proper judicial authority that
any provision of this Contract is in conflict with law, that provision shall be null and void and
shall not affect the validity of the remaining paragraphs of this Contract. In the event of an
unlawful determination, the City and the F.O.P. shall meet within thirty (30) days for the purpose

of negotiating a lawful alternative provision.

43
ARTICLE XXXII
SALARIES

Retroactive to April 1, 2013, there shall be a one percent (1%) increase in bargaining unit
base wages.

Retroactive to April 1, 2014, there shall be a two percent (2%) increase in bargaining unit
base wages.

Effective April 1, 2015, there shall be a two percent (2%) increase in bargaining unit base
wages.

The following are F.O.P. bargaining unit salaries effective as set forth below.

 
   

 

 

bi-weekly
max

65,070.53 2,502.7126

    
  
  
  
 
 
 

   

     

      

Sergeant 64,570.53 2,483.4818

Lieutenant 74,981.81 2,883.9157 75,481.81 2,903.1464
Captain 87,058.90 3,348.4191 87,558.90 3,367.6499
Commander 101,068.34 3,887.2437 101,568.34 3,906.4745

     

Commissioner Of Traffic
Control

 

101,068.34 3,887.2437 101,568.34 3,906.4745

  
  
   

  

 

 

 

 

2014

= | bi-weekly -weekly

min max

Sergeant 65,871.94 2,533.5361 66,371.94 2,552.7668
Lieutenant 76,491.45 2,941.9787 76,991.45 2,961.2095
Captain 88,810.08 3,415.7722 89,310.08 3,435.0030
Commander 103,099.71 3,965.3734 103,599.71 3,984.6041
Commissioner Of Traffic
Control 103,099.71 3,965.3734 103,599.71 3,984.6041

44
  

67,699.38 2,603.8222

     

    
  
 

      
     

Sergeant 67,199.38 2,584,5914

Lieutenant 78,031.28 3,001.2030 78,531.28 3,020.4337
Captain 90,596.28 3,484.4722 91,096.28 3,503.7030
Commander 105,171.70 4,045.0653 105,671.70 4,064,2961

  
 

    

Commissioner Of Traffic
Control

 

105,171.70 4,045.0653 105,671.70 4,064.2961

    

All officers will progress automatically to the maximum rate of pay for their rank after
twelve (12) months in the rank.

All computations are to be based upon date of appointment to a particular rank.

Officers who are required to act and perform in a higher rank shall be paid at that rank
level of pay for all time acting and performing in that capacity.

Wage increases shall be effective: (a) During the pay period in which April 1* falls if
April 1* falls in the first week of a pay period; or (b) During the pay period following the pay

period in which April 1* falls if April 1 falls in the second week of the pay period.

ARTICLE XXXII
VOLUNTARY COMPENSATORY TIME BUYOUT PROVISION

Effective in 2015, the City agrees to budget $200,000 from which officers may cash out
their accumulated compensatory time under a formula agreed upon between the Union and the
City. If the requests exceed the amount budgeted in each calendar year, then such requests shall

be paid on a pro rata basis.

45

 

 
ARTICLE XXXIV
LEGAL REPRESENTATION AND INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS

1. The City shall provide the defense of any officer, in any state or federal court, in
any civil action or proceeding to recover damages for injury, death, or loss to persons or
property, except as herein limited, allegedly caused by an act or omission of the officer which
occurred or allegedly occurred while the officer was acting within the scope of his duties or
official responsibilities as an officer, unless:

(a) The Director of Law has good cause to believe that the acts or omissions
were manifestly outside the scope of his/her employment, or official responsibilities;

(b) The Director of Law has good cause to believe that the officer or member
acted with malicious purpose, or in bad faith, or in a wanton and reckless manner;

(©) The Director of Law has good cause to believe that the officer was
performing services for another employer at the time the incident allegedly occurred;

() ___ The civil claim, action or proceeding, including disciplinary proceedings,
was brought by, or at the request of, the City or any of its officials, against the officers; or,

(©) The officer fails to comply with the conditions of his defense as prescribed
herein.

2. The City shall indemnify and hold harmless an officer in the amount of any
judgment, other than a judgment for punitive or exemplary damages, that is obtained against the
officer in a state or federal court, or as a result of a law of a foreign jurisdiction and that is for
damages for injury, death, or loss to persons or property caused by an act or omission of the

officer, if, at the time of the act or omission the officer was acting in good faith and within the

46
scope of his employment or official responsibilities, However, by separate ordinance, Council
may, at its discretion, expressly authorize payment of punitive or exemplary damages.

3. The continuing duty of the City to defend pursuant to Paragraph 1 or indemnify
the officer pursuant to Paragraph 2 of this Contract shall also be conditioned upon:

(a) _ delivery by the officer to the Director of Law a written request to provide
legal defense together with the original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice,
demand, or pleading within seven (7) days after the officer is served with such document;

(b) _ the continuing full cooperation of the officer in the defense of such action
or proceeding, and in defense of any action or proceeding against the City based upon the same
act or omission, and in the prosecution of any appeal; and,

(©) the absence of any misconduct, other than the act or omission of the
officer that is the subject of the action, by the officer which prejudices the defense of such action
or proceeding.

4. Other than as specified above, the officer shall be entitled to be represented by the
Director of Law, unless the Director of Law determines, prior to or during the pendency of a
civil lawsuit, that a potential conflict of interest could result, or that it is in the best interests of
the officer, City of Cleveland, or — in a case with multiple defendants — any other defendant,
that the officer be represented by counsel other than the Director of Law or any of his Assistants,
In such case, the Director of Law may elect to tender the defense of the officer to private counsel
selected by the Director of Law upon such conditions and attorney's fees as the Director of Law
deems appropriate in the particular case. In such case, the City will pay the reasonable cost of

attorney's fees and expenses of the selected private attorney. Any indemnification of an officer

47
represented by private counsel shall be subject to all limits upon indemnification of an officer
represented by the Director of Law.

5. If the Director of Law elects to decline representation of an/or indemnification to
an officer, then the exclusive determination of whether the Director of Law’s decision ‘was
arbitrary and capricious shall be pursuant to the grievance procedure. The arbitrator shall have
the authority to issue an award directing the City to indemnify and pay the reasonable attorneys
fees and costs of the officer, subject to the limitations of Paragraph 6.

6. The total amount of indemnification to which the City is obligated to pay on
behalf of one or more officer defendants or potential defendants arising out of a transaction or
occurrence, which is the subject matter of allegations against the officer and/or co-defendants,
shall be limited to the lower of either One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00), or the amount of any
deductible, self-insured retention, or uninsured primary level, under any policy of insurance paid
by the City which provides coverage for the transaction or occurrence.

7. These provisions for defense and indemnification shall not be construed to impair,
alter, limit, or modify the rights and obligations of the City or any officer under any policy of
insurance. Nor shall the benefits of these provisions be construed to affect, alter, or repeal any
section of the Workers' Compensation Law.

8. These provisions shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate, or restrict any immunity or defense to liability available to the City or officer. The
benefits of these provisions shall apply whether or not the officer is sued in an individual or

representative capacity and whether or not the officer is still employed by the City; provided,

48
however, that the acts of the officer complained of must have been committed within the scope
of his employment by the City.

9. An officer may, at any time, elect, at his/her own expense, to be represented by
private counsel selected by the officer in lieu of representation by the Director of Law, or
counsel selected by the Director of Law. However, by electing to be represented by such private
counsel, the officer waives all right to a defense and indemnification by or at the expense of the
City under this contract.

10. The City shall indemnify the defense costs (in accordance with the limitations
below) of a member prosecuted and not found guilty of a violation of City, State, or Federal law,
arising out of an alleged act or omission which occurred or allegedly occurred while the member
was acting within the course and scope of his/her duties as an officer. The City's defense
obligations shall be subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in this article. The City
shall not be obligated to pay defense fees in excess of the following amounts:

Murder — Homicide $10,000.00
Other major felonies $7,500.00

Minor felonies $5,000.00
Misdemeanors $2,500.00

ARTICLE XXXV
EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE

 

Employees will be provided the opportunity to have part or all of their tuition reimbursed
for successful completion of approved educational courses in the area of career enhancement.
Monies for such reimbursement will be provided from the Law Enforcement Trust Funds at the

annual rate of two percent (2%) of the yearly revenues of those funds.

49
ARTICLE XXXVI
PARKING TICKETS

Employees who can be identified and who fail to pay moving violation fines and/or
parking tickets/fines on City vehicles will authorize the City to deduct the amount of the fines

from their pay once the administrative appeal process, if applicable, has been exhausted.

50
ARTICLE XXXVI
CONTRACT DURATION

This Contract shall be effective as of the date of ratification (April 13, 201 5), and shall
remain in full force and effect through March 31, 2016, or as amended or modified as provided
herein. Negotiations on the provisions of this Contract shall begin no later than ninety (90) days
prior to March 31, 2016, provided either party has notified the other party in writing of its desire
to terminate and/or modify the terms herein not sooner than December 1, 2015. In the event that
either party desires to terminate this Contract, written notice must be given to the other party not

less than three (3) months prior to the desired termination date.

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE,
LODGE NO. 8

OB Qe, Pes,

Brian Betley, President

CITY OF CLEVELAND

  

Deborah Southerington, Director
Department of Human Resources

Wu st_ot/i4/i5
Nycole D. West, Labor Relations Manager

Department of Human Resources

1604-12-13

 
ADDENDUM A
SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY

 

Section 1 - Policy Statement. Both the Union and the City recognize illegal drug usage
and workplace alcohol abuse/misuse as a threat to the public safety and welfare and to the
employees of the Police division. Thus, the Division will take the necessary steps, including
drug and alcohol testing, to maintain a drug/alcohol free workplace. The goal of this policy is
education prevention and rehabilitation rather than termination.

Section 2 - Definitions.

(a) The term “drug” includes cannabis as well as other controlled substances as
defined in the Ohio Revised Code.

(b) The term “illegal drug usage” includes the use of cannabis or any controlled
substance which has not been legally prescribed and/or dispensed, or the abusive use of a legally
prescribed drug.

(c) The term “drug test” means a urinalysis test consisting of an initial screening step
and a confirmation step employing the gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS)
utilizing urine samples collected according to a chain of custody procedures consistent with the
United States Department of Transportation (“D.0.T.”) regulations.

(d) The term “Misuse of Alcohol” means the use or possession of alcohol in the
workplace, or testing positive (as defined in paragraph (e)) for the presence of alcohol in an
employee's system while at work.

(e) The term “Alcohol Test” means a test selected and certified under Federal
Standards. An initial positive level of .03 grams per 210L of breath shall be considered positive

for purposes of authorizing a confirming alcohol test. If initial screen results are negative, i.e.,
52
below the positive level, testing shall be discontinued, all samples destroyed and records of the
testing expunged from the members personnel file. Only members with screen test results that
are positive on the initial screen shall be subject to confirmation testing for alcohol. With respect
to confirmation testing, a positive alcohol level shall be .03 grams per 210L of breath. In
confirmatory breath testing results are negative, i.e., below the positive level, all records of the
testing shall be expunged from the member's personnel file.

@ “Voluntary Participation in a Dependency Program” means in the absence of a
positive test result or a request to take a drug/alcohol test, an employee seeks the professional
assistance of a treatment program supervised by the Medical Director and members of the
Employee Assistance Unit and/or covered by the employee's insurance plan.

Section 3 - Notice and Education of Employees Regarding Drug/Alcohol Testing. There
will be a ninety (90) day education and information period Prior to the testing under this policy
for employees, except that prior policies governing the testing of cadets and testing under
consent forms shall remain in effect during this period.

All employees will be informed of the Division's drug/alcohol testing policy. Employees
will be provided with information concerning the impact of the use of drugs on job performance.
In addition, the employer will inform the employees of the manner in which these tests are
conducted, the reliability of the tests performed, under what circumstances employees will be
subject to testing, what the tests can determine and the consequences of testing positive for
illegal drug use and alcohol abuse/misuse. All new employees will be provided with this
information when initially hired. No employee shall be tested until this information has been
provided.

53
Section 4 - Basis for Ordering an Employee to be Tested for Drug/Alcohol Abuse.
Employees may be tested for drug/alcohol abuse misuse during working hours under any of the
following conditions:

(a) Where there is reasonable suspicion that the employee to be tested is using or
abusing illegal drugs or alcohol while on duty. Such reasonable suspicion must be based upon
objective facts or specific circumstances found to exist which present a reasonable basis to
believe that an employee is using alcohol or illegal drugs in violation of this policy. Two
examples of where reasonable suspicion shall be deemed to exist are where there has been a
serious on-duty injury to an employee, or another person, the cause of which is otherwise
unexplained, and where an employee, while driving a city vehicle, becomes involved in a traffic
accident which results in physical harm to persons or property where the circumstances raise a
question as to the existence of substance abuse by the employee involved. The listing of these
examples is not intended to exclude other situations which may give rise to reasonable suspicion
of abuse. A supervisor ordering an employee to take a drug/alcohol test shall give the Chief of
Police, in writing, his/her “reasonable suspicion” reasons for ordering the test. A copy of the
reasonable suspicion reasons shall be provided to the Union and the Employee upon request.

(b) For Random Testing. The term “Random Testing” means employees during their
normal tour of duty, are subject to Random Drug/Alcohol Testing, effective after the employee
education process (as stated above) is completed. The annual number of such random tests shall
not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the members covered by the contract beginning April 1
(if testing commences later than April 30, the number of tests taken shall not exceed a pro-rated

amount of 25% of the members). Such test shall be reasonably spread throughout the year.

54
Member(s) notified of their selection for random/drug alcohol testing shall proceed immediately
to the collection site. The City shall take into consideration the operational needs of the Division
before directing an employee to commence to the testing facility.

A member who is on a regularly scheduled V-Day, furlough Day, already absent due to
illness or injury, on Compensatory Time Off (approved before the member was scheduled for
testing) or under subpoena from a Court, shall be excused from testing, but will remain subject to
future random testing. The testing process will begin within forty-eight (48) hours of the time
the list of employees is provided to the City.

(c) Prior to assignment to the following units with high potential for exposure to
controlled substance: Narcotics Units, Intelligence Units, District Vice Units, District and BSS
Strike Force Units, Bomb Squad, 8.W.A.T., Forensic Laboratory Unit, Aviation Unit, and
Harbor Unit.

(@ —_ Upon return to duty after an absence for an unexplained illness or from a thirty
(30) day or more disciplinary suspension, or upon reappointment to the Division.

(e) Prior to a return to duty after participation in a substance abuse rehabilitation
program regardless of the duration of the program, and following an employee's retum under
these circumstances wherein the employee shall be required to undergo three (3) urine tests
within the one-year period starting with the date of return to duty.

® Post-accident testing for an employee involved in an accident resulting in
personal injury or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more of property damage.

(g) __ Post-incident testing for an employee involved in a use-of-deadly-force incident.

55
Prior to obtaining a drug/alcohol test from an employee as set forth in sections (a)
through (e) above, the City shall instruct the officer that the results of the drug/alcohol test can
result in termination from employment.

The City and the Union realize that there are duty related activities that certain employees
must perform (such as narcotics, vice and undercover operations, etc.) that may conflict with this
policy. Employees who are engaged in these Divisionally authorized enforcement activities shall
not be subject to the full scope of this policy.

Section 5 - Urine Samples. Specimen collection will occur in a medical setting and
conform to D.O.T. regulations. The procedures should not demean, embarrass, or cause physical
discomfort to the employee.

Each step in the collecting and processing of the urine specimens shall be documented to
establish procedural integrity and the chain of evidence.

The employee will complete a form indicating the use of all drugs currently being taken
and identify the prescribing physician.

The employee designated to give a sample must be positively identified prior to any
sample being taken.

Specimen samples shall be sealed, labeled and checked against the identity of the
employee to ensure that the results match the employees tested. Samples shall be stored in a
secure and refrigerated atmosphere until tested or delivered to the testing lab.

Upon request, an employee shall be entitled to the presence of a union representative

before testing is administered.

56
Section 6 - Testing Procedure. The Laboratory selected by the City to conduct the
analysis must be experienced and capable of quality control, documentation, chain of custody,
technical expertise, and demonstrated proficiency in urinalysis testing. The testing or processing
phase shall consist of a two-step procedure.

@ Initial screening step, and
(ii) Confirmation step.

The urine sample is first tested using a screening procedure. (EMIT or an equivalent
test). For a specimen testing positive, a confirmatory test employing the gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) test (or an equivalent test) will be used. An initial
positive report will not be considered positive; rather it will be classified as confirmation
pending. Where a positive report is received, urine specimens shall be maintained under secured
storage for a period of not less than one (1) year. Any sample which has been adulterated or is
shown to be a substance other than urine shall be reported as such. All test results shall be
evaluated by suitable trained medical or scientific personnel prior to being reported. All
unconfirmed positive test records shall be destroyed by the laboratory. Test results shall be
treated with the same confidentiality as other employee medical records. Test results used as
evidence for disciplinary action shall also be entitled to the same confidentiality. An employee
who tests positive for drugs and or alcohol will be given the opportunity to review the tests and,
if desired, a reasonable opportunity to rebut the results.

Section 7 - Disciplinary Action.

(a) Drugs. Employees who as a result of being drug tested are found to be using

illegal drugs shall be subject to dismissal. Employees who are found to be abusing drug(s)

37
which have been legally prescribed shall be subject to dismissal unless the employee agrees to
participate in and satisfies the obligations of a treatment program supervised by the Medical
Director and members of the Employees Assistance Unit. Any employee found for a second
time to be abusing drugs which have been legally prescribed shall be subject to dismissal.

(b) Alcohol. An employee who tests positive for alcohol shall be subject to discipline
up to and including dismissal unless the employee agrees to participate in and satisfies the
obligations of a treatment program supervised by the Medical Director and members of the
Employees Assistance Unit.

An employee who agrees to participate and satisfies the obligations of this treatment
program will be subject to discipline up to a three (3) day suspension (but is also subject to
additional discipline for other rules violations).

Any employee testing positive for alcohol for a second time shall be subject to discipline
up to and including dismissal.

(c) Refusal to submit to a drug/alcohol test, or adulteration of, or switching a sample
shall be grounds for dismissal.

Section 8 - Right to Appeal. An employee disciplined as a result of a drug test has the
right to challenge such discipline beginning at Step 3-A of the grievance procedure.

Section 9 - Voluntary Participation in a Dependency Program. Employees who may be
drug/aleohol dependent are encouraged to voluntarily seek professional assistance through a
treatment program supervised by the Medical Director and members of the Employee Assistance

Unit and/or a program covered by the employee's health insurance plan. Voluntary assistance

58
should be sought BEFORE the drug abuse affects job performance or endangers fellow
employees or members of the public.

Participation in a dependency program is voluntary and strictly confidential. Under
provisions of GPO 1.1.15, neither the City administration, the Division of Police nor any unit or
entity within shall have access to the program's files and records. However, the Chief of Police
or his designee of the Medical Unit shall be advised when an employee is hospitalized or is an
outpatient as part of drug dependency rehabilitation. Also, upon written request of the
participating officer, efforts at rehabilitation will be divulged on his/her behalf in cases of
disciplinary action.

Section 10. _ Illegal drug use or alcohol misuse or participation in any substance abuse
dependency or rehabilitation program will not preclude disciplinary action against employees for
any law or rule violation even though such law or rule violation may have been connected in part

with drug/alcohol abuse, and/or even if the rehabilitation program is voluntarily undertaken.

59
ATTACHMENT 2

SIDE LETTER
WAGE INCREASES

To receive any negotiated wage increase, an employee must be in active status on the
City’s payroll system on the date which the Mayor signs the collective bargaining agreement
which includes the negotiated wage increase. To be considered “active on the City’s payroll,” an
employee must have an employee status of either “Active” or “Authorized Paid Leave of
Absence.” An employee with an employee status of “Unpaid Leave,” “Suspended” or “Layoff”
is not entitled to any retroactive wages payments and negotiated wage increases unless and until
he or she returns to “Active” employee status. If an employee who was in “Unpaid Leave,”
“Suspended” or “Layoff” status returns to “Active” employee status, he or she will be paid
retroactive wages payments and negotiated wage increases. Employees on approved, paid or
unpaid FMLA or military leaves are eligible for retroactive wage payments and negotiated wage
increases.

Bargaining unit members who retire, resign or otherwise separate from employment with
the City of Cleveland prior to the date that the Mayor signs the collective bargaining agreement
which includes the negotiated wage increase are not entitled to any negotiated retroactive wage

payment or increases.

60
ADDENDUM B

CITY OF CLEVELAND

MEDICAL INSURANCE PLAN DESIGN

 

COMPREHENSIVE MAJOR MEDICAL PPO PLAN (PLUS)

Annual Deductible:

Comprehensive Major Medical:
(Co-Insurance percentage)

Co-Insurance Annual Out-of-Pocket
Maximum (Excluding Deductible):

Doctor and other Office visits:
--Specialists:

Use of Emergency Room:

Wellness/Preventive Services:

Routine Physical Exam (One exam
per benefit period):

Well Child Care Services including
Exam and Immunizations (to age nine,
limited to a $500 maximum per benefit
period):

Well Child Care Laboratory Tests (to
age nine):

Routine Mammogram (One, limited

to an $85 maximum per benefit period):

61

In-Network

$500 single
$1,000 family

90% - 10%

$1,250 single
$2,500 family

$20.00 Co-pay
$30.00 Co-pay

$100.00 Co-pay

(Co-pay waived if admitted)
Non-Emergency use $100.00
Co-pay plus 90% Co-
Insurance

$20.00 office visit Co-pay,
not subject to deductible

$20.00 office visit Co-pay,
not subject to deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible
I.
The City will provide not less than two (2) HMO options.

Routine Pap Test and Exam (One per

benefit period):

Routine EKG, Chest X-ray, Complete
Blood Count, Comprehensive Metabolic
Panel and Urinalysis (Ages nine and over,

one each per benefit period):

CA 125 (cancer screening), Cholesterol
Screening (Ages nine and over, one each

per benefit period):

Routine PSA Test:

Routine Endoscopic Services (including
Colonoscopy) and Colon Cancer Screening
(Age over 50, one each per benefit period):

Out-of-Network varies by standard carrier design.

HMO

Co-Insurance percentage:

No deductible:

Co-Insurance Annual Out-of-Pocket

Maximum:
Doctor and other treatment visits:

Use of Emergency Room:

62

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

In-Network

90% - 10%

$1.250 single
$2,500 family

$20.00 Co-pay

$100.00 Co-pay (Co-pay
waived if admitted)
Non-Emergency use: $100.00
Co-pay plus 90% Co-
Insurance
IV. PRESCRIPTION DRUG

a. Co-Pays:
Generic (mandatory) $10.00
Name Brand, Formulary $25.00
Name Brand, Non-Formulary $40.00
b. Mandatory Generic Requirement - Mandate individual’s use of generic drugs

where available; if individual chooses Name Brand Formulary or Name Brand
Non-Formulary when generic is available, individual pays the applicable Name
Brand Formulary or Name Brand Non-Formulary co-pay plus the difference
between the Generic and Name Brand costs.

Note: Coverage levels for out-of-network services will be as established by the carrier.

63
ADDENDUM C

HIGH DEDUCTIBLE PLAN

Annual Deductible:

Comprehensive Major Medical:
(Co-Insurance percentage)

Co-Insurance Annual Out-of-Pocket
Maximum (Excluding Deductible):

-- Doctor and other Office visits:
-- Specialists:

Use of Emergency Room:

Wellness/Preventive Services:

Routine Physical Exam (One exam
per benefit period):

Well Child Care Services including
Exam and Immunizations (to age nine,
limited to a $500 maximum per benefit
period):

Well Child Care Laboratory Tests (to
age nine):

Routine Mammogram (One, limited
to an $85 maximum per benefit period):

64

In-Network

$1000 single
$2000 family

80% - 20%

$2000 single
$4000 family

$20.00 Co-pay
$40.00 Co-Pay

$100.00 Co-pay
(Co-pay waived if admitted)

Non-Emergency use
$100.00 Co-pay plus 80%
Co-Insurance

$20.00 office visit Co-pay,
not subject to deductible

$20.00 office visit Co-pay,
not subject to deductible

100% not subject to
deductible

100% not subject to
deductible
Routine Pap Test and Exam (One per 100% not subject to

benefit period): deductible
Routine EKG, Chest X-ray, Complete 100% not subject to
Blood Count, Comprehensive Metabolic deductible

Panel and Urinalysis (Ages nine and over,
one each per benefit period):

CA 125 (cancer screening), Cholesterol 100% not subject to

Screening (Ages nine and over, one each deductible

per benefit period):

Routine PSA Test: 100% not subject to
deductible

Routine Endoscopic Services (including 100% not subject to

Colonoscopy) and Colon Cancer Screening deductible

(Age over 50, one each per benefit period):

g. Out-of-Network varies by standard carrier design.

Note: Coverage levels for out-of-network services will be as established by the carrier.

65
ADDENDUM D

CITY-DEFINED WELLNESS INITIATIVES

 

Effective June 1, 2015 through March 31, 2016, to be eligible for the reduced premium
contributions, the employee must complete annually a health-risk assessment and have
participated once annually in a biometric screening. The initial assessment and screening must
be completed within seventy-five (75) days of Council’s ratification of the Agreement. The
screening can be attained either through a program offered by the City, at its option, or by the
employee through an annual physical conducted by a physician. The screening shall require the
following measurements:

Height

Weight

Body mass index (BMI)
Waist circumference
Blood pressure

The screening shall also require a blood sample to measure:

Total cholesterol

High-density lipoprotein (HDL)

Glucose

Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (available only with the fasting test)
Triglycerides (available only with the fasting test)

No later than 150 days prior to expiration, the parties shall convene a labor management
committee with no more than three (3) representatives from each party in order to discuss the
possible application of health-oriented results to the Wellness Initiatives in the next contract.

66
April 2, 1996

Hr. Joe Musarra

President

Fraternal order of Folice, .
Ledge No. 8 . Lo
2249 Payne Avenue . -
Cleveland, OF 44114~4485

Dear Hr. Musarra:

_ The Department will assign the President of the FOP and one
‘other member of the Union designated by the President of the FOP to.
perform, on a full-time besis, duties related to administration of
this Contract by the FoP, and the handling of matters of mutual

concern to the Depaxtment and the FOP.
sincerely,

“ | feb Sib

oseph S. Nolan
