MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BY AND BETWEEN

MH
cy

WICHITA

THE CITY OF WICHITA, KANSAS

 

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
LODGE #5, WICHITA, KANSAS, INC.

DATE EFFECTIVE: DECEMBER 26, 2009
DATE ENDING: DECEMBER 24, 2010
Article

I
Il
IV

VI
VIL
VIL
IX

XI
XIL
XII
XIV
XV
XVI
XVII
XVIII
XIX

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Preamble .

 

Recognition of Employee Organization...

Management Rights and Responsibilitie:

 

 

Employee Rights and Responsibilities

 

Nondiscrimination....

 

Strikes and Lockouts....

Hours of Work and Duty Shifts ....

 

Compensation

 

Check Off and Payroll Procedure ....

 

 

Employee Benefits and Allowances...

 

Leaves of Absence...

 

Seniority...

 

Promotions and Transfers ...

 

Disciplinary Procedures .

 

Grievance Procedure

 

Working Conditions and Equipment ....

 

Miscellaneous Provisions...

 

Interpretative Provisions

 

Substance Testing ....

 

Duration and Termination...

 

Approval Sheet...
Appendix A.

Appendix B.

 

Appendix C.
Appendix D.

 

Appendix E.

The City of Wichita will hereinafter be referred to as "City," and the Fraternal Order of
Police, Lodge #5, Wichita, KS., Inc., will hereinafter be referred to as "F.O.P."
PREAMBLE

WHEREAS, the parties hereto desire to maintain the existing harmonious relations; to
advance mutual interests in the preservation of public safety, law and order; to promote standards
and conditions of employment for police officers of the City of Wichita, Kansas; to achieve
harmonious and peaceful adjustment of differences which may arise; and to establish standards
for wages, hours, benefits and other conditions of employment.

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION OF EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION

Section 1. The City recognizes the F.O.P. as the sole and exclusive representative for the
purposes of negotiating collectively with the City pursuant to the Public Employer-Employee
Relations Act of the State of Kansas, with respect to wages, hours, benefits and other terms and
conditions of employment for all members of the bargaining unit.

Section 2. The bargaining unit consists of all employees in classifications listed in
Appendix A.

Section 3. If any classification in the bargaining unit is retitled, this Memorandum of
Agreement shall be construed to include such retitled classification in Appendix A. If any
additional classification is included in the bargaining unit, the City and the F.O.P. will meet and
confer concerning the terms and conditions of employment.

Section 4. This Agreement shall be binding upon all employees in the bargaining unit.

ARTICLE 2
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Section 1. The F.O.P. acknowledges that the City and its management have certain
exclusive statutory rights and responsibilities which they may not surrender. Except as expressly
provided otherwise by this Agreement or by law, the City shall retain its rights to make, amend or
execute decisions and policies that are necessary to operate and maintain the City and its
programs and to otherwise carry out its lawful rights and responsibilities.

Section 2. Except as expressly provided otherwise by this Agreement or by law nothing
contained in this Agreement shall circumscribe or modify the statutory right of the City to:

 

(1) To determine the services and level of services to be offered by the City;

(2) To determine the number of employees required;

(3) To schedule overtime as determined necessary;

(4) To lay off, terminate, or otherwise relieve employees for lack of work or
other legitimate reasons;

(5) To determine the fact of lack of work, provided that officer safety is not
compromised;

(6) To discipline for just cause;

(1) Todirect the work of its employees;
(8) To take actions as may be necessary to carry out the mission of the
department in emergencies;

(9) Tohire, promote, demote, transfer, assign and retain employees in
positions within the Wichita Police Department;

(10) To maintain the efficiency of governmental operation;

(11) To determine the method, means and personnel by which operations are to
be carried on;

Section 3. The above rights, responsibilities and prerogatives are inherent in the City and
its management.

Section 4. A copy of all department and bureau goals and $.0.P.’s will be delivered to
the F.O.P. for review and comment.

Section 5. The City of Wichita and the Wichita Police Department create and update
policies (i.e. Administrative Regulations, WPD Policies and Regulations) as needed.
Occasionally employees will be asked to sign a document acknowledging receipt of the
document. An employee's signature will be compelled for receipt of the document only.

ARTICLE 3
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Section 1. The City acknowledges that the employees must possess and exercise a high
degree of integrity, courage and sense of responsibility, and are specially trained and skilled in
their duties. When it employs these employees, the City does so with the express intent of
encouraging a professional attitude on the part of these employees, and of honoring their rights
and prerogatives. Correspondingly, the employees are to be governed by the highest ideals of
honor and integrity in all of their public and personal conduct in order that they merit the respect
and confidence of the public.

Section 2. Employees shall have the right to form, join and participate in the activities of
the F.O.P. and may refuse to join or participate in any F.O.P. activities.

ARTICLE 4
NONDISCRIMINATION

Section 1. No employee shall be discriminated against because of race, color, creed,
national origin, age, sex, religion, ancestry or disability, by either the City or the F.O.P.

If any grievance is filed under this section, and any complaint is filed with any other
board, agency or court with concurrent jurisdiction concerning the same incident, the grievance
shall be held in abeyance until the other board, agency or court has rendered its decision.

Section 2. The City shall not directly or indirectly discourage, deprive or coerce any
employee in the enjoyment of any rights conferred by the laws of Kansas and the United States;
and shall not discriminate against any employee with respect to hours, wages or any other term or
condition of employment by reason of membership in the F.O.P., or participation in any of its
activities, collective negotiations with the City, or institution of any grievance, complaint or
proceeding under this Agreement with respect to any terms or conditions of employment.

ARTICLE 5
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS

Section 1. The City shall not institute, authorize, cause, aid, ratify or condone any action
to provoke interruption of or prevent the continuity of work normally and usually performed by
the employees for the purpose of coercing the employees into relinquishing rights guaranteed
under the law.

Section 2. The F.O.P. shall not authorize, cause, aid, ratify, condone nor shall any
employee take part in, aid, render assistance to, or support any action for the purpose of coercing
a change in the conditions, rights, privileges or obligations of employment through failure by
concerted action with others to report for duty or failure to work at usual capability in the
performance of the normal duties of employment.

ARTICLE 6
HOURS OF WORK AND DUTY SHIFTS

Section 1. Employees will receive overtime pay for hours worked in excess of 40 during
a work week at the rate of one and one half times the regular rate of pay. Police Sergeants will
receive overtime pay for hours worked in excess of 42.5 hours in a week at one and one half
times the regular rate of pay. The following paid leaves of absences shall be included in
computing hours worked: authorized holidays, injury leave and jury duty. As required by the
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) the work week for employees in the bargaining unit is 7:01
a.m. Saturday through 7:00 a.m. Saturday. The normal workweek is five consecutive 8-hour
days (8.5 hour for Sergeants), with two consecutive days off, or four consecutive 10-hour days
(three consecutive 10.5 hour days and one 11 hour day for Sergeants) with 3 consecutive days
off. The City retains the right to schedule overtime work as required.

At the request of an employee and with supervisor approval, an employee may adjust
their workday start-time and/or end time to accomplish the following:

* Perform work-related tasks to enhance community safety
© Conduct surveillances

Attend beat team meetings

Attend community meetings

Take part in neighborhood projects

Special enforcement initiatives

Other police projects

= Accommodate family or personal appointments

°
°
°
°

°

In addition, an employee, with supervisor approval, will be permitted to change their days
off within a given work week to accomplish the above listed items. In any event, employees will
not be permitted to work more than 40 hours (42.5 hours for 85 hour pay period employees) a
week unless compensated by overtime.
When requested by an employee and authorized by the Chief of Police or designated
departmental management representative, time off at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) of the
overtime hours worked by an employee may be granted in lieu of overtime payment. An
employee shall be allowed to accrue and carry over up to 40 hours of compensatory time. Use of
compensatory time shall be subject to management approval, advance notice, and staffing
requirements, but shall not be unreasonably denied.

Section 2. A 28-day work period is established for the bargaining unit for purposes of
administering holidays. The contract effective date and work period is December 26, 2009.

Section 3.

(a) Time off with pay shall be granted for eleven authorized holidays; New Year’s Day,
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.’s Birthday, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Veterans’ Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas and 2 Personal Holidays.

(b) Probationary employees are not eligible to use Personal Holiday hours until they have
completed six months of service. Holidays that occur during an approved leave of absence with
pay, except injury leave, are not charged as days of leave taken.

(c) For designated holidays except Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Year’s Day and
Independence Day, the employee shall be granted the actual holiday off when law enforcement
activities permit. If an employee is required to work on the holiday, or a holiday falls on a
regular day off, the employee shall be given time off to be taken on a day selected by the
employee within the 28-day work period in which the holiday falls, as law enforcement activities
permit. If an employee cannot take an authorized holiday off within the 28-day work period in
which the holiday falls, and is required to work, the employee shall be compensated in addition
to the employee’s regular pay at time and one-half for the hours worked.

(d) For the Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Year’s Day and Independence Day holidays,
an employee, who requests it, shall be granted the actual holiday off when law enforcement
activities permit. If the holiday falls on a regular day off, the employee shall be given time off to
be taken on a day selected by the employee within the 28-day work period in which the holiday
falls, as law enforcement activities permit. An employee who works on either the Thanksgiving,
Christmas, New Year’s Day or Independence Day holiday, shall be compensated in addition to
their regular pay at time and one-half for the hours worked. Field officers who are scheduled to
work on a premium pay holiday may choose to work that day or request the day off, as law
enforcement activities permit.

Section 4. The normal workday for Traffic Safety Officers, Police Officers, Crime Scene
Investigators, Warrant Officers and Station Clerks shall be eight or ten consecutive hours. The
normal workday for Police Sergeants shall be between eight and eight and one half consecutive
hours or ten and ten and one half consecutive hours. The normal workday for all other
employees, shall be eight or ten consecutive hours. Whenever an employee requests and is
approved by the supervisor to work a split shift they shall be allowed one hour of their work day
scheduled for travel. The normal workday may be lengthened or shortened as law enforcement
activities require. Overtime will be paid in accordance with Section 1 of this article.

Section 5. All employees shall be allowed two 15-minute breaks with pay per work day.
The parties agree to maintain the current practices for scheduling and length of meal periods.
Those employees scheduled for a (9) nine hour day shall receive a (60) sixty minute unpaid meal
period.

Section 6. The shifts in effect on the effective date of this Agreement shall be continued
if at all possible, provided that if the City is required or desires to change such shifts, it shall
make every reasonable effort to notify the F.O.P. in order to allow the F.O.P. to have input
concerning such changes.

Section 7. When an employee appears for a Professional Standards interview or
Accident Review Board hearing which occurs outside of the employee’s normal working hours,
such employee will be paid for a minimum of two hours. However, if the interview time is in
conjunction with the beginning or ending of a normal working shift, only the extra time worked
will be paid, in lieu of the two hour minimum. Employees shall be paid for all required fitness
for duty examinations which occur outside of the employee’s normal working hours.

ARTICLE 7
COMPENSATION
Section 1. General Statements.

(a) The City will continue to write job requirements for each position classification
within the bargaining unit and will initially determine the classification of each position in
accordance with the classification plan presently in effect. Modifications in any classification
will be delivered to the F..P. in advance of such modification being made to allow input
concerning such modification, which will be given due consideration.

(b) The minimum rate of pay for a class shall be paid on the original appointment to the
class, provided that (1) the appointment to a higher rate within the wage range for a class may be
authorized by the City when it is impossible to recruit qualified persons at the minimum rate for
the class, or in recognition of exceptional qualifications of a candidate; and (2) any employee
who is promoted shall be advanced to the nearest step in the higher wage range that represents an
hourly increase in pay of at least 3.0% over pay the employee was receiving prior to the
employee’s promotion. Employees who are promoted, demoted or advanced in pay, their
anniversary or merit date shall remain the same throughout his/her career.

The Police Recruit classification is established at one range lower than Police Officer.
Police Recruits are eligible to participate in one of the health insurance programs offered by the
City and receive paid holidays. Police Recruits, in the course of any investigation or a situation
involving possible disciplinary action, shall be entitled to F.O.P. representation. A termination of
a recruit or probationary employee may not be grieved. Upon satisfactory completion of recruit
training, recruits will be advanced to the position of Police Officer and will be eligible for all
benefits afforded full-time employees.
‘An exception is made for full-time employees of the City who become Police Recruits.
Full-time employees may continue to participate in the life insurance program, in addition to
health insurance and receiving paid holidays. While the employee is in recruit training, use of
prior accrued leaves is not permitted, nor will the recruit accrue additional leave. Prior accrued
leaves and seniority for accrual of longevity benefits (vacation, sick leave and longevity pay) will
be reinstated upon appointment to Police Officer.

   

(c) The rates of pay for employees subject to this agreement are shown in Appendix B,
Appendix C, and Appendix D of this contract. Rates of pay reflect the base rate for each
employee.

(d) Employees assigned the duties of a higher position shall be compensated at the rate of
pay for the higher position for those hours worked if the employee is so assigned a period of time
20 consecutive work days or more in any 12-month period. This provision does not apply to
employees on probation.

Section 2. Rates of Pay.

(a) The rate of pay for Police Recruit is one range less than the beginning step of Police
Officer, Range 722, step A.

(b) After an employee has satisfactorily completed recruit training, the employee shall be
advanced to the position of Police Officer and shall have a twelve-month probationary period.

(c) All employees covered by this agreement shall have fifteen (15) pay steps. Within
range increases from Steps A through O shall be based on satisfactory performance and after 12
months of service in grade. Advancement may be granted after exemplary service on the
Department Director’s recommendation and with the approval of the City Manager. The denial
of a step increase shall be considered a grievable matter for commissioned personnel.

(d) Bilingual pay in the amount of $10.00 per hour for translation, paid in 15 minute
increments, in addition to their base hourly rate shall be paid to each officer designated by the
Chief of Police. The Chief shall determine which languages, other than English, are necessary to
conduct police operations and how many officers will be eligible to receive bilingual pay. An
initial test shall be established and administered by the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee to
determine competency and eligibility, but only those designated by the Chief of Police shall
receive such pay.

(e) Employees in grant-funded special assignments, rather than grant funded positions,
shall be paid at the overtime rate for all time working those assignments unless prohibited by the
grant.

Section 3. Longevity Pay. In consideration of long and faithful service, the City
Manager shall authorize payment of longevity pay to the employees in addition to their base pay.
Commencing the first full pay period after approval of the contract, employees will become
eligible for longevity pay upon the completion of six (6) years total accumulative service with the
City. The amount of this pay to employees shall not exceed $2.00 times the total years of
accumulative service per month, e.g., $2.00 times five years of service equals $10.00 monthly
longevity pay. Upon the completion of eleven (11) years total accumulative service with the
City, the amount of pay shall be increased, not to exceed $4.00 times the total years of
accumulative service per month, e.g., $4.00 times twelve years of service equals $48.00 monthly
longevity pay.

Commencing December 17, 2005, employees will become eligible for longevity pay upon
the completion of six (6) years total accumulative service with the City. The amount of this pay
to employees shall not exceed $2.00 times the total years of accumulative service per month, e.g.,
$2.00 times five years of service equals $10.00 monthly longevity pay. Upon the completion of
eleven (11) years total accumulative service with the City, the amount of pay shall be increased,
not to exceed $5.00 times the total years of accumulative service per month, e.g., $5.00 times
twelve years of service equals $60.00 monthly longevity pay.

Section 4. Educational Differential. Commencing the first full pay period after the
approval of this agreement, Police Officers, Police Detectives, and Police Sergeants shall receive
educational pay in the amount of $110.00 per month for a baccalaureate or $135 per month for a
masters degree from an accredited college or university. For commissioned officers hired after
12/27/86, a degree must be in Administration of Justice, a related field, or meet the requirements
of the department.

Academic degrees earned must be from a degree-granting institution which has been
accredited by the American Association of Collegiate Registrars and Admissions Officers and
certified as éligible by Human Resources.

Commissioned officers are not eligible for tuition reimbursement from the City of
Wichita.

Section 5. Shift Differential.
(a) Employees in the bargaining unit required to work 2™, 3“ or 4" shift will receive

shift differential pay at the rate of $.75 per hour in addition to their base pay.
(b) Differential pay will be determined by the shift starting time;

Ist Shift: From 6:00 a.m. To 10:00 a.m.
2nd Shift: From 10:00 a.m. To 5:00 p.m.
3rd Shift: From 5:00 p.m. To 11:00 p.m.
4th Shift: From 11:00 p.m. To 6:00 a.m.

Section 6. Specialty Duty Pay.

Specialty Duty Pay of $60 per pay period will be provided to officers in the positions
listed below. However, an officer that meets more than one of the criteria shall be paid a total of
only $60 per pay period (an officer is not eligible for more than one specialty pay).

1. those officers who are assigned to the Bomb Unit;

2. those officers who are assigned as Canine Officers;

. those officers who are assigned to the SWAT Team;

3.
4. those officers who are Clandestine Lab Processors;

w

. those officers assigned to the Air Section
Section 7. Stand By and/or Call Back.

(a) All employees required to carry a pager or any communication device while off duty
and not on standby, who are called back to duty, shall not be subject to disciplinary action,
transfer of assignment or changing of days off unless such non-availability becomes detrimental
to the employee’s ability to perform his/her duty assignment or is in direct conflict with the rules
and regulations of the department.

(b) Any employee placed on standby for the purpose of being called back to duty and
required to remain at home or at a specific place shall be compensated at the rate of time and
one-half for all actual duty time or restricted time.

Section 8. Field Training Officer and Field Training Sergeant Compensation.

The City agrees to pay each officer who is designated as a Field Training Officer by the
Chief of Police an additional 80 cents per hour while actually assigned to the training of newly
commissioned officers and newly commissioned reserve police officers. This pay shall occur
only during the regular training cycle or remedial training cycle established for such new officers
and/or during the time Field Training Officers are assigned to the Training Bureau. The City
agrees to pay each Sergeant who is designated as a Field Training Sergeant 70 cents per hour
while actually assigned to supervise the training of newly commissioned officers and newly
commissioned reserve police officers. This pay shall only occur during the regular training cycle
or remedial training cycle established for such new officers by the Chief of Police and/or during
the time Field Training Sergeants are assigned to the Training Bureau.

Section 9. Court Appearance.

Employees may elect one of the following two options when subpoenaed for Municipal
Court:

1, Employees may contact the Court Liaison Officer before their scheduled court time
and leave a pager, cell or home phone number where they can be reached for two (2)
hours after their scheduled court time. If employees are not contacted by the Court
Liaison Officer within two (2) hours after their scheduled court time, they will be
released from their subpoena.

2. Employees may contact the Court Liaison Officer thirty (30) to sixty (60) minutes
after their scheduled court time. At that time, employees will be released or not
released from their subpoena. If employees are not released from their subpoena, they
may:

a. Agree to call-back at a certain time;
b. Ask the Court Liaison Officer to call back at a certain time; or
c. Agree to report to Court.

Off-duty employees will have fifty (50) minutes to report to Court starting from the time
they are ordered or agrée to report.

Employees may use the time awaiting a determination from the Court Liaison Officer as
they choose.
Compensation

Off-duty employees will be compensated from the time they are ordered to Court and the
time spent in Court thereafter. Employees will be paid a minimum of two (2) hours after any
Court appearance.

Section 10. Rotation Pay - Shift Differential.

Within the investigations division there are positions for police officers that are limited in
duration and are designed to allow officers from the field services division to learn about the
investigative function by spending time working in the investigations division. ‘These positions
are considered rotation investigative assignments. While officers are assigned to these positions,
they will continue to receive shift differential paid in their previous assignment. This provision
will not apply to officers temporarily assigned to the investigations division for other reasons (i.e.
administrative, light duty, etc.)

 

 

Section 11. Annual Fitness Test.

Alll employees will be given the option of taking an annual fitness test. Those individuals
who take and pass the test will receive a $100.00 bonus for each year in which they pass the test.
The requirements for the test will be recommended by a joint committee of two members from
the F.O.P. and two members from police administration. The committee’s recommendations will
be subject to approval by the Chief of Police.

Section __12. Canine Officers

Canine Officers shall work a nine (9) hour work day, with the tenth (10") hour of each scheduled
work day being devoted to the training, care and maintenance of their canines. When canine
officers are on paid leave they shall be charged for nine (9) hours of vacation time per day but
shall be paid for ten (10).

ARTICLE 8
CHECKOFF AND PAYROLL PROCEDURE

Section 1. Whenever duly authorized by any employee on a form or forms appropriate
for such purpose and consistent with the regulations established by the Human Resources
Department of the City, payroll deductions shall be made and paid in accordance with such form
or forms for any or all of the following purposes:

(1) Donations to the Friendship Fund;

(2) Premiums for employee health, dental and life insurance benefits;

(3) Police Benefit Fund for commissioned police officers only, as defined by the
Benefit Fund by-laws

(4) Deferred Compensation;

(5) Employee Organization Dues; and

(6) Deduction to the Wichita Federal Municipal Employee’s Credit Union.

Section 2. The authorization form or forms will include a provision that an employee
may terminate the deduction for F.O.P. dues upon written notice to the City and the F.O.P. during

ll
the months of March and September.

ARTICLE 9
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS AND ALLOWANCES

Police Recruits are not eligible for any employment benefits except health insurance.
Benefits and allowances become effective when the Police Recruit is classified as Police Officer.

Section 1. Retirement and Pension Funds. Employees shall come under the retirement
systems as set forth by the City of Wichita in effective ordinances and charter ordinances. The
bargaining unit employees agree to be bound by any changes in the retirement systems that are
approved by a majority vote of all employees covered thereunder.

(a) The City will post pensionable pay categories on the City web portal so to provide
information about the pension benefits to employees and provide contact information so that
employees can contact the Board of pensions to obtain any information needed regarding their
pensions.

(b) If the Pension Board revokes the disability pension of any former bargaining unit
member for the reason that the member is no longer disabled, the department must rehire that
member at the rank, pay step and seniority that member held at the time of his retirement, except
that seniority shall include time spent in retirement.

(c) In order to be eligible for rehire, pursuant to paragrapb (b) above, the retiree must:

(1) Successfully complete the application process; and

(2) If a disciplinary investigation was pending at the time he/she was awarded a disability
pension, the retiree must have cooperated in that investigation. Such retirees shall retain all of
their grievance rights under this contract at the time of the imposition of any discipline.

Section 2. Medical and Hospitalization Insurance. The City will extend to all
employee groups the same health insurance program(s) available to ali full-time City Employees.
For those participating in the City plan, the City will pay 80% of the health insurance premium
of the lowest cost plan offered by the City. The employee will pay 20% of the health insurance
costs of the lowest cost health insurance plan offered by the City and additional costs of any other
health plan the employee group selects. Participation in the health insurance program is optional
with each employee.

Section 3. Life Insurance. The City agrees to provide a group life insurance in the
amount of two times the employee’s base annual salary, rounded up to the next higher thousand
(up to a maximum of $150,000). The City and employees shall share equally in the cost of the
life insurance plan. The life insurance program is optional.

Section 4. Wichita Police Benefit Fund Association. The City recognizes the existence
of the Wichita Police Benefit Fund Association, and recognizes the right of all commissioned
officers to belong to the same, subject to the by-laws of the Wichita Police Benefit Fund
Association.

Section 5. Automobile Insurance. The City shall provide liability insurance protection

for each employee covered by this Agreement during authorized operation of a City vehicle or
equipment. Any legal representation shall be provided by the insurer at no expense to the

12
employee or pursuant to Section 2.62.10 et. seq. of the City Code. The department will
complete State accident reports in officer involved accidents only when required by State
reporting criteria.

Section 6. Uniforms and Equipment.

(a) The City shall furnish or reimburse an employee for all required equipment and initial
issue of uniforms the employee is required to possess by virtue of the employee’s employment
with the City. Replacement or renovation of issued leather equipment, except shoes, and boots,
which have become unserviceable through fair wear and tear shall be done at no cost to the
employee’s uniform and equipment allowance. Replacement of bulletproof vests, which have
become unserviceable through fair wear and tear, or at the expiration of the manufacturer’ s
warranty, shall be done at no cost to the employee’s uniform and equipment allowance.

(b) Police Officers, Police Detectives, Police Sergeants, Traffic Safety Officers, Crime
Scene Investigators, Warrant Officers and Station Clerks shall be allowed a clothing allowance
up to a maximum of $650 in department credit or vouchers in accordance with department
policy.

(1) Uniformed employees may expend up to one-half of the uniform and
equipment allowance for civilian attire each year.

(2) Police Detectives may expend their total uniform and equipment
allowance for either uniform items or civilian attire according to individual
requirements.

(3) Nocash payments or carry over credit will be given for any under
expended portion of the annual uniform and equipment allowance.

(4) Police Officers who are in assignments which are expected to last at least
four (4) months and which require civilian clothing shall be allowed to
expend their total uniform and equipment allowance for either
uniform/equipment items or civilian attire according to individual
requirements.

(5) “All employees assigned to the Special Weapons And Tactics (SWAT)
team, Clandestine Lab, or Explosive Ordinance Disposal (EOD) Unit shall
be allowed a one time expenditure of 75% of their annual uniform and
equipment allowance for the purchase of personal SWAT team,
Clandestine Lab, or Explosive Ordinance Disposal Unit related equipment
not issued by the City. Thereafter, SWAT team, Clandestine Lab, and
EOD Unit members shall be allowed to spend up to a maximum of 25% of
their annual uniform and equipment allowance on personal SWAT team,
Clandestine Lab, or EOD related items not issued by the City.”

(6) Officers may use the full uniform and equipment allowance at any time
from January 1 through November 30 of each year.

(c) The City shall repair or replace uniforms, including leather goods, civilian attire, and

prescription eyewear damaged or destroyed in the line of duty. The employee who suffers the
damage to equipment described above will submit a claim with a complete report of

13
circumstances surrounding the incident, including the police case number, to the Commander of
the Support Services Division through channels who will rule on this claim in writing within five
days. Under no circumstances will the City be responsible for damages to any equipment when it
is determined that the employee was negligent or that the damage was not the result of an in-line-
of-duty police activities.

(d) While on duty in uniform or plain clothes, any member of the F.O.P. may wear the
F.OP. pin sold by the F.0.P. Grand Lodge to its members. The pin shall be worn on the left
front pocket flap of the uniform.

(e)_ Employee retiring from service may retain their badge provided they agree that the
badge will be sealed or encased preventing its official use. The retiring employee may pay for
the cost of the badge from his/her uniform allowance.

(f) Employees retiring from service, except for medical disability for_ psychological
reasons, may be able to purchase their duty weapon at the fair market value. In order to
purchase the weapon, the purchase must be in accordance with all applicable laws, including
sales, waiting periods and licensing. A qualified employee may expend his/her unspent clothing
allowance to purchase their duty weapon.

Section 7. Travel and Business Expense. Employees shall be reimbursed for all
authorized travel and business expense in accordance with the City’s administrative policies and
regulations covering such advancements and reimbursements.

ARTICLE 10
LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Section 1. General Statements.

(a) Leaves of absence with pay include: Vacation, sick (including maternity), well-day,
injury, emergency, civil and other leave with pay. Leaves of absence without pay include: Sick
(including maternity), educational, military and other leave without pay.

(b) All full-time employees who have completed recruit training and are represented by
the F.O.P. earn benefits.

(c) An employee must be in pay status while on leave of absence to accumulate benefits,
except that seniority credit may be accrued while on military leave without pay. When an
employee is promoted, demoted or transferred, all sick and vacation leave remains to the
employee’s credit and is transferred with the employee.

(d) Vacation leave will be earned on hours in pay status, exclusive of overtime, and will

be calculated at the time the payroll is processed. Base hours for computing vacation leave are
2,080 per year for employees of the unit except for Police Sergeants which is up to 2,210 per

14
year. All requests for leave of absence shall be made in writing in advance of the beginning date
io the immediate supervisor, except that requests for sick leave, injury leave and emergency leave
shall be made pursuant to the requirements of the sections dealing with those respective leaves.
Leave, with or without pay, is to be reported on the Employee Time Record in actual hours of
work and actual hours of leave.

Section 2. Annual Vacation Leave. Employees entering the service of the City earn
vacation leave on the basis of credited full-time employment. Police Recruits do not earn
vacation leave.

(a) The rate at which vacation leave is earned is determined by the start-work date or
adjusted start-work date, except:
Employees with prior creditable employment are not eligible to earn vacation
leave based on their adjusted start-work date until after completion of two years

reemployment.

(b) All requests for vacation leave will be approved by departmental seniority within the
Police Department.

(c) Vacation leave for employees of the unit is earned at the following rates:

 

Years of 80 Hour Employees Hours Accrued 85 Hour Employees Hours Accrued
Service Hours per Year per Pay Period Hours per Year per Pay Period
Less than 5 96 3.6923 102.0 3.9231
5 104 4.0000 110.5 4.2500
7 112 4.3077 119.0 4.5769
8 120 4.6154 127.5 4.9038
9 128 4.9231 136.0 5.2308
10 136 5.2308 144.5 5.5577
12 144 5.5385 153.0 5.8846,
14 152 5.8462 161.5 6.2115
16 160 6.1538 170.0 6.5385
18 168 6.4615 178.5 6.8654,
20 176 6.7692 187.0 7.1923
25 200 7.6923 212.5 8.1731

(d) Vacation leave may not be taken in advance of vacation earned, nor prior to
completion of six months satisfactory service. Employees must have satisfactorily completed six
months of their probationary appointment before being eligible to take vacation or be paid for
terminal vacation.

(e) An employee who goes on military leave for extended active duty or is terminated
will be paid for any unused vacation leave by adding the total sum due to the employee’ last
payroll check. In the event of an employee's death, any vacation pay due will be included in the
final payroll check.

(f) Vacation leave is scheduled in the department according to the policies established by
the Department Director. Vacation may not be taken in excess of the hours appearing on the

15
payroll stub nor in increments of less than thirty minutes. The Department may not cancel a
vacation which has been scheduled unless the emergency mobilization plan is in effect.

(g). Employees are allowed to accumulate and carry forward each year 240 hours (255
hours for Sergeants) of vacation leave. Employees will be required to use or lose vacation earned
in excess of 240 hours (255 hours for Sergeants) before the end of the pay period in which the
anniversary of their full-time (i.e., not limited) employment date occurs.

(h) An employee who is called back to duty or subpoenaed to appear in court on police
business during the employee’s vacation leave shail be granted additional vacation leave equal to
one day for each full day or partial day of vacation leave actually lost due to travel and
appearance or duty time. At the option of the employee, the employee may receive pay at
straight time for those days rather than taking the days off. In addition, the City shall make and
pay all necessary travel arrangements and expenses for the employee to report as required and to
return to employee’s vacation. If the employee has not received personal service on a subpoena
from the court and the employee is out of state on authorized vacation and is called back to court,
the employee will receive pay at the rate of time and one half for time actually spent in court with
a two hour minimum, regardless of any other leave time in the pay period, in addition to
replacement of vacation time for every day or partial day actually lost due to travel and
appearance or duty time.

Section 3. Sick Leave.

(a) Accrual. Upon appointment to the position (except Police Recruit), employees shall
accrue sick leave at the rate of 1.8462 hours per pay period or 48 hours per year (1.9615 hours
per pay period or 51 hours per year for sergeants) for the first five years of creditable service.
Beginning year six and through year fifteen of creditable service, sick leave will be accrued at the
rate of 3.6923 hours per pay period or 96 hours per year. (3.9231 hours per pay period or 102
hours per years for sergeants). Beginning year sixteen of creditable service, sick leave will be
accrued at the rate of 4.3077 hours per pay period or 112 hours per year. (4.5769 hours per pay
period or 119 hours per year for sergeants).

Employees with prior creditable service are eligible to accrue sick leave benefits based on
their adjusted start work date after two years of continuous service from the date of rehire.

(b) Sick Leave Use. Sick leave may be used for personal illness, off-the job injury,
dependent illness including paternity leave, and enforced quarantine.

(1) Dependent Illness. Sick leave may be used for illness of members of the
employee's immediate family. Immediate family is defined as spouse,
children (including stepchildren) parent, and any relative living in the
employee's home. In no event may the employee charge in excess of
forty-eight (48) hours per payroll year for dependent illness.

(2) Enforced quarantine in accordance with community health regulations.
(3) A probationary employee will not be paid for accrued sick leave used
during the first six months of service. Payment for accrued sick leave used

during the first six months will be made the pay period following
completion of six months of satisfactory service. Payment for sick leave

16
for other than probationary employees is in accordance with established
policies previously defined. The accumulation of sick leave is unlimited.

(c) When taking sick leave, an employee shall give notice to a supervisor by telephone or
messenger thirty minutes prior to the employée’s scheduled time to report for duty. Upon return
to work, the employee shall file a report on a form furnished by the City stating the reasons for
the absence. When an employee has been on sick leave for five (5) consecutive work days, the
City may require the employee to be examined by a physician it designates. The City may
require a physician’s statement anytime sick leave abuse is suspected. The burden of proof rests
with the City to show abuse in the grievance process.

(d) A leave of absence shall be granted for maternity upon request. Such request must be
presented in writing to the employee’s immediate supervisor, setting forth a date such leave is to
begin, as soon as that date can be determined by the employee and the employee’s physician.
Maternity leave shall be charged against accrued sick leave, and the Department Director or the
Human Resources Director may require the employee to be examined by a physician of the City’s,
choice. If maternity leave extends beyond the employee’s accrued sick leave, leave may be
granted in accordance with policies governing sick leave without pay.

(e) An additional day of leave (8 hours for 40 hour, 5 days per week employees, or 10
hours for 40 hour, 4 days per week or up to 10.5 hours for Police Sergeants) shall be granted to
an employee who has completed the previous payroll year as a full-time employee and who did
not report more than 24 hours of sick leave, or up to 25.5 hours for Police Sergeants, in the
preceding payroll year. Any employee who completed the previous payroll year beginning
December 16, 2006 as a full-time employee and who did not use any sick leave hours during the
payroll year will receive ONE additional day of leave (8 hours for 40 hour, 5 days per week
employees, or 10 hours for 40 hour, 4 days per week or up to 10.5 hours for Police Sergeants).
Well day leave must be taken in increments of not less than four hours with prior approval of the
immediate supervisor. Well day leave is granted the second pay period following the payroll
year, is noncumulative and is not charged against accrued leaves.

(f) An employee shall be eligible for sick leave without pay when the employee has
exhausted all regular sick leave and vacation leave, provided the maximum sick leave without
pay shall not exceed 60 calendar days. If an employee has used the employee’ s vacation leave on
account of sickness, the Department Director may grant a leave of absence without pay as
provided in Section 13 of this article.

(g) Sick leave may also be used by an employee under the circumstances specified in
Sections 4 of this article.

Section 4. Injury Leave.

(a) During recruit training the City will pay authorized Workers Compensation benefits
to a Police Recruit injured during training.

(b) After appointment to Police Officer, the City will pay benefits to the injured
employee over and above the authorized Workers’ Compensation benefits sufficient to allow the
employee to receive up to the amount of the employee’s full pay check during the first 90 days of
disability.

(c) After 90 consecutive days, the employee will be paid according to the terms of the

17
Workers’ Compensation Act until released to return to work and use sick leave and/or vacation
leave as needed above the Workers’ Compensation benefit to allow the employee to receive a full
pay check.

(d) All injuries, including heart and lung disease, will be considered and defined in
accordance with the Workers’ Compensation Act of the State of Kansas and the interpretive
cases arising thereunder. The City will provide all employees who file a workers’ compensation
claim with a fact sheet regarding their rights and the City’s responsibilities under State workers”
compensation laws.

   

(e) Recurring leave of absence related to a previous injury shall be considered one and
the same injury if the injury occurs within 365 days, subject to administrative analysis and
diagnosis of the injury reporting physician. However, if recurring leave relating to a previous
injury is required after one year (365 days) from date of release by the physician, such leave will
be treated as a new injury case.

(f) The Department Director shall provide all personnel in the F.O.P. with a list of
physicians certified by the City to handle cases coming under the Workers’ Compensation Act,
herein referred to as a "certified physician.” In the event of noncritical injury, the department
shall refer the employee to a certified physician for medical attention. In the event of critical
injury, appropriate arrangements for emergency treatment shall be made and a certified physician
shall be called to be in charge of the case unless such action may result in a delay that would be
detrimental to the injured employee, in which case the department shall authorize the most
expeditious care and treatment possible.

(g)_ Any employee who suffers a work related injury subject to this Section and who
consults with a physician without authorization will receive reimbursement for the unauthorized
consultation as allowed by the Kansas worker’s compensation statutes

(h) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a Police Officer, Police Detective, or Police
Sergeant sustains, in the line of duty and not during secondary employment, (1) any injury which
is peculiar to police work or (2) any injury while performing a function which is peculiar to
police work, which causes the employee to be unable to perform the employee’s duty, the
employee shall continue to be paid by the City on the same basis as the employee was paid before
the injury with full benefits and no deduction from any accumulated leave or overtime
accumulation during the time the employee is unable to perform the employee’s duty as a result
of the injury, but not longer than one year from the initial date of injury.

At any time during the period for which continuing compensation is required by this
provision, the City may order, at the expense of the City, medical examination of the injured
person to determine the degree of disability. During this period of disability, the injured person
shall not be employed in any other manner with or without monetary compensation. Any person
who is employed in violation of this paragraph forfeits the continuing compensation provided by
this provision from the time such employment begins. Any salary compensation due the injured
person from Workers’ Compensation, or any salary due the employee from any type of insurance
which may be carried by the City, shall revert to the City during the time for which continuing
compensation is paid to the employee under this provision.

(i) Any use of the FMLA during injury leave will be at the sole discretion of the

employee. If the employee is unable to perform the employee’s duties after one year from the
date of the intial injury, then the employee may be placed on FMLA leave by the employer.

18
19

 
Section 5. Bereavement Leave.

(a) _ Eligibility. In the event of a death in an employee’s immediate family, the employee may be
allowed a leave of absence with pay up to a maximum of five (5) work days within the two week
period immediately following the death of an immediate family member. Immediate family member
is defined as an employee’s spouse, children, step-children, parents, stepparents, state-approved
foster child, or any relative living in the employee’s home. For the death of a father-in-law, mother-
in-law, brother, sister, grandparents, grandchildren, daughter-in-law, or son-in-law the employee may
be allowed a leave of absence up to a maximum of three (3) work days to be taken within the two
week period immediately following the death of any of these persons. This leave must be approved
by the Division Commander and is not charged against any leave accumulation. In the event the
employee must travel out of state, the employee shall be allowed up to two additional days of leave,
chargeable to the employee’s vacation accrual or sick leave accrual.

(b) An employee who is unable to work because of a death in the immediate family must
notify a supervisor by telephone or messenger, prior to the employee’s scheduled time to report.

Section 6. Educational Leave. Educational leave of absence without pay may be
granted to an employee not to exceed 12 months. Course work shall be related to a law
enforcement career. Requests shall be submitted to the Department Director in writing, and must
be approved on the basis of the City’s policy.

While on educational leave, without pay, no additional seniority is accrued.
Section 7. Professional Conferences and Meetings.

(a) Leave with pay may be granted in accordance with City policy to attend professional
conferences and meetings, or to visit other cities in the interest of the City.

(b)_ It is acknowledged by both parties to this agreement that the role of professional
standards investigators is to serve as fact finders regarding internal administrative investigations.
To this end , these personnel are expected to have a high level of training regarding such
investigations. Therefore, all investigative personnel assigned to this bureau will attend an
applicable internal affairs training conference (such as labor relations information systems or
Thomas & Means), within the first six (6) months of their assignment unless exigent
circumstances exist. All investigative personnel will also attend the subsequent training seminars
at an interval not to exceed 24 months unless exigent circumstances exist. The FOP agrees that it
will pay one-half (1/2) of the expenses for such training incurred by active members of the FOP.
All personnel assigned to the professional standards bureau will attend the shift steward training
hosted by the F.O.P.

(c) Whenever possible any employee upon promotion to the rank of Captain shall attend
immediate shift steward training class hosted by the F.O.P. that falls on the date following that
promotion unless exigent circumstances exist.

Section 8. Jury Duty. Upon receipt of an order requiring an employee to report for jury

20
duty, the order will be shown to the immediate supervisor who shall receive the required
permission from the Bureau Commander . An employee shall receive the employee’s regular
hourly rate for all scheduled work hours lost when thé employee is required to serve as a member
of a jury. Fees received by an employee while serving on a jury shall be turned over to the City
Treasurer. An employee will not be required to return money received as reimbursement for
travel and meals while serving on jury duty, and an employee is not required to return money
received while serving on jury duty on regular days off, holidays or vacation.

Section 9. Court Appearance in Official Capacity. Court appearance in an official
capacity is considered working time. During an employee’s regular working hours, no leave of
absence is necessary for such court appearance. If such court appearance is during off-duty
hours, the employee shall be compensated in accordance with Article VI, Section 6. In either
event, when the employee is compensated by the City for court appearance, the employee shall
turn over to the City Treasurer any witness fees received.

Section 10. Court Appearance in Personal Matters. If an employee is involved in
court as a party in a case, the employee may be granted a leave of absence without pay or, at the
employee’s option, may have such time off charged to accrued vacation leave.

Section 11. Military Leave. Requests for military leave will be handled in accordance
with Title 38, U.S. Code, Section 2021 et. seq..

Section 12. Time Off for F.O.P. Business.

 
 

(a)
shall be assigned to the day shift with Saturday and Sunday off during their term in office. If this
was requested, the City may return those officers to their original shift upon completion of their
term in office. There shall be one chief lodge steward assigned to each bureau and one assigned
to investigations/support. Whenever a vacancy occurs in one of the those chief lodge steward
positions, the department will grant the lodge’s request to transfer individuals in order to fill any
such chief lodge steward vacancy. The department will transfer chief lodge stewards to those
bureaus where they are needed.

(b) The F.O.P, President may appoint members of the bargaining unit who will be given
time off with pay to conduct contract negotiations. The maximum number of collective hours of
pay the City will provide for contract negotiations will be 300 hours. Nothing in this
Memorandum of Agreement shall prohibit the F.O.P. or the City from being allowed to have
outside assistance in contract negotiations.

(c) The F.0.P. President and two (2) members designated by the F.O.P. President shall
be granted time off with pay to conduct F.O.P. business upon request to their supervisors. Such
requests shall not be unreasonably denied.

(d) F.O.P. representatives shall record on an authorized form only the amount of time
used for F.O.P. business in excess of thirty (30) minutes in an eight (8) hour day. Said form shall
be signed by the F.O.P. representative and a supervisor. The supervisor shall forward the
original form to the Chief’s office.

(@) Upon approval of the Police Chief, or the Chief’s designee, an F.O.P. representative

21

Formatted: Font color: Auto
may attend squad meetings periodically during negotiations to brief represented employees on the
status of negotiations. Such briefings will not exceed ten minutes in length and will be confined
to a factual report on the status of negotiations.

(f) Members of the F.O.P. Lodge #5 Executive Board, who are city employees, and on
duty shall be granted reasonable time to attend the regular Lodge meeting each month, and the
regular Executive Board meeting each month. A maximum of four (4) Shift Stewards who are
working the shift of the regular Lodge meeting each month shall be granted reasonable time to
attend the meeting, if the staffing permits. Anyone attending these meetings while on duty shall
be subject to call from the Emergency Communications Dispatchers or any Police Supervisor at
any time during the meeting. Lists of the Executive Board Members and the Shift Stewards will
be provided to the Chief of Police every six (6) months or when a change in the previous list
occurs. The Chief will also be given written notice at least fifteen (15) days in advance of such
meetings.

Section 13. Other Leave of Absence. The Department Director may grant leaves of
absence without pay to any employee up to 30 calendar days for any personal matter or
emergency for good cause, except, such leave of absence without pay will not be granted until all
vacation leave is exhausted.

ARTICLE 11
SENIORITY

Section 1. Police Officers, Station Clerks and Warrant Officers shall serve a
probationary period of 12 months. Traffic Safety Officers and Crime Scene Investigators shall
serve a probationary period of 6 months. They shall have no seniority rights during this period,
but shall be subject to all other clauses of this Agreement. All employees who are not laid off or
discharged during the probationary period shall be known as full-time employees, and all
employees will be given an equal opportunity to become full-time employees. When an
employee acquires seniority, the employee’s name shall be placed on the seniority list established
by the Department Director. “Departmental seniority shall be measured by service in any
bargaining unit position covered by this agreement. Members of the bargaining unit shail not
receive past service credit or other seniority credit for service outside of the bargaining unit.” If
length is equal, then time in grade shall control. If time in grade is equal, then relative seniority
shall be determined by the lowest department ID. number. Seniority for Sergeants will be
determined by time in grade.

Section 2. The seniority list shall be made current at the end of each quarter. As soon as
possible thereafter, the City will make available for review at least one copy at each police
facility with a copy delivered to the F.O.P.

Section 3. All lay-offs shall be in inverse order of seniority of classification by Division.
Laid off employees shall be recalled in order of seniority.

Section 4. Seniority shall be broken if: (1) the employee quits; (2) the employee is

properly discharged; (3) the employee is laid off and not rehired within 18 months; or (4) the
employee is permanently disabled.

22
Should an employee be re-employed and covered by the F.O.P. Agreement, the employee
will regain prior service seniority after being re-employed for one (1) complete year.

Section 5. None of the provisions of this article shall be permitted to conflict with any
obligation of the City under any Federal or State law concerning military service.

Section 6. Except as provided in Section 1 of this Article an employee transferring into
the bargaining unit from some other City department shall retain the employee’s accumulated
seniority for purposes of vacation accumulation, sick leave accumulation and longevity pay.

Section 7. Days off and vacations shall be determined by department seniority relative to
all employees covered by this Agreement within the same work unit.

Section 8. An employee’s days off may be subject to change if the employee fails to
meet reasonable minimum performance standards established in writing by the Chief of Police or
Division Commander. A change in days off made pursuant to this section shall be subject to
Article 14,

Section 9. Upon being transferred into a different assignment, an employee may invoke
seniority, as defined in section seven (7) of this article, only when an opening in days off
becomes available.

ARTICLE 12
PROMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS
Section 1. Promotional Policy

Wichita Police Department Policy 216 details the promotional process for the ranks of
Detective/Sergeant/Lieutenant, The parties hereby incorporate by reference the current
department promotion policy for the ranks of Detective, Sergeant and Lieutenant. They
specifically acknowledge that the procedures and requirements set out the current policy cannot
be modified or changed in any manner without the express written agreement of the City and the
Lodge.

In the event a Crime Scene Supervisor position comes open, the City of Wichita
promotional process will be followed in selecting a suitable candidate to fill the position.
Current Crime Scene Investigators will have first consideration but the Chief of Police reserves
the right to open the process to candidates outside of the department.

 

Section 2. When an employee is promoted, or transferred, the employee will be notified
in writing of such transfer or promotion at least seven days in advance of the promotion or
transfer. In the event a transfer must be made due to extenuating circumstances (requiring a case-
by-case review), the seven day notice may not apply. Transfer is defined as a non-emergency
shift change, division change or assignment change which can be reasonably expected to last for
a period of one month or longer.

Section 3. Vacancies in the Field Services Division and the Traffic Section shall be

posted for seven (7) calendar days to allow personnel to apply to the respective Bureau
Commanders where the vacancy exists. Bureau Commanders shall consider the needs of the

23
department, the qualifications, work history, and seniority of the applicants during the selection
process. Any special considerations or preferences of personnel to fill the vacancies shall be
listed at the time the position is advertised.

Section 4. There will be an bi-annual (April and October) selection process for each
specialized assignment, (SCAT, Community Policing and School Resource Officers). For all
other specialized assignment there shall be a selection process as needed. This list will remain in
effect for one full year, for purposes of this section; specialized assignments are anything except
basic patrol, and Sergeant positions. There will be standardized grid matrix for specialty units.

Section 5. No employee may be placed in a temporary assignment for more than ninety
(90) days. On the ninety-first day, the position shall be considered vacant and must be filled in
accordance with this agreement.

ARTICLE 13
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES

Section 1. If an employee commits misconduct on or off duty, disciplinary action may be
taken against the employee. "Misconduct" occurs when an employee, by act or omission,
neglects duty, fails to execute a lawful order, violates published departmental regulations, fails to
follow departmental policy, or commits a public offense. "Disciplinary action" is either
corrective or punitive administrative action and includes the following:

(a) A documented verbal counseling or written reprimand, which shall be considered
"minor disciplinary action;” and

(b) Demotion, suspension or dismissal, which shall be considered "major disciplinary
action."

Section 2. There shall be Professional Standards that conducts administrative
investigations. Administrative investigations shall involve the investigation of complaints
against an employee by citizens or fellow employees not amounting to a violation of the criminal
laws or alleged violations of the criminal laws where only an administrative penalty may be
imposed.

(a) When minor disciplinary action is imposed on an employee, a report of disciplinary
action will be placed in the employee’s departmental personnel file. The report will state the
factual details of the misconduct, the disciplinary action imposed, and the approval of the
appropriate command for such disciplinary action, The employee shall be provided with an
executed copy of the report. The employee shall have 30 days to file a written response to the
report. The response shall be placed in the employee’s departmental personnel file and shall be
attached to the report.

(b) When an employee is charged with misconduct which does or reasonably may result
in the imposition of major disciplinary action, the employee shall be notified in writing of the
charge within ninety-six (96) hours from the time that the charge/complaint is processed, the
Department shall send written notification to the employee. The notification shall state the
factual details of the accusations of the misconduct, the order, regulation, policy or law, of any
alleged violation; the names and addresses of all witnesses; and all other material facts known to

24
the City and its employees. The employee shall have the right to inspect and request copies of
the record of the Professional Standards file of the employee. All records, reports, statements
and information contained in the Professional Standards files are confidential and may only be
used by the employee in a grievance, as described in Article XIV, regarding discipline imposed
on the matter which is the subject of records, statements and information obtained from the
Professional Standards file.

(c) Whenever an employee has received discipline, within ninety-six (96) hours of the
issuance of any such discipline, the Department shall provide to the F.O.P. the entire Professional
Standards file, including all witness statements and reports contained therein, and any other
material in the department’s possession which relates to the charges or conduct which is the basis
of the discipline for the purposes of determining whether a grievance should be filed over the
discipline. This inspection and review shall be subject to the following limitations:

a)

Q)

GB)

(4)

All information learned from the review of the files and documents will be
treated as confidential and may only be used by the F.O.P. in conjunction
with the grievance procedure under the contract or in defense of any claim
that the F.O.P. failed to meet its duty of fair representation owed to the
employee/grievant.

In order to review the aforesaid files and documents, the Lodge President,
Vice-President, Chief Lodge Steward or other designated member of the
Executive Board will be required to produce a document signed by the
officer in question requesting that the President and Chief Lodge Steward
be given access to these files and documents. It is agreed that if the officer
involved does not give such consent for review of the files and documents
by these F.O.P. officers, any discipline imposed upon the officer as a result
of the incident under investigation shall not be considered in the database
upon which the City relies in determining appropriate discipline.

All letters of discipline which are issued to employees shall contain the
following statement for the disciplined employee to sign: I request that a
copy of this disciplinary notice be sent to the FOP and that the FOP shall
be given access to the professional standards investigations resulting in
discipline of me, and my personnel file.

Yes _ No

 

If a grievance is filed over the proposed discipline, which proceeds to a
hearing before the Grievance Board, the F.O.P., shall be provided copies
of the aforesaid files and documents to be used by the FOP in conjunction
with the grievance procedures under this contract or in defense of any
claim that the FOP filed to meet its duty of fair representation owed to the
employee grievant. It is agreed that these documents are confidential and
must be treated in a confidential manner, and may not be used for any
other purpose than the Grievance Board hearing. It is further agreed that
after the grievance procedure has concluded, the documents will be
returned by the F.O.P. to the City.

(d) An interview of an employee under investigation for misconduct which reasonably
may result in the imposition of major disciplinary action shall be recorded in a manner chosen by
the investigator. The employee and the FOP shall be entitled to record the interview
electronically or in writing. If the recording device for the FOP, professional standards or the

25
employee fails for any reason, all parties will provide copies of their recordings to one another
upon request.

(e) An employee who is the subject of an internal investigation may request that a
representative of the lodge be present during the interview. The representative of the lodge shall
not obstruct the interview. The lodge representative shall represent the employee in protecting
the employee’s rights, The lodge representative may ask for clarification of questions.

If the lodge representative cannot be made available at the designated time and location,
the lodge shall be obligated to provide an alternative representative, and the interview shall be
delayed until a representative can be made available, overnight if necessary.

(f) Attendance by a representative of the F.O.P., during the interviews of employees,
within the bargaining unit, will not obstruct administrative investigations. To that end, the City
of Wichita and F.0.P. Lodge No. 5 agree that the following procedures will be followed:

(1) A representative of the F.O.P. may attend an interview only at the option of
the employee. The option can be exercised after the employee has been advised that the
representative's attendance may affect the confidentiality of the interview and that any
communications the employee has with the representative outside of a Garrity-protected
interview, may not be privileged as to third parti

 

a. The F.O.P. representative may attend interviews of employees about whom
the complaint or allegations of misconduct are made and which may result in
discipline. A representative of the F.O.P. may attend interviews of
employees who are witnesses.

b. The employee is responsible for contacting the F.O.P. about an impending
interview.
c. Administrative investigators will not interview the F.O.P. representative to

determine whether the employee’s statements during the interview are
consistent with his or her statements in private.

d. Administrative investigations of traffic accidents by departmental personnel
assigned to investigate the accident and/or supervisors assigned to the scene
of the accident will be exempted from this requirement.

e. Supervisors will be allowed to conduct a preliminary investigation of alleged
misconduct to include a preliminary interview with the employee without
F.OP. representative present to determine whether an official internal
investigation should be initiated.

f. At the request of the employee who is the subject of the investigation, an
F.OP. representative may be present in the pre-polygraph examination
interview of that employee under the condition that the F.O.P. representative
is only an observer and may make no comments or ask questions during the
interview. During the polygraph examination, the F.O.P. representative shall
be excluded from the room.

26
(2) The F.0.P. will designate representatives who may represent employees during
administrative interviews.

a.

b.

Representatives will be available on all shifts.

The representative must currently be an active member of the F.O.P. Lodge
No. 5 and within the bargaining unit.

The representative cannot be an employee who is or may be involved in the
matter being investigated. If there is a possibility that the representative may
be interviewed or may be involved in connection with the matter being
investigated, a different representative shall be assigned.

Failure of the F.0.P. to make a representative available at the time of the
scheduled interview, if the employee who is the subject of the investigation
fails to provide the FOP with timely notice, will not cause the interview to be
postponed.

(3) The representative’ s role is limited to enforcement of the contract and employee’s
rights, The representative may not obstruct the investigation or the interview.

a.

Any breaks are solely at the interviewer's discretion and shall be at
reasonable intervals (approximately one break an hour).

In the event the representative repeatedly obstructs the interview, the
interview will be temporarily halted and the Chief of Police and the FOP
President (or their designees) will be contacted and advised of the situation.
The Chief of Police and the FOP President (or their designees) will work to
resolve the matter. If they agree the matter is resolved the lodge
representative may continue the representation of the employee being
interviewed. If there is not agreement that the matter is resolved the lodge
representative may not continue and will be replaced with a substitute
representative.

The professional standards interviewer will, at various times during the
interview, ask the representative of the FOP if he/she has any questions,
comments or claifying points to make. At the conclusion of the interviewer’ s
questions, the employee and the representative may take a reasonable break to
consult and, thereafter, the employee make an additional factual statement or
clarification.

The interview of any employee shall be at a reasonable hour, preferably
when the employee is on duty, unless the circumstances of the
investigation dictate otherwise, all as determined by the department.

The interview shall take place at a location designated by the investigating
officer, usually at a police facility.

The employee shall be informed of the rank, name and command of the

interrogating officers as well as the rank, name and command of the
officer in charge of the investigation and identity of all persons present

27
during the interview.

g. The interview shall be completed as soon as possible. Time may be
provided for personal necessities, meals, telephone calls, and rest periods,
as appropriate.

h. No offensive language, coercion or promise of reward as an
inducement to answering questions shall be directed at the employee.
Nothing herein is to be construed as to prohibit the investigating officer
from informing the employee that his conduct can become the subject of
disciplinary action.

i, All Professional Standards interviews shall be recorded. There will be
no off the record conversation during an interview, except by mutual
agreement. Alll recesses called during an interview shall be noted in the
record.

j. If major disciplinary action is imposed on an employee pending the
determination of a complaint of misconduct and that complaint
subsequently is determined to be unfounded or non-sustained or the
employee is exonerated, the disciplinary action shall be revoked and the
employee shall receive all rank, pay, and benefits lost as a result of the
disciplinary action.

Section 3. The Department Director shall establish a system for the receipt, investigation
and determination of complaints by any person against employees which may result in the filing
of criminal charges. That system shall include procedures to insure protection of an employee's
Federal and State constitutional and statutory rights.

Section 4. Prior to a change in the systems established pursuant to Sections 2 and 3 of
this article, the Department Director shall notify the F.O.P. of the proposed change. The F.O.P.
may comment in writing to the Department Director on the proposed change within ten work
days of notification. The F.O.P.’s comments shall be given due consideration.

Section 5. Whenever an employee is ordered to place his signature upon any document
or report for disciplinary action, it is understood that said employee is merely acknowledging
receipt of said document and does not indicate whether or not the employee agrees or disagrees
with the document, report or disciplinary action.

Section 6. Employees receiving discipline shall have the option of forfeiting the
appropriate number of accrued paid vacation days in lieu of the unpaid suspension, not to exceed
ten (10) working days per calendar year.

Section 7. Complaints. In cases where individuals have made false complaints against
any member of the Department, which have been deemed unfounded, the Department will review
such matters to determine whether it will prosecute such individuals involved.

Section 8. Just Cause. Employees may only be disciplined for just cause.

28
ARTICLE 14
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Section 1. A grievance is defined as any dispute involving the application or alleged
violation of any provision of this Agreement. A work day is defined as Monday through Friday,
excluding holidays. Verbal warnings shall not be considered grievable matters.

Section 2. Any grievance as defined by Section 1 of this article shall be settled in the
following manner:

(a) The grievance shall be taken in writing to the employee’ s Division Commander
within ten (10) work days after the grievance occurs by the aggrieved employee and/or the F.O.P.
The Division Commander will render a decision within five (5) work days. In cases involving
disciplinary action, a grievance must be filed within ten (10) days of receipt of the official
notification of the discipline imposed. Copies of the Division Commander’ s decision will be
sent to the employee and the F.0.P.

(b) Should the grievance not be resolved by the Division Commander, the employee
and/or the F.O.P. may take the grievance to the Department Director. The employee and/or the
F.O.P. representative must initiate the grievance in writing to the Department Director within
five (5) work days from the date of receipt of the action of the Division Commander. The
Department Director will render a decision within five (5) work days. Copies of the Department
Director’s decision will be sent to the employee and the F.O.P.

(c) Should the grievance not be resolved by the Department Director, the employee
and/or the F.O.P. representative may appeal the Department Director’s decision to the Employee
Relations Officer within five (5) work days of the receipt completion of the Department
Director’s written decision. The Employee Relations Officer shall require of the Department
Director to submit a letter setting forth specific reasons for the Department Director’ decision.
This letter must be submitted to the Employee Relations Officer within five (5) work days of his
receipt of the appeal.

(d) The Employee Relations Officer shall, within fifteen (15) work days after receipt of
the appeal, contact the F.O.P., the employee, and all supervisory personnel concerned, and
attempt to resolve the grievance. The written results of the findings of the Employee Relations
Officer will be given to the employee, the F.O.P., and to the Human Resources Director within
fifteen (15) work days of the receipt of the appeal.

(e) If the grievant and/or F.O.P. is not satisfied with the findings of the Employee
Relations Officer, they may request a hearing before the Grievance Board within five (5) work
days of the receipt of the Employee Relations Officer report.

Section 3. The Grievance Board shall consist of the following individuals:
(1) One person appointed by the F.0.P.
(2) One person appointed by the City.
(3) A third person, who shall act as chairperson, and who shall be selected from a
panel provided by the FMCS.
For each Grievance Board hearing, the parties shall attempt to mutually agree upon a
Chairperson from the names contained on the panel. In those cases in which the parties cannot

29
mutually agree upon a Chairperson, they shall alternatively select the Chairperson: that is, the
first case in which the parties cannot agree upon the Chairperson, the City shall select the
Chairperson; and the second case in which the parties cannot agree upon the identity of the
Chairperson, the F.O.P. shall select the Chairperson; and thereafter, they shall continue to
alternate the selection of the Chairperson in those cases in which the parties have not been able to
mutually agree upon the Chairperson.

Inall hearings conducted before the Grievance Board, the administrative rules of
evidence shall apply.

The party whose turn it is to designate the Chairperson must designate the chairperson
within thirty (30) days of the request for a grievance board hearing. Failure to so designate will
result in the grievance being abandoned by the union if it is the union’s turn to designate; or in
sustaining the grievance if it is the employer’s turn to designate.

Alll grievance board hearings shall be conducted within 60 days of the selection of the
chairperson, unless the grievance board has granted a continuance. In any event, all grievance
board hearings must be conducted within one hundred twenty days (120) days of the request for a
grievance board hearing.

All fees, costs and expenses of the chairperson shall be shared equally by the City and the
union.

The Grievance Board shall only issue one report, based upon majority vote.
Section 4. The burden of proof shall be allocated as follows:

(a) Inall disciplinary cases, the City shall bear the burden of proving just cause for the
discipline imposed.

(b) In all contract interpretation cases, the party alleging the contract violation shall bear
the burden of proof.

Section 5. The Employee Relations Officer shall act as secretary of the Grievance Board
and shall handle all correspondence. The Grievance Board shall draw all necessary rules and
regulations for conducting its fact-finding hearings. The rules and regulations shail provide for
the grievant and the City to:

Present evidence supporting their position
Call witnesses
Cross examine witnesses
Be represented by counsel at the hearing; and
Provide for a record of the hearing

Said rules and regulations shall be reviewed and approved by the F.O.P. and the City.
The recommendation of the Board shall be forwarded to the City Manager within ten (10) work
days of the conclusion of the hearing.

Section 6. The City Manager shall render a decision within twenty (20) business days of

receipt of the Grievance Board’s recommendation and his decision is final. In the event the City
Manager reverses or modifies the recommendation of the Grievance Board, he shall provide to

30
the grievant and to the F.O.P., in writing, the reason(s) for his actions and the specific finding(s)
upon which his actions were based. If the City Manager does not render a decision within this
time, the decision of the grievance board becomes final.

Section 7. In cases of termination, the grievant may proceed directly to step (d) of this
procedure within five (5) work days from the employee’s notice of termination.

Section 8. Any letter of disciplinary action to be placed in an employee's personnel file
shall specify the date when such letter is to be removed from such file (provided no subsequent
discipline has been imposed during said period) or if appropriate specify that the letter is
permanent and shall not be removed from the file.

Section 9. Whenever employees are scheduled by their supervisor and/or any other
superior within their department, to attend a meeting concerning disciplinary action, or before a
Safety Review Board, the person scheduling them shall advise them that they have the right to
have a F.O.P. representative attend the meeting with them. The employee will be allowed an
appropriate amount of time for scheduling a F.O.P. representative, overnight if necessary.

Section 10. The parties agree that after a grievance has been filed by the Lodge, neither

the City nor any of its representatives will meet with the grievant in reference to the incident
without prior notification to the F.O.P. The F.O.P. shall be present at any grievance meeting.

ARTICLE 15
WORKING CONDITIONS AND EQUIPMENT

Section 1.

(a) The City shall make available, at its expense, 600 rounds of ammunition each year for
each employee covered by this Agreement who is required regularly to carry a weapon in ihe line
of duty, for use by employees desiring to improve or maintain proficiency with their weapons.

(b). The City shall provide 4800 rounds of submachine gun ammunition and 1200 rounds
of ammunition for each sniper rifle in the arsenal, and an additional 600 rounds of handgun
ammunition for each member of the tactical team.

Section 2. The firing range shall be open and available in accordance with department
procedure for those who desire to become more proficient with their weapons. The parties agree
that all employees are encouraged to practice.

ARTICLE 16
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Section 1. The City shall provide space on the bulletin boards in the Wichita Police

Department for the F.0.P. to post notices. All notices shall be posted by an officer of the F.O.P.

Notices relating to the following matters may be posted without the necessity of receiving the
Department Director’s prior approval:

31
(a) Recreational and social functions.
(b) Notices of meetings.

(c) Appointments.

(d) Notice of elections.

(e) Results of elections.

(f) Reports of committees.

(g) Rulings or policies.

These items are restricted to F.O.P. matters.

Section 2. An employee may review the employee’s departmental personnel file upon
request and may also review the employee’s personnel file retained in the Human Resources
Department of the City.

Section 3. The President of the F.O.P., or designee, shall be a permanent member of the
Wichita Police Department Nominating Committee.

Section 4. Group Orientation.

During the course of training in recruit classes, police recruits will be advised of the
representative status of the F.O.P. In addition, a fact sheet prepared by the F.O.P. and approved
by the Department Director, which describes the goals and objectives, voluntary nature of
membership, procedures for making and revoking allotments for the payment of F.O.P. dues, the
procedure for processing grievances, and the coverage and scope of this Agreement, may be
provided. Such information shall not be presented in a way that could be construed as critical of
the City or in a way that indicates that membership in the F.O.P. is mandatory. The F.O.P. shall
be allowed one hour with the recruit class to distribute copies of the fact sheet and this
Agreement, and to discuss organizational goals, policies, procedures and this Agreement.

ARTICLE 17
INTERPRETATIVE PROVISIONS

Section 1. If any provision of this Agreement should be held invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, or if compliance with or enforcement of any provisions should be
restrained by any tribunal, the remainder of this Agreement shall not be affected thereby and the
parties shall enter into negotiation for the sole purpose of redrafting a mutually satisfactory
replacement for such provision so affected.

Section 2. Should any change be made in any State or Federal law or regulation, which
would be applicable and contrary to any provision herein contained, then such portion of this,
Agreement shall be automatically terminated but the remainder of the Agreement shall remain in
full force and effect. The parties shall immediately commence to negotiate for the purpose of
redrafting a mutually satisfactory replacement for such provision so affected.

Section 3. All practices and conditions not covered by this Agreement shall continue to
be governed, controlled and interpreted by reference to the City charter, ordinances, and rules and
regulations.

Section 4. Should the City wish to reclassify any position listed in this Agreement which

32
would result in a decrease in the pay range or an increase in position responsibilities over and
above the present duties for an affected pay range, either party may reopen negotiations for the
purpose of negotiating base wages for the newly classified positions. All other provisions of the
contract shall remain the same unless reopened by mutual agreement of both parties.

 

ARTICLE 18
SUBSTANCE TESTING

Alll employees shall be subject to random drug and alcohol testing as agreed upon by the
City and the Lodge April 2007.

ARTICLE 19
DURATION AND TERMINATION

Section 1. This Agreement shall take effect on DECEMBER _26, 2009, and shall
continue in full force and effect through DECEMBER 24, 2010.

Section 2. The parties agree that the negotiations for a successor Agreement shall

commence as soon as the parties reasonably and mutually agree. All parties shall endeavor to
begin negotiations for 2011 by August 1, 2010

33
IN WITNESS THEREOF, THE CITY has hereunto set their hands.

For the Fraternal Order For the City:
of Police
Hans Asmussen, President Robert Layton, City Manager

This Agreement was approved by The Honorable City Council this

Carl Brewer, Mayor

Attest: Approved as to form:

Karen Sublett, City Clerk

 

34
APPENDIX A

Station Clerk
Traffic Safety Officer
Warrant Officer
Crime Scene Investigator
Police Recruit
Police Officer
Police Detective
Police Sergeant
For purposes of this contract, commissioned personnel are defined as Police Officers,

Police Detectives, and Police Sergeants. Non-commissioned personnel are defined as Traffic
Safety Officers, Station Clerks, Warrant Officers and Crime Scene Investigators.

35
