KANSAS CITY MISSOURI POLICE DEPARTMENT
DEPARTMENT MEMORANDUM

DATE OF ISSUE

11/06/2014

EFFECTIVE DATE,

11/06/2014

AMENDS

NO.

14.07

 

 

 

 

‘SUBJECT
Memorandum of Agreement between the Board of Police
Commissioners of Kansas City, Missouri and Fraternal Order of
Police Lodge No. 99

REFERENCE RESCINDS
D.M. 12-8 Revised

 

The Memorandum of Agreement between the Board of Police Commissioners of
Kansas City, Missouri and Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge No. 99, is effective
September 1, 2014 and will remain in effect until April 30, 2017.

Please see the attached document to read the full memorandum.

Darryl Forté
Chief of Police

DISTRIBUTION: — All Department Personnel
Public View Master Index - Internet
Department Master Index - Intranet
Policy Acknowledgement SyStem (PASS)
 

 

 

 

Memorandum of Agreement

between the

Board of Police Commissioners of
Kansas City, Missouri

and
Fraternal Order of Police Lodge No. 99

(2014-2017)
PREAMBLE

This Memorandum of Agreement (“MOA” or “Agreement’) is made and entered into by
the Board of Police Commissioners of Kansas City, Missouri (BOPC), its successors,
and assigns and the Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge No. 99, its successors, and
assigns (FOP).

WHEREAS, the parties enter into this Agreement for the purpose of memorializing
agreements and providing dialogue mechanisms to improve overall employee
satisfaction and the performance of the Kansas City Police Department, and to fulfill
BOPC’s obligations under Missouri law and subsequent Missouri Court decisions.

WHEREAS, the employees covered by this Agreement shall be able, without fear of
penalty or reprisal, to engage in or refrain from membership activities and to provide
input and make recommendations to the FOP who will represent such employees
consistent with Missouri Law in their dealings with the BOPC on terms and conditions of
employment;

NOW THEREFORE, the parties agree as follows:
ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION

Section 1. The BOPC recognizes and acknowledges that the FOP is the exclusive
authorized representative of all sworn personnel of the Department below the rank of
Captain (hereinafter “BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES,” “members,” or “officers,” as
context makes appropriate), excluding confidential officers who have in their normal
duties access to confidential information affecting the employer-employee relationship,
including but not limited to, the sergeant and officer assigned to the Chief of Police. The
bargaining unit excludes all sworn commanders, all civilian personnel and all non-
sworn, pre-probationary recruits.

Section 2. This Agreement shail not prejudice the rights of any BARGAINING UNIT
EMPLOYEE to refrain from engaging in membership in or activity with the FOP.

Section 3. It is understood that the sole purpose of this Agreement is to allow the
FOP to represent all BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES in the above described unit in
the exercise of the rights of said BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES expressly set forth
in the provisions of this Agreement.

Section4. The FOP shall fully and fairly represent all-BARGAINING UNIT
EMPLOYEES in the unit regardless of their membership status AS REQUIRED UNDER
APPLICABLE LAW.
ARTICLE 2

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

The BOPC, in accordance with Missouri state statutes, possesses the sole power to
manage the Department. No court, agency or other tribunal shall have authority to find
the BOPC or the FOP are bound to do or refrain from doing anything unless it is clear
from the express provisions of this Agreement between the FOP and BOPC that the
result was intended by the parties. Nothing in this Agreement reached between the
parties shall limit or modify the rights and responsibilities of the BOPC under Chapter 84
of Missouri Revised Statutes.

Unless otherwise agreed to in writing, it is expressly agreed that BOPC shall possess
and have the sole and exclusive right to:

a.

b.

Determine the mission of the Department;

Plan, direct and control all the operations of and services of the
Depariment;

Hire, assign, promote, transfer or lay off employees;

Determine the method, means, organization, job classifications, job duties,
equipment and supplies needed to carry out the mission of. the
Department;

Re-organize the Department in a manner it deems appropriate;

Schedule operations and determine the number and duration of hours of
assigned duty each week, including the right to implement compensatory
time in compliance with the provisions of 7(0) of the Fair Labor Standards
Act (with notification to the FOP prior to performance of the work);
Determine the level of supervision;

Develop training and selection programs;

Utilize contractors as deemed appropriate;

Discipline, demote or discharge for cause as exclusively determined by
the Board of Police Commissioners pursuant with Chapter 84 of Missouri
statutes;

Determine methods, procedures, policies, orders, rules, facilities and
regulations relating to the management of the Department;

Take whatever actions, in its judgment, are required to take to carry out
the mission of the Department in emergency situations.
The failure of BOPC to exercise any such right shall not be deemed a waiver of any
such power or right or a modification of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 3
BARGAINING UNIT MEMBERSHIP

Section 1. It is agreed that any BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE, as defined in
Article 1, Section 1, above is free to join and assist the FOP without fear of retaliation of
any kind. Neither the BOPC nor any Department commander, representative or agent
of the Department shall interfere with, restrain, coerce, or intimidate an employee in the
exercise of his/her right to join or refrain from joining the FOP. Neither the BOPC nor
any Department commander, representative or agent of the Department shall
discriminate against any BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE with regard to employment,
including but not limited to promotions because he/she has formed, joined, or chosen to
be represented by the FOP or because he has given testimony or taken part in any
proceeding or other hearing, negotiation or conference on behalf of the FOP recognized
under the terms of this MOA.

Section 2. All BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES shall have the same right to refrain
from membership with the FOP. The FOP agrees that it will not interfere with, restrain,
coerce, of intimidate any employee in the exercise of his right to join or refrain from
joining the FOP, but every employee has the right to choose of his/her own free will
whether he/she will join the FOP.

ARTICLE 4
DUES DEDUCTION

The Department shall deduct FOP dues from the bi-weekly paychecks of each member,
who voluntarily signs and remits to the Department a dues-deduction authorization
form. The written authorization shall remain in effect until the member gives written
notification to both the FOP and the Department of his or her desire to terminate dues
deduction. Once such termination notice is delivered, the Department shall stop dues
deduction for that member. The FOP shall notify the Department of any change to the
dues amount, and the Department shall have thirty days to adjust the amount deducted
from members’ pay checks. The Department shall deposit the withheld amounts into
the FOP's designated account by the Tuesday following the issuance of members’
paychecks. After each pay period, the Department for tracking purposes shail provide
the FOP with electronic documentation showing the members’ names, who had their
dues deducted from their individual paychecks.
ARTICLE 5
NON-DISCRIMINATION

Section.1 The provisions of this MOA, in accordance with applicable Federal and
State Laws, shall be applied equaily to all BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES without
discrimination as to sex, marital or familial status, race, color, religion, national origin,
disability, political affiliation, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran status, or
any other characteristic protected by law; provided, however, (a) the prohibition or
disability discrimination does not, however, exempt BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES
from the requirement that they be able to perform the essential functions of their jobs in
accordance with applicable provisions of the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), as
amended, and as applied or interpreted by Courts of competent jurisdiction, and (b) the
prohibition on age discrimination dees not prohibit the BOPC from maintaining a lawful
mandatory retirement age for sworn officers, unless otherwise determined to be
unlawful as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction.

Section 2. _ In instances where the parties have made reference to “he” or “she” in this
MOA, the reference shail be interchangeable and non-discriminatory.

Section 3. The FOP will represent BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES without
discrimination as to sex, marital or familial status, race, color, religion, national origin,
disability, political affiliation, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran status, or
any other characteristic protected by law.

Section 4. If the BOPC determines there has been intentional discrimination by the
FOP on the basis of race, color, sex, national origin, marital or familial status, religion,
disability, political affiliation, age, sexual orientation gender identity, veteran status, or
any other characteristic protected by law, it shall so notify the FOP and include in the
notice the actions and/or non-actions it believes demonstrate.intentional discrimination.
The BOPC determination of intentional discrimination shall be based upon a finding that
an agent of the FOP is responsible for the discriminatory conduct or the conduct was
authorized or ratified (expressly or by inaction) by the FOP or one of its agents.

Section 5. ‘If the FOP disputes the BOPC’s determination, the FOP shall, within
twenty (20) days of receipt of the notice, respond in writing. The BOPC shall have
twenty (20) days to act on the FOP’S response. If, after reviewing FOP’S response, the
BOPC finds that the FOP engaged in intentional discrimination, it may withdraw
recognition of FOP as the exclusive representative, subject to the Dispute Resolution
provisions of this MOA (Article 6). The withdrawal of recognition shall not be effective
until the time period to file a grievance has expired, any grievance over such withdrawal
has been dropped by the FOP, or the BOPC’s determination has been upheld by the
selected arbitrator.

Section6. Any grievance over the BOPC’s withdrawal of recognition shall be
pursuant to Article 6 but shall be expedited as follows: (1) the FOP shail have ten (10)
days frorn receipt of the withdrawal of recognition to file a grievance; (2) the FOP shall
mail a request for a panel of arbitrators to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation
Service (FMCS) on the same date it files the grievance; (3) the arbitrator shall be
selected from the FMCS panel within five (5) days after receipt of the panel of
arbitrators from FMCS. The parties shail flip a coin to determine who picks first and
alternate strikes from the panel until an arbitrator has been selected; (4) the hearing
shall commence within thirty (30) days after selection of the arbitrator or if no such dates
are available on the arbitrator's calendar, af the first date the arbitrator is available; and
(5) the arbitrator's final and binding decision sustaining or denying the grievance shall
be made by the arbitrator at the close of the hearing with a written decision confirming
that award issued within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing .

ARTICLE 6
DISPUTE RESOLUTION

Section?. In the event a BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE has a dispute over the
interpretation or application of this Memorandum reached between the parties, it shall
submit the issue by a grievance, in writing, at the Commander above the supervisory
level at which the grievance arises within ten (10) days of the incident giving rise to the
grievance which specifies the specific provision or provisions allegedly violated. A copy
of the grievance shail also be provided to the Chief of Police. Grievances not filed or
appealed to the next step according to the time limits contained in this Article shall be a
waiver of the grievance. There shall be no right to arbitrate management rights set forth
in Article 2, but a dispute over any term of this Agreement other than those matters
reserved exclusively to BOPC in Article 2 may be the subject of a grievance.

Section 2. Step 1 — The Commander receiving the grievance, shall respond to the
grievance within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the grievance. If the Commander does
not respond within the assigned time limit, the grievance shall automatically move to the
next step 2.

Section 3. Step 2 - If the matter is not satisfactorily resolved at the Commander level,
the BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE may advance the grievance to the Chief of Police
or his designee. The Chief of Police or designee shall have fifteen (15) days to respond
to the grievance.

Section 4. Step 3 - In the event efforts to resolve the grievance are unsuccessiul, the
FOP may submit a request for a panel of seven (7) arbitrators fram FMCS within twenty
(20) days after the response from the Chief of Police. The request shall be for binding
arbitration. The parties shall flip a coin to determine who picks first and alternate strikes
from the panel until an arbitrator has been selected,

Section 5. The arbitrator shall conduct a hearing on a date mutually agreed upon.
Unless otherwise ordered by the arbitrator, the expenses of the arbitrator shall be borne
by the losing party. The arbitrator shall not have authority to alter, modify, amend or
detract from the terms of this MOA. The arbitrator shall issue a decision within thirty
(30) days of conclusion of the hearing. The arbitrator's binding decision shall be in
writing. Binding arbitration shall be the exclusive remedy for alleged violations of this
MOA. The parties agree that binding arbitration shall be used in lieu of further judicial
remedies.

Section 6. The decision of the arbitrator shail be final but either party may file an
action within twenty (20) days of the decision of the arbitrator, in the Circuit Court of
Jackson County, Missouri, alleging the award does not draw its essence from this MOA,
was procured by fraud, violates a well-defined and explicit public policy, or that the
arbitrator exceeded his jurisdiction (not arbitrable), was evidently partial or engaged in
prejudicial misconduct.

ARTICLE 7
LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

 

There shall be a Labor/Management Committee with representation from both sides.
The Committee shall be co-chaired BY REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT
AND THE FOP. The Committee shall meet on a quarterly basis and shall discuss
issues of importance fo both sides. The Co-Chairs are responsible for forwarding
agenda items to the other side at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled meeting.
The meeting’s final agenda shall be developed and circulated by the Chief of Police’s
Executive Officer. The Committee shall meet during the first fifteen (15) days of every
quarter on the date agreed upon by the parties.

The purpose of the committee shall be to discuss issues of importance to both sides
and create a forum to encourage constructive discussions of differences. The
Representatives of the Department and the members of. FOP’s Executive Board shall
avoid negative criticism of each other and their respective organizations in public forums
and instead they shall use this commiti¢e to reduce and resolve such differences.
Minutes of the meeting shall be produced and circulated to the FOP Executive Board
and the individual members of the Board of Police Commissioners. The Committee is
not vested with the power to change, modify or alter this Agreement.

ARTICLE 8
REDUCTION IN FORCE

In the event of a reduction in force or reduction in ranks, layoffs or demotions shall be
accomplished in reverse order of seniority. Total seniority for layoffs shall be calculated
from the last date of appointment. Demotions shall use seniority in rank. In the event of
a tie in seniority, the parties shall agree upon an objective method, such as a coin toss,
fo break any tie in seniority. Prior to announcing any layoff, the BOPC will provide the
FOP at least 72 hours notice and, if requested by the FOP, the parties will meet and
confer regarding potential alternatives or modifications to the prospective layoff. Such
meet and confer process will not delay the layoff unless mutually agreed by the parties.
The FOP agrees that prior to the announcement, it will keep the layoff confidential.
ARTICLE 9

NO STRIKE/NO LOCKOUT

Section 1. The FOP agrees that neither it nor any of the BARGAINING UNIT
EMPLOYEES covered by this Agreement will collectively, concertedly or individually
engage in or participate in any strike, slowdown, work stoppage, sick out, sympathy
strike, iliegai picketing, or other action or omission that interferes with ihe work or
efficient operation of the Department. The BOPC agrees that it will not jock out any of
the BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES covered by this Agreement, injunctive relief
shall be an appropriate remedy for violations of this article. Jurisdiction shall be in the
Circuit Court of Jackson County, Missouri with venue at Kansas City. Failure or refusal
on the part of any BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES to comply with any provision of
this Article shall be cause for disciplinary action, including suspension or discharge as
the BOPC shall deem appropriate.

  

Section 2. In the event of a strike, slowdown, work stoppage, sick out, sympathy
strike, illegal picketing or other action or omission that interferes with work or the
efficient operation of the Department, the FOP shall, upon receiving notice thereof,
immediately give oral or written directives, with a copy to the BOPC, instructing those
BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES engaged in such activity to immediately cease their
strike, slowdown, work stoppage, sick out, sympathy strike, illegal picketing, or other
activity and return to their assigned duties immediately at the direction of the
Department or the BOPC. The FOP’S communication shall warn that a failure to cease
prohibited activities and return to their assigned duties as directed will continue to
expose them to disciplinary action as the BOPC deems appropriate. The failure of the
FOP to promptly so act, after notice by the BOPC, shall be construed to mean the FOP
sanctioned or condoned the actions of the BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES involved.
If the FOP does promptly so act, such actions shall be construed, absent other
inconsistent acts by the FOP, to demonstrate that it did not sanction or condone the
unlawful and/or prohibited acts.

Section 3. The BOPC may exercise its ability to withdraw recognition of the FOP as
set forth in Article 6 if the FOP sanctions or condones the actions or omissions
prohibited by this Article.

ARTICLE 10
SEVERABILITY

It is specifically agreed that the provisions of this MOA are declared to be severable. If
any Section, Article, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this MOA is judicially
determined to be void, illegal or unenforceable, the remainder of the MOA shail continue
in full force an effect and be binding on the parties hereunto. If any Section, Article,
provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this MOA is judicially determined to be
void, illegal or unenforceable, the FOP or the BOPC may exercise the right to request
renegotiations of the part or parts of this MOA which are declared void, illegal or
unenforceable. During such renegotiations, the remainder of this MOA shall remain in
full force and effect, provided that these provisions are not declared void, illegal or
otherwise unenforceable.

ARTICLE 14
FOP DESIGNEE

Section 1. The BOPC agrees to create and maintain at its own expense a full-time
position that will be filled by a sworn BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE of the
Department designated by the FOP and agreed to by the Chief of Police, whose
agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld. The sworn BARGAINING UNIT
EMPLOYEE (DESIGNEE) designated by the FOP shall be assigned to the Office of the
Chief of Police. Such DESIGNEE shall be permitted to perform duties on behalf of the
FOP as set forth in Section 2 below and otherwise for legitimate representational
purposes, with such time to be accounted for in bi-weekly reports to the Chiefs
Executive Officer. With the exception of travel to and from Jefferson City, the Designee
may travel outside the jurisdiction up to 4 times per year. The DESIGNEE will advise
the Chiefs Executive Officer in advance of any such out of jurisdiction duties including
trips to Jefferson City, as well as any substantial deviation from the regular allocation of
work time spent at the Chief's Office and the FOP Lodge.

Section 2. The primary responsibilities of the DESIGNEE shall be: 1) to represent the
interests of Officers and Sergeants, as well as employees in the civilian bargaining unit,
requesting the assistance of the FOP with regard to grievance and discipline matters;
and 2) to provide timely written input to the BOPC and the Chief of Police concerning
ihe FOP’s position during the policy review process as described in Article 14 of this
agreement.

Section 3. The DESIGNEE will be required to perform ail special assignments
consistent with other members of the Chief's Office, and may be returned to full duty in
the event of an emergency. The DESIGNEE shall be required to maintain all
certifications required to be a Police Officer in the State of Missouri and complete all
mandatory training requirements imposed by the Department. in the event the
DESIGNEE requests to be returned to duty, reasonable efforts will be made fo return
the DESIGNEE to a similar position occupied prior to the transfer to the DESIGNEE
position.

Section 4. The DESIGNEE shall be required to work normal business hours, wear
normal business attire, and function within the rules and regulations of the Department.
Office space and equipment — computer and telephone — will be provided by the
Department at KCPD Headquarters for the DESIGNEE’s use. Cell phone, automobile,
and personal digital assistant (PDA) will not be provided by the Department. Pay raises
and evaluation of the Designee shall be completed by the Office of the Chief of Police
and in accordance with policies and procedures of the Department.
Section 5. The Designee shall be permitted to attend and participate in meetings of
the Nenariment’s Executive Committee

 

Section 6. The Designee’s representation of officers in grievance and discipline
matters shall be as the officers representative and shall net in any way be construed as
meeting and conferring on terms and conditions of employment, but agreements made
by the Designee concerning resolution of grievance and discipline matters shall be
binding on the FOP. With the excention of the Lodge’s Executive Board, individual
binding on the FOP. With the exception of the ge’s Executive Board, individual

bargaining unit members shali not have authority to bind the FOP to any agreement.

   

Section 7. The Chief of Police, at his sole discretion, may extend additional
invitations to the Designee to participate in other Departmental meetings.

ARTICLE 12
BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

Section 1. Disciplinary Investigations. In the event a BARGAINING UNIT
EMPLOYEE is required to participate in an investigatory interview and the
BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE reasonably believes that the interview could lead to
discipline, the BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE will be provided a reasonable amount of
time to secure representation to not exceed twenty four (24) hours. The BARGAINING
UNIT EMPLOYEE’S representative will be allowed to accompany the BARGAINING
UNIT EMPLOYEE at the investigatory interview, but will not be allowed to interfere with
or disrupt the interview process. In the event a BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE. is
required to provide the Department with a written response as part of a disciplinary
investigation, the BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE will be given two (2) working days,
immediately following the request, to complete and deliver the written response. Prior to
any investigatory interview or request for a written response, the BARGAINING UNIT
EMPLOYEE may request access to videos and police reports regarding the incident(s)
that is subject to the investigation, and access will be granted unless in the judgment of
the investigating officer such access may compromise the integrity of the investigation.

Section 2. Critical Incidents. In the event a BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE is
involved in a critical incident and a statement is required to be given to detectives, the
Department will endeavor to provide the BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE. with. a
reasonable period of time, based on the circumstances, following the critical incident to
provide a formal staternent to the investigating element. Generally, the BARGAINING
UNIT EMPLOYEE will be permitted up to forty-eiaht (48) hours to complete such
Statement, except as otherwise provided herein. The member may choose to give a
statement sooner, but such decision shail be left to the individual member and his or her
representative. Additionally, should the need arise to obtain a formal statement sooner
for purposes of filing charges and/or maintaining a subject who is in custody, the
member shall make reasonable efforts to provide a stat nt to the Department within
the timeframe necessary for filing charges. BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES involved
in a critical incident, who are required to provide a statement, will be given a reasonable
amount of time to secure representation prior to the statement being given.

 
Section 3. FOP Representatives. | The Department agrees that it will not question,
interview or interrogate FOP representatives regarding conversations pertaining to their
representation of individual bargaining unit employees. However, the Department may
question, interview or interrogate such individuals when the representative’s conduct is
the subject of an investigation or the representative is a witness to any conduct that is
the subject of an investigation. To avoid potential conflicts, the FOP agrees that it will
not assign any witness, potential witness, or direct supervisor to serve as a
representative of a BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE who is subject to an investigation.

Section 4. Personnel incident Reports. After a Personnel .incident Report is
prepared, the Supervisor/Commander shall present a copy of the Personnel Incident
Report and a copy of the entire incident packet to the involved member. Thereafter, the
member, if he or she so chooses, shall have forty-eight (48) hours to respond, in writing,
to the information contained in the Personnel Incident Report and the incident packet.
The Supervisor/Commander, in his or her discretion, may authorize additional time for
the member to submit his or her response to the Personnel Incident Report.

 

Section 5. Incident Package. Upon completion of the procedural process in
accordance with the procedural instruction entitled “Disciplinary Actions,” if a
Supervisor/Commander recommends any discipline listed in Section II, F, subsections
2-6, the Supervisor/Commander shall meet with the member to present the member
with the incident package and explain their justification for the recommendation. During
the meeting, the member shall have the right to review the incident report and any
supporting documents in the “incident packet,” including the supervisor/commander’s
written endorsement and verbally respond. Each subsequent commander or his or her
designee in the member's chain of command up to the member's division commander
will meet with the member to notify the member of his or her recommendation and
explain the justification for endorsing, decreasing or increasing the discipline
recommended by the previous supervisor/commander. In each instance, the member
shail have the right to review the incident report and any supporting documents. in
the “incident packet,” including each supervisor/cammander’s written endorsement.
The contact with the member will be documented on a Form 191 P.D. and attached to
the Form 387 P.D. The incident package will then be forwarded to the appropriate
bureau commander for final disposition on recommendations of disciplinary counseling,
letters of reprimand, and Absent (A) Days on incidents other than substantiated OCC
complaints. The Chief of Police shall decide the final disposition on all other
recommendations, including all recommendations resulting from substantiated OCC
complaints. After receiving the final disposition from the Chief, the member shall have
the right to file a grievance in accordance with Department policy or the BOPC appeal
procedures.

Section 8. Procedure for Providing Incident Packet and other Documentation.

The member will be presented with a complete copy of the entire incident packet (to
include only the incident report, factual summary memorandum, demeanor record, and
if applicable, vehicle accident packet), which will reference all facts and circumstances
to be considered in determining whether discipline shall be imposed. Further:

4. In those circumstances in which a miscellaneous investigation, OCC or other
intemal investigation file is developed (the investigation file) and information
obtained during such investigations will be considered in determining whether
discipline shall be imposed, then:

a. Two copies of the investigation file will be made available for inspection
and review by the member and member's FOP representative or attorney;

b. The member has forty-eight weekday (Monday-Friday) hours immediately
following presentation of the incident packet to request inspection and
review of the investigation file, such request shall be made in writing or
verbally to the Chief of Police or the Chief's Executive Officer (XO);

c. The member and member's FOP representative or attorney will be given
forty-eight weekday hours for inspection and review of the investigation file
on day(s) and time(s) mutually agreeable to the member and Chief's XO,
provided the inspection and review must commence and be completed
within seven total weekdays following the request described in subsection
b. above. The time frames set forth in this subsection may be extended
by mutual agreement to accommodate the schedules of the member
and/or his representative;

d. The member or member's FOP representative or attorney and the Chief's
XO will agree upon a reasonable space to be provided the member and
member's FOP representative or attorney far inspection and review of the
investigation file. For purposes of this subsection, ‘reasonable space’
means one in which communication and document review between the
member and member's FOP representative or attorney will remain
confidential and one in which the member and members FOP
representative or attorney has access to audio or video equipment
allowing them to review any disks or tapes that are contained in the
investigation file.

2. Prior to inspection and review of an-investigation file the member and member's
FOP representative or attorney shall, where indicated, sign and date one copy of
this form evidencing their agreement that the information contained in the
investigation file remain confidential. The original signature copy shall be
maintained by the Department with the investigation file, with copies being
provided. to the signatories. Specifically:

a. Neither the member nor member's FOP representative or attorney will
disclose any information contained in the investigation file to anyone not

tt
involved in the representation of the member and who has not signed a
confidentiality agreement;

. Neither the member nor member's FOP representative or attorney, nor
any other person who has signed a confidentiality agreement or acts on
behalf of the member, will contact any of the witnesses in the case about
the substance of their statement or their willingness to provide a statement
to the Department or member. Notwithstanding this provision, the member
or their FOP representative or attorney are not prohibited from contacting
any witness after discipline is imposed and is grieved or challenged;

. Neither the member nor member's FOP representative or attorney shall
disassemble, write upon or otherwise alter or remove any portion of the
investigation file;

. Neither the member or member's FOP representative or attorney shall
make copies of any portion of the investigation file, either by copy
machine, photograph, scanner, or any other means;

. The member and member's FOP representative or attorney may take
handwritten notes during their inspection and review of the investigation
file, however, such notes shall not be shared or provided in whole or part
to any other Department member. Notwithstanding this provisions, the
members FOP representative or attorney are not prohibited from
contacting any witness after discipline is imposed. and is grieved or
challenged. Further, the FOP representative and attorney may consult
with the FOP E-Board about the file for advice and consultation prior to
discipline being imposed and grieved or challenged. The FOP E-Board
are required to maintain the confidentiality of all information imparted by
the FOP representative and attorney, regardless of whether the FOP E-
Board members have signed this document, and FOP E-Board members
are subject fo the provisions set forth herein regarding confidentiality and
possible discipline as outlined in subsections (f) and (g) below;

Nothing in this Agreement allows an FOP representative or attorney to
teview an investigation file without the express consent of the member
who is the subject of an incident packet;

. If it is determined that any member violated any portion of subsection a-f
of this section, that mermber shall be subject to disciplinary action for
violating the confidentiality of the investigation, and a new incident report
regarding the violation may be initiated by the member's chain of
command or the Chief's XO;

. If it is determined that any FOP representative or attorney violated any
portion of subsection a-f of this section, that representative or attorney

12
shail no longer be allowed to accompany members and take part in the
inspection and review of investigation files in the future.

Section 7. Polygraph or Truth Verification Tests

In the course of an investigation, BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES may be
required to submit to a polygraph examination.

Ifa BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE is the subject of a complaint filed with the
Office of Community Complaints [OCC], the EMPLOYEE will not generally be
required to submit to a polygraph examination as part of the investigation of the
complaint unless (a) the complainant first submits to a polygraph examination
and in the professional opiniori of the polygrapher is found to have passed the
examination, and/or (b) other reasonable factors (including, but not limited to,
material inconsistencies or statements of other witnesses) exist in support of a
polygraph examination.

BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES who are ordered to submit to a polygraph
examination shall be provided 48 hours’ notice prior to the examination.
EMPLOYEES shall also be provided a written document explaining the
conditions under which the EMPLOYEE is taking the examination; for example,
the date, time, location, general matter of the investigation, name of the
polygrapher and the polygrapher’s license, certification or other credential or
education evidencing the polygrapher’s expertise.

The results of the BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEE’S polygraph examination will
not form the sole evidence on which discipline will be based.

ARTICLE 13

FOP ORGANIZATIONAL RIGHTS

 

Section 1. Bulletin Boards *- 7° ~

The FOP shall provide bulletin boards to the Department to place at designated work
locations throughout the Department for the purpose of posting notices of FOP
activities. All notices shall be on FOP letterhead and shall be dated and signed by the
representative of the FOP who posted the notice. All notices shall be submitted to the
Chief of Police’s Executive Officer prior to posting. If the Chief believes that any posting
is inappropriate, he shall communicate as such to the FOP President or FOP Executive
Vice President, who shall then take appropriate action to remove any inappropriate
postings. {t shall be the responsibility of the FOP to remove notices that are outdated,
unauthorized or inappropriate. The FOP agrees to ensure that all notices are in good
taste and do not disparage the Department or any individual employee.
Section 2. New Hire information

During academy training, the FOP shall be allowed to provide orientation information
during one (1) hour of class time to pre-probationary Entrant Officers who are potential
BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES regarding its representation of the bargaining unit
and the benefits of FOP membership in the event they graduate from the Academy and
become BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES. During the FOP presentation, the
representatives shall make no disparaging comments about the Department, the BOPC
or other empioyees of the Department.

Section 3. Time Off for FOP Executive Board Members and Station Trustees

BOPC recognizes that FOP E-Board Members may be permitted to conduct FOP
pusiness during their normal tour of duty. Therefore, upon reasonable advance request
to their appropriate supervisor and staffing levels permitting, FOP E- Board Members
may be permitted to conduct FOP business while on duty and in paid status, up to an
aggregate total of 10 hours/month per member. The appropriate supervisor's approval
will not be unreasonably denied.

BOPC also recognizes the need to allow Station Trustees, to attend the FOP’s monthly
Géneral Membership Meetings while on-duty. Upon reasonable advance request to
their appropriate supervisor and staffing levels permitting, Station Trustees may request
to attend FOP meetings while in paid status, up to an aggregate total of 4 hours/month.
The appropriate supervisor's approval will not be unreasonably denied.

Section 4, Attendance at National and State Conferences

The Department shall allow the FOP DESIGNEE and up to six (6) FOP representatives
from the sworn and civilian bargaining units in the aggregate to attend the FOP’s
National or State Conference each calendar year while in special duty or other paid
status. Up to eleven (11) other representatives of the FOP may request to be released
from duty on personal paid time off or in unpaid status for purposes of attending such
conferences, and such requests will be handled in the same manner as other time off
requests. The FOP will make all requests for time off to attend such conferences by
February 15" of each calendar year so that appropriate staffing arrangements can be
made.

ARTICLE 14
BOPC POLICY AND PROCEDURE REVIEW

 

The BOPC’s current policies and procedures that affect BARGAINING UNIT.
EMPLOYEES and other Department members are maintained on the Department’s
intranet site. Those policies and procedures are regularly reviewed and, when needed,
updated, amended and/or repealed through a process that includes reasonable
advance notice that changes may be made. The process also provides an opportunity
for written input from members of the Department.

The BOPC agrees that it will not modify its current process for Policy and Procedure
review without providing the FOP with at least fourteen (14) calendar days advance
written notice. The BOPC further agrees to negotiate with FOP prior to implementation
of any such modification to the process for Policy and Procedure review.

The Chief's Executive Officer shall notify the FOP when a policy is up for review or the
BOPC, the Chief of Police or their designees have directed a policy review. As to
policies that are primarily matters of wages, hours, terms and conditions of employment,
the FOP may request input into the policy review by submitting such request within
fourteen (14) calendar days to the Chief's Executive Officer. Within thirty (30) calendar
days after such request by the FOP or at a mutually agreeable time as determined by
the parties, the Department's designees and a member of the Research and
Development Division (RADD) shall meet with up to three individuals designated by the
FOP (as well as representatives of the civilian and commanders bargaining units) to
discuss any proposed or suggested changes to the policy. All recommendations from
such meeting shall be submitted to the RADD to begin the review process. After the
RADD has conducted its review, the individuals designated by the FOP (as well as
representatives of the civilian and commanders bargaining units) shall be invited to
participate in the Executive Committee meeting to discuss the final proposed changes
or amendments to the current policy which will be submitted to the BOPC for approval,
rejection, or modification.

Should the FOP’s suggestions or requests be rejected, the FOP may still present any of
its previous suggestions or requests to the BOPC as part of the final approval process
by the BOPC. However, nothing in this Article 14 shall limit or restrict the authority of
the BOPC to change, alter, amend, or nullify any policy or procedure (other than the
Policy and Procedure review process itself), or to issue any new policy or procedure,
that is not inconsistent with the express provisions of this agreement, provided the
BOPC adheres to the process outlined above

ARTICLE 15
INCENTIVE PAY AND CLOTHING ALLOWANCE

 

Section 1. Field Training Officer
Members designated by the Chief as FTOs shall receive:
4. Skill incentive allowance of $100.00 per month.
2. Trainer’s Ribbon denoting FTO status to be worn while in the program and

permanently after one year in the program. A star shall be awarded for every five
primary recruits trained.

415
3. One extra (E) day (ie., 8 hours) for each primary recruit trained, and two exira
(E) days (i.e., 16 hours) upon the completion of every twelve (12) months in the
program, which are not cumulative. Extra (E) days shall be used in accordance
with Department policy.

4. Consideration for pre-approved leave time.

5. Aminimum of one hour at the overtime rate for each shift spent training a recruit.

6. Priority consideration for Continuing Education Training.

Section 2. Shift Differential

All sworn members permanently assigned to Watches I, IH and IV shall receive shift
differential in the amount of one hundred and twenty dollars ($120) per month.

Section 3. Educational Incentive Pay

Permanent police officers, who have received an Associates, a Bachelors or a Master's
Degree shall receive the following incentive pay:

a. Associates degree or a minimum of sixty (60) college hours - $50.00 per month
b. Bachelor's Degree - $75 per month
c. Master's Degree, Specialists Degree or Doctorate- $100.00 per month.

Section 4 Aerobics Program

Members shall receive up to two.(2) extra (E) days (Le., 16 hours) for completing one
(1) of two (2) designated programs in a six (6) month period. Members may receive up
to four (4) extra (E) days (ie., 32 hours) per year. Those employees permanently
assigned to a 10 hour day work plan may use 8 hours E and 2 hours EX to make a full
day off.

Section 5. Bilingual Pay

Members certified as bilingual officers shall receive an additional fifty dollars ($50.00)
per month as specially pay.

Section 6. Specialty Duty Pay
Members of the Department's Bomb and Arson Unit, Helicopter Unit, Mounted Patrol

Unit, and K-9 Unit, shall receive an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) per month as
specialty pay.

16
Section 7. Clothing Allowance

Uniformed members shail receive fifty dollars (50.00) per month to care for and clean
their uniforms. Plain clothes and undercover members shail receive fifty dollars
($50.00) per month for purchase of and maintenance of their required work clothing.

Section 8. Out of Classification Pay

Employees who are assigned to work in a position of higher rank for more than 21
calendar days will be compensated at the rate of pay for the first step in the pay scale of
the higher rank for the duration of their assignment to that position starting at the
beginning of the next pay period following 21 days in the position.

ARTICLE 16
FUNERAL LEAVE

A member shall be granted up to three (3) days of leave with pay to attend the funeral of
an immediate family member. For purposes of this Article, “immediate family member"
shall include the officers spouse, children or step children, parents, sisters, brothers,
grandchildren, grandparents or spouse’s grandparents, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
daughter-in-law, son-in-law, and domestic partner. Additional funeral leave may be
granted by the member's immediate supervisor when the death occurs and/or the
funeral is held at a distant location. The immediate supervisor may grant time off with
pay up to one (1) full day for a member desiring to attend the funeral of any person
other than those specified herein. The Chief shall have the discretion to extend funeral
leave. Officers requesting funeral leave shall contact their immediate
supervisor/commander in person or by telephone to request leave.

ARTICLE 17
HOLIDAYS
Section 1. Designated Holidays

BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES shall receive one (1) day off with pay in
compensation for the following holidays:

New Year's Day Labor Day

Martin Luther King, Jr. Day Veterans Day
Presidents Day Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day Day After Thanksgiving

Independence Day Christmas Day
Section 2. Hours Worked on Holiday

BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES who are required to work on a designated holiday
shall be paid per BOPC policy.

Section 3. Quality Days

Beginning January 1, 2015, BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES shail receive five (5)
quality days each year to be used as floating holidays. It is recognized that such “Q”
days are “holidays” within the meaning of Mo. Rev. St. Section 84.140. When requests
are made to use such days for bona fide religious holidays or observances, such
requests will be given priority consideration, but will remain subject to approval based
on the Department's operational needs.

ARTICLE 18
SICK LEAVE
Section 1. Sick Leave Accrual
4. Members appointed prior to November 16, 1987 shall accrue either thirty (30)
days (20 hours per month) or eighteen (18) days (twelve (12) hours per
month) of sick leave per year.

2. Members appointed after November 16, 1987 shall accrue eighteen (18) days
per year.

3. Members appointed on or before the 15" day of the month shall accrue sick
leave for that month. A new member appointed after the 15" day of the
month shall not accrue sick leave for that month.

4. Members, who retire, resign or are terminated after the 15" day of the month
shall accrue sick leave for the entire month.

5. Members who have accepted an assignment in the Limited Duty Pool shall
accrue sick leave while assigned to a position.
Section 2. Accumulation of Sick Leave
Members may carry over an unlimited amount of sick leave from one calendar year to
the next, A member on sick leave, who wishes to save sick leave, may use vacation

days instead of sick days. Members on sick leave shall not be allowed to carry over
vacation days to a subsequent year.

18
Section 3. _ Notifications

A member shall notify a supervisor and request sick leave at least one (1) hour prior to
the time scheduled to report for duty. Notification is required each work day unless the
illness, injury or disability would normally require the member to be off for an extended
period of time. Upon medical confirmation of an illness, injury or disability requiring
immediate or future use of sick leave over twenty-eight (28) consecutive calendar days,
a member shall notify the immediate supervisor and the Benefit Section, in writing. A
member with an injury, disability or illness, which may require future use of sick leave,
including scheduled operations and pregnancies, shall obtain a medical statement from
their attending physician addressing the member's ability to perform the work
assignments and specifically note whether the member has the ability or inability to
perform the full and unrestricted duties of a police officer effectively and safely for an
entire tour of duty.

Section 4. | Members Appearance at Court While on Sick Leave

if a member appears in court because a continuance could not be obtained, or is called
back for a statement concerning some other matter, court time/overtime shall be
allowed for members on sick leave provided that the member is willing and physically
able to respond as determined by the member’s immediate commander based on the
member's current medical condition.

Section 5. Extended Sick Leave

During extended sick leave, including sick leave for operations, broken bones,
debilitating illnesses and pregnancies, a member may engage in any activity at any
place the illness or physical condition shall permit as determined by the member's
attending physician.

Section 6. Firearms

Members on sick leave may carry firearms in accordance with the current Procedural
instruction on firearms.

Section 7. Leave Without Pay

A member, who uses all accrued sick leave, may submit a Form 1 P.D. to request other
types of paid leave or request leave without pay. The division commander may grant up

to twenty-eight (28) consecutive calendar days of leave without pay for an illness, injury
or disability if a member has used all forms of paid leave.
Section 8. Sick Leave Donations

Members may donate sick leave to other members who have used all accrued paid
leave and sick leave. Sick leave may also be donated to a member on family and
medical leave. Sick leave must be donated in whole day increments and only members
with a balance of at least ten (10) days will be allowed to make a donation. All sick
leave donation adjustments shall be processed by the Personnel Records Section.
Donated sick leave shall be deducted from an active member's sick leave balance, as it
is needed. Sick leave shall be deducted from multiple donors in the order in which it
was donated. if a donor is in the sick leave-pool at the time the donation is to be used,
the donation shall be cancelled. If a member returns to full and unrestricted duty or
leaves the Department, all sick leave donations shall be cancelled. The Personnel
Records Section shail notify the donor that the donation was or was not used.

ARTICLE 19
VACATION
Section 1. Vacation Leave Accrual

Ali BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES shall accrue vacation based on their number of
years of service. Vacation leave shall be scheduled in accordance with the member's
personal preference and operating requirements of the assigned element. Vacation
leave may be taken in one (1) hour increments and shail be earned by the following
schedule:

4. First calendar year of employment ~ A member appointed after a first work
day in a calendar year will earn eight (8) hours of vacation per month for
that year and earned vacation shall be granted on January 4° of the next
calendar year. A member appointed on or before the fifteenth. (1 5") day of
the month shall earn eight (8) hours of vacation leave for that month, but a
member appointed after the 15" of the month shail not.

2. Less than five (5) years of service - Members with less than five (5) years
shall earn one hundred and four (104) hours of vacation leave on the first
day of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year of
appointment.

3. At least five (5), but less than ten (10) years of service - Members shall
earn one hundred and sixty (160) hours of vacation leave on the first day
of the calendar year following the member's completion of four (4) years of
service.

4. At least ten (10), but less than fifteen (15) years of service - Members
shall earn one hundred and eighty-four (184) hours of vacation leave on

20
the first day of the calendar year following the member's completion of
nine (9) years of service.

5. Fifteen (15) or more years of service - Members shall earn two hundred
(200) hours of leave on the first day of the calendar year following the

member's completion of fourteen (14) years of service.

Vacation leave shall not be carried forward into the next calendar year except as
provided in Department policy on duty related injuries. Separating members shall be
compensated for vacation earned, but not taken as of the last day worked.

Section 2. Procedures for Requesting Vacation

A. To request vacation leave of three (3) days or less, a member shall verbally request

approval from their immediate supervisor.

. To request vacation leave of more than three (3) days, a member shall submit an

Application for Leave, Form 1 P.D. to their immediate supervisor.

. Upon approval, the Form 1 P.D. will be forwarded through the chain of command

to the division commander for final approval. To request a change in an
approved vacation request, a member shail submit another Form 7 P.D. which
supersedes the previous request. All copies of approved Forms 1 P.D. shall be
forwarded to the element timekeeper for entering and distribution of copies.
Once approved, Form 1 P.D. shall be returned to the requesting member.

Section 3. Vacation Scheduling

The following procedures shall be used to schedule vacation for bargaining unit
members.

1.

Vacation requests submitted on or before February 15" of any given year shall
be approved on the basis on law enforcement seniority with the Department.
Sergeant seniority shall be based upon time in grade. The last day of
employment. as a law enforcement officer shall be used in cases of
reappointment. Vacation requests submitted after February 15" shall be granted
as the schedule permits on a first come basis.

In cases where more than one member requests vacation on a given day, the
Application for Leave, Form No. 1 P.D. should be marked to indicate which is the
officer's first choice. Seniority as defined above in Paragraph 1 shail apply only
to the member's first choice.

Sergeants’ vacation requests shall be reviewed by the assistant division

commanders who shall approve them based on the supervisory requirements of
the watch. Each watch may allow ten percent (10%) of the officers assigned to

at
the field duty to be off on Vacation, Extra, or Compensatory Time (O) days at any
one time.

4. In the event an officer transfers into a different watch or division with a previously
approved vacation request, every effort will be made to honor that request.
However, vacation requests already scheduled by Personnel at the new
assignment shall take precedence. This shall apply regardless of the nature of
the transfer.

5. Vacation days, which are unscheduled as of October 4° shall be assigned by the
respective desk sergeant with the approval of the assistant division commander.

6. Recognizing that unusual and/or emergency situations may arise, division
commanders may deviate from this policy if necessary. However, these
exceptions must be approved by the division commander and the documentation
retained in the file for auditing purposes for a period of five (5) years.

ARTICLE 20
JURY DUTY

Members, who receive a summons to serve on jury duty, shall alert their supervisor
immediately upon receipt of the summons. Members shall receive their normal salary
and benefits while serving on jury duty. Members shall also retain any compensation
that they receive for jury duty. Members assigned to Watch 11, who must report for jury
duty during their regular tour of duty, shall be required to report to their regular
assignment for the time not spent on jury duty, unless otherwise specified and approved
by the members’ immediate supervisors. Members assigned to Watches | and III shall
be placed on a “Special Duty” day (SD) for that day. However, members assigned to
Waich Ill, who are required for jury duty less than four hours, shall be required to report
for their regular tour of duty.

ARTICLE 21 ~

COURT TIME/OVERTIME COMPENSATION

 

Section 1. | Terminology
The following terms and definitions shall apply to this Article.
4. Extension of Duty-Member is.called back to work or required to remain at
work within one (4) hour from the time of the completion of their regular

duty. The member is required to stay a minimum of seven (7) minutes
after their regular duty has ended.

22
Section 2.

1.

Section 3.

1.

Prior Duty - Member works four (4) hours or less prior to the start of their
regular duty hours. Overtime shall be paid from the time of report of duty
to the start of their regular duty time.

Tour of Duty — A period of time when a member is regularly scheduled to
be on duty or stationed at a prescribed place.

Workday — For members assigned to elements using an eight (8) hour
plan, a work day is considered to be a twenty-four (24) hour period of time
that starts eight (8) hours before the scheduled tour duty. For members
assigned to elements using a ten (10) hour plan, a work day shall be
considered to be a twenty-four (24) hour period of time that starts seven
(7) hours before the scheduled tour of duty.

Overtime Compensation

Members shall be compensated at one and one-half (1.5) times their
regular rate of pay for hours worked in excess of their regular tour of duty.
Compensatory-time may be paid in lieu of overtime payment as prescribed
herein.

Overtime shall be granted under the following conditions:

a. Job duties or functions that are essential to conducting Department
business which could not have been anticipated in advance or
scheduled into regular hours of assignment.

b. Unusual events or occurrences which are beyond the control of the
Department or the individual officer.

c. Special assignments or activities required by Department policy
that.are approved in advance by a commander.

d. Overtime of less than seven (7) minutes shall not be submitted for
compensation. If a member is required to answer/return a call of
seven (7) minutes or longer in duration, they shall be entitled to
compensation for actual time worked at their regular rate of
overtime.

Special Circumstances
A member in active service who is required to give a statement to the Internal

Affairs Unit or submit to a polygraph examination shall be authorized overtime
in accordance with this article.

23
2. Members suspended from duty without pay and allowances shall be
authorized compensation during the suspension period for the time required
in connection with the Department's investigation of the incident(s) which
resulted in the suspension unless the member is reinstated with back pay. All
payments shall be delayed until the member returns to duty. Ifa member is
terminated or resigns without being restored to duty, overtime earned during
the suspension shall be paid.

3. A member relieved of duty with pay and allowances shall be authorized
compensation for work time involved in completion of reports, etc., which
occurs on a day off or exceeds a regular tour of duty.

4. Members participating in a promotion or selection procedure interview
regarding transfer or promotion or attending Department-sponsored training
shall be considered in work status and shall be eligible for compensation.

Section 4. Court Time Compensation
4, Court Appearance Prior to Duty

When a member is scheduled to appear in court two (2) hours or less prior to
their tour of duty, a member shali be authorized compensation until such time
as their tour of duty begins.

2. Extension of Duty Court Time

When a court session is scheduled to begin one (1) hour or less following a
member's tour of duty, a member shall be authorized compensation from the
completion of the tour of duty until the member is dismissed by a court official.
Members who remain in court past the end of their tour of dufy shall be
authorized compensation for time that exceeds their tour of duty.

3. Court Call Back

When a court session is scheduled to begin more than one (1) hour after a
tour of duty, a member shall be authorized a minimum of two (2) hours
compensation Should the actual time in court exceed two hours, the member
shall be authorized compensation from the time court is scheduled to begin

until the member is dismissed by a court official. oS

4. Court on Regular Day off
When a court session occurs on a member's day off, the member shall be
authorized a minimum of two (2) hours compensation or the actual time in

court, whichever is greater. !f only one court session is involved when a court
takes a recess and the member is required to return, if the court reconvenes

24
on a subsequent day, the time involved shall be regarded as a separate
appearance.

5. More than One Court Session in a Day

a. When court sessions convene exactly two (2) hours or less from the
start of the first session to the start of the second, a member shall be
authorized compensation from the time actually involved in the
session, or hours minimum, whichever is greater.

b. If the session is more than two (2) hours apart, the member shall be
authorized either a two (2) hour minimum, or the actual time involved,
whichever is greater, for the first session. For the second and
additional sessions, the member shall be authorized compensation for
the actual time spent in court.

c. A member shall not receive more than one (1) two (2) hour minimum
court time compensation for the same day.

6. Extensions of duty followed by additional court appearances.

a. When a second court session convenes within two (2) hours or less of
an extension of duty, a member shall be authorized compensation for
the actual time involved in the extension of duty plus the actual time
involved in the second appearance or a two (2) hour minimum,
whichever is greater. For additional court sessions in the same day,
the members shall be authorized compensation for the amount of time
actually spent in court.

b. When a second court session is more than two (2) hours after an
extension’ of duty court appearance, a member shall be authorized
compensation for either a two (2) hour minimum or the actual time in
court, whichever is greater, for the first session. For additional
sessions, the member shall be authorized compensation for the actual
time spent in court.

Section 5. Special Circurnstances for Court

4. An off-duty member subpoenaed to appear in a civil case which resulted from
or involved an on-duty performance of police service shall be authorized
overtine compensation and shall not accept other payment for such
appearance.

2. Ifa suspended member appears in court because a continuance could not be

obtained by the legal advisor, or is called back for a statement concerning
some other matter, court fime/overtime shall be allowed unless the member is

25
reinstated with back pay. All payments shall be delayed until the member
returns to duty. If the member is terminated without restoration to duty, the
compensation eared during the suspension shall be paid. If a member on
sick leave appears in court because a continuance cannot be obtained,
compensation shall be allowed.

Section 6. Court Time Compensation Not Authorized

A member subpoenaed to appear as an expert witness in a case unrelated to an
on-duty performance shall not be authorized compensation. A member will not
be authorized compensation for any court appearance which results from or
involves an arrest made during the course of off-duty employment. A member on
injury leave, who is determined by the Department approved physician to be
physically able to respond, shall be required to appear in court and shall not be
eligible for compensation, except when court time exceeds eight (8) hours in one
(1) day.

Section 7. Call-Back Time

4. A member called back to duty while on regularly-scheduled days off or after
one (1) or more hour has elapsed following the completion of their tour of duty
shall be authorized a minimum of four (4) hours compensation or the actual
amount of time from the time the member reported for duty until relieved of
duty, whichever is greater.

2. More than one call-back in a day — When call-back occurs exactly four (4)
hours or less than four (4) hours apart, the member shall be authorized
compensation for the amount of time involved in the call-back or a minimum
of four (4) hours, whichever is greater. For call-backs occurring more than
four (4) hours apart, a member shall be authorized either a minimum of four
(4) hours compensation, or the amount of time involved, whichever is greater
for the first call-back.

3. For the second additional call-back, a member shall be authorized
compensation for the actual time involved. A member shall not be authorized
overtime compensation for more than one (1) four (4) hour minimum during
the same day unless it is a coded call-back. Coded call-backs are events in
which the Department charges the entity for the use of the off-duty officers.

ARTICLE 22

The parties agree to adhere to the dictates and requirements of Missouri law and
Chapter 84 of the Missouri Revised Statutes or any amendments thereto.
ARTICLE 23

INTERNAL AFFAIRS PROCEDURES

 

SECTION 1. With the exception of Miscellaneous Investigations, bargaining unit
members shall be informed in writing of the nature of the investigation and of the names
of the complainants with reasonable notice before the scheduled interview, unless there
is good cause to dispense with notice prior to the interview.

SECTION 2. The time and place for any interview shall be determined by the Internal
Affairs Detective. Every effort shall be made to schedule members’ interviews during
their on-duty hours. With the exception of Miscellaneous Investigations, members shall
be given reasonable notice of a pending interview in order to allow them time to
coordinate with a representative should they choose to have one present.

SECTION 3. During the interview session, the Detective shall provide the member with
a Garrity Warning before a formal statement is obtained. All interviews conducted by
Internal Affairs shall be recorded. The member shall be informed of the name and rank
of the interviewing officer(s) and all other people present during the interview.

SECTION 4. Members giving statements or being questioned concerning internal
matters may have a representative of tidir cfidosing present during the interview;
provided that the representative is a sworn member of the Department who is not in the
interviewee’s chain of command. The representative shall not be allowed to interfere
with or disrupt the interview process. After the interview, the member and the
representative shall be allowed to confer in private to determine if any other information
is needed or if the member's previous answers need to be clarified. After conferring
with the member, the representative may return to the interview with the member. At
this time, the member may provide additional information or clarify any answers that
were given to the interviewer

ARTICLE 24
MASTER RANKS
It is understood that employees serving as Master Detectives and Master Police
Officers shall from time to time be required to perform additional duties by virtue of their
master rank as determined by the employees’ supervisors.
ARTICLE 25
SEPARATION, COMPENSATION, AND CLEARANCE PROCEDURES

Members separating from the department will complete the separation clearance
process. Upon separation, members will be paid for days worked in the final pay period,

a7
accrued court/overtime, and any leave time for which they are eligible to receive
compensation.

Section 1.

A.

Section 2.

Terminology

Qualified Deferred Compensation Plans - These are 457(b) deferred
compensation plans which allow base salary to be set aside. Compensation
for Vacation (V) days, Extra (E) days, compensatory time, and sick leave
earned may be deferred up to the annual IRS limit.

Final Payroll Advice - Payment for days worked in the final pay period,
including base salary, education/skill pay, clothing allowance, overtime,
court time and accumulated compensatory time.

Lump Sum Payout - Payment for accrued V-days, E-days, and sick leave.
Clearance Procedures

Members will complete the separation clearance process when they retire,
resign, are terminated, or are approved for a leave without pay in excess of
twenty-eight (28) days. The separation clearance process includes returning
all department-owned equipment, completing separation documents, and
computing final compensation (except leaves without pay).

Members who decide to resign or retire must notify their supervisor and the
Personne! Records Section to begin the separation clearance process.
Members voluntarily separating may either separate or receive pay for
accrued and unused V-days, E-days, and compensatory time or use
available leave before separation.

When a member is notified of termination, the member's supervisor will be
present and take immediate. possession of the terminated member's I.D.
card, police badge, department issued ammunition, and arly department
owned firearms. The supervisor will escort the member to the Personnel
Records Section to begin the separation clearance process. The Personnel
Records Section wil! determine the actual termination date and pay for any
unused or accrued V-days, E-days, compensatory time, and sick leave if
applicable.

\V-days and E-days will be converted to pay at the member's current hourly
rate.

Compensatory time and sick leave will be converted to pay at the member's

current hourly rate or the average hourly rate over the last three years,
whichever is higher.

28
Exempt and exempt-managerial members will not be paid for
accumulated compensatory time in excess of 120 hours unless
approved by the Chief of Police.

Non-exempt members will not be paid for accumulated compensatory
time in excess of 60 hours unless approved by the Chief of Police.

F. Sick Leave Compensation

1.

Separation by Retirement (regardless of appointment date)
a. Sworn Members ~— Receiving 240 hours Sick Leave per Year

Will be paid at the ratio of one hour of pay for every four hours of
accrued, unused sick leave at the member's current hourly rate.

b. Swom Members — Receiving 144 hours Sick Leave per Year

Will be paid at the fatio of one hour of pay for every two hours of
accrued, unused sick leave at the member's current hourly rate.

Separation by Resignation or Termination

The balance of sick leave will be paid to bargaining unit employees
with at least one (1) year of continuous employment at the ratio of
one hours pay for each four hours of accrued sick leave at the
member's current hourly rate.

G. All BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES separating from the department must
complete the separation clearance process. Separation Clearance, Form
5321 P.D., will be completed and returned to the Personnel Records Section.

H. The Final Payroll Advice will bé deposited on the regular pay day for the final
pay period. On the following pay day, separating BARGAINING UNIT
EMPLOYEES will receive the lump sum payout (except for leaves without
pay in excess of twenty-eight days). The lump sum payout will be taxed at
the appropriate rate and no deductions other than to a Qualified Deferred
Compensation Program will be allowed.

|. The Personne! Records Section will notify eligible BARGAINING UNIT
EMPLOYEES approximately six months prior to mandatory retirement date
and inform them of separation compensation options at that time.

J. Separation by Death - Separation compensation for members regardless of
appointment date.

28
1. Separation compensation will be paid according to the beneficiary listed
on the Designation of Beneficiary, Form 311 P.D., regardless of the
member's length of service. A member's accrued sick leave, V-days, E-
days, and compensatory time will be converted to pay, using the same
ratios as those used for retirement, except that in the event of a line of
duty death, the employee’s heirs or estates shall receive compensation
for every hour of accrued, unused sick leave.

2. Payment for days worked in the final pay period, including base salary,
education/skill pay; clothing allowance, overtime, court time, and
accumulated compensatory time will be paid on the first pay period
following the date of death.

3. The lump sum payout will be paid out on the pay period immediately
following.

ARTICLE 26
PAY COMMITTEE

The BOPC and the FOP acknowledge that the BOPC does not have taxing authority
and its overall funding fluctuates depending upon the City’s general revenue receipts
and other factors outside the control the BOPC. Accordingly, the BOPC cannot commit
to certain pay increases or other major elements of compensation.

Notwithstanding such circumstances, the BOPC agrees that representatives of the
Department (including budget officials) will meet at least twice with up to three FOP
representatives in advance of the Department's annual funding request to the City of
Kansas City. Such meetings may be held in conjunction with FOP Lodge 102 at the
Department's discretion. The purpose of the meetings is to permit the FOP to make
suggestions and recommendations to the BOPC regarding pay increases or pay
adjustments to be included in the BOPC’s proposed budget submitted to the City. The
parties shall not be bound by any such recommendations or suggestions made in
course of these meetings regardless of whether. they are contained in the proposed
budget. Either party is free to present its respective positions on pay increases or the
proposed budget to the City Council.

The foregoing process is not intended to alter the respective rights and responsibilities
of the City and the BOPC under Chapter 84 of the Missouri Revised Statutes.

DURATION and FRAMEWORK for NEGOTIATING NEW AGREEMENT

This Agreement shall be effective as of September 1, 2014 and shall continue in effect
to April 30, 2017.

30
Unless otherwise agreed, the parties shall begin negotiations for a successor
agreement on or before October 1, 2016. Should the parties be unable to reach an
agreement before the expiration of this agreement, the current agreement shall remain
in effect until such time as a successor agreement is reached or the parties have
reached impasse. if the parties reach impasse, they shall each be permitted to present
their respective positions on the open issues at impasse to the BOPC. After
consideration of the parties’ positions, the BOPC may either adopt one of the party's
positions on each of the open issues at impasse or direct the parties to continue to
negotiate subject to any specified conditions or limitations.

For the Board of Police Commissioners of Kansas City, Missouri: -

dre —§ ZU

ALVIN BROOKS MICHAEL ’RADER
President Vice President

 

 

Concurrence:

—
Deal Dajte!
DARR¥L FORTE

Chief of Police
Kansas City Police Department

3
For the Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge No, 99:

 

 

B EM
President
Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 99

STEVEN D. MICCER
Executive Vice President
Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 99

19107774.1

la
