COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
AGREEMENT

between

Las Vegas Metropolitan
Police Department

&

LAS VEGAS POLICE PROTECTIVE
ASSOCIATION

July 1, 2016 — June 30, 2019

 
Table of Contents

 
 
 
 
 
 

ARTICLE 2 - SCOPE OF AGREEMENT.
2.1 Bargaining Unit.
2.2 List of Eligible Classes.

ARTICLE 3 - DEFINITIONS

ARTICLE 4 - ASSOCIATION SECURITY +
AL Check Off, ..cecsssssesssssssesssosssesssssssscssusscsssssossereccensecerssesetsonssessensusesssssucessnsecsssnussssneccessnecessnee 2
4.2 Hold Harmless. .
4.3 Errors.
4.4 Notice of Investigatory InterviewS..........-sesssssssstestecsseessseessseeeessneecsnsessesssssessasssssesssseesvess 2

ARTICLE 5 - ASSOCIATION BUSINESS.
5.1 Leave Hours. .......0...

5.2 Limits on Use
5.3 Association Authorization.

 

 

 

 

 

5.4 Application for Leave. .
5.5 Full-Time Association Positions.
5.6 Duties of Compensated Representatives. .........ssssssccssessseeeessesssssesssessssueessscessettsseeseresseeeesee 4
5.7 Bulletin Boards. .....
5.8 Access to Briefings.
ARTICLE 6 - STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS.
6.1 Strike. ..
6.2 Lockout. .
ARTICLE 7 - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS .
ARTICLE 8 - HOLIDAYS ....eccssssssssscssssesoresssscsseensecsssesasecnsseesereceneccautecenseeensessueessnscsssessneceaseesnees 6
8.1 Recognized Days. .
8.2 Weekend Holidays.
8.3 Eligibility...
8.4 Holiday Work.
8.5 Holiday Compensation..
8.6 Day Off Work.
8.7 Compensation Options. ......sssccsescsessstesstesssessscsensessarecssecssanecsnscessensssecessecseussssueessesenuesseeeenee 7

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE 9 - VACATION LEAVE. a7
7
9.2 ACCTUAL. ...ssecsssesscseessssessssesssneeersnssseesssessussssesesscssuressuntessucenusessanvecsurecnsesssneessneesneessee 7
9.3 Accumulation. 27
9.4 Approval.... 8
9.5 Advance Leave. 8
9.6 Death of Employee. ..
9.7 Sellback.
9.8 Professional Leave Days. a
ARTICLE 10 - SICK LEAVE ....sssssessessssessvsecssscsseenseecssscccsseessececsnsesssnensuseessnecsssecsueessncsssecssneesssessnee 9

10.1 Accrual.
10.2 Pay...
10.3 Utilization.
10.4 Approval/Notice. .
10.5 Immediate Family. .
10.6 Family and Medical Leave. .
10.7 Reporting Requirement. .........ccsssscsssssecsssssesecsnessssseecssecssnuessosessueesssesssseseusessnecsasensnecensnse 9
10
10

 

 
 
  

 

 

10.8 Residence Requirement.

 

10.9 Abuse or Excessive Use.

  

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

10.10 Bonus Time. .......ccccsccssesssssesssessssstsssssvesneesueseecssesseresensoneseness 10
10.11 Sick Buyback. 10
10.12 Cash Out. 10
10.13 Death...... 12
10.14 Bridged Time. ........sssssssssssssssssessssssvessvessaressarecssccsssesssssetsevesssseessaeseutecnneennsecanestseeesnsessses 12
ARTICLE 11 - SPECIAL LEAVES.. 12
11.1 Military Leave... 12
11.2 Leave Without Pay. .......ccceccsssseserscsesstensesessnecssssseesstecsessnscessssessavenneenesseess 13
11.3 Maternity/Paternity Leave 14
11.4 Application and Examination Leave. 14
11.5 Catastrophic Leave. ww 4
ARTICLE 12 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE w.....sssecssssssssssssesssssessovecenneersneeesuesseesenscessesssnessnseess 15

12.1 Grievance Procedure. 1S
(A) Purpose. «00... css 15
(B) Definition. a 15

(C) Representation, ........c.ccssssssessessesssessesssssessseseesssessesssegssvsguecesesersesessatssaseaeasesesereseseesasees 16

 

 

 
(D) Process..

(E) Resolution.

(F) Time Limits

(G) Documentation.

ARTICLE 13 - COMPENSATION
13.1 Salaries

FUGA, 00.0... tesesessessessssssseuconscsssenscnsecnsenetsessnscesscsnecssescesesasssusssuessusssecsacasessuesaesevessecsuceseesaes 21

13.2 Assignment Differential Pay.

13.3 Longevity. .....csccsseeseeseee

13.4 Jury/Court Pay.....ee.cesssesssscsssssessessssescsnsssscesssnecsereearssacesaessnsssacesecnsenneessarsessveseres

 

 
 

 

 

 
  
  
 
 
 
 

13.5 Retirement.......
13.6 Shift Differential.
13.7 Spanish Pay. ....

13.8 K-9 Pay. oscccesesseccssescsssesssessssnessuccsnessstessnessuessasecaseesssasecnusesssseesnsssneesaseesauessseessnesssesesseeessee
13.9 Education Incentive

 

 

  

13.11 Field Training Officer Pay..........
ARTICLE 14 - CLOTHING/EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE .......cccssssssssssssssscssessssscsssessseesnssnvees 24
14.1 Clothing and Equipment Allowance.
14.2 Entitlement.
ARTICLE 15 - HEALTH & WELFARE BENEFITS..........cssescsotsssessssssvesesssessessseesecersensvessecensees 25
15.1 Health Insurance.
15.2 Contributions...
15.3 Deductions, .....ccsceccecseessesssseensecensessesesneesse
15.4 Flexible Spending Account. ....
15.5 Employee Benefit Trust (EBT).
ARTICLE 16 - DISABILITY 1
16.1 Service Connected. ........esssssssssesssessesssseessseessstessssesssntecnsessssesssesesaneensessncessuessneeesserssseessaes 26
16.2 Compensation Integration...
16.3 Sick Leave Utilization...
16.4 Compliance with Administrative Procedures
16.5 Hours Computation. ........c.ccsseeccsssssssessssssesssssueeocceveeceecntessesssesssessssessasecessasecsaueeessnneceesssne 26

  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ARTICLE 17 - REDUCTION IN FORCE .
17.1 Notice to Association. ............00.02
17.2 Provisions.
17.3 Seniority Lists.
17.4 Specialized Assignments.

ARTICLE 18 - HOURS

18.1 Work Week. .....ccssesecscsecsssssescssssessssscsssssesssssmsocsssnessesnsnscessusesesnisesssusecssssuesssesueseessssssensseane

18.2 Tour of Duty. ..........

18.3 Tour of Duty Change..

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 

 

 

18.5 Callback. .............
ARTICLE 19 - SENIORITY .
19.1 Definition. ....
19.2 Bridging Time.
19.3 Application.
ARTICLE 20 - ACCIDENT PREVENTION BANK .....sscssssssssssssstescssvsccsssecessssccssssesssssssnersssssuees 34
20.1 Accident Prevention Bank.
20.2 Accrual and Use of Hours.
ARTICLE 21 - LABOR/MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE ...
21.1 Meetings
21.2 Purpose.

 

 

  
 
 
 
 

21.3 Notice to Supervisors.
21,4 Compensation. .......sessescsssscsessssrecsesssseesssessseessseessnnasiesssssessesesnsesssussavecrseesssutessussssasesensness 35
21.5 Resolutions
ARTICLE 22 - DUTY WEAPO!
22.1 Maintenance.

 

 
 
 
  

 

22.2 Replacement.

22.3 Stock. + 35
ARTICLE 23 - TRANSFERS. oe
ARTICLE 24 - RANDOM DRUG TESTING .u.....ssssssssssccsssssstsescnsecesssteccsssesssnnecesssseeseesssesecesseees 35

24.1 Parameters.

 

 
 

24.2 Voluntary Identification.
ARTICLE 25 - GENERAL PROVISIONS on
25.1 Savings Clause. ......cessssesssssrsssssesssssssecsvsccnsecssnessssessnvesssuesenssssueessssesuersnscesssessueeetsneessestense 36
25.2 Contract/Civil Service Rule Duplication.
25.3 Personnel Files. .......csesssssceeeeeeeenseereees
Employee AcCOSS, .......sescesssceestesseseeseestecnsosescsseensentsevssceaseaeeaceeeseeneess

    
  
 

Employee Copies. ...
Rebuttal Statement.

Notice of Placement of Item in File.
Official File. .
Information Contained in File... .ssesssesssseseesseesssecscssesseessessessusesecsecenessaeeesteesesssseenceeenees 38

25.4 Performance Appraisals.
25.5 Legal Representation.
25.6 Body Worn Cameras (BWC) aes
ARTICLE 26 - TERM OF AGREEMENT ......ccscsessessssssssssesssesssesstssressessuessnssnessnssaseeaneceerseesseetess 40
ATTACHMENT A Salary Schedules
ATTACHMENT B NRS 289.010 through 289.120

 

 

  
 

 

 
PREAMBLE

WHEREAS, the Department is engaged in furnishing essential public services vital to the health,
safety, and welfare of the population of the City of Las Vegas and the County of Clark; and

WHEREAS, both the Department and its employees have a high degree of responsibility to the
public in so serving the public without interruption of essential services; and

WHEREAS, both parties recognize this mutual responsibility, they have entered into this
Agreement as an instrument and means of maintaining the existing harmonious relationship between the
Department and its employees and with the intention and desire to foster and promote the responsibility of
a sound, stable, and peaceful labor relations between the Department and its employees; and

WHEREAS, the parties recognize that this Agreement is not intended to modify any of the
discretionary authority vested in the Department by the statutes of the State of Nevada; and

WHEREAS, the parties have reached an understanding concerning wages, hours, and conditions
of employment and have caused the understanding to be set out in this Memorandum of Agreement.

NOW, THEREFORE, the parties do agree as follows:

ARTICLE 1 - RECOGNITION

Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Government Employee-Management Relations Act, Chapter 288,
Nevada Revised Statutes as amended, the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department, hereinafter referred
to as “Department”, recognizes the Las Vegas Police Protective Association, Inc., hereinafter referred to as
the “Association”, as the exclusive representative of the eligible Department employees as hereinafter
defined for the purpose of collective bargaining. The Association makes the Agreement in its capacity as
the exclusive bargaining agent for the Department employees in the bargaining unit.

Only members in good standing with the Association are eligible to vote on the contents of this contract
drawn as the result of collective bargaining.

The Department and Association agree that members of the Department who have “Peace Officer” status
are covered by N.R.S. 289 (Rights of Peace Officers) - Attachment B. Both parties will also comply with
future legislative changes to N.R.S. 289. Those changes, if any, will supersede the tights listed in
Attachment B.

ARTICLE 2 - SCOPE OF AGREEMENT

2.1 Bargaining Unit. The term “employee” as used in this Agreement applies to those persons having a
regular commissioned Civil Service appointment to the work force of the Department, excluding, however,
appointive and other administrative employees, supervisory employees, confidential employees, employees
in other recognized bargaining units, and temporary employees, except as specified below.

2.2 List of Eligible Classes.
Salary Range
Police Officer II 21
Corrections Officer II 21
Police Officer I 20
Corrections Officer I 20

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page| 1
ARTICLE 3 - DEFINITIONS

This Agreement is made pursuant to and in conjunction with the Local Government Employee-Management
Relations Act of the State of Nevada, and all terms used herein which are terms used in the Local
Government Employee-Management Relations Act shall have definitions ascribed to them by said Act.

ARTICLE 4 - ASSOCIATION SECURITY

4.1 Check Off. The Department agrees to deduct from the paycheck of each employee within the bargaining
unit who has signed an authorized payroll deduction card such amount as has been designated by the
Association as Association dues and is so certified by the Treasurer of the Association. The Association will
certify to the Department, in writing, the current rate of membership dues. The Department will be notified
of any change in the rate of membership dues 30 days prior to the effective date of such change.

Such funds shall be remitted by the Department to the Treasurer of the Association within one (1) month
after such deductions. Dues deduction authorization shall be irrevocable for a period of one (1) year and
automatically renewed each year thereafter commencing October 1, except that authorization may be
withdrawn by an employee during a period of 20 days each year ending October 20. Members of the
bargaining unit who are promoted to sergeant may withdraw their payroll deduction authorization during the
first 30 days following their promotion, regardless of the date, but thereafter are limited to the same withdraw
period set forth above.

The Department will not be required to honor any pay period deduction authorizations that are delivered to
the Payroll Section after the beginning of the pay period during which the deductions should start.

4.2 Hold Harmless. The Association agrees to indemnify and hold the Department harmless against any
and all claims, suits, orders, or judgments brought or issued against the Department as a result of any action
taken or not taken by the Department in conformance with the provisions of this Article.

4.3 Errors. The Association agrees to refund to the Department any monies paid to it in error on account of
the payroll deduction provisions herein upon presentation of proper evidence thereof.

4.4 Notice of Investigatory Interviews. Whenever an employee covered by the collective bargaining
agreement is a party to an internal investigation as a subject or witness and is so notified as per Department
Procedure 5/101.26, such notice shall be e-mailed to the Association office.

Notification to the Association and employee shall be completed the same business day. If the notice is e-
mailed to the Association anytime after 3:00 p.m. on the last business day of the week, the Association shall
also receive telephonic notification. If no telephonic notification is provided, there shall be at least one
intervening business day between the e-mailing of the notice and the interview.

A. The parties recognize the rights of all police officers under NRS 289 (Attachment B). The
Association will receive a copy of all notices and summaries of any internal investigation of an
employee at the time the notice and summary is sent to the employee via e-mail or 1000 miler.

B. Employees called for a witness interview in an investigation will have the same rights as subject
employees and will be entitled to representation during any interview.

C. The parties agree that on any investigation conducted pursuant to NRS 289, a summary of facts will
be provided to the subject employee who is to be interviewed. For purposes of this section,
“summary” means a description of the allegation, with the locations, time, and date. If the location,
time, or date are unknown, the notice will so state. If there are multiple allegations, then the
summary of facts must address all of the allegations and include a description of the misconduct or
performance problem.

The Association may raise issue with the named investigator as required by NRS 289 if it is believed
there is a conflict of interest. In such instance, the matter shall be presented to the Bureau
Commander of Professional Standards and his/her decision regarding the matter shall not be
appealable.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 2
D. When alleged employee misconduct is discovered during the course of an internal investigation
unrelated to the original matter under investigation, a second complaint number will be obtained and
a separate investigation initiated into the unrelated misconduct. This provision will not apply if it is
determined an employee was untruthful during the investigation. In such instances, the finding will
be “misconduct not based on complaint”.

E. When the Department receives notice of a complaint against an employce, that employee will be
notified as to the existence of the complaint through the employee’s chain of command as
expeditiously as practicable. Such notice shall be made via e-mail or 1000 miler. In situations where
covert actions may be necessary to properly engage an investigation, no notice will be given to the
employee until those actions are completed. Additionally, the parties agree that notice will only be
necessary when it is determined an investigation will be undertaken. ‘his alleviates the need for
any notice while a supervisor or IA is conducting a preliminary review to determine if an
investigation should go forward.

F. Untruthfulness during an internal investigation is defined as the willful making of a knowingly false
statement of material fact. This finding shall be reviewed and approved by the Assistant Sheriff
responsible for the Office of Internal Affairs prior to a disposition being sent out.

G. When the Department possesses information or facts which contradict an employee’s recollection
of those facts under investigation, the investigator will allow the employee an opportunity to explain
an answer or refute the negative implication of his/her recollection after informing the employee of
the specific contradiction(s).

H. When the Department possesses information in an electronic, audio, video, or written format, the
investigator will allow the employee an opportunity to explain an answer or refute the negative
implication of his/her recollection after the employee is given the opportunity to review the media
evidence.

I. On any statement, report, or document prepared at the direction of the Department for an internal
investigation, the protections afforded to employees pursuant to NRS 289 and under the doctrines
set forth in Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493 (1967), will apply to all employees.

J. Employees, whether a witness or subject employee, will receive 48-hours notice of an interview
unless such notice is specifically waived in writing with the employee’s signature. If a subject
employee waives the notice period, this waiver must also be approved by the Association. A
reasonable extension will be granted for a subject employee at the request of the Association.

K. Asa guideline, no interview session will extend more than four (4) hours unless the employee agrees
to more time in one 24-hour period. Regular breaks wilt occur during the interview based on any
person’s request attending the interview.

L. When charged with a criminal offense, the Department may, at the employee and the Association’s
request, waive an interview of the subject employee if there are sufficient facts present to make a
fair determination in the case.

M. The Association, an employee or Labor Relations may suggest that a case meets the criteria where
a formal investigation may be waived. If the parties agree to the alleged allegation and the
appropriate level of discipline, the investigation and any subsequent right to the grievance procedure
will be waived. This agreement will be reflected in a letter sent from the Association to the Internal
Affairs Bureau Lieutenant through Labor Relations.

N. Anemployee may be relieved of duty without pay when the employee has been criminally indicted
or arrested and approved for prosecution for a felony offense under state or federal law.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 3
ARTICLE 5 - ASSOCIATION BUSINESS

5.1 Leave Hours. ‘The Department agrees to provide 1000 hours each fiscal year, accumulative for the
duration of this contract, for the use of PPA members to conduct Association business associated with the
administration of the collective bargaining agreement which is inclusive of representation of bargaining unit
employees and including day-to-day operations, i.e., conventions, seminars, training, and lobbying during
the legislative session. Once the maximum yearly hours are exceeded, vacation leave will be used.

5.2 Limits on Use. No more than one individual from a section/mit/squad may use Association leave at any
given time. Exceptions may be granted by the Sheriff/designee.

5.3 Association Authorization. The Executive Director, or his designee, will determine the use of
Association leave.

5.4 Application for Leave. Members relieved from duty for purposes listed above will submit LYMPD 2
(Application for Leave) or an electronic leave slip through Employee Self Service (ESS) through the chain
of command to Payroll. The application for leave will indicate the hours absented are for Association
business.

5.5 Full-Time Association Positions. The Association will be allowed to maintain seven (7) full-time
representatives. Such positions will be filled by appointment of the Executive Director and confirmation of
the LVPPA Board of Directors. The LVPPA Board of Directors may also elect to reimburse the Department
for hours used beyond the hours defined in 5.1 for one additional full-time position.

Employees who are assigned to the Association full time after July 1, 2009, will be entitled to ADP. Upon
completion of the term, the Executive Director, Assistant Executive Director(s), and full time representatives
shall return to the previously held classification, position, and work assignment within the Department, or
any successor position such members would have been reclassified had they not been serving in this capacity.
Seniority will apply as if the member remained in that assignment. Members serving in a full time capacity
shall be assigned to the Office of the Deputy Chief, Professional Standards Division. The Deputy Chief will
be informed of all annual, sick, and/or other leaves used by the members serving in a full-time capacity.

In compliance with SB241, enacted into law June 1, 2015, the Association will make the following
concessions for the full cost of seven (7) full-time employee positions as well as up to 1,000 hours of union
leave per year. These current concessions include:

1, Article 10.12 Cash Out, will contain a third column, amending the sick leave cash out for officers
hired after the ratification of this contract.

2. The Association will reimburse the Department for one (1) full-time position of the Association’s
choice.

3. The Association agrees to remove the following contract language in Article 5.5 “[o]ne full time
employee representative for every 400 employees in the bargaining unit.”

4. The Association agrees to reduce the number of full time employee positions from eight (8) to seven
.

This concession will satisfy the requirements of SB 241 until and unless the law is amended, repealed, or
held unconstitutional. Should the Association decide to maintain more than seven (7) full-time
representatives; the Association will be required to reimburse the Department for all positions above the
allotted seven (7).

5.6 Duties of Compensated Representatives. The representatives so elected or appointed shall devote the
full time provided by the Department to matters of collective bargaining or representation for Las Vegas
Metropolitan Police Department’s commissioned employees. Any time devoted by the representatives to
employees of any other entity must be on other than the hours provided by the Department for this position.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 4
5.7 Bulletin Boards. It is the right of the PPA Board of Directors or their designee to use the provided space
on the bulletin boards for the posting of notices concerning legitimate Association business. A copy of all
material to be posted will be sent to the Sheriff and/or his representative when posted.

It is understood that no material will be posted, distributed, or circulated by any employee while in or on
LVMED property which contains:

¢ Untrue personal attacks upon any member or any other employee;
¢ Untrue scandalous, scurrilous, or derogatory attacks upon Administration or the LVPPA;

¢ Untrue attacks on any other employee association regardless of whether the organization has local
membership;

¢ Attacks on and/or favorable comments regarding a candidate for any public political office.

Any Association member claiming that this section has been violated is responsible for filing a Brief of
Complaint.

5.8 Access to Briefings. The Association is entitled to address members of the bargaining unit at briefing
sessions on issues relating to the administration of this collective bargaining agreement. Discussions relating
to the Association’s recognition as the exclusive bargaining agent are not authorized. Access to briefing
sessions will be approved by the Executive Director and the appropriate Division Chief who will mutually
agree upon the schedule and amount of time taken by the Association during such briefing sessions.

When the elected bureau representative needs to address their members, they will notify the supervisor
before briefing of the need to discuss Association matters. The elected bureau representative does not need
to obtain prior approval from the Division Chief. The supervisor will conduct the briefing and upon
conclusion allow the members of the Association appropriate time to meet with Association Representatives,
so long as this does not impede with the regular operations of the Department.

ARTICLE 6 - STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS

6.1 Strike. The Association will not promote, sponsor, or engage in any strike or any slowdown, interruption
of work or operation, concentrated stoppage of work, absence from work upon any pretext or excuse such
as illness, which is not founded in fact, against the Department, or any other intentional interruption of the
operations of the Department, regardless of the reason or reasons for so doing.

It is also understood that the Association and the Department will adhere to the provisions of N.R.S. 288.240,
288.250, 288.260, and 288.270.

6.2 Lockout. ‘The Department will not lock out any employees covered hereunder as a result of a labor
dispute or any other disagreement with the Association.

ARTICLE 7 - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
The Department and the Association agree that the Management officials of the Department possess the sole
right to operate the Department and that all Management rights remain with those officials. These rights
include, but are not limited to:

¢ Hire, direct, or transfer employees, except when such assignment or transfer is done as a part of
disciplinary purposes.

© Reduce in force or lay off any employee because of lack of work or lack of money. Layoffs shall be
conducted in accordance with the requirements of Article 17 - Reduction in Force.

* Determine appropriate staffing levels and work performance standards, except for employee safety
considerations.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 5
« Determine work schedules, tours of duty, and daily assignments.

¢ Determine quality and quantity of services to be offered to the public and the means and methods of
offering those services.

e Determine the content of the work day, including, without limitation, workload factors, except for
employee safety considerations.

* Take whatever action may be necessary to carry on its responsibilities in situations of emergency
such as a riot, military action, natural disaster, or civil disorder. Such actions may include the
suspension of this collective bargaining agreement for the duration of the emergency. Any action
taken by the Department under the provisions of this subsection shall not be construed as a failure
to negotiate or keep the intended good faith. A fiscal emergency does not constitute an “emergency”
for purposes of management rights.

© Manage its operation in the most efficient manner consistent with the best interests of all its citizens,
taxpayers, and employees.

© Promote employees and determine promotional procedures, as provided in N.R.S. 280.310.
« Educate and train employees and determine corresponding criteria and procedures.
° The Department shall have such other exclusive rights as may be determined by N.R.S. 288.150.

e The Department's failure to exercise any right, prerogative, or function hereby reserved to it shall
not be considered a waiver of that right, prerogative, or function.

Nothing contained herein shall supersede any provision of NRS 288.150.

ARTICLE 8 - HOLIDAYS
8.1 Recognized Days. The Department and the Association agree that the legal holidays shall be:

New Year’s Day Nevada Day
Martin Luther King Day Veterans’ Day
Presidents’ Day Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day Friday after Thanksgiving Day
Independence Day Labor Day
Day before Christmas
Christmas Day

Any legal holiday specifically appointed for local government employees by the President of the United
States, except for any Presidential appointment of the fourth Monday in October as Veterans’ Day.

8.2 Weekend Holidays. \f any of the above holidays fali on Sunday, the following Monday shall be
considered as the legal holiday. If any of the above holidays fall on Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be
considered as the legal holiday.

8.3 Eligibility. All full-time employees shall be entitled to time off for such legal holidays. If an employee
is off-duty on a scheduled work day, which is also a holiday, he/she will be considered off in lieu of the
holiday. If an employee is on duty on a scheduled work day, which is a holiday, they will be eligible to
receive the holiday benefit as described in section 8.4 Holiday Work. All full-time employees, in order to
be entitled to a legal holiday as provided, shall be on full paid status on their scheduled work day immediately
preceding and immediately following such holiday. Employees who are on partial leave without pay the day
preceding or immediately following a holiday will receive a prorated benefit based on the hours in a paid
status.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 6
8.4 Holiday Work, Employees who work on a legal holiday shall receive their normal salary for the
holiday(s) on a straight time basis for the hours worked. Also, employees shall receive an additional eight
(8), nine (8), ten (10), or 12 hours of vacation leave, or straight time pay, depending upon their regular
schedule.

Employees who are on administrative leave for use of force shall receive the holiday benefit as though he/she
was working his/her regular work schedule. Employees who are off-duty on workers’ compensation shall
be considered off in lieu of the holiday.

Employees who call in sick on a holiday will be carried as sick and payroll will post off in-lieu of holiday-
sick. Sick accruals will not be deducted, but this sick leave will count toward bonus time eligibility.

Employees that take a professional leave day will be carried as such. Employees who use their professional
leave day will have the equivalent hours of vacation leave time added to the employee’s annual leave
accumulation for the holiday benefit. Employees will not have the option of pay for the holiday under this
circumstance.

Employees who work in a section that is off on the holiday and work for a different section on same holiday,
shall receive the holiday benefit as though he/she was working his/her regular work schedule. Overtime will
only be paid for hours that an employee works outside of his/her regular work schedule.

8.5 Holiday Compensation. Employees whose regularly scheduled day off falls on a legal holiday shall
receive eight (8), nine (9), ten (10), or 12 hours of vacation leave or straight time pay depending upon their
regular work schedule.

Vacation leave or straight time pay is based upon the employee’s regular schedule and not the light day;
ie., the 8 hour day in a regular 9 hour schedule or 12 hour schedule.

8.6 Day Off Work. An employee required to work on a legal holiday which falls on his/her scheduled day
off shall be paid overtime (time and one half) for hours actually worked. Additionally, the employee will
receive eight (8), nine (9), ten (10), or 12 hours of vacation leave or straight time pay depending upon their
regular work schedule.

Vacation leave or straight time pay is based upon the employee’s regular schedule and not the light day;
i.e., the 8 hour day in a regular 9 hour schedule or 12 hour schedule.

8.7 Compensation Options. Pursuant to the provisions above, employees covered by this Agreement may
twice a year select the option of pay or vacation leave for holidays. The employee’s selection will remain in
effect until a change is made. Any changes made are due in Payroll by June 5" to be effective on the July 4
holiday and due in Payroll by December 5" to be effective for the December 24 holiday. If selection is not
made at time of employment, vacation leave will be given.

ARTICLE 9 - VACATION LEAVE

9.1 Purpose. The Department and the Association agree that vacation leave is provided to employees for
the purpose of rest and relaxation from their duties and for attending to personal business.

9.2 Accrual. Employees shall be eligible to take vacation leave after completion of six (6) months of
continuous full-time service. Vacation leave shall accrue at the rate of 4.62 hours per pay period during
which an employee is in a paid status, excluding overtime. Vacation leave does not accrue during periods
of leave without pay or for employees who have exceeded 800 hours of workers’ compensation. After 15
years of continuous service, vacation leave shall accrue at the rate of 6.15 hours per pay period during which
an employee is in a paid status, excluding overtime. After 20 years of continuous service, vacation leave
shall accrue at a rate of 7.68 hours per pay period during which an employee is in a paid status, excluding
overtime.

9.3 Accumulation. Vacation leave may be accumulated up to a maximum of 320 hours during the first ten

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page |7
(10) years of service; upon completion of ten (10) years of service and up to 15 years of service will
accumulate up to 360 hours, and upon completion of 15 years of service and thereafter will accumulate up
to 400 hours. Any vacation leave which exceeds the allowed maximum shall be forfeited on December 31st
of each calendar year.

Employees with more than six (6) months service who leave the service of the Department are entitled to
payment for unused vacation leave which has not been forfeited in accordance with 9.3 and computed on
the employee’s rate of pay. In order to receive shift differential pay and/or assignment differential pay, the
employee must have worked in the assignment at least six months prior to separation. Employees who are
within six months from separation from the Department, are transferred as a result of a disciplinary transfer,
administrative transfer, or are deactivated as a field training officer are excluded from the six month
requirement and will receive the cash out at the pay of the assignment immediately preceding the transfer,
as if they had been assigned there at least six months.

The Parties agree that the language regarding the six months in an assignment will be reassessed at the
following negotiation session in order to determine whether it was successfully implemented.

9.4 Approval. Application for vacation leave must be approved in advance of taking leave. An employee
on authorized vacation leave may be granted an extension thereof upon his/her request.

Upon approval by the Department Head, an employee may be advanced vacation leave.

9.5 Advance Leave. An employee who has taken advance vacation leave beyond that accrued at the time of
separation shall make restitution for such leave, either by deduction from any amount owed him/her by the
Department or by cash refund.

9.6 Death of Employee. Upon the death of an employee, the Department will make a lump sum payment of
accrued vacation leave due to the employee’s most recently designated beneficiary on file or, ifno designated
beneficiary, to the employee’s estate.

Employees on the Department’s payroll as of June 30, 1982, who have had a break in service, shall have
their vacation leave accrued as if their combined years of service were continuous and without break. For
persons hired or rehired on July 1, 1982, or thereafter, any break in service shall not be bridged for the
purpose of accruing vacation leave.

9.7 Sellback. Any employee who has completed his/her initial probation without a break in service in a
Department position by the due dates listed below may elect to exchange up to 40 hours of vacation leave
for up to 40 hours of gross salary, excluding overtime. The rate of pay will be the same as what is received
if the employee were to work his/her regular shift.

Sellback of vacation leave shall only be paid on the first payday of each November. Employees shail submit
their request for sellback by October 1" of cach year.

9.8 Professional Leave Days. Employees are authorized two (2) professional leave days per fiscal year.
These days must be used by June 30" of each fiscal year. Employees shall be eligible to use these leave days
after completion of six (6) months of continuous full-time service. If the employee requests a professional
leave day, the supervisor may not deny the request without approval of the Bureau Commander on a case-
by-case basis. No employee may accrue or use more than two professional leave, personal holiday, or
appointed leave days in a fiscal year.

If an employee has utilized any or all of this benefit for the current fiscal year under a different collective
bargaining agreement, they are not entitled to additional professional leave days under this collective
bargaining agreement.

The professional leave day is to be taken as a full day according to the employee’s regular work schedule,
eight (8), nine (9), ten (10), or 12 hours.

When an employee chooses to utilize and is granted a professional leave day on a holiday, the employee will
receive their normal salary for the holiday on a straight time basis for the hours they would have worked.
Also, the employee shall receive an additional eight (8), nine (9), ten (10) or 12 hours of vacation leave
credited to their vacation account, depending upon his/her regular schedule. The employee will lose the

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page! 8
professional leave day once it is exercised in this manner.

ARTICLE 10 - SICK LEAVE

10.1 Accrual. The Department and the Association agree that all full-time employees shall accrue four (4)
hours of sick leave per pay period, or .05 hours for each hour of actual paid service in that pay period,
excluding overtime.

10.2 Pay. Employees shall be paid their current rate of pay for each hour of sick leave used. The rate of pay
will be the same as what is received if the employee were to work his/her regular shift.

Annotation: This section was changed in 2001 to clarify that rate of pay is inclusive of all regular compensation the employee receives, exclusive of avertime.
40.3 Utilization. Upon approval of the Department, sick leave may be used by employees who have:
© Illness or Injury. Incapacitated from the performance of their duties by illness or injury, or
e Public Health Requirements. Attendance is prevented by public health requirements, or

© Doctor Appointment. Required to absent themselves from work for the purpose of keeping an
appointment with the doctor (up to a maximum of four (4) hours for any one appointment), or

e Bereavement. Required to absent themselves from work for bereavement subsequent to the death
of a member of their immediate family (up to a maximum of 48 hours per occurrence). The
Sherifi/designee may grant more than 48 hours, not to exceed 240 hours, upon request of the
employee. Employees may utilize other paid leave for the purpose of bereavement, or;

e Medical Emergency. Required to absent themselves from work to personally care for a member of
their immediate family in those medical emergencies which require the employee’s prompt attention.
Emergency leave shall be taken as sick leave, except for a one-time provision of 48 hours of vacation
leave that may be used per fiscal year.

Armotation: In 1997, the parties modified 20.3 Utaation to allow flexibility for employees to use sick leave for significant other who they consider a mate. li was
agreed this flexibility was not to be extended anywhere else in the contract. This section also allows for an extension of time by the Sheriffidesignee in an extraordinary
Joss,

10.4 Approval/Notice, All sick leave shall be approved by the designated Department representatives.
Employees who do not become ill on the job shall call in as required by Department policy before the
beginning of their shift when using sick leave.

10.5 Immediate Family. \mmediate family shall be defined as a spouse, parent, sibling, child, grandchild,
and grandparent (including legally adoptive relationships, current in laws and step relations), or any of the
previously specified relationships to the employee’s spouse, significant other, or domestic partner. This shall
also apply to legal guardianship/dependent situations. For the purposes of section 10.3 utilization only,
“significant other” shall be interpreted to apply when it involves a person the employee lives with who they
consider a mate. The expansion of the immediate family definition to include a significant other or domestic
partner is not extended to any other provisions in this contract,

10.6 Family and Medical Leave. Determination as to the eligibility of Family and Medical Leave must be
made prior to, if foreseeable, or during the use of sick leave and the employee must be advised before
returning to work of the status of that leave. Employees with questions about FMLA should consult with
the Health Manager or his/her designee and/or the Association for clarification.

10.7 Reporting Requirements. Employees covered by this Agreement shall be subject to the following
reporting requirements for payment of sick leave:

© Sick Leave Request: Employees are required to file and sign a sick leave request as evidence the
reason for the employee’s absence was a legitimate use of sick leave as outlined above, within 24
hours of returning to work.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 9
© Certificate of Recovery and Fitness: A Certificate of Recovery and Fitness shall be submitted by an
employee when requested to do so by the Sheriff or his designee. Such certificate shall be signed
by a physician and shall state that the employee is capable of returning to work.

10.8 Residence Requirement. Employees shall be at their place of residence, a medical facility, or their
doctor’s office, or shall notify their supervisor of their whereabouts when using sick leave. Any gainful
employment, pursuit of personal business, recreation, travel for recreation, or non-sick leave purpose, or
other such activity when an employee is on sick leave is considered evidence of abuse of sick leave unless
approved in advance in writing by the Sheriff or designee.

10.9 Abuse or Excessive Use. Utilization of sick leave for purposes other than those defined in this Contract

shall be considered evidence of abuse. Supervisors may discipline employees when evidence of abuse exists

and for excessive use of sick leave. Discipline will not be applied for extended illnesses or injuries. When

a supervisor has concerns about an employee’s usc of sick leave, he/she shall consult with Labor Relations

to ensure consistent application of this section.

fava negaive mpact on citer enblpees and operon, The partes eprcd hat Lhe Greed de os me we eee eee ove dy por ar
ing the absence

excessive. Jt was undersiood that eight (8) days is not a specific standard, bul merely a guideline for supervisors when assessing circumstances surround es
of employees, supervisors wll lok at historical atondance, pater of ure, ele). For the purpone oon euiended liter or injury, the FMLA standard will apply.

Contact with Labor Relations was made mandatory in 2005.

10.10 Bonus Time, Employees who have taken no more than three (3) days of the combination of sick leave
(including FMLA), or leave without pay, during his/her employment year (employee’s hire date) shall
receive three (3) shifts of bonus time hours based on the employee’s regular work schedule (eight (8), nine
(9), ten (10) or 12 hours) at the time of accrual, which shall be credited to the employee’s bonus leave
account. An employee hired after January 1, 1982, may only accumulate 240 hours of bonus time.

Employees who leave the service of the Department are entitled to payment for unused bonus time computed
on the employce’s regular rate of pay (base, longevity, assignment differential, and shift differential).

In order to receive shift differential pay and/or assignment differential pay, the employee must have worked
in the assignment at least six months prior to separation. Employees who are, within six months from
separation from the Department, transferred as a result of a disciplinary transfer, administrative transfer, or
are deactivated as a field training officer are excluded from the six month requirement and will receive the
cash out at the pay of the assignment immediately preceding the transfer, as if they had been assigned there
at least six months.

The Parties agree that the language regarding the six months in an assignment will be reassessed at the
following negotiation session in order to determine whether it was successfully implemented.

10.11 Sick Buyback. Employees hired or rehired between July 1, 1988, and July 1, 1994, are eligible for
sick buy back. The Department shall buy back up to 50% of all sick leave hours accrued above the 1,250
hour maximum payoff limit, subject to provisions of the paragraph below. The sick leave accrual not bought
back by the Department shall become a sick leave “bank” which can be used by the employee only after
regular sick leave hours are exhausted. Banked sick leave shall not be eligible for payoff at any time,
including at separation.

To be eligible for sick leave buy back, an employee must have used 80 hours or less of sick leave in the
twelve-month period immediately preceding the buy back. If the employee used between 41 and 80 hours
of sick leave in the twelve-month period immediately preceding the buy back, the Department will buy 25%
of the accumulated leave above the 1,250 hour cap. If the employee used 40 or fewer hours of sick leave in
the twelve-month period immediately preceding the buy back, the Department will buy 50% of the
accumulated leave above the 1,250 hour cap.

The buyback period will be from November 16" of the previous year through November 15" of the current
year. The buyback will be paid on whichever paycheck for the pay period in which November 15" falls.

10.12 Cash Out. Depending on the member’s hire date, the sick cash out will be dictated by the chart below.
If the member was hired after 07/01/88 but before the ratification of the 2016-2019 CBA the sick leave cash
out will be the following. If a permanent employee leaves the Department after ten (10) years of continuous
service, the employee shall receive payment for 50 percent of the employee’s allowable sick leave

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 10
accumulation up to 1,250 hours. After 15 years of continuous service the employee shall receive payment
for 62.5 percent and after 20 years of continuous service payment for 75 percent of the employee’s sick leave
accumulation up to 1,250 hours. After 25 years of continuous service the employee shall receive payment
for 87.5 percent of the employee’s sick leave accumulation up to 1,250 hours. In all circumstances prior to
30 years of continuous service, payment for sick leave will be computed at the employee’s base salary rate
plus longevity. After 30 years of continuous service, payment shall be increased to 100 percent of the
employee's sick leave accumulation at the employee's regular rate of pay up to 1,250 hours. Regular rate of
pay is defined as the rate of pay an employee would receive if he/she was actually working a shift and
includes the following: base pay, step increases, longevity, shift differential, and Assignment Differential
Pay.

In all circumstances, in order to receive shift differential pay and/or assignment differential pay, the
employee must have worked in the assignment at least six months prior to separation. Employees who are,
within six months from separation from the Department, transferred as a result of a disciplinary transfer,
administrative transfer, or are deactivated as a field training officer are excluded from the six month
requirement and will receive the cash out at the pay of the assignment immediately preceding the transfer,
as if they had been assigned there at least six months.

The Parties agree that the language regarding the six months in an assignment will be reassessed at the
following negotiation session in order to determine whether it was successfully implemented.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| Hited after o7/ou8 | ;
Years of | Hired before 07/01/88 Maximum Accrusi Pate ce
| Service | Maximum Accrual Payout | Payout a a
0-9 wa Not eligibie Not eligible
50% of balance up to
10-14 n/a 1,250 brs Not eligible
62.5% of balance up to
15-19 n/a 1,250 hrs 50% up to 1,250 hours
75% of balance up to
29 - 24 75% of full balance 1,250 brs 62.5% up to 1250 hours
87.5% of balance up to 1,250| 87.5% of balance up to
25-29 hrs H 1,250 hrs 75% up to 1,250 hours
75% of remaining balance n/a n/a
100% of balance up to 1,250) 100% of balance up to
ae brs 1,250 hrs 100% up to 1,250 hours
75% of remaining balance n/a n/a

 

 

 

 

 

 

An employee hired or rehired after July 1, 1988, may utilize the benefit of this provision one (1) time only.
Employees hired or rehired after July 1, 1988, may not receive payment for more than 1,250 hours of
accumulated sick leave at time of termination, retirement, or resignation. Any hours exceeding the 1,250
hour limitation will be forfeited.

Employees hired prior to July 1, 1988, will only receive 87.5 percent or 100 percent payment on accumulated
hours up to 1,250 hours, whichever is appropriate based on years of service. All other accumulated hours
will be paid at 75 percent.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 11
** This change was made as a concession, in compliance with SB241, in order to pay for six (6) of the seven
(7) full-time association positions.

10.13 Death. Jn the event of the death of an employee, the employee’s beneficiary shall receive payment
for sick leave accrued at the time of the employee’s demise at the rate of 50% for zero to ten years; 75% for
11 to 20 years; and 100% for over 20 years of employment with this Department. The 1,250 hour cap for
payout is applicable to this section except for employees that were hired prior to July 1, 1988.

In the event of an in-line-of-duty death, the employee’s beneficiary will receive 100% payment at the regular
rate of pay for all sick leave hours accrued at time of death.

10.14 Bridged Time, Employees on the Department payroll as of June 30, 1982, who have had a break in
service, shall have their sick leave payoff computed as if their combined years of service were continuous
and without break. For persons hired or rehired on July 1, 1982, or thereafter, the provisions of 10.11 Sick
Buyback shall be applied and any break in service shall not be bridged for the purpose of determining total
years of service.

ARTICLE 11 - SPECIAL LEAVES

11.1 Military Leave. An employee having a reserve status in any of the regular branches of the Armed
Forces of the United States or the Nevada National Guard, upon request to serve on active duty or inactive
duty for training as outlined in the provisions of N.R.S., shall be granted a maximum of 30 shifts of paid
leave per calendar year. The 30 shifts provided herein are meant to be used in conjunction with the statutory
obligation. Any statutory time used will be deducted from the 30 shifts.

Any employee who is called to active duty by the President of the United States to serve in a national or
international deployment of the United States Armed Forces shall be granted leave and pay as prescribed by
Federal law.

In addition, an employee who is called to active duty by the President of the United States to serve in a
national or international deployment of the United States Armed Forces shall suffer no loss of benefits. The
Department will supplement the employee’s military pay to ensure their gress pay is equal to his/her regular
rate of pay. The employee’s pay will be adjusted whenever normal increases occur to his/her salary.

At the beginning of each calendar year or after a change in status or assignment, the employee will provide
their immediate supervisor with documentation establishing reserve status and unit assignment. Such
documentation shall include the name and phone number of the reservist's commanding officer or designee
as a contact point. The employee will provide an annual training schedule, or orders in case of active duty,
by the first scheduled work day after such documentation becomes available to the employee. These
documents are to be maintained in the employee's bureau file.

The employee will provide an LVMPD 2, Application for Leave form, or an electronic leave request through
ESS to his/her immediate supervisor two weeks prior to his/her scheduled military leave, when possible.
The supervisor will forward the form to Payroll for processing. A copy of the military duty documents must
be given to the bureau of assignment for submission to Payroll (military duty documents required may be
unit training schedules, earning statements, orders or DD214’s). Emails are not acceptable documentation
but may be used to transmit PDF copies of above acceptable documents. If the employee was unable to
provide the appropriate documentation prior to his/her military leave, the paperwork must be submitted
within 30 days after deployment.

if an employee has an approved scheduled vacation leave, that leave will not be canceled because another
employee has been granted military leave.

For the purpose of this section, an "approved scheduled vacation" means any vacation request submitted to
the immediate supervisor 2 weeks or more in advance and is approved.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 12
Employees may utilize vacation, bonus, or professional leave in lieu of leave without pay for military leave.
Use of these leaves for this purpose shall not be controlled by other policies, procedures, or rules that affect
these leaves.

11.2 Leave Without Pay. Leave without pay may be granted to an employee for purposes normally covered
by sick, vacation, bonus, or professional leave when all paid leave balances have been exhausted or for other
justifiable reasons. At the option of the employee, he/she may be able to maintain a maximum of 40 hours
of sick leave when granted leave without pay.

Except as provided in 11.1 Military Leave above, periods of leave without pay in excess of 160 work hours
shall not be credited for purposes of completion of probation, salary increases, time in grade for promotion,
seniority or computing longevity pay. The employee’s hire, longevity, seniority, and merit dates shall be
adjusted accordingly and the employce shall receive credit for all time for which the employee was actively
working for the Department.

Employees that exceed 14 continuous days of leave without pay will be notified in writing by the Payroll
Section of the below requirements. This notice will take seven (7) to ten (10) days after the end of the pay
period in which the leave without pay occurred.

Continuous leave without pay for periods in excess of 160 work hours, exclusive of FMLA and/or ADA,
must be approved by the employee’s Bureau Commander. Continuous leave without pay in excess of ninety
(90) calendar days must also be approved by the Division Head and the Sheriff, or the Sheriff's designee in
the Sheriff’s absence.

Employee Requirement:

The affected employee must make his/her request by completing the documents provided by Payroll
and verification as set out below from the employee’s treating physician prior to exceeding 160 work
hours of leave without pay. If the nature of the absence precludes the employee from completing
this paperwork, the supervisor will ensure the chain-of-command and the Health Detail is notified
of such; Health Detail will engage the appropriate parties for obtaining the necessary information.
Notice will be given to the Association regarding all employees falling under this paragraph.

The request will include verification from the treating physician that:

© The employee is under medical care;
© Nature, severity, and probable duration of condition; and
¢ A date of return to work specified by the treating physician.

The extended leave request and the physician verification shall be submitted to the Health Detail for
processing.

In making the decision whether to grant extended leave, the Bureau Commander will consult with the Health
Detail.

Additional leave granted cannot exceed one year. Requests for extended leave without pay to seek other
employment will be denied.

Continuous leave without pay for periods in excess of 160 work hours for reasons not related to a medical
condition may only be approved by the Sheriff, or the Sheriff’s designee in the Sheriff’s absence.

If extended leave without pay is not granted or the employee does not request extended leave as specified
above, the employee may resign, and may request re-employment within three (3) years from the date of
his/her resignation, according to Civil Service Rule 350.5. If the employee does not resign the Department

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 13
may make a request to the Sheriff to convene the preterm board.

Periods of leave without pay in excess of 160 work hours resulting from a job connected illness or injury
shall be credited for purposes of seniority or computing longevity pay, and may be credited for purposes of
completion of probation and/or salary increases on the recommendation of the Division Head and approval
of the Division Head of Professional Standards.

41.3 Maternity/Paternity Leave, Employees shall be entitled to take up to six (6) months of leave for
maternity/paternity parent bonding purposes commencing as determined below within 12 months following
the birth, placement of a son or daughter with the employee for purposes of adoption or foster care or
adoption of the child.

Pursuant to the dictates of the Pregnancy Discrimination Act, (PDA), Public Law 95-555, if an employee is
temporarily unable to perform her job duties due to a medical condition related to pregnancy or childbirth,
the employee shall be treated in the same manner as other employees affected by other temporary disabilities,

Employees will use FMLA leave time at the beginning of the maternity/paternity leave and exhaust such
FMLA leave time concurrently with their accrued leave. The type of leave used will be at the employee's
discretion but the type will be designated in advance to Payroll. If the employee does not designate the leave
usage in advance of using it, Payroll and/or the Supervisor will use leave in the following order: sick,
compensatory, vacation, professional leave, then bonus leave for maternity/paternity leave purposes. All
maternity/patemnity leaves must be taken as one continuous leave period (unless special circumstances
clearly show a legitimate need for broken periods of leave) with the leave without pay being the last to be
designated. By the sixth month of pregnancy, employees should make an appointment with the Health
Section, to develop a tentative plan for leave usage. Employees should submit a leave application request
prior to taking leave to indicate the type of leave that will be utilized.

The parties agree that the provisions of this contract provide employees with time off beyond that provided
by the Family Medical Leave Act. The Family Medical Leave Act would restrict time off to 12 weeks to be
shared by the husband and wife. Under this contract, if husband and wife who both work for the Department
and who both wish to take leave for the birth of a child, or adoption or placement of a child in foster care,
they are each entitled to six months leave.

11.4 Application and Examination Leave. An employee shall be permitted reasonable time off with pay
during the employee’s shift to make application and/or take an examination for Departmental promotional
or transfer opportunity. In no case shall an employee become eligible for overtime as a result of competing
for a promotional or transfer opportunity.

11.5 Catastrophic Leave. When an eligible employee suffers a catastrophic illness or injury, and the eligible
employee has exhausted all accrued leaves as a result of the illness/injury, then the eligible employee may
file a request for donations of leave with the Association.

The request must be accompanied by:

° Avmedical statement from the attending physician explaining the nature of the illness/injury and an
estimated amount of time the employee will be unable to work.

e Evidence of the Bureau Commander’s approval of leave of absence.

The Executive Board of Directors for the Association will establish eligibility standards and will review the
request to verify the employee’s eligibility to receive leave donations.

The Association will conduct the solicitation of donations and will be limited to an information-only
solicitation, with no personal lobbying by employees. Solicitations will be conducted for 30 calendar days
and all donations will be submitted to the Association on the provided form.

Donations can be made from the donor’s bonus hours, vacation leave, and/or professional leave. Sick leave

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 14
cannot be donated. The minimum donation is four (4) hours. Employees must have a vacation leave balance
of at least 40 hours after the donation.

The Association will forward donations to the Department Payroll Section, where the donated time will be
converted to dollars at the hourly rate of the donor. The dollars will then be converted to sick leave at the
hourly rate of the recipient. If any donated sick leave hours remain at the end of the catastrophic leave, they
will be transferred to the Catastrophic General Fund Account (bank).

Bank hours, if any, may be approved by the Association Executive Board on a matching basis, if needed
(e.g,, a solicitation for an approved employee nets 100 hours - after the 100 hours are used, the Association
Executive Board may approve up to another 100 hours from the bank, if hours are available). However,
employees will be eligible to utilize up to 160 hours of bank time prior to applying the matching standards
set out herein. From the date of ratification of this agreement forward, an employee may use no more than a
total of 160 hours of bank time throughout the course of his or her career,

Eligible employees:
© The Catastrophic Leave Program is available to all collective bargaining unit employees who require
a minimum of 80 hours leave after all accrued leaves have been exhausted. This may also apply to
intermittent leave situations directly associated with the catastrophic leave request.

* Employees who have graduated the Academy and are covered by the collective bargaining
agreement.

¢ Employees must meet the following definition of catastrophic itlness/injury:
“Catastrophic Illness/injury is an illness or injury that keeps an employee from performing the duties
of their job (i.e., the employee is hospitalized, homebound, or is the primary care giver to a member
of their immediate family). The illness or injury cannot be a result of an illegal act, nor can it be
intentionally self-inflicted.”

e Employees with work-related Worker’s Compensation claims are not eligible for the Catastrophic
Leave Program.

When an employee utilizes leave from the Catastrophic General Fund Account Bank, the employee will be
required to reimburse the bank with accrued vacation at a rate of two (2) hours per pay period. This
reimbursement will only be required for Bank hours utilized up to a maximum of 160 hours. If an employee
separates from employment for any reason before reimbursing the bank for borrowed time, the balance of
money owed the bank will be deducted from the employee’s final paycheck, cashout check, or both.

The parties agree that should any problem or abusive practice arise, the parties will meet to make reasonable
adjustments to facilitate the administration of the program or to eliminate these abusive practices.

ARTICLE 12 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

12.1 Grievance Procedure.

(A) Purpose. The purpose of the following provision is to set forth, simply and clearly, the methods and
procedures to address the various types of disputes that may arise between the parties hereto.

(B) Definition. A grievance shall be defined as:
1. A dispute regarding the application of a written reprimand.

2. A dispute regarding the application or interpretation of any Department rule, regulation,
policy, or procedure that governs the Department.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 15
3. A dispute regarding the application of a disciplinary suspension.
4. A dispute regarding the application of a disciplinary transfer.

5. A dispute regarding the application or interpretation of any and all provisions of the
Collective Bargaining Agreement between the Department and the PPA.

6. A dispute regarding the Sheriff’s decision following a Use of Force Review Board
(UOFRB) for something less than termination,

7. A dispute regarding a termination.

8. Note: The enforcement and establishment of Civil Service Rules promulgated by the Civil
Service Board are expressly excluded from consideration as a grievance. Where Civil
Service Rules are contrary to the terms of this Agreement, they shall have no force or effect
on the employees covered by this Agreement. Civil Service Rules will apply in
circumstances where the contract is silent. An alleged violation of a Civil Service Rule not
covered by the terms of this Agreement may only be appealable through Civil Service Rules.

Annotation: Any discipline solely from a Tactical Review Board shall be grieved following the procedures below, based upon the level of discipline.
(©) Representation. A grievant may have representation of his/her choice at any or all steps.

(D) Process. Employees shall have the right to appeal all grievances defined above pursuant to the
procedures described herein. If a dispute cannot be resolved informally, the employee shall deliver the
grievance in writing to Labor Relations within 15 calendar days from the employee’s knowledge of the
occurrence giving rise to the dispute. With regard to disciplinary appeals, this shall be the date the employee
signed his or her Adjudication of Complaint and received a copy of the Adjudication. The grievance shall
specify the information relevant to the employee’s reason for appealing and the relief requested.

Grievances are timely if they are emailed to LRGrievances@LVMPD.com or faxed to (702) 828-3985 before
1700 hours on the fifteenth (15) day.

 

In the event the Association does not sanction a grievance to proceed to a Labor Management Board or
arbitration, the employce shall have the right to request a hearing, but the employce will be responsible for
expenses as set out in Step 2 of this procedure.

Step 1 - Labor Relations will deliver the grievance to the Bureau Commander, or his/her designce.
However, if the matter giving rise to the grievance occurred at the Bureau Commander level,
including a disciplinary transfer, the appeal will be sent to the next level of supervision above the
Bureau Commander as Step 1.

Grievances regarding a recommendation by the UOFRB for suspensions shall be filed with the
Sheriff.

All recommendations for termination, including those by the UOFRB, proceed directly to a Pre-
termination Board.

If Labor Relations determines the grievance meets the definition of a grievance as described above
and is timely, the reviewer shall initiate an investigation of the appeal. Within 15 calendar days of
the filing of the grievance, the reviewer will hold a meeting with the grievant and his/her
representative in an effort to explain the results of the investigation. The reviewer shall submit to
the grievant and his/her representative a written response to the grievance, including a summary
statement of the findings of the investigation, within 22 calendar days of the filing of the grievance

Annotation: If there is a dispute as to whether a dispute meets the definition of a grievance, it shall be resolved by an arbitrator in a modified arbitration
heaving pursuant to the arbitrator process described below,

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 16
Step 2. Deputy Chief Review: For disputes regarding a Written Reprimand: If the grievant is
not satisfied with the response in Step 1, the Association may request, within 30 calendar days of
the Step 1 response, that the matter be resolved by a Deputy Chief in the grievant's chain-of-
command. An alternate Deputy Chief will hear the grievance in the event the grievant’s Deputy
Chief is not available. The reviewer shall initiate an investigation of the appeal. Within 15 calendar
days of the filing of the appeal, the reviewer will hold a meeting with the grievant and his/her
representative in an effort to explain the results of the investigation. The reviewer shall submit to
the grievant and his/her representative a written response to the appeal, including a summary
statement of the findings of the investigation, within 22 calendar days of the filing of the appeal.
This response shall be the final decision on the matter.

Step 2. Labor Management Board: For disputes regarding the application or interpretation of
any Department rule, regulation, policy, or procedure that govern the Department; a
disciplinary suspension; a disciplinary transfer; or regarding the application or interpretation
of any and all provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement between the Department and
the PPA: If the grievant and/or Association is not satisfied with the response provided in Step 1,
the Association may request, within 30 calendar days of receipt of the Step 1 response, that the
matter be resolved by a Labor/Management Board selected by the Department and Association. The
decision of this Board shall be final and binding on the parties, but in no event shall the Board have
any authority to exceed or alter any provisions of this contract. Expenses associated with the
involvement of an arbitrator shall be equally shared by the parties.

The Labor/Management Board will be comprised of a five (5) member panel. The Board shall
consist of two (2) Department employees from the rank of Lieutenant, Captain, or Deputy Chief and
two (2) Department employees from the bargaining unit, all four (4) of whom shall be randomly
selected by a mutually agreed upon method. The random selection shall occur as follows: One
department member will be selected from the rank of Lieutenant (excluding Internal Affairs and
Personnel) and the other Department member will come from Captain and Deputy Chief combined
(excluding Internal Affairs, Personnel, and the Human Resources Deputy Chief); One bargaining
unit member will be selected from the Association Board of Directors (excluding full-time
representatives) and the other bargaining unit member will come from a designated pool to be
determined by the Association. Each side will have an equal pool to draw from, which shall be
reviewed and updated annually in March. If an employee is randomly selected to serve on his/her
RDO or vacation, that employee may decline such service. If an employee serves when not on
his/her regular tour of duty, that employee will be paid overtime or compensatory time for service
or will have his/her shift adjusted. Employees selected for service during normal duty hours will be
released without loss of pay. If an employee cannot be released because of operational
considerations, another random selection will occur. In the event a board member must cancel up
to seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing, a new random selection will be made from the same
pool as the member that canceled. In the event a board member must cancel less than seven 7)
calendar days prior to the hearing, the opposite corresponding member (Lieutenants = Bargaining
Unit; Captains and Chiefs = PPA Board) will also be canceled, leaving the board comprised of one
department member, one bargaining unit member and the arbitrator.

The fifth (5) member shall be an arbitrator from the parties arbitration panel, who shall serve as
chairperson of the hearing. The arbitrators will serve on a rotational basis. This rotation will be
separate and apart from the rotation in disputes where there is an Arbitration hearing instead of a
Labor Management Board, Arbitrators will be assigned based upon the rotation and notified in
advance of their selected dates.

No member of the Board can be a party to the dispute, have participated in the dispute in any way
whatsoever, be part of the grievant’s squad or chain-of-command, or have any relationship with the
grievant that would create an inherent conflict. The Board will have the authority to rule on
procedural matters raised at the hearing with the basic understanding that the proceeding is intended
to be informal and speedy, and that the procedural guidelines provided below shall be followed.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page| 17
No member of the board can meet with the employee or the employee’s chain of command ahead of
time, have any discussions with the employee or the employee’s chain of command, or meet with
the Department and/or its counsel or Association and/or its counsel to prepare for the hearing.

Procedural Guidelines for Labor Management Hearing or Arbitration:

1,

The parties may designate who will represent them at the hearing. Each representative may
have one other person present to provide administrative and/or consultation support. Other
persons may be present at the hearing upon mutual agreement of the representatives.

One hearing will be conducted on a specified day each month, as needed; the day shall be
agreed upon by the parties to this collective bargaining agreement. All pending requests for
a hearing that have been filed more than 30 days prior to the designated hearing date shall
be heard. In the event all pending matters cannot be heard in one day, the parties will work
with the arbitrator to schedule an additional hearing date.

The party who bears the burden of proof in the hearing (the Department in a disciplinary
appeal and the Association in a contract appeal) will provide the opposing side its exhibits
at least 21 days prior to the hearing. Thereafter, the party who does not bear the burden of
proof in the hearing will provide the opposing side its exhibits at least 14 days prior to the
hearing. The parties will exchange witness lists and issue statements at least seven (7) days
prior to the hearing. In the event these exchanges are not completed in a timely fashion and
there is no agreement by the parties to accept the late submission, the Board will accept the
exhibits, witnesses and issues, make a determination whether any prejudice might arise as a
result of the late submission and, based upon that determination, may reset the hearing.

In Labor Management Hearings, each party will have 90 minutes within which to present
its case. This limitation shall include argument, presentation of witnesses, and cross-
examination of witnesses. Extensions of these time frames must be mutually agreed to by
the parties prior to the hearing date. Any such agreement shall specify the time period
extension. If no agreement can be reached, the arbitrator may be petitioned for an
appropriate extension which may include a separate hearing date if necessary.

Meetings and hearings will be closed and there will be no taping or minutes taken. The
individual representatives and support personnel may take individual notes for their own
purposes.

The Department has the burden of proof and will present its case first in disciplinary matters.

The grievant has the burden of proof and will present his/her case first in contractual and
policy matters.

The Board may deny the appeal or grant the appeal. If the appeal is granted, the Board will
determine the appropriate remedy. If the appeal is denied, the Board may increase the
discipline imposed by a maximum of an additional one half ('4) of the original discipline, if
it deems appropriate, due to the factual circumstances resulting in the discipline. (Note: In
the event the level of suspension is not commensurate with the employee's shift, the
additional time will be considered “with option”.)

Once the case is submitted to the Board, the Board shall deliberate and decide the appeal,
The arbitrator shall oversee deliberations to ensure that all Board members are heard.
Additionally, the arbitrator shall participate in the deliberations and shall participate in the
vote regarding the outcome of the appeal. The Board's decision need only be by a simple
majority. The actual vote shall not be shared with either the Department or the grievant.
The Board will announce its decision at the conclusion of the hearing including an
explanation of why the Board reached the decision it did. The decision will be placed in

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 18
writing by the Department representative within ten (10) calendar days of the hearing. The
written decision will require approval from the Association representative. If no agreement
is reached on the decision, the arbitrator will prepare the written decision.

10. The decision of the Board shall be final and binding on the parties and shall be submitted to
the parties as set out above. In no event shall the Board have any authority to exceed or
alter any provisions of this contract or any rules, regulations, policy or procedure that govern
the Department.

1. Expenses of the arbitrator shall be shared equally by the parties. However, in the event an
employee pursues a grievance without the sanction of the Association, he/she shall be
responsible for the costs associated with that grievance which includes all the arbitrator’s
fees and expenses. In this case, the employee will be required to submit an advanced
payment to the arbitrator 30 calendar days after the arbitrator selection and payment
instructions, prior to the arbitration being scheduled. This payment shall be dictated by the
arbitrator based on his/her assessment of the time that will be involved in the case. Any
overpayment shall be refunded to the employee. All other expenses incurred by either party
in the preparation of its case are to be borne solely by the party incurring such expense.

Step 2. Modified Arbitration: For disputes regarding the Sheriff’s decision following a UOFRB
for something less than termination and to resolve a dispute as to whether a matter meets the
definition of a grievance: The Association may request, within 30 calendar days of receipt of either
Labor Relations’ determination that a matter does not meet the definition of a grievance, or the
Sheriff's UOFRB decision for something less than termination, that the matter be resolved by an
Arbitrator. The selection process for the Arbitrator will follow the same guidelines and be part of
the same rotation process set forth below. Procedurally, the process will be the same as that set forth
for the Labor Management process, except that there will be no five-member board, only a single
Arbitrator from the list.

Expenses of the arbitrator shall be shared equally by the parties. However, in the event an employee

pursues a grievance without the sanction of the Association, he/she shall be responsible for the costs

associated with that grievance, which includes all the arbitrator’s fees and expenses. In this case,

the employee will be required to submit an advanced payment to the arbitrator 30 calendar days after

the arbitrator selection and payment instructions, prior to the arbitration being scheduled. This

payment shall be dictated by the arbitrator based on his/her assessment of the time that will be

involved in the case. Any overpayment shall be refunded to the employee at the same time the~
arbitrator presents an award. All other expenses incurred by either party in the preparation of its

case are to be borne solely by the party incurring such expense.

Step 2. Arbitration: For disputes regarding termination: If the grievant wishes to appeal a
termination, the Association may request, within 30 calendar days of the date on the Notice of
Termination, that the matter be resolved by an Arbitrator. A list of eligible Arbitrators will be utilized
by the parties on a rotational basis, based upon their availability within 90 days of the date of
selection. The first Arbitrator on the list will be notified of his appointment and the hearing will be
scheduled within 90 days of the notice to the Arbitrator. If the selected Arbitrator cannot serve
within 90 days, the next Arbitrator on the list will be scheduled under the same conditions. In the
event an arbitrator is unavailable within the 90 day time period set forth above, the arbitrator’s
unavailability does not alter the arbitrator list rotation for subsequent grievances.

A list of Arbitrators will be maintained by the Association and the Labor Relations Section. There
shall be five (5) Arbitrators on that list at all times; two (2) selected by the Association, two (2)
selected by the Department, and a fifth (5) Arbitrator who shall be approved by both the Association
and the Department. If mutual agreement cannot be reached on the fifth (5) Arbitrator, the list will
remain at four (4) until the parties reach agreement on a fifth (5) arbitrator. The Association and
the Department may meet to review and update the above list as deemed necessary.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 19
The decision of the Arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties and shall be submitted to the
parties within 30 calendar days of the close of this hearing. In no event shall the Arbitrator have any
authority to exceed or alter any provisions of this contract or any rules, regulations, policy, or
procedure that govern the Department. Expenses of the arbitrator shall be shared equally by the
parties. However, in the event an employee pursues a grievance without the sanction of the
Association, he/she shall be responsible for the costs associated with that grievance, which includes
all the arbitrator’s fees and expenses. In this case, the employee will be required to submit an
advanced payment to the arbitrator 30 calendar days after the arbitrator selection and payment
instructions, prior to the arbitration being scheduled. This payment shall be dictated by the arbitrator
based on his/her assessment of the time that will be involved in the case. Any overpayment shall be
refunded to the employee at the same time the arbitrator presents an award. Ail other expenses
incurred by either party in the preparation of its case are to be borne solely by the party incurring
such expense.

{E) Resolution.

Reduction in Discipline - At any level of review, if the decision is to reduce the level of discipline, the
reviewer that reduced the discipline will have the Adjudication of Complaint rewritten. The new
Adjudication of Complaint will show the new level of discipline in the appropriate place on the form. All
original dates will be utilized on the written adjudication. If the grievant does not accept the reduction or
removal, the matter can proceed to the next step of the procedure based on the original discipline.

Exoneration of Discipline - Exoneration of discipline or the sustained complaint or a change to the Internal
Affairs sustained violation, can only be authorized by the Deputy Chief, a Labor Management Board, or
arbitrator if the grievance has been appealed to that level. If the discipline and sustained complaint are
reversed in favor of the employee, the Personnel file and the employee’s bureau file will be purged of all
teferences to the investigation. Additionally, the Internal Affairs file will be supplemented to show the new
findings.

(F) Time Limits. In computing any period of time described or allowed in this procedure, the day of the act,
event, or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day
of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday, in which event the
period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday.

In the event that the employee and/or Association fails to appeal a discipline or answer given to the next step
of the grievance procedure within the time allowed, or in the event that the Department fails to answer a
grievance within the time required at any step of the grievance procedure, then the grievance will be
considered settled against the side which has defaulted for failing to act in a timely fashion. Specifically, if
an appeal is not filed or processed within the time limits set forth above, it will be deemed withdrawn with
prejudice; if a grievance meeting is not held or an answer to a grievance or appeal is not filed or Processed
within the time limits set forth above, the appeal and requested relief will be deemed granted in its entirety,
so long as such remedy is within the confines of the dispute. However, any of the time limits in a grievance
procedure may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties, in writing. Grievances settled by default
cannot be the basis of establishing precedent for the settlement of any other grievances.

(G) Documentation, A copy of all appeals shall be forwarded to the Association and the Labor Relations
Section immediately upon filing with the Department.

ARTICLE 13 - COMPENSATION

13.1 Salaries. The Department and the Association agree that the salaries paid the employees in the various
classifications will be the salaries assigned to the salary ranges for each classification shown in the attached
documents labeled Salary Schedules, which are attached hereto and incorporated thereby. The employees
shall receive a 2.25% salary increase on July 1, 2016, a 2.5% salary increase on July 1, 2017, and an
additional 2.25% salary increase on July 1, 2018. The Parties have agreed that .25% of the salary increase
in July 2016, .5% of the salary increase in July of 2017, and .25% of the salary increase in July of 2018 is in

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 20
exchange for Article 25.6 Body Worn Cameras as outlined below. The attached salary schedules shall remain
in place through June 30, 2019. This is reflected in Attachment A.

Effective July 1, 2013, all merit increases will be 4%.

In FY 2011-2012 and FY 2012-2013, the 4% merit increase employees were to receive in FY 2011-2012
was split over a two year period so that employees received 1% in FY 2011-2012 and 3% in FY 2012-2013
and the 4% merit for FY 2012-2013 was suspended. As a result of this modification to movement on the
salary schedule, where an employee split a step advancement over a two-year period, the employee will still
reach the last step on the salary schedule but, under normal circumstances, will reach the last step one year
later than they normaily would have.

All paychecks will be paid through direct deposit and the employee will be able to view and print his/her
payroll information electronically.

Funding. In the event the percent increase in the consolidated taxes received by either the City of Las Vegas
or Clark County from one fiscal year to the next is less than the increase in the consumer price index for the
same period, this section will automatically reopen. The annual CPI change to be used is the U.S. City
average, All Urban Consumers, for July each year. Consolidated taxes are those revenues distributed by
formula to the City and County. These include sales, motor vehicle, cigarette, liquor, and property transfer
taxes. Both CPI and actual tax revenue information will be available for comparison by October following
the close of each fiscal year. Negotiations regarding this section will affect the fiscal year that begins the
following July.

13.2 Assignment Differential Pay. Assignment Differential Pay is temporary monetary compensation paid
to commissioned personnel who are working in the assignment categories listed below.

Reimbursable overtime scheduled outside the ADP assignment shall be paid at the employee’s overtime rate
not including ADP except that in the situation where an employce normally receives ADP and is working an
overtime assignment that is the same function for which he receives ADP, the overtime shall be paid at the
employee’s overtime rate including ADP.

Members transferring for the first time to the Traffic Section or any investigative unit will receive four
percent (4%) increase in pay for the first year and another four percent (4%) increase in pay thereafter while
so assigned. Members who are transferring from one ADP assignment to another ADP assignment,
regardless of bureau, will maintain their eight percent (8%) increase.

First time assigned After one year

 

 

 

 

 

Police Officer IT (A-2) 4% 8%
Corrections II (A-2) * 4% 8%
{Applies to Intel and Policies and Procedures)

Motorcycle Officer 4% 8%
Helicopter Pilot 8% na
Resident CO/PO Officer 20% wa
Training Pay** 8% 8%

 

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page! 21
** Training Pay is intended for Officers assigned to the Academy and Advanced Training.

All resident officers currently receiving resident ADP, will continue to receive their 20% ADP so long as
they remain in their current assignment.

Any new resident officers assigned to: Moapa, Logandale, Overton or Laughlin will reccive resident officer
20% ADP. Within six (6) months of the assignment, new officers assigned to these areas must establish
residence in a location that will allow a 30 minute response time to the resident area of responsibility to
tetain the 20%.

Annotation: Any new resident officers assigned ta: Mt, Charleston, Blue Diamond, Jean, Stateline and Indian Springs after September 13, 2013, will no longer receive
20% ADP. Any new officers assigned ta Sandy Valley afier July 1, 2014, will no longer recetve 20% ADP.

*Corrections Officer Is assigned where they work side-by-side and perform the same tasks as a Police
Officer II who is receiving assignment differential pay will also receive assignment differential pay under
the terms set out in this section. Eligibility under this paragraph is based on an assignment greater than 30
calendar days.

ADP assignments are not promotional and, therefore, no property right exists. Additionally, employees shall
only be paid ADP for the duration of their ADP assignment.

13.3 Longevity. The longevity pay for employees shall be paid on the following basis: Upon completion of
ten (10) consecutive years of employment, covered employees shall be paid the equivalent of an additional
five percent (5%) of their pay period base salary.

For each continuing year of consecutive service thereafter, each employee shall receive an additional one-
half of one percent (0.5%) increase of the base salary until a maximum of 15% has been reached.

In FY 2011-2012 and FY 2012-2013, the .5% longevity increase employees were to receive in those years
was reduced by half so that employees received .25% in FY 2011-2012 and .25% in FY 2012-2013. Asa
result of this modification where an employee received half of a longevity increase over a two-year period,
the employee will still reach the maximum 15% but, under normal circumstances, will reach the total amount
one year later than they normally would have.

Longevity pay shall become effective in the pay period in which the employee’s date of hire falls.

Employees hired on or after October 24, 2011 will not be eligible for compensation under this section.

13.4 Jury/Court Pay.

Jury - Eligible members called to serve on jury duty on a normally scheduled shift shall receive their regular
pay as well as all jury pay. Those persons called but not selected to serve on the jury shall report back to
work when excused.

On-Duty Court - Eligible members subpoenaed to appear on duty as a witness in a criminal proceeding
connected with official duties, and who are not a party in such criminal proceeding, shall receive their regular
pay providing that all witness fees or pay are returned to the Department. Employees shall report to work
when excused.

Off-Duty Court - Eligible members required to appear off-duty in court as a witness for the prosecution or
defense, connected with official duties, shall be paid overtime for all hours while off-duty and no additional
compensation once the employee begins his/her regular duty schedule. If the eligible member’s entire
appearance is made while off duty, he/she shall be paid with a minimum of two (2) hours overtime. If the
eligible member’s appearance commences while off-duty, but continues into his/her regular duty hours,
he/she shall be paid either the actual overtime worked or the $25 witness fee, whichever is greater. In either
event, the eligible member shall also receive an hour (1) straight-time for duces tecum subpoenas. All
witness fees shali be returned to the Department, except as described herein.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 22
13.5 Retirement. The Department and the Association agree that all employees shall participate in the Public
Employees Retirement System of the State of Nevada in accordance with the rules of that system. The
Department shall comply with all the provisions of N.R-S, 286.421 for the purpose of paying the employces’
Tetirement contribution, but will not pay for the purchase of eligible prior service.

For the duration of this contract, any decrease in the percentage rate of the retirement contribution will result
in a corresponding increase to each member's base pay equal to one-half (1) of the decrease. Any such
increase in pay will be effective from the date the decrease in the percentage rate of the retirement
contribution becomes effective.

13.6 Shift Differential.

Shift differential is defined as the amount of compensation authorized to be paid to an employee in addition
to his/her regular straight time hourly rate for working a regularly scheduled shift other than day shift. Any
regularly scheduled shift that begins or ends outside the 5:00 a.m. or 8:00 p.m. time period shall be eligible
for shift differential pay computed at four percent (4%) of base, longevity and assignment pay. Eligibility
for shift differential pay will be determined on a shift by shift basis.

Non-probationary employces that work a shift where their hours of work fully encompass the hours of
midnight to 5:00 a.m. will receive an additional 2% differential.

Clark County Detention Center employees that are assigned the 12-hour graveyard shift that encompass the
hours defined above for a 6% shift differential will receive the same differential for their cight (8) hour
workday even though it does not fully encompass the hours of midnight to 5:00 a.m.

Annotation: The above paragraph was adopted in June 2006 fmid term) to clarify how this shift would be paid for corrections officers working the late 12-hour shift.

13.7 Spanish Pay. Employees who translate and/or speak Spanish as a second language and who meet the
criteria set forth in this section will receive additional compensation. The compensation level for these
employees will be $46.00 per pay period for speaking conversational Spanish. Proficiency exams will be
administered by the Personnel Bureau as needed.

Such employees must pass a Department approved proficiency examination on conversational Spanish to
receive payment.

13.8 K-9 Pay. K-9 handlers will receive ten (10) hours of paid overtime per pay period for the at-home care,
grooming, transportation, and feeding of the dog. The handler will receive an additional five (5) hours of
overtime per pay period if assigned a second dog, effective July 1, 2006.

13.9 Education Incentive. Employees who hold the following degrees on July 1* of each fiscal year shall
reccive one of the following lump sum payments on the first payday in August:

+ Any employee in the Unit who has received an Associate’s Degree from an accredited college or
university shall receive a sum of $600 per year in addition to his/her annual salary.

+ Any employee in the Unit possessing a Bachelor's Degree from an accredited college or university
shall receive a sum of $1,200 per year in addition to his/her annual salary.

+ Any employee in the Unit possessing a Master’s Degree or higher from an accredited college or
university shall receive a sum of $1,467 per year in addition to his/her annual salary.

The Education Incentive for FY 2016-2017 will be on the earliest paycheck as can be more expeditiously

administratively arranged following contract ratification. The amount received on the check shall be less
any Education Inventive paid since July 1, 2016.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 23
Annotation: The term “accredited” shalll mean any accrediting entity recognized by the Department of Education or the Council for Higher Education Accreditation and
degrees obtained outside the U.S. if the applicant submits an original, certified, sealed repart from an academic credential avalvation agency recognized by the National
Assoctation of Credential Evaluation Services, the Association of International Credential Evaluators, Inc., or the international Academic Credential Evaluators, inc.

43.10 Acting Pay. Employees officially required to assume operational responsibilities of an established
position of a higher grade shall be paid in accordance with the following policies:

a) If the assignment is for seven (7) consecutive calendar days or less, the employee shall receive his
own regular rate of pay.

b) Ifthe assignment is for more than seven (7) consecutive calendar days, the employee shall be paid
at the rate of one increment above his own regular rate of pay retroactive to the date of the acting
assignment and during the balance of the assignment.

The start of the consecutive calendar days shall occur based on the first day the employee is actually working
and has assumed the operational responsibilities.

13.1] Field Training Officer Pay, Field Training Officer Pay is temporary monetary compensation of 8%
paid to commissioned personnel who are working in a Field Training Officer (FTO) assignment or a
Corrections Field Training Officer (CFTO) assignment.

Police Field Training Officers’ assignments will be for a continuous six-month cycle. The six-month cycle
may be extended when deemed necessary by the Department. Extensions will only occur as a result of
continuation of training with the academy class associated with the initial assignment and will be in one
month increments. At the conclusion of any given cycle, the Department, at its discretion, can decrease or
increase the number of FTOs as required. Any FTOs assigned at any point during an existing cycle will
receive FTO pay for the remainder of that cycle. Selection and assignment to the FTO positions will be
based upon established Departmental procedures.

Corrections Field Training Officers’ assignments will be for a continuous ten week cycle. At the conclusion
of any given cycle, the Department, at its discretion, can decrease or increase the number of CFTO’s as
required. Any CFTOs assigned at any point during an existing cycle will receive FTO pay for the remainder
of that cycle. The ten week cycle may be extended when deemed necessary by the Department. Extensions
will occur as a resuit of the continuation of training with the academy class associated with the initial
assignment and will be in one month increments. Selection and assignment to the CFTO positions will be
based upon established Departmental procedures.

The Department recognizes employees may need extra training due to extended absences or other issues,
and may require re-orientation. Re-orientation FTO or CFTO assignments will be for the period of time of
the re-orientation training as established by the Bureau Commander.

FTO and CFTO assignments and corresponding compensation will be discontinued if the employee leaves
the assignment and is no longer available to act in that capacity. Employees who are relieved of duty are not
eligible for selection and assignment to an FTO or CFTO position, except for administrative relief of duty
not involving allegations of misconduct.

ARTICLE 14 - CLOTHING/EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE
14.1 Clothing and Equipment Allowance. Effective July 1, 2016, the Department and the Association agree
that employees shal! be paid a yearly clothing/equipment allowance of $1,200 on the earliest paycheck as
can be most expeditiously administratively arranged following contract ratification. The amount received
on the check shall be $1,200 less any clothing allowance paid since July 1, 2016.

Effective July 1, 2017, the Department and the Association agree that employees shall be paid a yearly
clothing/equipment allowance of $1,400 on the second check in July.

Effective July 1, 2018, the Department and the Association agree that employees shall be paid a yearly

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 24
clothing/equipment allowance of $1,400 on the second check in July.

Motor officers and Mounted Patrol Unit officers will receive an additional $100 per year for the purchase of
specialty boots. This $100 boot allowance will be paid once per year on the second check in July.

14.2 Entitlement, Officers are entitled to a prorated clothing allowance upon completion of the police or
corrections academy and promotion to Police or Corrections Officer. Allowances will be prorated in
accordance with adopted policy. Officers who are rehired under Civil Service Rule 350.5 are also entitled
to a prorated clothing allowance.

ARTICLE 15 - HEALTH & WELFARE BENEFITS

15.1 Health Insurance. The PPA will participate in the Las ‘Vegas Metropolitan Police Department
Employee's Health and Welfare Trust.

415.2 Contributions. Effective July 1, 2016, the Department shall contribute $883.50 per employee per
month to the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department Employees Health and Welfare Trust. The
Department and the Association agree to open this Article for negotiations no later than February 1, 2017
and February 1, 2018.

15.3 Deductions. The Department and the Association agree the Trust is authorized and responsible to
determine contribution amounts for employee dependents. Once the dependent contribution amounts are
established, whether retroactive or prospective, the Department is hereby authorized to automatically deduct
from the paycheck of each employee in the bargaining unit the dependent contribution amount specified by
the Trust. Prior to such deductions being made, employees will be given 30 days notice of dependent
contribution changes to allow for optional withdrawal of coverage for dependent(s).

15.4 Flexible Spending Account, The Department is responsible for administering and maintaining a
flexible spending account.

13,5 Employee Benefit Trust (EBT). Effective July 1, 2002, the Association did join a trust fund for the
purpose of funding health insurance coverage for retirees.

The above-referenced EBT is established for the purpose of subsidizing the retiree’s cost of health insurance
coverage for those who retire after July 1, 2001. The EBT has been established in accordance with federal
and State laws applicable to employee benefit trust funds (26 USC 501(c)(9)). The monies contributed to
the EBT shall be used only for retiree health insurance premiums or health service expenses. The employee’s
contribution shall be made by automatically deducting the specified amount from the paycheck of eligible
employees prior to any taxes being withheld. The amount of the payroll deduction shall be determined by
the Trust.

To be vested in the EBT, an employee must meet the minimum contribution Tequirement established by the
Trust. Upon retirement of an employee who has not met the minimum contribution vequirement, the
Department may, with the employee’s consent, deduct from the employee’s sick leave cash out and
contribute to the EBT the amount necessary (as determined according to the rules of the EBT) to meet the
minimum contribution requirement of the EBT.

All issues regarding the operation of the Health Trust and the EBT are exclusive of this collective bargaining

agreement. Final decisions on contributions, benefits, and Trust operations are the sole responsibility of the
trustces of the Health Trust and the EBT.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 25
ARTICLE 16 - DISABILITY

46.1 Service Connected. In the event an employee is absent due to a service-connected injury or illness, the
benefits afforded this employee will be as follows:

If the benefits paid to such employee under the provision of the Department Workers Compensation
Program does not equal the employee's gross salary, the Department should pay to the employee an
amount equal to the difference between the compensation received under Workers Compensation
and the employee’s then present gross salary, excluding overtime. This compensation will continue
for a period of 800 hours from the first day of absence.

Employees who have completed ten (10) to 15 years of continuous full-time employment on the
date of injury will have their salary compensated for an additional 200 working hours. Employees
who have completed in excess of 15 years of continuous full-time employment will have their salary
compensated for an additional 120 hours plus the above 200 hours, totaling 320 hours.

After the initial 800 hour period, sick and vacation leave will not accrue. At the time of bonus time
accrual (employee’s hire date) if'an employee has more than three (3) shifts of non-accrual workers’
compensation, they will not be eligible for bonus hours. This also applies to any approved extended
hours.

16.2 Compensation Integration. It is the intent of the Department to pay the on-the-job injured employee
(as outlined in this Article) the difference between full base salary and that provided by the Workers
Compensation as salary continuance. Therefore, compensation integration shall continue as set out by the
Department’s workers compensation administrator, Health Section, statute, or SIIS (for past claims).

16.3 Sick Leave Utilization. Upon the expiration of the covered salary protection period, if the employee is
still unable to work, the employee may elect to utilize accrued sick leave.

When accrued sick leave has been exhausted, if the employee is still, because of disability, unable to work,
the employee will be permitted to use all accrued vacation, bonus, and professional leave as sick leave.
Subsequent to exhausting these leaves, the employee shall receive no additional compensation from the
Department; however, exceptions to this rule may be allowed by the Sheriff.

16.4 Compliance with Administrative Procedures. Before the Department grants these benefits, the
employee shall comply with reasonable administrative procedures established by the Department. The
Department may also request, at its option and expense, the employee be examined by a physician appointed
by the Department. The examining physician shall provide to the Department and the employee a copy of
his medical findings and his opinion as to whether or not the employee is able to perform his/her normal
work duties and/or whatever, if any, work duties the employee is able to perform or unable to perform. The
Department may further require such injured employee make him/herself available for light duty work as
soon as possible after release by a qualified physician which may be either Department or employee
appointed.

16.5 Hours Computation. Compensable hours are for cach injury or illness and hours necessary for
subsequent medical attention because of the same injury will be accumulative.

ARTICLE 17 - REDUCTION IN FORCE

17.1 Notice to Association. Whenever it is determined that a layoff of employees may occur because of lack
of work or funds, the Department shall give written notice of the layoff, including the reason(s) such action
is necessary and the estimated length of the layoff period, to the Association Executive Director at least
seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of notification to employees.

47.2 Provisions. The Department and the Association agree that reduction in personnel as it pertains to
employees covered under the provisions of this contract shall be as hereinafter prescribed. When bargaining

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 26
unit positions are abolished, reductions shall be accomplished in accordance with the following provisions:

A.

Seniority. Employees will be laid off within the classification selected for layoff based upon the
employee’s date of classification as a Police Officer or Corrections Officer as set out in Article 19 -

Probationary Positions. Initial employment probationary positions within the bargaining unit shall
first be eliminated.

Notice of Layoff. All non-probationary employees to be laid off shall be given written notice of
such layoff at least 14 calendar days prior to the effective date.

Re-employment.

List - The name of the non-probationary employee who has been laid off shall be placed on a re-
employment list by classification and by seniority within that classification and, if that employee
has not separated his employment, shall be recalled in the inverse order in which the employee was
laid off. Persons on such a list will be offered appointment to an opening in the job classification
and no new employee in the classification where the layoff occurred will be hired until all qualified
employees on layoff status desiring to return to work have been offered the position. The employee
must provide the employer with any address change while waiting for recall.

Notice - Notice of recall will be made in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
employee's address of record.

Response - An employec who is sent notice of recall must respond within 14 calendar days of the
date notice was sent. In the event the employee fails to respond within the 14 calendar day period,
he/she will be considered to have abandoned his/her recall rights.

Reporting Date - An employee recalled to the employee's former job classification will be subject
to a background update covering the time the employee was on lay off status. The employee must
report for re-employment on the date established by the Department or be considered to have
abandoned the employee's recall rights.

Accruals ~ At the time of layoff, the employee’s leave balances may be paid off in accordance with
the provisions set out in this Agreement for employees separating from the Department. An
employee on layoff accrues no additional sick leave or vacation time. When an employee is recalled
from layoff and re-employed, the employee is considered to have continuous service credit less the
time spent on layoff, for computation of future earned vacations. Sick and annual leave will be
reinstated in an amount equal to that as of the date of the employee's layoff if the employee did not
receive a payout as described in 10.12 Cashout. In the event the employee received sick leave payout
at the time of layoff, he/she may elect to pay back all or some of the cashout at the time of recall. In
the event full reimbursement is made, the employee will remain eligible for sick leave payout as
described in 10.12 Cashout. In the event reimbursement is not made or is not made in the full
amount, the employee will be eligible to accrue the balance of the maximum allowable sick leave
pursuant to 10.12 Cashout and will be eligible for sick leave payout of this remaining balance
accrued (the maximum allowable less the amount cashed out at the time of layoff).

Period of Eligibility - Persons on a re-employment list shall retain eligibility for appointment for a
period of three (3) years from the date their name was placed on the list.

Merit Increases - Upon returning to the employee's original job classification within the period of
eligibility, the employee will be credited with prior seniority for the purpose of further movement
on the salary schedule, not including the time spent on layoff.

Seniority Date - Upon retum of a laid off employee, said employee shall receive the seniority that
the employee had from the date of the original hire less the period of time that the employee was

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 27
laid off.

Appeal - Any employee who is separated by reduction in force pursuant to this Article shall have the
right to an appeal in accordance with Article 12 - Grievance Procedure regarding the application or
interpretation of the Collective Bargaining Agreement if the employee believes the Department has
not adhered to the provisions of this Article.

E. Cash Out. Employees are cashed out for balances as provided in this contract when laid off.
Reinstatement of time remaining will only apply in sick leave accruals that are not subject to payout
(ie., an employee with less than 10 years of service that is not eligible for a payout).

17,3 Seniority Lists. Whenever it is determined that a layoff of employees shall occur, the Department
agrees to supply current time in classification seniority lists to the Association for the jobs being affected.

17.4 Specialized Assignments. Whenever it is determined that a reduction of employees in specialized
assignments (including TADs) may occur because of lack of work or funds, the following order of reduction
will apply:

Employees with less than three (3) years in the unit, will be removed based upon Department
seniority as set out in Article 19 — Seniority.

If further reductions are necessary after all employees with less than three (3) years in the unit have
been removed, employees with three (3) or more years in the unit will be removed based upon
Department seniority as set out in Article 19 — Seniority.

The name of the employee who has been removed from a specialized assignment under this provision shall
be placed on a re-assignment list which takes precedence over the existing transfer list, When moving
employees back into the specialized assignment from this list, employees will be called back to the
assignments in inverse order during the life of the existing transfer list. If no active list exists, or if an active
list expires, then employees removed under this provision will be required to test for the position.

Anmotation: Any Correction Officers who have been removed from a TAD position shall be entitled to be recalled to complete the remaining time in the assignment,

ARTICLE 18 - HOURS

18.1 Work Week, The Department and the Association agree that the normal paid weekly working hours
shall be 40. However, if mutually agreed, an alternate work schedule of 80 hours bi-weekly may be utilized.
The start of a work week for an employee begins following his/her regular days off, at the start of his/her
scheduled shift; and ends upon the completion of the last scheduled shift before his/her next scheduled
regular days off.

The Department has adopted the FLSA 7(k) exemption for officers working in the resident program and
they, therefore, have a 28 day work period.

Annotation: The FLSA 7 (k) exemption has been Department policy since the Fatr Labor Standards Act has applied to local government. The term “7(K)” refers to the
section of FLSA, 29 USC 207(k), where these requirements are found.

18.2 Tour of Duty. A tour of duty or shift shall be defined as the span of hours during which an individual,
or unit, is assigned to work.

18.3 Tour of Duty Change. Employees will be notified of a tour of duty change at least 12 hours in advance
of that change. Voluntary transfers and overtime shall be excluded. Involuntary transfers will require 14
days advance notice of the specific area, shift and RDO’s of the new assignment. Any change to an
employee’s tour of duty with less than 12 hours advance notice is subject to either the overtime provision or
callback provisions below.

18.4 Overtime. Overtime pay is defined as additional compensation earned by an employee who is held

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 28
over on his regularly scheduled tour of duty, or is requested to return to duty at a time that is more than 12
hours after notice is given. The employee will be compensated at time and one-half (14%) for their regular
rate of pay. Regular rate of pay is defined as the rate of pay an employee would receive if he/she was actually
working a shift and includes the following: the employee’s base pay, longevity, shift differential, and
Assignment Differential Pay. The Department has adopted the FLSA 7 (k) exemption for law enforcement
officers. Under this exemption, officers working in the resident program will receive overtime for any hours
over 171 hours in a 28 day work period. This exemption for resident officers does not apply to reimbursable
overtime assignments. Eligibility for reimbursable overtime ADP is addressed under Article 13.2.

An employee will not earn overtime unless they have worked or been in paid status for 80 hours in the pay
period.

Officers who voluntarily sign up for overtime and are called to work the overtime, are not entitled to travel
time or callback pay.

Compensatory Time. Overtime (excluding callback and reimbursable hours) may be paid in the form of
compensatory time off. Employees will have the option of choosing whether overtime hours worked will
be paid or accumulated as compensatory time - this selection is irrevocable except under the following
circumstances:

A. Death of the employee (in this event, payment will be made to the beneficiary);

B. Involuntary separation of the employee;

Cc. The Department may specify that some voluntary overtime assignments may only be paid
as compensatory time; or

D. In some circumstances, such as New Year’s Eve, where overtime is mandatory, the
Department may require that the overtime be paid.

Compensatory time will be accumulated at one and one-half (1%) times hours worked and will not
accumulate beyond 48 hours. The scheduling of compensatory time off will be done in the same fashion as
vacation leave scheduling,

Accumulated compensatory time must be utilized prior to separation from the Department, In the event an
employee cannot be scheduled this time off prior to separation, the employee will be paid for accumulated
comp time remaining on the books.

Resident Officers. All officers assigned to the Resident Section come under the provision of the Fair Labor
Standards Act 29 U.S.C. 207(k), known as the 7K provision. Under this provision, Resident Officers are
entitled to overtime for hours worked in excess of 171 hours in a 28-day work period. Payroll is tesponsible
to track FLSA overtime hours accumulated during the 28-day cycle. Supervisors are responsible to ensure
the Resident overtime slips are completed in a timely manner and forwarded through the chain of command
to Payroll. To determine how overtime and cali-back hours are computed, please refer to the following
explanation.

© Hours Worked: Only actual hours worked count toward the 171 hours in a 28 day work period.
In other words, a Resident officer on vacation, sick leave, or who is absent from his job for a non-
work related reason.

* In other words, a Resident Officer on vacation, sick leave, or who is absent from the job for a non-
work related reason, cannot count those hours as hours worked. The fact that the resident Officer
may be on a paid leave is irrelevant under FLSA 7(k). Since Resident Officers normally work 160
hours in a 28 day cycle, they must work an additional 11 hours before earning paid overtime. The
20% resident pay covers the payment of the additional 11 hours that an Officer must work prior to
becoming eligible for overtime. With limited exceptions (explained below), officers will not qualify
for overtime pay until the 11 hours minimum is satisfied.

Employees are subject to callout during all hours of their established workweek. For this purpose, the
workweek is defined as the reporting time at the start of the workweek and the end of shift time at the end

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 29
of the workweek. While subject to call, the employee will remain within 30 minute response time proximity.
Callouts beyond normal work hours are credited as actual hours worked within the 207(k) exemption; e.g.,
a callout of two (2) hours will only have two hours applied to the 7(k) hours. This exemption does not
include callback, as defined in the collective bargaining agreement during the employee’s regular day off.

Subject to change of regular days off, hours of work, and on-call status without 12-hour notice.
Extended shift hours with or without notice.
The following payment classifications have been created to help determine how to count hours worked:

¢ Overtime/Callback Accumulation (Workdays): Applies when a Resident Officer has not met the 171
hour minimum, Payroll will post the Resident Officer’s FLSA overtime/callout hours worked when
reporting early, staying late, or returning after normal working hours.

¢ Overtime Rate of Pay (Workdays): Applies when a Resident Officer has met the 171 hour minimum
and no leave has been taken during the 28 day cycle. When the Resident Officer comes in early or
stays late they will be paid time and one half for the time worked.

¢ Callback FLSA (Workdays): Applies when a Resident Officer is called out during his/her normal
workweek, and has met the 171 hour minimum and no leave has been taken during the 28 day cycle.
Officers will be paid time and one half for hours worked the the Department will make the
appropriate contribution to the state Public Employee Retirement System (“PERS”) for the time
worked. Employees that entered PERS as of July 1, 2008, will not be credited for periods of callback
unless the callback is a declared emergency.

¢ Callback Rate of Pay (RDO): Applies when a Resident Officer is called back to work on his regular
days off with less than 12 hours’ notice. Payment will be made as outlined in the Callback provisions
of the labor agreements covering the affected Resident Officer.

© Special Circumstances Overtime: New Year’s Eve, Laughlin River Run or any other overtime that
is authorized by the Section Lieutenant or above.

¢ Prisoner Transport: Applies only to a Resident Officer assigned to the Overton Substation. A
Resident Officer called out or kept past the end of his/her shift, to transport prisoners, will be paid
Overtime or Callback as outlined in the provisions of the labor agreements covering the affected
employee.

48.5 Callback. When required, the Department Head or his designated representative may call back one or
more members of the Department. For purposes of this paragraph, callback is defined as compensation
earned for returning to duty after an employee has completed his/her regular tour of duty, is off duty for any
period of time, and is requested to return to duty with less than 12 hours notice. When an employee is called
back to work, the employee shall be paid overtime on a time and one-half (14) rated basis. The employee
will be paid for a minimum of four (4) hours regardiess of having worked less than four (4) hours or the
employee will be paid for the amount of time actually worked over the four (4) hours; however, in the event
the period of call back runs into an employee’s normal tour of duty, such employee shail be paid time and
one-half (1’) for only those hours worked outside of his/her normal tour of duty.

An employee who works less than four (4) hours on the initial call-out and is then called out a second time
during the initial two-hour period shall not be entitled to any additional overtime pay unless the aggregate
time worked for both occurrences shall exceed four (4) hours, in which case he/she shall be paid for the
aggregate time so worked. In the event an employee is called out for a second time after the expiration of
four (4) hours from the first call-out, he/she shall be paid for a minimum of four (4) hours for each call-out
except as provided in the previous paragraph.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 30
ARTICLE 19 - SENIORITY

19.1 Definition. Seniority shall be determined based upon the employee’s date of classification as a Police
Officer or Corrections Officer. In the event of any sort of reduction-in-grade, this determination will include
any time the employee accrued in the class series as a Sergeant, Lieutenant, or Captain, so long as there has
not been a break in service.

Where employees are hired on the same date, seniority will be determined by their placement on the Civil
Service cligibility list. Placement on the eligibility list is determined by overall score in the entry
examination process. In the event of ties, the date and time of the employee’s application for employment
with respect to the eligibility list in question will be the determining factor.

Seniority for police officers will be based on promotion to a Police Officer 1 and ranked in the following
order:

1. Corrections officers reducing in grade to Police Recruit;
2. Military deferrals from previous eligibility lists;

3. Cadets promoting to recruit;

4. Recycled recruits;

5.

Ranking on the eligibility list.

Seniority for corrections officers will be based on promotion date to a Corrections Officer 1 and ranked in
the following order:

1. Police Officers reducing in grade to Corrections Recruit
2. Military deferrals from previous eligibility lists;

3. Recycled corrections recruits;

4, Ranking on the eligibility list.

Employees who have been rehired as a police or corrections officer, the seniority date will be the employee’s
current hire date. In the event there are two or more rehires on the same day, the officers will be ranked
according to prior service time in classification.

19.2 Bridging Time. Employees on the Department’s payroll as of June 30, 1982, who have had a break in
service, shall have seniority determined as if their combined years of service were continuous and without
break. For persons hired or rehired on July 1, 1982, or thereafter, any break in service shall not be bridged
for the purpose of determining seniority. Except as provided in this section, seniority shall be calculated
based upon the employee’s current date of hire. Ties regarding seniority ranking are resolved as provided in
the Civil Service Rules.

19.3 Application. In the selection of days off, in lieu of holiday, compensatory time, bonus time, professional
leave and vacation leave preference, first choice shall be given those employees holding the greatest amount
of seniority as determined in 19.1 Definition and 19.2 Bridging Time.

Armotation: In 200, the parties added the ability to use sentortty for the selection of in lex of hatidays; however, once the holidays are scheduled no bumping can occur.
A. Patrol Division Bump

Upon graduation from FTEP, and once placed in their initial assignment on a scheduled bloom
transfer date, officers assigned to the Patrol Division may use their seniority to select shifts and days
off within their Area Command, once annually. The parameters for bidding for available shifts and
days off will include the following:

* If there is a supervisory employee bump, the Patrol Division Bump shall not occur until all
supervisory employees have completed their bump and their new assignments have been
published. Once all new assignments have been published, all employees including
supervisors will move on the same date.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 31
¢ Bidding will be allowed for all Patrol officers. However, those officers, other than regular
patrol, who are assigned to special units and/or assignments (e.g., activated FTO, bike,
utility PSU, and COP, etc.) shall bid within their own special unit and/or assignment.

© Bidding outside the Patrol Division does not fall within this requirement, but when bidding
for shifts is an option, the Section/Unit supervisors may establish the process they deem
appropriate.

¢  Asarule, no bumping will be allowed during the bid year, but accommodations can be made
where applicable. Employees will be allowed to move during the bid year based upon their
seniority and openings within the area command.

¢ Atanytime between bids, the Department retains the right to change an officer’s shift and/or
days off based on a documented special or operational need.

* Inthe event an officer transfers from a special assignment to Patrol, the officer would move
to an open position in Patrol. The Patrol Deputy Chief wili designate which positions are
open and available. Under this circumstance, the employee will be allowed to bid during
the next regularly scheduled cycle. When transferring to Patrol from a specialized
assignment, an officer will have a choice of area command if a position is available.
Seniority shall also apply when exercising such choice.

* Patrol will maintain an on-going registration for area command to area command transfers,
with special emphasis on opportunities for accommodating requests at or near the time of
the FTEP graduations. If, at any time during the year, there are available positions as
determined by the Deputy Chief of Patrol, transfers will be accommodated and an officer
can utilize seniority to affect such transfers. Additionally, patrol will continue the practice
of allowing officers to make a one-to-one swap in area commands as governed by the
Deputy Chief of Patrol.

B. Detention Services Division Bump

Upon graduation from CFTEP, and once placed in their initial assignment on a scheduled bloom
transfer date, officers assigned to Detention Services Division (DSD) may use their seniority to
select the bureau, shift and days off within the DSD, once annually. The parameters for bidding for
available bureaus, shifts and days off, will include the following:

¢ Bidding will be allowed for all DSD officers. However, those officers, other than regular
DSD officers, who are assigned to special units and/or assignments (e.g., Field Services
Section, Classification, House Arrest, etc.) shall bid by seniority within their own special
unit and/or assignment.

¢ Asa rule, no bumping will be allowed outside the annual bid during the bid year, but
accommodations can be made where applicable. Employees will be allowed to move during
the annual bid year based upon their seniority and available openings within the bureau.

* Atanytime between bids, the Department retains the right to change an officer’s shift and/or
days off based on a documented special or operational need.

* When an officer is scheduled to transfer out of a special or temporary assignment to duty
(TAD) during the annual bump, that officer will complcte a Detention Division bid sheet
(12 slots) and be placed according to their seniority to bid for bureaus, shift, and days off
within the DSD.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 32
Cc.

e DSD will maintain an on-going registration for bureau to bureau transfers within the DSD,
with special emphasis on opportunities for accommodating requests at or near the time of
the CFTEP graduations. If, at any time during the year, there are available positions as
determined by the Deputy Chief of Detention, transfers will also occur. When executing
transfers, preference will be given to those within the bureau, by seniority, over those from
outside the bureau. Additionally, DSD will continue the practice of allowing officers to
make a one-to-one swap in bureaus as governed by the Deputy Chief of Detention.

© Inthe event an officer transfers out of a special or TAD assignment at a time other than the
annual bump:

© Those officers leaving a completed TAD assignment will be allowed to use their
seniority to select from the open and available positions within DSD (as determined
by the Deputy Chief) and will be considered to be in all the bureaus, thus eliminating
the “in-bureau preference provision.”

© Officers requesting to transfer from a TAD assignment prior to its completion will
select from the open and available positions within the DSD as determined by the
Deputy Chief.

Use of seniority will be allowed for Corrections Officers coming out of special assignments to bid
between annual bumps for open available positions. The Deputy Chief of Corrections will designate
which positions are open and available.

Armotation: It is recognized that the North Valley Complex may be opened during this contract. If the complex opens, the Detention Division bid sheet will
reflect than bureau, shift and days off

Patrol Division Vacation Bidding

Employees will be allowed to bid for vacation based on seniority. Leave slips for vacation may be submitted
up to six (6) months in advance of a vacation. Once approved by an employee’s supervisor, no other leave
by another employee, even if senior, may supercede this approved leave. An employee may bid a single
shift or more as a vacation, Vacation bidding shall include bidding for bonus time, professional days and
compensatory time.

D.

Detention Services Division Vacation bidding

Vacation bidding in Detention Services Division will occur by seniority as specified below:

During the annual vacation bid, the employee will be allowed to bid for a combined total of
two hundred and eighty hours (280) over three (3) separate bid processes. On the first bid
process, employees will be allowed to bid up to a total of one hundred sixty (160) hours for
up to four (4) separate blocks of time. On the second bid process, eighty (80) hours for up to
two (2) separate blocks of time. On the third time through the bid process, the employee can
have up to a total of another forty (40) hours for one (1) block of time. A block of time is
defined as a single shift or more, that is separated by an officer's RDO's. A block of time
cannot be added before or after an officer's RDOs so as to count as a continuous single block
of time. Officers cannot bid for more vacation time than will be accrued at the time the officer's
vacation starts.

If a vacation spot is canceled, that vacation time will be made available and can be requested
via memo to the shift lieutenant. The request must be sent via department e-mail, with the
memo attached, to the respective shift licutenant in order to record the time and date

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 33
sent/received. Priority will be given based upon the earliest request.

Officers are responsible for the management of their own vacation time, compensatory time, and
bonus time accruals to ensure vacation caps are not exceeded at year’s end.

Annotation: Additional guidelines are outlined in a Memorandum of Understanding that was signed by the Department and the Association dated April 23,
2014. That MOU and those guidelines remain in effect and witl be followed and adhered to in implementing the vacation bidding process at CCDC.

E. Disputes

Any disputes that may arise regarding the application of seniority may only be processed as a grievance to
the appropriate Deputy Chief and will not be subject to any further appeal.

ARTICLE 20 - ACCIDENT PREVENTION BANK

20.1 Accident Prevention Bank. Employees will be rewarded for non-negligent and/or an accident-free
department driving record. The reward will be the ability to accrue hours that will be banked for use in the
event they receive a disciplinary suspension for a traffic accident.

20.2 Accrual and Use of Hours. Hours will only be accrued on a non-negligent and/or an accident-free
basis and will be credited at the end of a two (2) year eligibility period. This eligibility period is established
based on an employee’s graduation date from the academy. All hours will be recalculated based on this
formula.

Based on the above parameters, employees will accrue 20 hours of bank time per two (2) year period. The
maximum accrual will be capped at 40 hours.

These hours may be used at the employee’s option for disciplinary suspensions applied for traffic accidents
and will not be used for any other purpose (i.e., the hours will not be compensated under any circumstance).
This benefit will have no effect on decisions made by the Accident Review Board; however, the Accident
Review Board will be responsible for determining the amount of hours an employee has in his/her bank
based on the formula set out above and the accident records maintained by the Board.

ARTICLE 21 - LABOR/MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

21.1 Meetings. A standing Labor/Management Committee made up of representatives of the Department
and the Association shall meet at a mutually agreed upon time and place. The meetings will be set by the
Executive Director of the Association or his/her designee and the Director of Labor Relations. The
Labor/Management Committee will be comprised of the Executive Director of the Association/designee, the
Director of Labor Relations, and any division commander that would be involved in the subject matter to be
discussed. In addition to what is set out above, others may be asked or required to attend and participate in
these meetings. It shall be the responsibility of the respective parties to notify the constituents they believe
are needed to attend such meetings.

21.2 Purpose. The purposes of such meetings may be to:
© Discuss the administration of the Agreement;

¢ Notify the Association of changes made or contemplated by the Department which may affect the
working conditions of employees represented by the Association;

© Disseminate general information of interest to the parties; and

¢ Give the Association representatives the opportunity to share the views of their members and/or
make suggestions on subjects of interest to their members.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 34
© Either party may raise an issue at a Labor/Management Committee meeting and if an issue is raised
it will be discussed.

21.3 Notice to Supervisors. To facilitate the adjustment of work schedules, the Association's representatives
will notify their immediate supervisors of the dates and times of such meetings.

21.4 Compensation. Association committee members shall not lose pay nor be entitled to overtime for the
time spent in any meetings authorized by the provisions of this Article.

21.5 Resolutions. All items resolved by the parties at the meetings will be distributed to the Association and
Department members as appropriate.

ARTICLE 22 - DUTY WEAPON

22.1 Maintenance. Aside from general upkeep and cleaning, the Department will be responsible for
maintenance of weapons. Any mechanical problems with weapons shall be referred to the Department
armorer.

22.2 Replacement. Any weapon that is damaged or destroyed as a result of a duty related incident will be
replaced by the Department.

22,3 Stock, The Department will stock a sufficient number of replacement weapons for temporary use when
weapons become unserviceable.

ARTICLE 23 - TRANSFERS

The Association and the Department agree there are three types of transfer - voluntary, administrative, and
disciplinary.

Administrative transfers occur as a result of an action to enhance operations, further the Department’s
mission, or improve efficiency and effectiveness. The parties agree these types of transfers from specialized
units will be evaluated for necessity. Administrative transfers will be approved at the Bureau Commander
level; the employee will have the ability to review that decision to the Deputy Chief. Generally,
administrative transfers do not occur as a result of single events or incidents.

Disciplinary transfer is an option which may occur where it is determined that an employee’s conduct or
performance warrants that level of discipline. Disciplinary transfers are appealable pursuant to Article 12.

The Association understands that assignments are not a property right whether or not an assignment
differential is applied. Despite this, the Department will work to avoid transfers that cause a loss of pay if
another form of discipline can be applied to correct the problem.

ARTICLE 24 - RANDOM DRUG TESTING

24.1 Parameters. Department Procedure 5/110.26 specifies the procedures for random drug testing. In
addition to this procedure, the following parameters will apply under this contract:

The random drug testing program shall only apply to illicit drugs as set out in Procedure 5/110.26.

© Covered employees will be randomly selected based on assignment/unit and required to provide a
sample. Refusal to test or substantial evidence indicating alteration or adulteration of the sample will
be cause for termination. Substantial evidence of alteration or adulteration at the collection site and
laboratory means evidence which would support a reasonable conclusion that adulterants or foreign
substances were added to the urine, that the urine was diluted, or that the specimen was substituted. If

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 35
there is articulable reasonable evidence at the collection site and/or laboratory that there has been an
alteration or adulteration of a sample, the sample alleged to have been altered or adulterated will be
secured and processed under the same standards and process as if the sample was a proper urine sample;
however, the Chain of Custody and Control Form used in submitting the specimen for testing will be
labeled SUSPECTED ALTERED/ADULTERATED SAMPLE. The collector will write the reasons
describing what factors led the collector to suspect alteration or adulteration on the form. The employee
will be required to submit another sample if alferation or adulteration is suspected at the collection site.

Any alteration or adulteration allegation will be cause for an internal investigation to determine whether
there is substantial evidence to demonstrate whether the employee altered or adulterated his/her sample.
In any event, the employee retains all rights provided them by his/her collective bargaining agreement
and the Department manual.

An employee will not be ordered or required to disclose protected health information and maintains
his/her rights to privacy under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA),
federal law, or Nevada state law.

e The employee who tests positive will be subject to termination, subject to the provisions of Article 12
of this agreement.

e  Asaresult of a verified positive test, the employee will have the option of resigning his/her employment.

24.2 Voluntary Identification. An employee may voluntarily identify himself/herself as an abuser of
prescription drugs prior to being identified through other means. Such self-identification may occur through
any person in the employee's chain-of-command or an Association representative. Under these
circumstances the employce will participate in a mandatory rehabilitation program paid for by the employee
and/or the appropriate health insurance carrier. The employee will also be subject to the conditions of a last-
chance agreement, limited only to the issue of a repeated instance of prescription drug abuse, which will
include unannounced testing for a two (2) year period. Because a last-chance agreement is provided in lieu
of a termination, no other discipline will be applied in conjunction with the last-chance agreement. A last-
chance agreement, as provided herein, will remain in an employee’s personnel file for the duration of his/her
employment or re-employment.

Voluntary identification of the use of illicit drugs will subject the employee to termination.

ARTICLE 25 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

25.1 Savings Clause. The Department and the Association do agree that if any provision of the Agreement
is subsequently declared by the proper legislative or judicial authority to be unlawful, unenforceable, or not
in accordance with applicable statutes or ordinances, all other provisions of this Agreement shall remain in
full force and effect for the duration of the Agreement. Should such a declaration occur, the parties agree to
negotiate a successor for the clause in question. This Agreement shall become effective only when signed
by the designated representatives of the Department and the Association.

25.2 Contract/Civil Service Rule Duplication. The Department and Association agree that matters subject
to bargaining under N.R.S. 288.150 which are in this contract will supersede any corresponding Civil Service
Rule of the Department for all Department employees represented by the Association.

25.3 Personnel Files.

Employee Access. Each employee shall, during normal business hours of the Labor Relations Section, have
a right to access his or her own personnel file by appointment.

Employee Copies. The contents of personnel records shail be made available to the employee for inspection

and review at the time of his/her appointment. At an employee’s request, he or she shall be provided one (1)
copy of any or all documents posted in the employee’s file.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 36
Rebuttal Statement. Beforc an adverse comment or document can be put into an employee’s personnel file,
the employee must be made aware of the comment or document by having read the comment or document
and initialed or signed the same. An employee has the right to refuse to sign the comment or document after
reading it, and the fact that the employee refused to sign the comment or document shall be noted on the
face of the document itself. The employce may file a written response that is specific to the adverse comment
or document entered into his/her personnel file within 30 days after he or she is asked to initial or sign the
comment or document. If a written response is prepared by the employee, the Department must attach the
employee's written response to the adverse comment or document. All formal disciplinary actions shall be
recorded in the employee’s personnel file and shall constitute the official record to be utilized in disciplinary
proceedings.

Access hy Others. The only other persons permitted to have access to the contents of an employce’s
personnel file, excluding background investigations and references from previous employers, are a
designated representative of the employee having the employee’s signed authorization and the Department’s
authorized staff, which may include outside legal counsel.

An employee’s physical file shall not be made available to any persons or organizations other than the
Department and the employee without the employee’s expressed authorization, unless pursuant to a court
order or other statutory requirements.

Purging. All disciplinary matters will be removed from the personnel file at the following times and under
the following conditions. A subsequent discipline of a similar nature is defined as a disciplinary action that
is similar because it is:

e a performance issue;
° misconduct issue as defined in Civil Service Rule 510; or
. adjudicated through the Accident Review Board process.

Aside from the separate categories set out above, extension retention in the personnel file will occur in both
the area of performance or misconduct if there is a reasonable similarity. For example, a performance
discipline will extend a misconduct discipline if it is reasonably similar to the performance discipline in
question.

Written Reprimand - 18 months after the date the employee signs or is given the opportunity to sign the
adjudication or three (3) months after the filing of the statement of complaint. The earlier of these two dates
will start the purge period. Any subsequent discipline of a similar nature shall extend the purging of the
original discipline by another 12 months or the purge length of the latest disciplinary action, whichever is
shortest.

Minor Suspension - three (3) years after the date the employce signs or is given the opportunity to sign the
adjudication or three (3) months after the filing of the statement of complaint. The earlier of these two dates
will start the purge period. Any subsequent discipline of a similar nature shall extend the purging of the
original discipline by another 24 months or the purge length of the latest disciplinary action, whichever is
shortest.

Major Suspension - five (5) years after the date the employee signs or is given the opportunity to sign the
adjudication or three (3) months after the filing of the statement of complaint. The earlier of these two dates
will start the purge period. Any subsequent discipline of a similar nature shall extend the purging of the
original discipline by another 24 months or the purge length of the latest disciplinary action, whichever is
shortest.

Disciplinary Transfer - two (2) years after the date the employee signs or is given the opportunity to sign the
adjudication or three (3) months after the filing of the statement of complaint. The earlier of these two dates

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 37
will start the purge period. Any subsequent discipline of a similar nature shall extend the purging of the
original discipline by another 24 months or the purge length of the latest disciplinary action, whichever is
shortest.

In all circumstances where investigations are delayed because of a criminal investigation, the purging date
will begin the date the employee signs or is given the opportunity to sign the adjudication, or three (3) months
after the completion of the criminal investigation or the date Internal Affairs is cleared to conduct their
investigation. The earlier of these dates will start the purge period. In cases of any extended period of
absence of the employee, the purge period will begin the date the employee signs or is given the opportunity
to sign the adjudication.

A contact report will not be maintained in the personnel file. Contact reports in a supervisory file may be
utilized to show that discipline was warranted.

Purged documents may be retained by the Department pursuant to any applicable statutory document
retention schedules; however, such documents may not be used by the Department for disciplinary purposes
in the future. Evidence of purged discipline can only be raised for rebuttal purposes in an administrative
hearing if the employee claims he/she has no disciplinary history.

Annotation: It was understood by the parties the purging of Internal Affairs files directly associated with the disciplinary actions mentioned above will be purged in like
fashion.

Changes in the purge criteria that were adopted on 2011, are applied prospectively for disciplinary actions taken on or after July 1, 2011. All other
disciplinary actions will be purged under the schedule that was in place at the time the disciplinary action was taken.

Notice of Placement of Item in File. No unfavorable comment or document will be placed in the file unless:
a) The officer has read and initialed the comment or document; or

b) If the officer refuses to initial the comment or document, a notation to that effect is noted on or
attached to the comment or document.

An employee must be given a copy of any adverse comment or document that is placed in his/her personnel
file.

No citizen complaint shall be placed in an employee’s personnel file.
Official File. Only one official personnel file shal! be maintained on a bargaining unit member.

Information Contained in File. Personuel investigations that result in “exonerated”, “unfounded”, or “not
sustained” dispositions shall not be made a part of the employee’s personnel file or supervisor’s file.
Additionally, “exonerated”, “unfounded”, or “not sustained” complaints shall not be used as a basis for a
subsequent discipline nor shall they be used as evidence in a subsequent investigation on a different matter.

25.4 Performance Appraisals,
Signatures and Rebuttal

The evaluation shall be completed by the employee’s immediate supervisor, as the rater, on a form prescribed
by the Department. Once the evaluation is completed, it will be examined by the reviewer. Once finalized,
the evaluation will be signed by the rater and reviewer, then presented to the employee for signature. The
employee shall indicate agreement or disagreement with the evaluation, and shall sign the evaluation which
indicates that the individual has read the contents of the evaluation. Employees may attach a rebuttal within
30 calendar days of receipt of the evaluation. The rebuttal may only contain information specific to issues
addressed in the evaluation. No comments are to be added after the employee has signed the report. All
evaluations shall compiy with the Department guide to performance appraisals.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 38
Appeal

If an employee disagrees with his/her appraisal, he/she may request, in writing, a review. Any performance
appraisal proven to contain an error or improper reference, through this process, shall be corrected. Any
appraisal ordered corrected will have ALL records related to the process purged from the employee’s
personnel file.

Step 1 All performance appraisals shall be discussed with the chain-of-command above the reviewer. The
written request shall be dated and delivered within 15 calendar days of receipt of the appraisal, based
on the date the employee signed the appraisal.

Within 15 calendar days of receipt, that level of supervision will investigate to determine if the
appraisal contains error of fact or improper reference and then meet with the employee to explain
the results of the investigation.

If the issue is not resolved at this level, the employee will receive the written response including the
summary of findings within 15 calendar days of that meeting.

Step 2 The employee may initiate this with the next level of supervision within 15 calendar days of receipt
of the written response/summary from step one. At this level, the supervisor shall schedule a
meeting with employee within 15 calendar days to attempt to resolve the issue. The supervisor will
provide the employee a written response within 15 days of the meeting.

This is the final step of the procedure and cannot be grieved. In no event will an appeal go beyond
the level of the Undersheriff. However, if the employce is not satisfied with the response of the
supervisor, the employee may still file a rebuttal as specified above within 30 days of the final written
response.

Time Limits: Time limits may be extended only by written mutual agreement of both parties. If a request is
not processed by the department within the time limits set forth above, it will bc deemed conclusive in the
employee’s favor and ordered corrected.

Ifa request is not processed by the association within the time limits set forth above, performance appraisal
will be sustained as written.

25.5 Legal Representation, The parties agree to discuss the payment of legal representation fees in the event
an employee is charged with a crime that results from the course and scope of duties.

25.6 Body Worn Cameras (BWC): The Parties agree that regularly assigned uniformed members of the
Department will be required to wear a BWC, while on duty at all times.

The parties recognize that .25% of the salary increase in July 2016, .5% of the salary increase in July of

2017, and .25% of the salary increase in July of 2018 are a result of the Parties agreeing to the conditions
identified above in Article 25.6.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 39
ARTICLE 26 - TERM OF AGREEMENT

This Agreement shall become effective as of July 1, 2016, except as otherwise set out in the agreement or as
directed by the interest arbitration process and shall be effective through June 30, 2019. This agreement shall
remain in full force and effect during negotiations for a successor agreement with the exception of any
increase in compensation that is inconsistent with any Nevada law. Retroactivity provided herein shall only
apply to employees of the Department as of the date of the signing of this agreement.

 

Joseph Lombardo aN Steve Grammas
Sheriff Executive Director
VI 0) Vi; Le AS

William McBeath

Chair

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 40
ATTACHMENT A

Salary Schedules

PPA
Effective 07/01/16 - 06/30/17 (2.25% COLA)
Sch | Step1 | Step2 | Step3 | Step4 | Step5 | Stepé | Step7 | Stop8 | Step9 ‘[_ Step 10
M20, 25.97 | 27.00 | 28.09 | 20.20 | 3036 | 3160 | 3285 | 3417 | 36.52 | 36.95
28.63 | 2975 | 30.96 | 3221 | 3347 | 3482 | 3620 | 3765 | 39.17 | 40.75

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PPA

Effective 07/01/17 - 06/30/18 (2.5% COLA)
*Subject to PERS increase/decrease

Step3 | Step4 | Step5 | Step6 | Step7
31.12 | 3239 | 33.67
34.31 | 36.69 | 37.11

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
    

  

PPA

Effective 07/01/18 - 06/30/19 (2.25% COLA)
*Subject to PERS increase/decraase

  
   

 

 
     
 

 

 

 

   

 

              

  

 
  
   

     

Step1 | Step2 | Steps | Step4 | Step5 | Steps | Step7 | Step8 | Step9 | Step 10
27.22 | 2830 | 2944 | 3060 | 31.82 | 3312 | 3443 | 3581 | 3723 | 38.72
30.01 | 31.18 33.76 | 3508 | 364¢ | 37.94 | 3048 | 47.05 | 42.71

 

 

 

     

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page [ 41
ATTACHMENT B
NRS 289.010 through 289.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS

NRS 289.010 Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

Ll.

“Administrative file” means any file of a peace officer containing information, comments or documents about the
peace officer. The term does not include any file relating to an investigation conducted pursuant to NRS 289.057
or a criminal investigation of a peace officer.

“Choke hold” means the holding of a person’s neck in a manner specifically intended to restrict the flow of
oxygen or blood to the person’s lungs or brain. The term includes the arm-bar restraint, carotid restraint and
Jateral vascular neck restraint.

“Peace officer” means any person upon whom some or all of the powers of a peace officer are conferred pursuant
to NRS 289.150 to 289.360, inclusive.

“Punitive action” means any action which may lead to dismissal, demotion, suspension, reduction in salary,
written reprimand or transfer of a peace officer for purposes of punishment.

RIGHTS OF PEACE OFFICERS

NRS 289.020 Punitive action: Prohibited for exercise of rights under internal procedure; opportunity for
hearing; refusal to cooperate in criminal investigation punishable as insubordination.

1.

A law enforcement agency shall not use punitive action against a peace officer if the peace officer chooses to
exercise the peace officer’s rights under any internal administrative grievance procedure.

Ifa peace officer is denied a promotion on grounds other than merit or other punitive action is used against the
peace officer, a law enforcement agency shall provide the peace officer with an opportunity for a hearing.

Ifa peace officer refuses to comply with a request by a superior officer to cooperate with the peace officer’s
own or any other law enforcement agency in a criminal investigation, the agency may charge the peace officer
with insubordination.

NRS 289.025 Confidentiality of home address and photograph of peace officer in possession of law
enforcement agency; exceptions.

1.

Except as otherwise provided in subsections 2 and 3 and NRS 239.0115, the home address and any photograph
of a peace officer in the possession of a law enforcement agency are not public information and are confidential.

The photograph of a peace officer may be released:
a) Ifthe peace officer authorizes the release; or
b) Ifthe peace officer has been arrested.

The home address of a peace officer may be released if a peace officer has been artested and the home address is

included in any of the following:

a) Areport of a 911 telephone call.

b) A police report, investigative report ot complaint which a person filed with a law enforcement agency.

c) Avstatement made by a witness.

d) A report prepared pursuant to NRS 432B.540 by an agency which provides child welfare services, which
report details a plan for the placement of a child.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 42
NRS 289.027 Law enforcement agency required to adopt policies and procedures concerning service of certain
subpoenas on peace officers.

1. Each law enforcement agency shall adopt policies and procedures that provide for the orderly and safe
acceptance of service of certain subpoenas served on a peace officer employed by the law enforcement agency.

2. A.subpoena to be served upon a peace officer that is authorized to be served upon a law enforcement agency in
accordance with the policies and procedures adopted pursuant to subsection 1 may be served in the manner
provided by those policies and procedures.

NRS 289.030 Law enforcement agency prohibited from requiring peace officer to disclose financial
information; exception.

A law enforcement agency shall not require any peace officer to disclose the peace officer’s assets, debts, sources of
income or other financial information or make such a disclosure a condition precedent to a promotion, job assignment
or other personnel action unless that information is necessary to:

1. Determine the peace officer’s credentials for transfer to a specialized unit;
2. Prevent any conflict of interest which may result in any new assignment; or

3. Determine whether the peace officer is engaged in unlawful activity.

NRS 289.040 Law enforcement agency prohibited from placing unfavorable comment or document in
administrative file of peace officer; exception; right to respond; provision of copy of comment or document;
right to review administrative file under certain circumstances,

1. Except as otherwise provided in subsection 3, a law enforcement agency shall not place any unfavorable
comment or document in any administrative file of a peace officer maintained by the law enforcement agency
unless:

a) The peace officer has read and initialed the comment or document; or
b) Ifthe peace officer refuses to initial the comment or document, a notation to that effect is noted on or
attached to the comment or document.

2. If the peace officer submits to the law enforcement agency a written response within 30 days after the peace
officer is asked to initial the comment or document, the peace officer’s response must be attached to and
accompany the comment or document.

3. Ifa peace officer is the subject of an investigation of a complaint or allegation conducted pursuant to NRS
289.057, the law enforcement agency may place into any administrative file relating to the peace officer only:
a) A copy of the disposition of the allegation of misconduct if the allegation is sustained; and
b) A copy of the notice of or statement of adjudication of any punitive or remedial action taken against the
peace officer,

4. A peace officer must be given a copy of any comment or document that is placed in an administrative file of the
peace officer maintained by the law enforcement agency.

5. Upon request, a peace officer may review any administrative file of that peace officer maintained by the law
enforcement agency that does not relate to a current investigation.

NRS 289.050 Consequences of refusal to submit to polygraphic examination.
1. Ifa peace officer refuses to submit to a polygraphic examination:
a) No law enforcement agency may take any disciplinary or retaliatory action against the peace officer; and

b) No investigator may make a notation of such a refusal in the investigator’s report or in any other manner
maintain evidence of such a refusal.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 43
2. Evidence of any refusal by a peace officer to submit to a polygraphic examination is not admissible at any
subsequent hearing, trial or other judicial or administrative proceeding.

NRS 289.055 Establishment and availability of written procedures for investigating complaints and
allegations of misconduct.

Each agency in this State that employs peace officers shall:

1, Establish written procedures for investigating any complaint or allegation of misconduct made or filed against a
peace officer employed by the agency; and

2. Make copies of the written procedures established pursuant to subsection | available to the public.

NRS 289.057 Investigation of allegation of misconduct; suspension without pay; review of file by peace officer
in certain circumstances; law enforcement agency prohibited from keeping or making record of investigation
or punitive action in certain circumstances.

1. An investigation of a peace officer may be conducted in response to a complaint or allegation that the peace
officer has engaged in activities which could resuit in punitive action.

2. Except as otherwise provided in a collective bargaining agreement, a law enforcement agency shall not suspend a
peace officer without pay during or pursuant to an investigation conducted pursuant to this section until all
investigations relating to the matter have concluded.

3. After the conclusion of the investigation:

a) Ifthe investigation causes a law enforcement agency to impose punitive action against the peace officer who
was the subject of the investigation and the peace officer has received notice of the imposition of the
punitive action, the peace officer or a representative authorized by the peace officer may, except as
otherwise prohibited by federal or state law, review any administrative or investigative file maintained by
the law enforcement agency relating to the investigation, including any recordings, notes, transcripts of
interviews and documents.

b) If, pursuant to a policy of a law enforcement agency or a labor agreement, the record of the investigation or
the imposition of punitive action is subject to being removed from any administrative file relating to the
peace officer maintained by the law enforcement agency, the law enforcement agency shall not, except as
otherwise required by federal or state law, keep or make a record of the investigation or the imposition of
punitive action after the record is required to be removed from the administrative file.

NRS 289.060 Notification and requirements for interview, interrogation or hearing relating to investigation;
prohibition against use of certain statements or answers in subsequent criminal proceedings.

1. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a law enforcement agency shall, not later than 48 hours before
any interrogation or hearing is held relating to an investigation conducted pursuant to NRS 289.057, provide a
written notice to the peace officer who is the subject of the investigation. If the law enforcement agency believes
that any other peace officer has any knowledge of any fact relating to the complaint or allegation against the
peace officer who is the subject of the investigation, the law enforcement agency shali provide a written notice to
the peace officer advising the peace officer that he or she must appear and be interviewed as a witness in
connection with the investigation. Any peace officer who serves as a witness during an interview must be
altowed a reasonable opportunity to arrange for the presence and assistance of a representative authorized by
NRS 289.080. Any peace officer specified in this subsection may waive the notice required pursuant to this
section.

2, The notice provided to the peace officer who is the subject of the investigation must include:
a) A description of the nature of the investigation;
b) A summary of alleged misconduct of the peace officer;
c) The date, time and place of the interrogation or hearing;

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 44
d) The name and rank of the officer in charge of the investigation and the officers who will conduct any
interrogation or hearing;

€) The name of any other person who will be present at any interrogation or hearing; and

f) A statement setting forth the provisions of subsection 1 of NRS 289.080.

The law enforcement agency shali:

a) Interview or interrogate the peace officer during the peace officer’s regular working hours, if reasonably
practicable, or revise the peace officer’s work schedule to allow any time that is required for the interview or
interrogation to be deemed a part of the peace officer’s regular working hours. Any such time must be
calculated based on the peace officer’s regular wages for his or her regularly scheduled working hours. If the
peace officer is not interviewed or interrogated during his or her regular working hours or if his or her work
schedule is not revised pursuant to this paragraph and the [aw enforcement agency notifies the peace officer
to appear at a time when he or she is off duty, the peace officer must be compensated for appearing at the
interview or interrogation based on the wages and any other benefits the peace officer is entitled to receive
for appearing at the time set forth in the notice.

b) Immediately before any interrogation or hearing begins, inform the peace officer who is the subject of the
investigation orally on the record that:

1) The peace officer is required to provide a statement and answer questions related to the peace
officer’s alleged misconduct; and

2) Ifthe peace officer fails to provide such a statement or to answer any such questions, the agency
may charge the peace officer with insubordination.

c) Limit the scope of the questions during the interrogation or hearing to the alleged misconduct of the peace
officer who is the subject of the investigation. If any evidence is discovered during the course of an
investigation or hearing which establishes or may establish any other possible misconduct engaged in by the
peace officer, the law enforcement agency shall notify the peace officer of that fact and shall not conduct
any further interrogation of the peace officer concerning the possible misconduct until a subsequent notice of
that evidence and possible misconduct is provided to the peace officer pursuant to this chapter.

d) Allow the peace officer who is the subject of the investigation or who is a witness in the investigation to
explain an answer or refute a negative implication which results from questioning during an interview,
interrogation or hearing.

If a peace officer provides a statement or answers a question relating to the alleged misconduct of a peace officer
who is the subject of an investigation pursuant to NRS 289.057 after the peace officer is informed that failing to
provide the statement or answer may result in punitive action against him or her, the statement or answer must
not be used against the peace officer who provided the statement or answer in any subsequent criminal
proceeding.

NRS 289.070 Use of polygraphic examination in investigation.

1.

 

During an investigation conducted pursuant to NRS 289.057, the peace officer against whom the allegation is
made may, but is not required to, submit to a polygraphic examination concerning such activities.

A person who makes an allegation against a peace officer pursuant to NRS 289.057 may not be required to
submit to a polygraphic examination as a condition to the investigation of the person’s allegation, but may
Tequest or agree to be given a polygraphic examination. If such a person requests or agrees to be given a
polygraphic examination, such an examination must be given.

If a polygraphic examination is given to a peace officer pursuant to this section, a sound or video recording must
be made of the polygraphic examination, the preliminary interview and the postexamination interview. Before
the opinion of the polygraphic examiner regarding the peace officer's veracity may be considered ina
disciplinary action, all records, documents and recordings resulting from the polygraphic examination must be
made available for review by one or more polygraphic examiners licensed or qualified to be licensed in this State
who are acceptable to the law enforcement agency and to the officer. If the opinion ofa reviewing polygraphic
examiner does not agree with the initial polygraphic examiner’s opinion, the peace officer must be allowed to be
reexamined by a polygraphic examiner of the peace officer’s choice who is licensed or qualified to be licensed in
this State.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 45
4.

The opinion of a polygraphic examiner regarding the peace officer’s veracity may not be considered ina
disciplinary action unless the polygraphic examination was conducted in a manner which complies with the
provisions of chapter 648 of NRS. In any event, the law enforcement agency shall not use a polygraphic
examiner’s opinion regarding the veracity of the peace officer as the sole basis for disciplinary action against the
peace officer.

NRS 289.080 Right to presence and assistance of representatives at interview, interrogation or hearing
relating to investigation; confidential information; disclosure; record of interview, interrogation or hearing;
right of subject of investigation to review and copy investigation file upon appeal.

1.

Except as otherwise provided in subsection 4, a peace officer who is the subject of an investigation conducted
pursuant to NRS 289.057 may upon request have two representatives of the peace officer’s choosing present with
the peace officer during any phase of an interrogation or hearing relating to the investigation, including, without
limitation, a lawyer, a representative of a labor union or another peace officer.

Except as otherwise provided in subsection 4, a peace officer who is a witness in an investigation conducted
pursuant to NRS 289.057 may upon request have two representatives of the peace officer’s choosing present with
the peace officer during an interview relating to the investigation, including, without limitation, a lawyer, a
representative of a labor union or another peace officer. The presence of the second representative must not
create an undue delay in either the scheduling or conducting of the interview.

A representative of a peace officer must assist the peace officer during the interview, interrogation or hearing.
The law enforcement agency conducting the interview, interrogation or hearing shall allow a representative of
the peace officer to explain an answer provided by the peace officer or refute a negative implication which
results from questioning of the peace officer but may require such explanation to be provided after the agency
has concluded its initial questioning of the peace officer.

A representative must not otherwise be connected to, or the subject of, the same investigation.

Any information that a representative obtains from the peace officer who is a witness concerning the
investigation is confidential and must not be disclosed.

Any information that a representative obtains from the peace officer who is the subject of the investigation is
confidential and must not be disclosed except upon the:

a) Request of the peace officer; or

b) Lawful order of a court of competent jurisdiction.

A law enforcement agency shall not take punitive action against a representative for the representative’s failure
or refusal to disclose such information.

The peace officer, any representative of the peace officer or the law enforcement agency may make a
stenographic, digital or magnetic record of the interview, interrogation or hearing, If the agency records the
proceedings, the agency shall at the peace officer’s request and expense provide a copy of the:

a) Stenographic transcript of the proceedings; or

b) Recording on the digital or magnetic tape.

After the conclusion of the investigation, the peace officer who was the subject of the investigation or any
representative of the peace officer may, if the peace officer appeals a recommendation to impose punitive action,
review and copy the entire file concerning the internal investigation, including, without limitation, any
recordings, notes, transcripts of interviews and documents contained in the file.

NRS 289.085 Inadmissibility of evidence obtained unlawfully during investigation.

Ifan arbitrator or court determines that evidence was obtained during an investigation of a peace officer concerning
conduct that couid result in punitive action in a manner which violates any provision of NRS 289.010 to NRS.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 46
289.120, inclusive, and that such evidence may be prejudicial to the peace officer, such evidence is inadmissible and
the arbitrator or court shall exclude such evidence during any administrative proceeding commenced or civil action
filed against the peace officer.

NRS 289.090 Investigation concerning alleged criminal activities.

The provisions of NRS 289.057, 289.060, 289.070 and 289.080 do not apply to any investigation which concerns
alleged criminal activities.

NRS 289.100 Limitations on application of chapter.

1. This chapter does not prohibit any agreements for cooperation between the law enforcement agency and agencies
in other jurisdictions.

2. This chapter does not affect any procedures which have been adopted by the law enforcement agency if those
procedures provide the same or greater rights than provided for in this chapter.

NRS 289.110 Report concerning improper governmental action; investigation of report; reprisal by employer
prohibited.

1, A peace officer may disclose information regarding improper governmental action by filing a report with:
a) The district attorney of the county in which the improper governmental action occurred; or
b) The Attorney General if the district attorney referred to in paragraph (a) is involved in the improper
governmental action.

2. Upon the filing of a report pursuant to subsection 1, the district attorney or Attorney General may investigate the
report and determine whether improper governmental action did occur. Upon the completion of the investigation
the district attorney or Attorney General:

a) Ifthe district attorney or Attorney General determines that improper governmental action did occur, may
prosecute the violation. The Attorney General may prosecute such a violation if the district attorney fails or
tefuses so to act.

b) Shall notify the peace officer who filed the report of the results of the investigation.

3. The employer of a peace officer shall not take any reprisal or retaliatory action against a peace officer who in
good faith files a report pursuant to subsection 1.

4. Nothing in this section authorizes a person to disclose information if disclosure is otherwise prohibited by law.
5. This section does not apply to a peace officer who is employed by the State.

6. Asused in this section, “improper governmental action” means any action taken by an officer or employee of a
law enforcement agency, while in the performance of the officer’s or employee’s official duties which is in
violation of any state law or regulation.

NRS 289.120 Judicial relief available for aggrieved peace officer.

Any peace officer aggrieved by an action of the employer of the peace officer in violation of this chapter may, after
exhausting any applicable internal grievance procedures, grievance procedures negotiated pursuant to chapter 288 of
NRS and other administrative remedies, apply to the district court for judicial relief. If the court determines that the
employer has violated 2 provision of this chapter, the court shall order appropriate injunctive or other extraordinary
relief to prevent the further occurrence of the violation and the taking of any reprisal ot retaliatory action by the
employer against the peace officer.

LVMPD & LVPPA - July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2019 Page | 47
