Minnesota
626.89 PEACE OFFICER DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES ACT.
Subdivision 1.Definitions.

For purposes of this section, the terms defined in this subdivision have the
meanings given them.

(a) "Administrative hearing" means a nonjudicial hearing or arbitration
authorized to recommend, approve, or order discipline.

(b) "Formal statement" means the questioning of an officer in the course of
obtaining a recorded, stenographic, or signed statement to be used as evidence in a
disciplinary proceeding against the officer.

(c) "Officer" means a licensed peace officer or part-time peace officer, as defined
in section 626.84, subdivision 1, paragraphs (c) and (d), who is employed by a unit of
government.

Subd. 2.Applicability.

 

The procedures and provisions of this section apply to law enforcement agencies
and government units. The procedures and provisions of this section do not apply to
investigations of criminal charges against an officer.

Subd. 3.Governing formal statement procedures.

The formal statement of an officer must be taken in accordance with subdivisions
4 to 10.

Subd. 4.Place of formal statement.

The formal statement must be taken at a facility of the employing or
investigating agency or at a place agreed to by the investigating individual and the
investigated officer.

Subd. 5.Complaint.

An officer's formal statement may not be taken unless there is filed with the
employing or investigating agency a written complaint signed by the complainant
stating the complainant's knowledge, and the officer has been given a summary of the
allegations. Complaints stating the signer's knowledge also may be filed by members
of the law enforcement agency. Before an administrative hearing is begun, the officer
must be given a copy of the signed complaint.

Subd. 6.Witnesses; investigative reports.
Upon request, the investigating agency or the officer shall provide the other party
with a list of witnesses that the agency or officer expects to testify at the
administrative hearing and the substance of the testimony. A party is entitled to copies
of any witness statements in the possession of the other party and an officer is entitled
to a copy of the investigating agency's investigative report, provided that any
references in a witness statement or investigative report that would reveal the identity
of confidential informants need not be disclosed except upon order of the person
presiding over the administrative hearing for good cause shown.

Subd. 7.Sessions.

Sessions at which a formal statement is taken must be of reasonable duration and
must give the officer reasonable periods for rest and personal necessities. When
practicable, sessions must be held during the officer's regularly scheduled work shift.
If the session is not held during the officer's regularly scheduled work shift, the
officer must be paid by the employing agency at the officer's current compensation
rate for time spent attending the session.

Subd. 8.Record.

A complete record of sessions at which a formal statement is taken must be made
by electronic recording or otherwise. Upon written request of the officer whose
statement is taken, a complete copy or transcript must be made available to the officer
without charge or undue delay. The session may be tape recorded by the investigating
officer and by the officer under investigation.

Subd. 9.Presence of attorney and union representative.

The officer whose formal statement is taken has the right to have a union
representative or an attorney retained by the officer, or both, present during the
session. The officer may request the presence of the attorney or the union
representative, or both, at any time before or during the session. When a request under
this subdivision is made, no formal statement may be taken until a reasonable
opportunity is provided for the officer to obtain the presence of the attorney or the
union representative.

Subd. 10.Admissions.

 

Before an officer's formal statement is taken, the officer shall be advised in
writing or on the record that admissions made in the course of the formal statement
may be used as evidence of misconduct or as a basis for discipline.

Subd. 11.Disclosure of financial records.
No employer may require an officer to produce or disclose the officer's personal
financial records except pursuant to a valid search warrant or subpoena.

Subd. 12.Release of photographs.

No law enforcement agency or governmental unit may publicly release
photographs of an officer without the written permission of the officer, except that the
agency or unit may display a photograph of an officer to a prospective witness as part
of an agency or unit investigation, and the agency or unit may provide a photograph
of an officer to the civilian police review authority for it to display to a prospective
witness as part of the authority's investigation.

Subd. 13.Disciplinary letter.

No disciplinary letter or reprimand may be included in an officer's personnel
record unless the officer has been given a copy of the letter or reprimand.

Subd. 14.Retaliatory action prohibited.

No officer may be discharged, disciplined, or threatened with discharge or
discipline as retaliation for or solely by reason of the officer's exercise of the rights
provided by this section.

Subd. 15.Rights not reduced.

The rights of officers provided by this section are in addition to and do not
diminish the rights and privileges of officers that are provided under an applicable
collective bargaining agreement or any other applicable law.

Subd. 16.Action for damages.

Notwithstanding section 3.736 or 466.03, a political subdivision or state agency
that violates this section is liable to the officer for actual damages resulting from the
violation, plus costs and reasonable attorney fees. The political subdivision or the
state is deemed to have waived any immunity to a cause of action brought under this
subdivision, except that the monetary limits on liability under section 3.736.
subdivision 4, or 466.04 apply.

Subd. 17.Civilian review.

 

 

A civilian review board, commission, or other oversight body shall not have the
authority to make a finding of fact or determination regarding a complaint against an
officer or impose discipline on an officer. A civilian review board, commission, or
other oversight body may make a recommendation regarding the merits of a
complaint, however, the recommendation shall be advisory only and shall not be
binding on nor limit the authority of the chief law enforcement officer of any unit of
government.
