MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

BETWEEN

THE CITY OF LONG BEACH

and

THE LONG BEACH POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

OCTOBER 1, 2009 TO September 30, 2014
TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE ONE —- MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

Section! - Parties to Memorandum of Understanding

 

Section Il- Purpose ...

 

 
  

Section Il - RECOGNITION... ee cece eee eee eeeeteeeeeeeseeeeaeseeeeeeteseeesaeseeseeseeeeaeeneeeaeeaee 1

Section IV - No DiSCrimination........... cece eee cece cee ceceeeeceeeeseeceseeseseeeesseseseesseseseeseseees 1

Section V- Employee Organizational Rights and Responsibilities ........0..0 eee 2
A. Association Representation Responsibilities . weed
B. Board Member List...........0ccceeee 2
C. Dues and Benefit Deduction Program . 2
D. Release Time. weed
E. Transfer of Members of the Police Officers’ Association Board of

Directors
Addressing Squad Meetings

 

7

 

Section VI - City Obligations and Responsibilities
A. — City Obligations
B. Impact of City Obligations
C. Authority of Third Party Neutral —
D.

  
 
 
 
 

 

Layoffs/Furloughs

Section VII - Intent of the Parties oo... ccc ccc eee ceceeeeceeeseeceeeesseseeseseseseeseseeeeeeeeees 8
ARTICLE TWO - SALARIES AND COMPENSATION

Section!- Listing of Positions and Rates of Pay 2005-2009 00... eeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeeeeee 9
Section I= Skill Pay. ec ce eee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeseeeeeesaeseeeeaeseeseaeseseeeseseeeeeeeeeeaee 9
Section Ill - Marksmanship Pay .........:cccceceeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeaeseeeeeseeeeeeseseeeeaeeeeteaee 9
Section IV - INCENtIVE Pay oo... eee ecec eect eens cette eeeeteeseeeeeeseseaeseseeeseseeeeeseeeeaeeeeeeeenee 9
Section V- Field Training Officer Pay (FTO)... ceeeeceseeeeeeeeeteeeeeeteeeeeeeeeteaeeeeeeaees 10

 

Section VI - Corporal Pay..

Section VIl - Detective Pay... cic ecceceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeseseeeseeeeeeaeseeseaeeneeeaees 10
Section VIII - Port Security UNit..... eee eee ee eeeeeeeeeeeeneseeeeaeseeeeeeseeeeeeseseeeeneeeeeeaees 10
Section IX - Bilingual Pay... eee eee ee eee eeeeeeeneeeeeseseeesaeseeesaeseeeaeseseeesneeeeeeaees 10

LBPOA 2009-2014 i
ARTICLE TWO - SALARIES AND COMPENSATION (continued)
Section X- Reimbursement for K-9 Care oo... cccecccee ce ceeee cece eeeseceeeeseeeeeeceeeeeeeneeees 10

Section XI- Overtime

 

Section XII - Call Back
A. Court Appearance
B. Other Call-Backs....

 

 

C. Other Stay coaessssvssssvsesssosssesssesesssvseresereessevesesnseseeenvesenes
Section XIII - Tuition ReiMbUrSeEMENL......... ee cee eee cece eects ceceeeesseeeseesseceeeeseseeseesiees 14
Section XIV - Physical Fitness Program ..........eceeceeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeaeeeeeeaeeeeeeeees 14
Section XV - Education Pay... eceecceeeseeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeeseseeeseeeeeeeaeseeseaeeneeeaees 15
Section XVI - LONG VItY oo. le ee eects ee eee eeeeeeeseeeeeeseseeesaaseeesaeseeeeaeseeseeeseseeesneseeeeages 15
Section XVII -ACtINg Pay oo... eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeseeeeeseeeeeesaeseeesaeseeesaeseeseaeeeeeeaees 16

ARTICLE THREE - PAID TIME OFF BENEFITS

 

Section!- Vacation Scheduling...

Section Il- Exchange of Vacation DayS.........ececeeceeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeaeeeeeeaeeneeeaees 18

 

Section Ill - Exchange of Days Off.
Section IV - Holiday ACCUMUIAtION 000... eee eee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeetaeeeeetaeeeeseaeeneteaees 19

Section V- Holiday Schedule.

 

Section VI - Use of Accumulated Sick Leave for Family Illness or Doctor/Dental

APPOINTMENES .00.. ee ee eee eee ee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeseeeeeseseeeseeeeeeeaeseeteaeeeeeeaee 20
Section VII - Preservation of Sick Leave (Vacation) During Extended Leave............... 20
Section VIII - Integral Part Trust (Post Employment Medical Benefits)..............c ee 20
Section IX -  JUrY DULY... eee eee e eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaesaeeeeeseeseeeseeseeeseeeeeesaeeeeseaeeneeeaees 22

ARTICLE FOUR - HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS
Section!- Health, Dental and Life INSUrANCE........ cece eee eee eeee steers teeeeteeeeteeeeeeee 23

Section Il- | Continuation of Health Insurance for Surviving Spouse and/or Eligible
Dependents of Retired Employee ...........eceeeeceeseeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeeteaee 24

LBPOA 2009-2014 ii
Section Ill - Life INSUPANCE oo... ee cece eee cece eeeceeceseeceecessesescessesiecesaseeseseasieeesiaee 25
ARTICLE FIVE - RETIREMENT

Section!- Retirement Provisions.
A. Maintenance of Existing Retirement Provisions
B. Retiree Health Insurance Account Supplement.
C. Pension Formula Change..
D. Report the Value of Employee-Pai
Special Compensation
E. Reopener — Pension Plan..

    
  
 
  
 

ARTICLE SIX - OTHER BENEFITS AND WORKING CONDITIONS

Section!- = Parking for Members... eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeseeeeaeseeeeeeeeeeeaees 28
Section Il- Uniform Replacement ...........cceececeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeseseeesaeeeeseaeeneeeaees 28
Section Ill - Ome-Officer Units ....... cee cece eee ce cece ceeeecseceeeesseceseesseceseessesesnesseeeseesiaes 29
Section IV - Hours and Schedules... cece ceee esses eecseceseeseceseesesesnesseseeeesacee 29
Section V- Certification... ccc ccc ceccseceeececeseececessesescessesiecesseseeeesaseeeesaeee 29
Section VI - Work Permits .......cccccec cece cece ceeececessececesseseecessesscessesiseessaniseesaee 29
Section VII - Internal Affairs Investigations .......... cece eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeneeeaees 29
Section VIII - Gun ReimburseMent.........0ccceecc cece cece cee ceeeececeseeseceseesseceseessseeseesiaees 30
Section IX - Work Related ACtiVItIES ..0..... ccc ccc eee ceece eee ceceeeesseceseesssceseeteeeeseeneaee 30
ARTICLE SEVEN - GRIEVANCES

Section |- Grievance Procedure .........cccceeccccce cee ceee cece eececeseeseceseesseceseeseeeeseesiaees 31

Section Il- Definitions...

 

Section Il -  ProCeQuyre oo... ccc cece ce cecsceceseececessesecssssseeceseesescessaseseesasiseesiacee 31

 

Section IV - Appeal...
Section V- City Employee Relations Officer Hearing

Section VI- Appeal From City Employee Relations Officer... eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 32

LBPOA 2009-2014 iii
Section VII - General Provisions ..........ccccccceccccecesceeecseceseececeseeseceseesseseseessseeseeciaees 34

ARTICLE EIGHT - TRANSFER POLICY

 

Section! - General Provisions .

ARTICLE EIGHT - TRANSFER POLICY (continued)

 

Section Il- Voluntary Transfer
A. Request for Transfer .
B. Selection Procedure

 
 

Section Ill - Involuntary Transfers 0.0... ec eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeseeeeeesaeeeeseaeeeeeeaees 36

 

Section IV - Special Detail Assignments ....

ARTICLE NINE - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section |- — Full Agreement oo... eee ee eee eee eeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeesaeseeesaeseeteaeeeeeeaees 37
Section Il- Implementation oo... ee ee cece eee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeseeeseseeeeaeseeseaeeeeeeaees 37
Section Nl - TOM woe cece cceecsecseeecsecseceesssecessessecessesscessesisceseessesesseseseesaneseesace 37
Section IV - Remegotiation.....e eee ceceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeseeeeeeseeseeeseeeeeesneeeesneeeeeeages 38

 

Section V- Separability....

APPENDIX A

Section!- Classifications Represented ......... eee eceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeaeeneeeaees 40
Section Il- Lower Entry Step for Police RECrUit ......... cece eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteeteeeeeeeeees 40
Section Ill- General Salary INCreases ..0.... eee eeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeesneeeeeeeeesneeeeeaees 40

LBPOA 2009-2014 iv
ARTICLE ONE
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

Section | - Parties to Memorandum of Understanding

This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) or Agreement is made and entered into by
and between the City of Long Beach, a Municipal Corporation (City) and the Long
Beach Police Officers Association (Association) pursuant to Government Code 3500 et
seq.

Section Il - Purpose

It is the purpose of this MOU to promote and provide for harmonious relations,
cooperation, and understanding between the City and the employees covered herein; to
provide an orderly and equitable means of resolving any misunderstanding or
differences which may arise under this MOU; and to set forth the understanding of the
parties reached as a result of good faith negotiations.

Section Ill - Recognition

The City of Long Beach hereby recognizes the Police Officers’ Association as the
exclusive representative for employees in the basic and supervisory Police unit
classification referenced in Appendix A of the Memorandum, subject to the right of an
individual employee to represent himself/herself as provided in Government Code
Section 3502.

Section IV - No Discrimination

A. The parties mutually recognize and agree fully to protect the rights of all
employees covered by this Memorandum of Understanding, and that all
employees so covered shall have the right to join and participate in the lawful
activities of the Association, and to exercise all rights expressly and impliedly set
forth in Section 3500 et seq. of the Government Code of the State of California.
No employee shall be interfered with, intimidated, restrained, coerced, or
discriminated against because of the exercise of these rights.

B. The provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding shall be applied equally to
all employees covered without favor or discrimination because of race, color, sex,
age, creed, or religion, and in accordance with all applicable State and Federal
Laws.

Cc. The City and the Association agree that unit members will not be discriminated
against because of membership or non-membership in employee organizations.

LBPOA 2009-2014 1
Section V - Employee Organization Rights and Responsibilities

A.

Association Representation Responsibilities

The Association has the duty to fairly represent all members of the bargaining
unit.

Board Member List

A current list of board members, including names and classifications shall be
submitted to the Director of Human Resources. Any changes on this Board shall
be submitted, with the same required information as stated above, to the Director
of Human Resources within ten working days following such changes.

Dues and Benefit Deduction Program

1. During the term of this Agreement, upon receipt of an executed voluntary
written authorization, the City shall deduct Association dues and benefit
program premiums from the pay of employees represented by the
Association. The form for this purpose shall be provided by the City and
the amounts to be deducted for union dues shall be certified to the City by
the appropriate Association official. For such purposes, the City shall
charge the Association five and one-half cents ($.055) per deduction.

2. The Association hereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City for
any loss or damages, claims or causes of action, arising from the
operation of this provision of the Agreement. It is also agreed that neither
any employee nor the Association shall have any claim for error against
the City for any deductions made or not made, as the case may be.

Release Time

The City shall authorize the Association President and the Board of Directors
union release time from their regularly scheduled duties. As used herein, union
release time shall be authorized leave with pay to conduct full-time employee
organization representation activities. Employees on such union release time
shall be reported and compensated as if on vacation. While on union release
time, such employees shall not be eligible for Workers' Compensation benefits or
any benefits ordinarily available to peace officers under Division 4 of the
California Labor Code.

1. The Association President shall be authorized union release time from the
effective date of this agreement through the term of this agreement.

2. Subsequent to October 1, 2003 and every October thereafter, the
Association shall reimburse the City for release of the Association
President by reducing each bargaining unit member’s scheduled holiday

LBPOA 2009-2014 2
LBPOA 2009-2014

hours by up to 4.0 hours. This reduction in holiday hours shall only apply
to members in the classification of Police Officer, Police Corporal, Police
Sergeant and Police Lieutenant.

Board of Directors Union Release Time

a. On October 1 of each year, the City shall authorize the Police
Officers’ Association Directors union release time in a_ total
aggregate amount not to exceed 1,000 hours annually to be divided
among such directors as the Police Officers’ Association may
decide. Any portion of this annual aggregate 1,000 hours which is
unused at the end of the year shall be carried forward to be used in
the next year. Accumulated unused release time authorized in this
paragraph will not be carried forward past the term of this
agreement, unless the provisions of the MOU are extended by
mutual agreement, in writing, while good faith negotiations to
secure a new agreement are proceeding.

b. In addition to the 1,000 hours of release time allotted to the
Association Board of Directors from the City, the bargaining unit
members may volunteer hours from their individual accumulated
unpaid holiday or banked overtime to be used by the Board
members. Such donated hours may be used by Board members
and union stewards. Use of hours by union stewards will require a
minimum of seven (7) days prior notification. Donated hours will be
carried over continuously.

The total time identified in paragraphs 2 and 3 above for
President/Director release time shall not exceed 5000 hours. If necessary,
the holiday hours deducted from members in paragraph 2 above will be
reduced to ensure the 5000-hour maximum is not exceeded.

Bargaining unit members on union release time, if currently receiving Field
Training Officer (FTO) or One Officer Car (OOC) pay while on union
release time, may charge the applicable pay against the union’s release
time account.

With prior agreement the City shall reimburse the Association for hours
used by Board members when their time and support of a City position is
requested.

Procedure

a. The Chief of Police or designee shall authorize the requested
release time when such request is submitted one week (7 calendar
days) in advance of the day or days requested. Documented
emergency situations, such as Officer-involved shootings, or other
situations when it is not possible to give prior notice, will likewise be
honored. Approval of other requests will not be unreasonably
withheld. During a Police emergency, the Chief of Police may
cancel release time.

b. On a quarterly basis, the City shall provide the Association with a
report detailing the number of release time hours used in the
preceding quarter.

8. Disputes

a. In the event that a dispute arises regarding the number of hours
used or any other issue involving the administration of the union
release time, the Association President and the Chief of Police will
meet and attempt to resolve the matter.

b. If the dispute cannot be resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the
Association President and the Chief of Police, the dispute shall be
submitted as a grievance to the Director of Human Resources.

9. Non-Union Release Time Bargaining Unit Representation

 

The parties to this MOU agree that the working hours spent by bargaining
unit members, including the Association Directors, acting as an employee
representative for bargaining unit members only in grievances, discipline
hearings, shooting boards, Officer-involved shooting investigations, meet
and confer sessions and consulting with City management on all matters
covered by the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act (California Government Code
Section 3500, et seq.) shall not be considered union release time.

E. Transfer of Members of the Police Officers’ Association Board of
Directors

 

While serving as a member of the Association Board of Directors, a member will
be permitted to remain in his/her Division assignment provided they are
performing their duties at an acceptable level. If they were assigned to a position
which is normally rotated, they will be treated the same as other members of the
Department.

If an Association Board of Directors member feels he has been unjustly retaliated
against or unfairly treated, he can appeal directly to the Chief of Police. If the
issue is not resolved within 10 business days by the Chief of Police, the Director
can appeal directly to the City Manager. The City Manager or designee must hold
a hearing within 10 business days from the date of the Director’s request. The
decision must be rendered in 10 business days from the date of the hearing. If
appealed by the Director, the transfer will be stayed until the decision is made by
City Manager.

LBPOA 2009-2014 4
F. Addressing Squad Meetings

It shall be the policy of the Long Beach Police Department to allow Association
Directors to address the Patrol Division squad meetings under the following
conditions:

1.

The Association Director shall obtain permission to address the squad
meeting from the ranking Command Officer on duty. He shall state the
topic to be spoken about. Such permission and topic advisement shall be
accomplished prior to the beginning of the squad meeting. If an
Association Director is denied an opportunity to address squad meetings,
the ranking Command Officer who refused this request shall file a
memorandum to the Chief of Police prior to the end of his/her shift
explaining why the Association was denied this opportunity. The
Association will be served a copy of this memorandum within 24 hours of
date of occurrence.

At the conclusion of the regular squad meetings, the ranking Command
Officer shall announce that a presentation is to be made by a member of
the Board of Directors of the Police Officers’ Association. Attendance is
not mandatory.

Presentations to squad meetings by Association Directors shall not
exceed ten (10) minutes unless specific permission is granted by the
ranking Command Officer on duty. The Association Director shall not
speak to such length that would cause delay in relief of the watch going off
duty.

The topics that may be discussed must be related to wages, hours, and
working conditions.

At no time shall an Association Director ridicule the Long Beach Police
Department, any member or organizational unit of the Long Beach Police
Department whether by name, title, capacity or inference. This does not
preclude legitimate constructive criticism regarding Police Department
policies, practices and procedures.

The above procedures shall be subject to the existing grievance
procedure.

Section VI - City Obligations and Responsibilities

A. City Obligations

In order to ensure that the City shall continue to carry out its public safety
functions, programs, and responsibilities to the public imposed by law, and to
maintain efficient public safety service for the citizens of Long Beach, the City

LBPOA 2009-2014
continues to reserve and retain solely and exclusively all rights of management,
except as specifically vested to the Association by this Agreement, regardless of
the frequency of use, including those rights and responsibilities set forth by law
including but not limited to the following rights:

1.

10.

1.

LBPOA 2009-2014

To manage the Police Department and determine policies and procedures
and the right to manage the affairs of the Department.

To take into consideration the existence or nonexistence of facts, which
are the basis of the management decision in compliance with State law.

To determine the necessity, organization, implementation, and termination
of any service or activity conducted by the City or other government
jurisdictions and to expand or diminish police services.

To direct, supervise, recruit, select, hire, evaluate, promote, transfer,
discipline, discharge, terminate, demote, reduce, suspend, reprimand,
withhold salary increases and benefits for disciplinary reasons, or
otherwise discipline employees in accordance with City, Department,
and/or Civil Service Rules and Regulations.

To determine the nature, manner, means, extent, type, time, quantity,
quality, standard, and level of police services to be provided to the public.

To require performance of other public safety services not specifically
stated herein in the event of emergency or disaster, as deemed necessary
by the City.

To lay off employees of the Police Department because of lack of work or
funds or under conditions where continued work would be inefficient or
ineffective.

To determine and/or change the police facilities, methods, technology,
equipment, operations to be performed, organizational structure, and
allocate and assign work by which the City police operations are to be
conducted.

To determine methods of financing.

To plan, determine, and manage the Department's budget, which includes
but is not limited to, the right to contract or subcontract any work or
operations of the Police Department.

To determine the size and composition of the Police Department work
force, assign work to employees of the Police Department in accordance
with requirements determined by the Police Department and to establish
and require compliance to work hours and changes to work hours, work
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

schedules, including call back, standby and overtime, and assignments,
except as otherwise limited by this agreement, or subsequent
agreements.

To establish and modify goals and objectives related to productivity and
performance programs and standards, including but not limited to quality
and quantity, and require compliance therewith.

To determine qualification, skills, abilities, knowledge, selection
procedures and standards, job classification, job specifications, and to
reallocate and reclassify employees in accordance with City, Department,
and/or Civil Service Rules and Regulations.

To determine the issues of public policy and the overall goals and
objectives of the Police Department and to take necessary action to
achieve the goals and objectives of the Police Department.

To hire, transfer intra- or inter-division, promote, reduce in rank, demote,
reallocate, terminate, and take other personnel action in accordance with
City, Department, and/or Civil Service Rules and Regulations.

To determine policies, procedures, and standards for recruiting, selecting,
training, and promoting employees.

To establish, implement, and/or modify rules and regulations, policies and
procedures related to productivity, performance, efficiency, personal
appearance standards, code of ethics and conduct, safety and order, and
to require compliance therewith.

To maintain order and efficiency in police facilities and operation.

To restrict the activity of an employee organization on City facilities and on
City time except as set forth in this Agreement.

To take any and all necessary steps and actions to carry out the service
requirements and mission of the City in emergencies or any other time
deemed necessary by the City and not specified above.

B. Impact of City Obligations

Where required by law, the City agrees prior to implementation to meet and
confer with the Association over the impact of the exercise of a right of
management upon the wages, hours, and terms and conditions of employment
on unit members unless the impact consequences of the exercise of a right of
management upon unit members is provided for in this Memorandum of
Understanding, City or Civil Service Rules and Regulations, or Departmental
Rules and Regulations.

LBPOA 2009-2014
c. Authority of Third Party Neutral - City Obligations

All rights of management, powers, authority and functions, whether heretofore or
hereinafter exercised, shall remain vested exclusively with the City. No third party
neutral shall have the authority to diminish any of the rights of management
which are included in this Agreement, exclusive of a competent court having
subject matter jurisdiction.

D. Layoffs/Furloughs

In consideration of the POA's willingness to help address the City’s financial
challenges by forgoing the September 30, 2009 required median adjustment,
POA members will not be subject to mandatory layoffs until after December 31,
2009 to provide time to assess whether staffing reductions have reached the
level required to achieve the number of budgeted sworn positions in the Adopted
or Amended Budget. Thereafter, if it is determined that layoffs are necessary, the
parties will meet for up to 30 calendar days to discuss options to layoffs.
Possible alternatives must include furloughs, voluntary out of order layoffs,
and/or other compensation and benefit related cost saving measures. If, following
this discussion acceptable solutions to mitigate the need for layoffs have not
been agreed to, management will provide notice and begin the layoff process.
Unilateral implementation of furloughs for Bargaining Unit members will not be
imposed until such time as top step Police Officer base salary pay has reached
the level it would have been had the September 30, 2009 median adjustment
been awarded.

Section VII - Intent of the Parties

It is the intent of the parties hereto that the provisions of this MOU shall supersede all
prior written agreements. It is understood by and between the parties that the intent as
set forth herein shall be to cover the wages, hours and working conditions of the
employees represented by the Association.

It is agreed that there exists within the Police Department, personnel policies and
procedures, general orders, departmental policies and rules and regulations. Except as
specifically modified by this MOU, these rules and regulations, and policies and any
subsequent amendments thereto shall be in full force and effect during the term of this
MOU. Before any new or subsequent amendments to these policies or departmental
rules and regulations directly affecting wages, hours and terms and conditions of
employment are implemented, the City, through the Police Chief, shall meet in
accordance with Government Code Section 3500 et seq., with the Association regarding
such changes.

However, the existing provisions of the Salary Resolution and Personnel Ordinance that

apply to employees represented by the Association shall remain in full force and effect
during the term of this Agreement unless otherwise modified by this MOU.

LBPOA 2009-2014 8
ARTICLE TWO
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION

Section | - Listing of Positions and Rates of Pay 2009-2014
The hourly, bi-weekly and equivalent monthly salaries for the classifications represented

by the Association for the period of October 1, 2009 through September 30, 2014 shall
be in accordance with the salary schedule set forth in Appendix A.

Section Il - Skill Pay

The following skill pay provisions, effective through September 30, 2011, will be
continued in the Salary Resolution at the equivalent monthly rate indicated:

Motor Officer $350.00 per month
Helicopter Pilot $575.00 per month
Helicopter Observer $275.00 per month

Effective October 1, 2011, the above skill pay provisions will be converted to a
percentage of top step Police Officer base hourly rate.

Section Ill - Marksmanship Pay

Marksman $ 4.00/month
Sharpshooter $ 8.00/month
Expert $16.00/month
Master $32.00/month

Payment for Marksmanship will be made once a year on the first paycheck in
December.

Section IV - Incentive Pay

The following incentive pay rates shall be paid in accordance with the criteria listed in
the Salary Resolution:

Police Officer/Identification Officer
Program II $260.00 per month

No new officers will be added to this Incentive Pay Program.

LBPOA 2009-2014 9
Section V - Field Training Officer Pay (FTO)

Police Officers and Police Corporals who are assigned by the Chief of Police to be Field
Training Officers shall receive skill pay in an amount equal to 10% of the current top
step of Police Officer or Police Corporal for each hour worked in that assignment. Field
Training Officers will be assigned to train Police Officers during the 12 month probation
period. However, for lateral transfers, said assignment period shall be determined by the
Chief of Police.

Section VI - Corporal Pay

Corporals shall be treated as Police Officers in all aspects except pay. The base pay
differential between top step Police Officer and Corporal shall be maintained at its
current rate, 12.466%.

Section VII - Detective Pay

Police Officers, Police Corporals, Police Sergeants and Police Lieutenants assigned to
the Detective Bureau and Accident Investigation Detail will receive $300 per month.
Effective October 1, 2011, this pay will be converted to a percentage of top step Police
Officer base hourly rate.

Section Vill - Port Security Unit

Police Officers, Police Corporals, Police Sergeants and Police Lieutenants assigned to
the Port Security Unit will receive $350 per month after they have obtained a valid Basic
Boat Operations Certificate. Port Security Unit members will not be eligible to receive
any other skill pay associated with their responsibilities on the Port Security Unit or one-
man car pay or FTO pay when receiving Port Security Unit assignment pay. Effective
October 1, 2011, this pay will be converted to a percentage of top step Police Officer
base hourly rate.

Section IX - Bilingual Pay

Bilingual skill pay will be available to all classifications covered by this agreement who
are certified by the Civil Service Commission as having oral bilingual skills of a
language predominantly spoken by the residents of the City of Long Beach, and who
interact with the public on a regular and frequent basis which is defined as either the
majority of their shift or those who are first line emergency responders, will receive
$.80/hour. Eligible languages include Spanish, Khmer, Tagalog, Vietnamese, Samoan,
American Sign Language or other languages designated by the City Manager. Bilingual
skill pay for American Sign Language will only be paid to members who interact with the
public in person, face to face. Bilingual pay may be paid on a per diem basis to those

LBPOA 2009-2014 10
who are certified by Civil Service and use said bilingual skills of a language deemed
necessary by the City Manager and the Police Chief on an as-needed basis.

Section X - Reimbursement for K-9 Care

An employee of the Long Beach Police Department who, with the authorization and at
the request of the City Manager or the Chief of Police, furnishes a privately-owned
police service dog and uses said dog in connection with the performance of his/her
patrol and law enforcement duties with the Police Department, may be paid in the
amount and in the manner set forth herein as reimbursement of costs and expenses
incurred by said employee in connection with furnishing said dog for use in the
performance of his/her official duties with the City. Reimbursement may, at the
discretion and with the approval of the City Manager or the Chief of Police, be paid to
such employee as specified herein, provided that during the period for which
reimbursement is paid hereunder:

A. Said employee keeps, maintains and furnishes a fully trained and duly certified
police service dog for use in connection with the performance of his/her patrol
and law enforcement duties with the Police Department; and said police service
dog is actually used by the employee in the performance of his/her official duties
with the Long Beach Police Department.

B. The biweekly cost and expense reimbursement will be one hundred eighty three
dollars and seventy-five cents ($183.75) per pay period.
An employee will be paid the reimbursement for any biweekly pay period during
which the employee furnishes and uses the dog for City services, including
vacation and holidays. If the employee does not use the dog for a majority of a
period, the reimbursement will not be paid.

In addition to the biweekly reimbursement provided in the preceding paragraph,
the City will reimburse an employee for veterinarian costs for on-the-job injury to
police dogs. The City will continue to provide liability insurance for on-duty/off
duty purposes at current levels.

Cc. The amount received by K-9 Officers for reimbursement for expenses of
furnishing a police service dog, $111.75 will be deemed to be sufficient to cover
all expenses of providing and servicing the police dog. Effective October 1,
2011, this pay will be converted to a percentage of top step Police Officer base
hourly rate.

In addition, for purposes of complying with the Fair Labor Standards Act, to
accommodate employees for the handling of police dogs off duty, the parties
have agreed to the following terms and conditions: of the biweekly payment, the
handler will be deemed to have spent six (6) hours off duty every fourteen (14)
calendar days at $8.00 per hour, or current State minimum wage, to feed,
exercise, clean and maintain the police dog. At the overtime rate of time and one-

LBPOA 2009-2014 11
half, this equates to $72.00 biweekly. The remainder of the biweekly payment will
be considered as sufficient reimbursement for any handling expenses.

In the event the hourly minimum wage increases during the term of this
agreement, the parties agree to re-open this provision of the agreement only and
commence negotiations on this issue to ensure the City complies with the Fair
Labor Standards Act.

Section XI - Overtime

Overtime will be assigned on a fair and equitable basis in accordance with criteria
determined and published by the Chief of Police.

Section XII - Call Back

A.

Court Appearance

Attendance at court or other quasi-judicial hearing is considered to be an official
duty assignment. Employees who are in an "off duty" status and are directed to
“Be There" or placed in an "On Call" status by the District Attorney, City
Prosecutor or the Court Affairs Sergeant, shall be compensated as follows:
(Note: An employee who enters duty status while in court shall be compensated
by overtime only for the hours worked in an off-duty capacity. For example, if an
employee has an A.M. “Be There” and an A.M. start time, that employee shall
receive actual time worked prior to the start of the shift.)

1. A.M. "On Call" (0930-1230) - 1 hour of overtime
2. P.M."On Call" (1330-1630) - 1 hour of overtime
3. A.M. "Be There" (0800-1230) - 3 hours of overtime.

An employee that has an A.M.
“Be There” and also starts work
on their normal shift during the
P.M. shall receive three hours of
overtime or actual time worked,
whichever is greater.

4. P.M. "Be There” (1231-1700) - Employees ordered to P.M. “Be
There” who were not on “Be
There” status for the A.M., will
receive 3 hours of overtime or
actual time worked, whichever is
greater.

LBPOA 2009-2014 12
10.

11.

12.

13.

An employee on a “Be There”
status on the same case from the
A.M. will receive 1/2 hour of
overtime or hours actually
worked, whichever is greater.

Employees who are in both an “On Call" and "Be There" status - 3 hours
of overtime.

Employees will receive 1 hour of straight-time compensation for “Be
There” court appearances that are cancelled with less than 24 hours
notice of their appearance, and a % hour of straight-time compensation for
“On Call” court appearances that are cancelled less than 24 hours prior to
the “On Call” start time.

For Orange and Los Angeles Counties, employees will also be credited
with driving time from the Public Safety Building to the court of
appearance and return. For appearances out of the Los Angeles or
Orange Counties, the Court Affairs Sergeant will review travel
arrangements and approve compensation for travel and court time in
advance.

Employees in a “Be There" status shall report either to Court or to the
Court Affairs Sergeant at or before the time stated on the subpoena. For
each half hour an employee is late in reporting to the Court Affairs
Sergeant, one-half hour shall be deducted from the employee's overtime.

Any employee who is in an “On Call" status and is notified to report to
court shall do so as soon as possible but in no event later than one hour
after such notification.

After being notified, the employee shall go directly to Court. Employees
attending court are in an on-duty status and are under the direct
supervision of the Court Affairs Sergeant.

Any employee who finds it necessary to be excused from a court
appearance shall direct such requests to the Court Affairs Sergeant.

Employees "On Call" shall fill out overtime cards.

Any officer wishing time off in lieu of pay must contact the Payroll Office
prior to 1630 hours of that court day.

B. Other Call - Backs

LBPOA 2009-2014

Employees who are called back to duty status for other than court
appearance will receive two (2) hours of overtime or one hour travel time
plus time actually worked, whichever is greater.

13
C. Other Standby

1. Officers assigned to receive “standby” pay will be at the discretion of the
Chief of Police.

2. Officers placed on “standby” must adhere to the controlling City
Administrative Regulations and Department policies.

3. Officers must respond to the call out location within ONE HOUR of
notification ready and available for work.

4. Officers may not consume alcoholic beverage(s) while on "standby
status".
5. The Chief of Police may consider a take home vehicle as compensation

for “standby” pay in lieu of pay.
6. On-call personnel will receive pagers at Department expense.
7. Compensation for one week standby will be nine hours of regular pay at
the straight time rate.
Section XIll - Tuition Reimbursement
Employees who are enrolled in an accredited job and/or career related college or
university study program during off duty hours, are eligible to receive reimbursement

based on the following schedule:

Semester/Quarter Payment Schedule

1.0 through 5.9 semester units $375.00
1.0 through 7.9 quarter units $375.00
6.0 or more semester units $400.00
8.0 or more quarter units $400.00
Community College $120.00
Total maximum per fiscal year $800.00

The Tuition Reimbursement program is a citywide program that is subject to annual
funding fluctuations. Requests for reimbursement will be considered on a citywide basis
in order of the date received. Reimbursement will be made until the funds budgeted for
tuition reimbursements are no longer available.

Section XIV - Physical Fitness Program

A voluntary Physical Fitness Program has been implemented by the Police Department
and revised in 2002. The amount of $194,688 plus PERS costs will be provided for the

LBPOA 2009-2014 14
Physical Fitness Program. Payment for the Physical Fitness Program will be made
once a year on the first pay period in December.

Section XV - Education Pay

All represented members are eligible to receive the following equivalent monthly rate for
the indicated degrees from a fully accredited college or university:

AA Degree (or 60 units towards a BA/BS Degree) $175
BA/BS Degree $350
MA Degree $450
(Masters)

Effective October 1, 2011, each of the above monthly rates will increase $25.

Effective October 1, 2011, all represented members who do not receive education pay
as indicated above or Intermediate POST pay, will be eligible to receive two hundred
dollars ($200) additional compensation per month for a POST Advanced Certificate.
The following terms and conditions shall apply to education pay:

1. Education Pay will begin for new officers after successful graduation from the
Long Beach Police Academy, or upon date of hire for a lateral officer who does
not attend a full Long Beach Police Academy training program.

2. Officers can receive only the highest level of education pay he/she is entitled to.
There will be no combining of education pays.

3. Officers may not receive both education and POST pay simultaneously. Any
officer who was receiving POST II (Intermediate) pay prior to October 1, 2011,

will be grandfathered and continue to receive the $260 per month amount they
were receiving prior to the discontinuation of the POST II (Intermediate) pay.

Section XVI - Longevity Pay

The City shall provide to all bargaining unit members longevity pay as compensation
under the following conditions:

1. Five percent (5%) of top step Police Officer base hourly rate for ten (10) years of
service as a Police Officer with the City of Long Beach;

2. An additional five percent (5%) of top step Police Officer base hourly rate for
fifteen (15) years of service as a Police Officer with the City of Long Beach;

3. Bargaining unit members transferring to the City as Police Officer-Lateral Entry
with California law enforcement experience prior to Long Beach are eligible for

LBPOA 2009-2014 15
longevity pay on a month for month basis if they have prior experience as a
Highway Patrol Officer, Deputy Sheriff, Municipal Police Officer, or State Police
Officer and possess a basic POST certificate issued by the State of California;

4. Bargaining unit members transferring to the City as Police Officer-Lateral Entry
with law enforcement experience outside of California are eligible for longevity
pay on a month for month basis if they possess a Basic Course Waiver (BCW)
issued by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training
and the experience is determined to be equivalent by the Chief of Police.

Section XVII - Acting Pay

The Chief of Police or designee, may designate an officer to act in a higher level
position i.e., Police Officer and Police Corporal for Police Sergeant, Police Sergeant for
Police Lieutenant/Administrator and Police Lieutenant for Commander/Administrator for
a period of 14 days in any 365 day period (commencing on the first day acting out of
classification) without compensation. Employees in acting positions will not wear the
insignia of the higher rank.

After acting duty for a 14 calendar day period, officers shall receive a 5% salary
increase over their existing pay (including all skill and incentive pays), but in no event
more than the top step of the rank above them. However, FTO and One Officer Car Pay
will be included in existing pay only if the employee has served 75% of their time in
these positions in the past year.

LBPOA 2009-2014 16
ARTICLE THREE
PAID TIME OFF BENEFITS

Section | - Vacation Scheduling

A. The following terms and conditions will apply:

1.

10.

LBPOA 2009-2014

Sign up starts in November of the preceding calendar year by seniority.
There will be two rounds of signups.

Officers first sign up for their vacation up to a maximum of four (4) weeks
or a minimum of one (1) week in one contiguous block. They cannot split
their first sign up.

Round two will begin after every officer has had an opportunity to sign up
for their first choice.

Officers shall sign up for the remainder of their vacation balance in either a
single contiguous block of their remaining time or in no more than two
separate blocks of at least one week.

All vacation selections are to be made by December 20th so that the final
vacation schedule can be completed by January 1.

The officer's total vacation will be taken within the calendar year in which
scheduled.

No accumulated unused vacation days will be carried over.

The Police Department will retain control of the total number of personnel
in a division, section, or detail allowed off for vacation at any given time.
The Police Department will allow vacation time to be used as scheduled
unless there is an emergency condition to warrant change in vacation
signup.

In the event of a voluntary transfer or promotion, the right to the selected
vacation shall be waived. However, the Department will attempt to honor
the original request.

In cases of involuntary transfers, vacation selection will be administered in
accordance with current departmental practice. If a division, section or
detail is disbanded, those officers who are reassigned involuntarily will be
allowed to take their vacation with them to new assignments, if it does not
create an overall staffing shortage in the new assignments.

a7
11.

12.

13.

Vacation sign up in the Investigation Bureau will be by detail and based on
department seniority.

Bargaining unit members with less than 20 days vacation shall be allowed
to combine other time off to equal 30 consecutive calendar days for a
month vacation one time per year. All other time off will be according to
existing policy.

Unused and accumulated carryover vacation and/or personal holiday must
be used by the end of the calendar year and will not be cashed-out unless
specifically authorized by the Chief of Police and the City Manager.

Section Il - Exchange of Vacation Days

Sworn personnel may exchange vacation days, subject to the following terms and

conditions:

1.

Both parties to the exchange must be willing to make the exchange of
vacation days and must fill out revised vacation schedules (Form PD
1000.007).

There will be a limit of one such exchange per year for any officer.

Such exchange of vacation days will be kept within the Division, Section,
Watch and/or Detail.

A minimum of five days notice must be given to each officer's supervisor.
Supervisors concerned must approve the exchange of days off.

Officers may exchange days off only with Officers of the same rank.
Exchange shall be in exact blocks, with no single days exchanged. The

minimum block of vacation days which may be exchanged shall be five (5)
days.

Section Ill - Exchange of Days Off

1.

LBPOA 2009-2014

Both parties to the exchange must be willing to make the exchange of
days off.

Such exchange of days off will be kept within the Division, Section, Watch
and/or Detail.

A minimum of five days notice must be given to each officer's supervisor.

18
4. Supervisors concerned must approve the exchange of days off.
5. Officers may exchange days off only with officers of the same rank.

6. Except in the event of illness, an Officer must report for the exchanged
days off. An officer who otherwise fails to report shall be carried "no work"
and shall be suspended from participation in the exchange program for a
period of one year. In the event of illness, that Officer will still owe the

exchange.
7. Exchange of days off must be repaid within one calendar year.
8. No overtime will be allowed when exchanging days off.
9. Supervisors approving the exchange are responsible for the proper

distribution of the completed form PD 2000.004.

Section IV - Holiday Accumulation

A.

Seven (7) holidays will be assigned to each employee on January 1st and an
additional six (6) holidays on July 1st of each year. If not used by June 30th, the
January 1st days may be carried over to be taken with the July 1st days. A
maximum of six (6) holidays earned during the calendar year may be carried over
from one calendar year to the next. Under no condition may more than 18
holidays be accumulated at any time.

This change in holiday assignment will not apply to those employees whose
primary assignments cause them to be involved with the courts or any City or
County offices that are normally closed on holidays. The above mentioned
employees will continue to take their holidays as they fall unless otherwise
directed by the Division commander.

All requests for holidays require supervisor's approval.

In all cases, the Department scheduling priority shall take precedence in order to
meet the community's needs.

Section V - Holiday Schedule

New Year's Day - January 1

Martin Luther King Day - Third Monday in January
Washington's Birthday - Third Monday in February
Memorial Day - Last Monday in May

Independence Day - July 4

Labor Day - First Monday in September

Thanksgiving Day - Fourth Thursday/Friday in November
Christmas Day - December 25

Personal Holiday Leave - (4 days)

LBPOA 2009-2014 19
Every day appointed by the President of the United States or the Governor of the State
of California to be a public holiday, or by the City Council of the City of Long Beach to
be a City holiday.

For covered employees not on a holiday in lieu schedule, four personal holidays will be
credited on January 1 each calendar year. Employees hired after January 1, will be
credited with 1.24 personal holiday hours for each full pay period of said time.
Thereafter, each January, they shall receive four personal holidays in the first pay period
that begins in January.

Employees who leave the City having taken/not taken their personal holiday leave prior
to earning it will have their separation pay debited/credited proportionately. For example,
if an employee has taken all four personal holidays and retires on June 1, he/she shall
owe the City 18.67 hours of pay for the personal holiday hours taken but not earned.

Employees on in-lieu schedules will continue to receive 13 holidays per year. Personal
holiday leave will be requested by employees and granted by the department on an
availability basis.

In no instance will employees receive more than 13 holidays per calendar year unless
authorized by the President, Governor or City Council, as indicated in paragraph 1
above; however, in the event the State legislature and/or the City Council establish a
Caesar Chavez holiday, the number of holidays per calendar will remain at 13. This also
applies to Section IV - Holiday Accumulation.

Section VI - Use of Accumulated Sick Leave for Family Illness or Doctor/Dental
Appointments

An employee shall be entitled to use a maximum of one-half (1/2) of the earned sick
leave per calendar year for absence from duty to attend to his/her ill or injured child,
parent, spouse or same-sex domestic partner. A maximum of two days may be used for
personal doctor or dental appointments.

Section VII - Preservation of Sick Leave (Vacation) During Extended Leave

Whenever a permanent employee has requested an extended leave of absence (more
than 30 days), the employee may be permitted to retain up to eighty-hours of sick
leave/vacation/holiday pay in the system. However, previously scheduled vacation time
may be preserved in addition to the 80-hour limit.

Section VIII - Integral Part Trust (Post Employment Medical Benefits)

The City of Long Beach ("City") and the Long Beach Police Officers Association
("LBPOA") agree, in accordance with the Internal Revenue Service Private Letter Ruling
(PLR-116685-99), to the establishment of a Post Employment Medical Benefits Program

LBPOA 2009-2014 20
for each represented member, through the establishment of an Integral Part Trust. The
purpose of the trust is to provide for reimbursement of medical expenses incurred upon
retirement. Deposits into the account and subsequent withdrawals for medical expenses
are governed by the Internal Revenue Code and IRS regulations.

Said Trust will be funded from the following sources:

A. Upon retirement, portions of the employee’s accumulated sick leave, which have
been exclusively designated for payment of health and/or dental insurance
premiums in accordance with Personnel Ordinance Section 2.10, may be
deposited in the employee's plan account in accordance with the following:

1.

LBPOA 2009-2014

If an employee chooses to remain in the City’s health insurance program,
the following payments will be made within the first month after the
employee's retirement, from the employee’s unused sick leave account,
until the funds in the account are exhausted:

a. The total amount of health and/or dental insurance premiums based
on the employee’s choice of City-provided plans will be paid from
the employee's unused sick leave account.

b. In addition to subsection A (1)(a) above, the City will deposit $1,200
per year, on a pre-tax basis, into the employee’s plan account
within the first month after the employee’s retirement. The amounts
will come from the employee’s unused sick leave account.

An employee who retires in any month other than December will
receive a prorated amount based on the number of full months
remaining in the calendar year after their retirement date. For
example, if an employee retires June 30, of the year, $600 will be
deposited in the employee's plan account during the month of July
($1,200/12 months = $100 x 6 months = $600).

If an employee chooses to withdraw from the City’s health and dental
insurance programs, the City will make the following payments into the
employee's plan account. These payments will come from the employee's
unused sick leave account. The payments will be made within the first
month after the employee's retirement and will be made on a pre-tax
basis.

The City shall contribute $10,752 to the employees RHS account each
year of the contract. This amount was derived by adding the City’s health
insurance contribution on the beginning date of the contract plus $100 per
month.

An employee who retires in any month other than December will receive a

prorated amount based on the number of full months remaining in the
calendar year after their retirement date.

21
In no event will the City pay any amount which exceeds the cash
equivalent value of the employee's unused sick leave hours at the
employee's effective retirement date.

B. In accordance with current City policy, when a retiree withdraws from the City’s
health insurance program and is no longer participating as an employee or
dependent, he/she will not be permitted to re-enroll at a later date.

Cc. Any represented employee who retires on or after December 1, 1998, will be
eligible for the Integral Part Trust.

D. The following will be appointed as trustees: Director of Human Resources, City
Treasurer and one representative from the Long Beach Police Officers
Association.

E. The parties agree and understand that the final parameters of the program must

be approved by the IRS and shall be subject to their rules and regulations.

Section IX - Jury Duty

Employees will be limited to forty hours of paid jury time each calendar year. Upon
request, Officers will be assigned to a day work schedule while on jury service.

LBPOA 2009-2014 22
ARTICLE FOUR
HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS

Section | - Health, Dental and Life Insurance

A.

Cc.

LBPOA 2009-2014

1.

The City shall contribute by way of obligation for health, dental and life
insurance benefits, the maximum amounts indicated below, for employees
in permanent full-time positions for the period starting:

Effective December 1, 2004 - $796 per month

This amount will be updated following the conclusion of the 2009 Plan
Year to reflect the current amount contributed per full-time position per
month.

Employees may change benefit coverage during open enrollment. A
change in benefit coverage may result in a change in the employee payroll
deduction. The employee payroll deduction will be based on the City’s
annual rate schedule, and will include any increases incurred up to the
date of the change.

Effective January 1° 2010, and every January 1°' thereafter, during the term of
this agreement, increases in the costs for the health, dental and life insurance
plans selected by employees shall be borne by the employee in the manner set
forth below. The portion of this increase paid by the employee shall be added to
the existing payroll deductions for that coverage, but will not exceed the following
amounts:

On January 1, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014, employees shall pay
30% of the increase or $25 whichever is less, over the rates in effect in the
prior year for the plan options selected.

These increases will be added to the previous payroll deduction for the
coverage selected. The City shall pay the difference between the actual
cost and the employee contributions outlined above.

On December 1, 2005, and every December 1° thereafter during the term
of the agreement, any decreases in the cost for the health, dental and life
insurance plans selected by employees shall be conveyed seventy
percent (70%) to the City and thirty percent (30%) to the employee in the
form of a rebate to the employee’s payroll deduction for the selected plan.
This section is not intended to provide a rebate if no employee deduction
is required.

The Association shall maintain one representative on the City’s Health Insurance
Advisory Committee (HIAC). The representative shall be enrolled in one of the
City’s health insurance plans.

23
Each year the Health Insurance Advisory Committee meets to review the status
and solvency of the health, dental and life insurance plans. The Committee
reviews plan costs and makes recommendations to the City Manager on plan
changes, benefit levels, and addition or deletion of plans.

The Health Insurance Advisory Committee will recommend to the City Manager
the benefits for the various plans for the period January 2010 through the term of
this agreement. Every effort should be made to have these recommendations to
the City Manager by September 15” of each year. The City Manager will
consider these recommendations prior to making his final recommendations to
the City Council for any changes to plan design. If the City Manager’s
recommendations to the City Council differ from the recommendations received
from the HIAC, the City Manger will advise the association of his
recommendations in writing, at least seven (7) calendar days before he submits
them to the City Council for approval.

Section Il - Continuation of Health Insurance for Surviving Spouse and/or Eligible

 

Dependents of Retired Employee

A.

Accumulated unused sick leave that has been designated for continuance of
health insurance coverage by an employee who has retired shall, upon the death
of the employee, be utilized for the purpose of continued payment by the City on
the basic health insurance plan premium for the spouse and/or eligible
dependents providing:

1. The retired employee has an effective retirement date of July 1, 1983 or
later; or
2. The retired employee did not predecease the surviving eligible dependent

prior to July 1, 1983.
Said premium payment shall continue until:
1. The spouse remarries;

2. The dependent child becomes 19 or is no longer a full time student in an
accredited educational institution as recognized by the City's indemnity
health insurance carrier;

3. The spouse becomes eligible for Medicare, at which time and in the same
manner as those retirees and dependents subject to Section 2.11 of the
Personnel Ordinance, the premium payment will be adjusted to pay for the
Medicare supplement plan underwritten by the City's indemnity insurance
carrier;

4. There is insufficient accumulated unused sick leave to pay the required
monthly premium.

LBPOA 2009-2014 24
Cc. Continuation of Health Insurance for Surviving Spouse and/or eligible
dependants of members deceased as a result of their employment, but not killed
in the line of duty:

1. The City will deposit 2000 hours of Sick Leave into the deceased
employees account for the purposes of providing a continuation of Health
Insurance for the Surviving Spouse and/or eligible dependants if it is
determined by a Workers’ Compensation judgment that the deceased
member's cause of death is deemed related to the member’s employment.

2. Said premium payment shall continue until:

a. The dependent child becomes 19 or is no longer a full time
student in an accredited educational institution as
recognized by the City's indemnity health insurance carrier;

b. The spouse becomes eligible for Medicare, at which time
and in the same manner as those retirees and dependents
subject to Section 2.11 of the Personnel Ordinance, the
premium payment will be adjusted to pay for the Medicare
supplement plan underwritten by the City's indemnity
insurance carrier;

c. There is insufficient accumulated unused sick leave to pay
the required monthly premium.

3. The benefits of this provision will be eligible only to the dependents of the
deceased officer at the time of his/her death.
Section Ill - Life Insurance

The City will make available to members the opportunity to purchase, at their own cost,
additional term life insurance at group rates.

LBPOA 2009-2014 25
ARTICLE FIVE
RETIREMENT

Section | - Retirement Provisions

A.

For members of the bargaining unit employed in those classifications set forth in
Appendix A on the effective date of the Agreement, the City will continue to
provide 3% at 50 pension benefits to Tier | and Tier Il employees in accordance
with the Public Employees’ Retirement System contract in effect for each of these
Tiers on the effective date of this agreement. The City shall contribute to PERS
on behalf of each bargaining unit member covered by this Agreement, a
maximum of seven-ninths (7/9) of his or her nine percent (9%) individual
employee contribution.

Should an employee hired under Tier II, terminate service prior to retirement and
elect to withdraw his/her retirement contributions from PERS, it is intended that
the City will pay to the employee two percent (2%) and applicable interest of the
employee’s regular compensation for that portion of service worked between
April 21, 1990 through June 29, 2001. Regular compensation includes
applicable wages, skill pay, incentive pay, etc., but does not include overtime,
employer contributions to deferred compensation, or other forms of
compensation not subject to PERS.

Post Retirement Health Insurance Account Supplement

Retirees who retire on or after September 30, 2009 but before their retirement
benefit level reaches what it would have been had the agreed upon midpoint
adjustment been made, will receive a supplement to their post retirement health
insurance account in accordance with the mutually agreed to supplement plan
(see Appendix B).

Pension Formula Change

If any three (3) of the following agencies: Anaheim, Glendale, Huntington Beach,
Santa Ana, Santa Monica, Torrance, Irvine, Redondo Beach, and Newport
Beach, convert to a 3% @ 55 CalPERS formula, the LBPOA agrees to
automatically convert to a 3% @ 55 CalPERS formula for new bargaining unit
members.

Report the Value of Employer-Paid Member Contribution (EPMC) - Special
Compensation

 

In accordance with Government Code Section 20636 (c), (4), pursuant to Section
20691, the City designates EPMC as compensation earnable and reports it as
such to PERS for unit employees in both Tier | and Tier II.

LBPOA 2009-2014 26
E. Reopener - Pension Plan

The parties agree to re-open the agreement on March 1, 2011 and at any time
during the term of this agreement with thirty (30) days notice by either party
solely for the purposes of discussing changes to the pension plan for bargaining
unit members. Changes will only be made by mutual agreement of both parties.

LBPOA 2009-2014 27
ARTICLE SIX
OTHER BENEFITS AND WORKING CONDITIONS

Section | - Parking for Members

Association unit members shall have the right to use, free of charge, the parking lot
between the Public Safety Building and the County Court Building and designated
spaces in the City parking structure on the Southeast corner of Broadway and Chestnut,
for the term of this Agreement, subject to the following conditions:

1.

With the advent of decentralization, the Police Department will make every
effort to provide secure and safe parking for employees at all
decentralized locations;

The existing County lot and the City parking structure shall be used. In the
event the City is unable to provide all or part of the existing county lot
permanently or temporarily, the City will provide spaces inside the area
bound by Fourth, Daisy, Pine and Ocean;

Parking decals will be issued to vehicles driven by unit members;
The Police Department will enforce all applicable City parking regulations;

The City will provide up to 290 spaces for the parking of vehicles used to
transport employees to work, including spaces for full sized, medium
sized, compact cars and motorcycles. The City will evaluate the need for
290 spaces based on decentralization, as the headquarters building will
no longer require as many spaces. The Department and Association will
meet and confer on the results of the evaluation prior to any reduction in
allocated spaces;

The City will be responsible for providing repair, cleaning, striping and
other maintenance;

The City shall abide by the above provisions unless said provisions are in
conflict with regulations promulgated by the AQMD. In said event, the City
shall meet and confer with the Association regarding the impact of any
required changes.

Section Il - Uniform Replacement

All items required to be worn in the Uniform and Equipment Specifications Manual of the
Long Beach Police Department shall be replaced at the discretion of the Police Chief or
his designee on a fair wear-and-tear or damaged basis.

LBPOA 2009-2014

28
Section Ill - One-Officer Units

A. On the effective date of the Agreement, Officers (Police Officers and Corporals)
who are assigned and who work a one-officer unit in Patrol between the hours of
1630 and 0730 will receive skill pay in an amount equal to 10% of their current
top step of rank for each hour worked in a one-officer unit.

B. The Chief of Police shall determine what units are to be designated as one-officer
units.
Cc. Selection of officers to work one-officer units will be made as follows:
1. An officer must have a minimum of 18 months of service.
2. An officer must have successfully completed Phase III Training.
3. Officers with prior service will have that prior service counted towards the

18 months. Officers with prior service shall have 12 months patrol
experience and must also successfully complete the training program as
determined by the field training Lieutenant.
Section IV - Hours and Schedules
The Chief of Police shall assign all bargaining unit members to a 4/40 work schedule
during the term of the agreement unless otherwise agreed to by the Police Officers’
Association.
Section V - Certification
In accordance with the budgeted authorized strength of the Long Beach Police
Department, the City agrees that a vacancy in a rated position may be deemed to exist
upon the last physical on duty day of the terminating employee.

Section VI - Work Permits

The Chief of Police will make the final decision, which shall be grievable.

Section VII - Internal Affairs Investigations

 

Every attempt will be made to complete internal affairs investigations within one
hundred twenty days of the filing of the initial complaint. Employees or their
representatives may request the status of their case.

LBPOA 2009-2014 29
Section Vill - Gun Reimbursement

All permanent police officers on payroll as of October 1, 2009 shall receive five hundred
dollars ($500) on the first pay check of December 2009 for providing their own firearm.
Future police officers shall receive five hundred dollars ($500) for providing their own
firearm upon successful completion of their initial probation period.

Section IX - Work Related Activities
All uniformed employees will be allowed ten (10) minutes at the beginning of their

regularly scheduled shift specifically for work related activities. In addition, they will be
allowed fifteen (15) minutes at the end of their shift for work related activities.

LBPOA 2009-2014 30
ARTICLE SEVEN
GRIEVANCES

Section | - Grievance Procedure

It is hereby agreed and understood that the following procedures shall be utilized by the
City, and by any officers who are represented by the Association as the method by
which applicable disputes are resolved.

Section Il - Definitions

A.

A grievance is an allegation by an employee that the City has violated the terms
of this Agreement.

1. Disputes over the terms of any proposed collective bargaining agreement
or Memorandum of Understanding between the City and the Association
are excluded from this procedure.

2. Disputes over matters subject to review by the Civil Service Commission
are not grievable.

3. Disputes over matters which are subject to State or Federal law and which
are reviewable by State or Federal administrative agencies are not
grievable. For example, equal employment opportunity matters.

4. A grievant is a member of the unit who has been harmed by the alleged
violation.

A"“day" is a calendar day.

Section Ill - Procedure

A.

A ccomplaint shall be presented orally or in writing directly by the employee to the
immediate supervisor within ten (10) calendar days from the event or events on
which the grievance is based.

The immediate supervisor will attempt to resolve the grievance within ten (10)
calendar days. Upon resolution of the grievance, or on the tenth day after the
grievance is presented, the supervisor shall forward a memorandum detailing the
grievance and the steps taken to resolve the grievance to the Lieutenant/mid-
manager.

The Lieutenant will attempt to resolve the grievance within ten (10) calendar
days. Upon resolution of the grievance, or on the tenth day after the grievance is
presented, the Lieutenant shall forward a memorandum detailing the grievance

LBPOA 2009-2014 31
and the steps taken to resolve the grievance to the Department Employee
Relations Officer.

Cc. The Police Department Employee Relations Officer will resolve the grievance or
he/she shall forward the grievance memorandum and, an_ additional
memorandum detailing the steps taken to resolve the grievance, to the Chief of
Police or his designee within seven (7) calendar days.

D. The Chief of Police or his designee shall meet with the grievant within ten days.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall render their decision within ten days of
hearing the grievance.

Section IV - Appeal

If the grievant is not satisfied with the results of the Informal Procedure, he/she must
appeal it on the Department Grievance Appeal Form to the Police Chief within ten (10)
days after the answer of the Deputy Chief or designee. The Police Chief or his designee
shall meet with the employee within ten (10) calendar days after submission of the
grievance to him. Failure to complete the Department form or to submit the form within
the time limit automatically disqualifies the grievance. The Police Chief or designee will
answer within ten (10) days after the meeting with the employee.

Section V - City Employee Relations Officer Hearing

A. If the grievant is not satisfied with the results of the procedure, he/she must
appeal it on the Department's Grievance Appeal Form to the City Employee
Relations Officer within ten (10) days after the answer of the Chief or designee.
Failure to complete the Department Form or to submit the form within the time
limit, automatically disqualifies the grievance.

B. After receipt of the appeal, the City Employee Relations Officer, or his designee,
shall call for a hearing between the grievant and a representative of the
Department. The hearing shall be under the direction of the City Employee
Relations Officer, or his/her designee, and will be opened within ten (10) days.
The Rules of Evidence shall not apply in such a hearing. The hearing will be
completed within five (5) days.

Cc. Awritten decision shall be given, which may affirm, amend or deny the grievance,

within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, unless otherwise mutually
agreed upon between the City and the grievant.

Section VI - Appeal From City Employee Relations Officer

 

A. If the grievant is not satisfied with the results of the City Employee Relations
Officer's decision he/she may proceed by written request either to the City

LBPOA 2009-2014 32
Manager or to arbitration within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the
decision.

B. If the matter is referred to the City Manager or designee, the hearing shall be
opened within not more than ten (10) days from the date the request is received.
The City Manager or designee may affirm, modify or deny the grievance. The
decision shall be rendered in writing within ten (10) days from the close of the
hearing. The decision of the City Manager will be final and binding. The rules of
evidence shall not apply in such a hearing.

Cc. If the matter is submitted to arbitration, the following procedure shall apply:

1.

LBPOA 2009-2014

Upon receipt of a written request from the Association to refer the disputed
matter to arbitration, the parties shall meet and attempt to jointly select an
arbitrator. If they are unable to make a joint selection in a period of time
not to exceed ten (10) calendar days, either party may request a panel of
five (5) arbitrators from the American Arbitration Association;

Upon receipt of said panel from the American Arbitration Association, the
parties shall meet within three (3) calendar days, at which time the parties
shall determine the arbitrator by the alternate strike method. A coin flip will
determine the party to strike first;

Any arbitrator appointed must be familiar with employee/management
relations in public employment;

The arbitrator shall hold such hearings and conduct such proceedings as
may be necessary, but such hearings and proceedings shall be conducted
in an expeditious and confidential manner with the involved Parties only.
Employees called as witnesses shall be released from duty as needed;

The rules of conduct of proceedings shall be according to those
procedures utilized by the American Arbitration Association;

The findings of the arbitrator shall be transmitted only to the parties to the
dispute;

Each party shall bear the expenses of presenting its own case. Calling of
witnesses by either party shall be done with a reasonable amount of
constraint;

Cost of making stenographic record shall be borne equally; the arbitrator's
fee shall be defrayed wholly by the party whose position was not
supported by the arbitrator's findings, except in the case of compromise
decisions, the arbitrator shall be empowered to allocate the fee;

The arbitrator shall not have the authority to amend, modify or add to the
provisions of the Agreement.

33
10. Any issue of arbitrability must first be decided by the arbitrator before
proceeding to a hearing on the grievance;

11. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding.

Section VII - General Provisions

A.

All time periods specified in this section may be extended by mutual consent of
the aggrieved employee(s) or his/her representative(s) and management
representative involved.

The aggrieved employee(s) and representatives(s) shall be allowed reasonable
time to participate in the grievance hearings without loss of pay for the time so
spent. The cost of witnesses called by either party shall be borne by that party if
required to testify when not otherwise required to be on duty.

A grievance shall be considered untimely if not presented by the employee(s)
within ten (10) calendar days of the alleged grievance.

Written grievances shall be on a form provided by the City.

Employees who so desire shall have the right to union representation at all
stages of this Grievance Procedure.

If the complaint is submitted to Step IV, the grievance shall be presented in
writing, and the grievance form shall contain information which:

1. Identifies the aggrieved;

2. Contains the specific nature of the grievance;

3. Indicates the time or place of its occurrence;

4. States the rule, law, regulation or policy, which is alleged to have been
violated;

5. Indicates the consideration given or steps taken to informal resolution;

6. States the corrective action desired;

7. Gives the names of any person or representative chosen by the employee

to enter the grievance;

8. Grievances over Special Detail assignments may be initiated at the
Employee Relations Officer level. The City and the Association will
expedite the procedure past that step.

LBPOA 2009-2014 34
ARTICLE EIGHT
TRANSFER POLICY

Section | - General Provisions

A. Transfer is defined as movement from one Division to another. The geographic
Patrol divisions shall be considered one Division.

B. Assignment is defined as placement within a Division.

Cc. Transfers will be made only with the approval of the Chief of Police or his
designee.

Section Il - Voluntary Transfer

A. Request for Transfer

1.

Except as provided herein, any unit member may at any time request a
transfer to an open position within the same job classification. The
voluntary transfer procedure will not be used to "bump".

An applicant selected for voluntary transfer and the command officer
making the selection may agree to a minimum and a maximum term of
duty in the assignment.

B. Selection Procedure

1.

LBPOA 2009-2014

Job announcements shall be posted for a minimum of two weeks prior to
the beginning of the selection process. The job announcement shall be
publicized throughout the department using e-mail, the Watch Report, and
the intra-department television channel.

The job announcement shall include, but is not limited to: hours and days
off, prerequisites of the position, dates that the resume or other qualifying
material shall be turned in, and the timetable of the interview process, if
any.

Once selection has been made, the command officer shall notify the
Commanding Officer/Administrator of the Personnel Division, so that the
appropriate transfer forms can be completed. If an applicant properly
grieves the transfer, the command officer will provide written reasons for
his/her decisions to be used in accordance with the established grievance
procedures.

35
Section Ill - Involuntary Transfers

A.

B.

Involuntary transfers shall be made at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

Every effort will be made to provide the affected employee with a minimum of one
pay-period notification prior to being involuntarily transferred.

An employee who believes that a proposed transfer is arbitrary or capricious may
request a meeting with the City Manager or his designee within 10 calendar days
after notification of the transfer. A proposed transfer that has been appealed as
provided herein shall not be accomplished until the decision of the City Manager
or his designee has been rendered supporting the proposed transfer.

Employees may be transferred for disciplinary purposes. The employee being
disciplined will be provided with the following in writing by the Chief of Police:

1. The reasons that the employee is being transferred.

2. Corrective action required of the employee to correct the problem that was
cause for the discipline. The employee shall have the right to appeal the
discipline in writing to the City Manager or his designee within ten (10)
calendar days of receiving written notice of transfer. The City Manager or
his designee will schedule a meeting with the employee within five days of
receiving notice from the employee.

The City Manager's decision under Section Ill, C. and D. above is final.

Section IV - Special Detail Assignments

A.

Special detail assignments shall be utilized by the Chief of Police to move
department personnel to a specific assignment for a specific period of time to
meet a department need when it is intended to return the individual to their
regular assignment at the end of a given period of time.

Special detail assignments shall not be used as a form of disciplinary action.

Special detail may be used for training or retraining.

LBPOA 2009-2014 36
ARTICLE NINE
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section | - Full Agreement

A.

It is agreed that this constitutes the full and complete Memorandum of
Understanding between the parties, and that all other matters presented by the
parties during the conduct of the meet and confer process which result in this
Memorandum of Understanding are withdrawn by both parties as matters in
dispute for the term of this Memorandum of Understanding, and may be raised
again by mutual consent only.

This section in no way inhibits or restricts the City or the Association from the
lawful conduct of the meet and confer process regarding issues not presented
during these negotiations.

Section Il - Implementation

A. This MOU is a recommendation to be jointly submitted by the Long Beach Police
Officers' Association and the City Manager to the City of Long Beach City Council
for final approval. This MOU shall not become binding upon the Association or
the City of Long Beach in whole or in part unless and until:

1. The Association has approved these provisions of the MOU in the manner
required by its constitution, by-laws, and regulations;

2. The City Council has approved the provisions of this MOU in the manner
required by law;

3. The City Council has by ordinance and/or resolution appropriated the
monies to fund the economic terms and conditions contained herein. It is
understood between the parties that the funding of all the economic terms
and conditions contained in this MOU are subject to all current and future
applicable Federal, State, and local laws, the City Charter of the City of
Long Beach, including but not limited to those relating to contracts, annual
appropriations and debt limitation.

Section Ill - Term

The term of this MOU shall commence when the terms and conditions of its
effectiveness as set forth in Article Three, Section | have been fully met, but in no event
shall this MOU become effective prior to 0001 hours October 1, 2009. This MOU and all
its rights, obligations, terms, and provisions shall expire and otherwise be fully
terminated at 2400 hours on September 30, 2014.

LBPOA 2009-2014 37
Section IV - Renegotiation

A.

In the event either party to this Memorandum of Understanding desires to modify,
amend, or renegotiate the provisions of this Memorandum, such party shall serve
upon the other party, during the period between April 15, 2014 and May 15, 2014,
its written request to commence such negotiations.

The parties shall, as soon as practical, serve upon each other their written
proposals for modification, amendment, or renegotiation. Upon receipt of said
proposals, meet and confer sessions are to commence as soon as possible, but
in no event later than June 15, 2014, and shall continue until concluded.

Neither a request to commence negotiations nor the commencement of meet and
confer negotiations as provided above during the term of this Memorandum of
Understanding shall relieve either party of its obligations under this Memorandum
of Understanding unless both parties agree in writing to modify the terms and
conditions of this Memorandum of Understanding.

Section V - Separability

A.

This Memorandum of Understanding is subject to all applicable Federal, State,
and City charter laws and regulations. If any part or provision of this
Memorandum of Understanding is in conflict or inconsistent with such applicable
regulation, or is otherwise held to be invalid or unenforceable by any tribunal of
competent jurisdiction, such part of provision shall be suspended and
superseded by such applicable law or regulations, and the remainder of this
Memorandum of Understanding shall not be affected thereby.

The provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding shall not be binding upon
the parties until approved by the City Council and ratified by the Long Beach
Police Officers’ Association general membership. The below signatories, by
affixing their signatures hereto, pledge their joint recommendation to the City
Council and the Long Beach Police Officers' Association general membership for
approval, and understand that if the Council fails to accept by ordinance or
resolution or the Long Beach Police Officers’ Association membership fails to
ratify this joint recommendation upon presentation, the Memorandum of
Understanding shall have no force or effect whatsoever.

LBPOA 2009-2014 38
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Memorandum of
Understanding to be executed this 24" day of September, 2009.

FOR THE POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION:

tte 7

 

 

 

 

 

Stephen E. James, President Michael Beckman

Police Officers' Association Police Officers’ Association
Marc Cobb Ron Trott

Police Officers! jation oss Officers' Association
Steven Lauricella Brian Be

Police Officers' Association Police Officers' Association
‘Ge ITY OF LONG BEACH: at
Patrick H. West Anthony W. Batts

City Manager Chief of Police

Suzdpfe R. Mason William Blair

uman Resources

    
 

Deputy Chief of Poli

ae a
Geffrey-daimés Craig —

Deputy Chief of Police

 

 

Jay Johnson
Police Commander

 

Police Commander

Lite Kemp, Personnel Analyst tl

   
 
  

Tara Brewer, Personnel Analyst lil

Grace Yoon

Administrative Analyst III

 

Robert E. Shannon
City Attorney

LBPOA 2009-2014 38
APPENDIX A

Section | - Classifications Represented

Basic Police Unit Police Supervisory Unit
Police Investigator — NC Police Captain

Police Officer Police Lieutenant

Police Officer —- NC Police Sergeant

Police Recruit

Section Il - Lower Entry Step for Police Recruit
While in the Police Academy, Police Recruits shall receive a salary that is 10% below
Step 1 of Police Officer. Upon being sworn in as a Police Officer, the Police Recruit will

be placed at Step 1 of the salary range for Police Officer or other appropriate step as
determined by the Chief of Police.

Section Ill - General Salary Increases

The Salary Resolution will be amended to provide for the following salary increases for
the classifications included in Section | above on the effective dates indicated:

October 1, 2010

2.00% Police Officer
1.25% Sergeant
2.00% Lieutenant

October 1, 2011

0.00% Police Officer
0.00% Sergeant
0.00% Lieutenant

October 1, 2012

3.00% Police Officer
1.50% Sergeant
3.00% Lieutenant

October 1, 2013

 

3.00% Police Officer
2.00% Sergeant
3.00% Lieutenant

LBPOA 2009-2014 40
April 1, 2014
3.00%

1.00%
3.00%

LBPOA 2009-2014

Police Officer
Sergeant
Lieutenant

41
APPENDIX B

 

2009 LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN
THE CITY OF LONG BEACH
AND
THE LONG BEACH POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

 

 

RETIREMENT SUPPLEMENT
FOR FORGOING THE SEPTEMBER 30, 2009 MIDPOINT ADJUSTMENT

 

The LBPOA, in an effort to help the City of Long Beach preserve services to the community
during the current financial situation, agrees to forgo the September 30, 2009 salary increase
equal to midpoint of the Strategic Plan Cities survey, which is expected to be 9.3 percent for
Police Officers, 3.2 percent for Sergeants, and 14.8 percent for Lieutenants, and will accept
the 2% minimum adjustment. The parties agree that forgoing the midpoint adjustment should
not impact those who will be retiring on or after September 30, 2009.

Bargaining unit members that retire from the City of Long Beach will receive an annual
adjustment to their post retirement health insurance account equivalent to the difference
between what their retirement benefit would have been had they received the midpoint
adjustment on September 30, 2009 and the amount their retirement will be based upon actual
adjustments to date. (9.3% for Police Officers and Lieutenants and 3.2% for Sergeants. For
the purposes of calculating the retirement supplement, Lieutenants will receive the same
adjustment value as Police Officers.) Their post retirement health insurance account will be
adjusted annually as long as they or their beneficiaries are still receiving retirement benefits
from CalPERS. The annual supplement will be adjusted in accordance with the member's
annual CalPERS COLA adjustment and will be equal to the amount of the member's annual
CalPERS COLA adjustment.

In an effort to incentivize retirements to reduce General Fund costs, Police Officers and
Lieutenants that retire on or before December 31, 2009 will receive an adjustment to their post
retirement health insurance account equivalent to the difference between what their retirement
benefit would have been had the 9.3% salary adjustment been made for a full year and what
their retirement benefit is on September 29, 2009. Sergeants will receive an adjustment to
their post retirement health insurance account equivalent to the difference in what their
retirement benefit would have been had they received a 5% salary adjustment for a full year
and their actual salary. (Example calculation worksheets are attached.)

 

Patrick West Date Stephen E. James Date
City Manager President
City of Long Beach Long Beach Police Officers Association

42
ev

 

 

(uauremey Boy - UEIpEY
ANSWAIddNs / SON3YaSIG

ypard juewysnipy ueIpayy YIM
quawaijey jenuuy!

yuawajddns ou jm
juawWaay jenuuy|

 

       

% juOWsIeY Jeuls

 

 
 

   
 

  

          

SUEY ES Ty TT) oS) TC

etree ser]
Eee: MME slocccel cys Rakaca' ae

yunowy uaa ey [eul4 40J suOHe|NIjeD

 

 

 

 

(eto TUE]

YET BS Ble fol) C rm
STE eae Las hho

  

Evy
EMU

0000 600z/0E/6
(1A | 40) 11P240) LNSWLSAPOY NVIGAIN /M)

Can)
UNE] Us) ids) CONSE BIS 2 Bt)
ers) Ay Seah} OS ec) Coe TED Lt} tra] J
(ejnuuO4 JUaWeNeY Ul pas) UoHesSUedWOD jENUUY jeUl4 JOJ SUOHE|NIeD

SHeo parybyyBipy 404 eye Us II
(60/L€/Z4 - 60/1/01 40.4) 40,2]ND]eD UaWa\ddng yuaWe;NEY VOd

‘S}UBUA}N!] PU S1991YjO Bd![Og 40) ajnpayog yuawajddng
yoeag Bu07 Jo Ai!I9
vv

 

  

Mo JuEWANOY JEU!

    

 

Quewieuey Boy - UeIpay\)
. $ LNAWIddNs / 3ONINSASIG

ypaig juewsnipy ueIpeyy UitM|
juewaijey jenuuy,

      

   

    

aw OY ees) Wo)

 

WAAAY % — SLL TEI)

    

juawajddns ou jm
juewajey jenuuy

  

 
 

EPMA — aWaEY IB AY
junowy juawasjay jeuly 10) suonejnaje9

 

 

 

 

LNAWLSAFOY NVIGAW /M

 

60/62/6 30 Se duioD jenuuy)

ines (esc) a
Pte BE QW %e OST Sea | te) Cer aL)
Pleo Rey SPE CE Pema Ly SP LeCean | SU sh may ENSPmT iy sy EST Wi). 1-2] ARLE LUT SLD cg Esta]
(eno jusWaEY UI pas) UOHesUedWOD jENUUY JeUI4 40} SUONEINI|eD|
S18D parybyyBipy 40j BFE UI IIA

 

GeHy - OL/L/L 404) s0y2In9]e9 yusWE|ddng yusUIEAEY YOd
S}UBUAINAI] PUe $1991} 891]0g-40J ajnpayos juawe;ddng
yoeag 6u07 jo AID
Sv

 

 

      

%o OWI [EULA

 

ANAWAT1dd NS / 3DNSYAASIG

ypaig juewsnipy ueIpeW YIM

                 

      

WaWaAY % Sup eo, au DAG JOSIA —- BINUOY Pee yN]

ayepyyig quawaijay ye aby
yunowy jUsWajey [BUly J0J SuOHe|NIeD

  

juewasjey jenuuy,

  
  

 

juawejddns ou jm
juawaijey jenuuy

 

 

 

 

%0'S 000'0 600Z/0E/6
GA | JO} P2419) LNAWLSNCGV NVIGAWN /M

60/67/6 Jo Se duiod jenuuy)

(cso
Pre ET Bla pe) TERY a Ot) to cL] lo CESS t asta BT)
Cy Ce Mee] IOMN TL) MET LeY| PES TI | )y AUC). ML (I PV RL atsy EStra]
(einWWO JUsWAINEY U! pass) UONeESUsdWOD JeNUUY jeuLy 40} SUOEINIeD

S129 paryByyBIH 404 e1eQ UF {114

 

(60/1€/Z4 - 6O/L/0L 403) 40ye|ND]e9 yUeWajddng yuEWeMNeY VOd
sjurabsas 40) ajnpeyos yuewejddng
yoeag Bu07 jo Ayo,
ov

 

Quawiamey bay - UEIPa)
ANAWAIddNS / SONSYAAAIG

ypaig juawysnipy ueIpayy YUm|
quewazjey jenuuy’

yuawajddns ou jw

60/62/6 JO SB dwiOd jenuuy

ot ET BEd | cel Td
Co IToSo MUTE] SY}UOW JO # RaW Lowey

 

lo JUaEEY |EULS

BEES Cy Tod TOS Cay)

SUE ME EGR
junowy juaWamNey [eU4 Jo} SUOHeINe5

ANBIWLSNPV NVIGAIN /M)

Coney
UCT) Coto) CSB Taito
pajsnipy Man Keg Wis OUTER) MLO LL LST BLED PLC cy aeq
(ejnuuo-j JusWaInEY Ul pas) UoHesUsdWOD jenUUY jeUl4 10} SUOHEINIeD

SHAD parybyyBiy 404 e7eq UI INF

 

(seye pue OL/L/t 404) 10yejnND]e9 yuEWe;ddng yuewesNEY YOd
syueeBieg 10) ajnpeyos yuewejddng
yoeag Buoy 10 M9
