AGREEMENT

BETWEEN

SACRAMENTO POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

AND

CITY OF SACRAMENTO

2005-2010
Section

ARTICLE 1 — RECOGNITION

1.1

ARTICLE 2 — CITY RIGHTS

2.1

ARTICLE 3 — SPOA RIGHTS,

3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

RECOGNITION ....

 

CITY RIGHTS...

 

PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS.
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS
SPOA TIME
ACCESS TO NEW EMPLOYEES

 

 

 

BRONRB

 

   
 

 

 

 

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  

 

 

ARTICLE 4 — GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE. 4
41 PURPOSE... 4
4.2 DEFINITIONS. 5
4.3 STEP ONE . 5
44 STEP TWO. 5
45 STEP THREE. 6
4.6 ARBITRATION 6
47 TIME LIMITS . 7
48 WITNESSES . 7
ARTICLE 5 — SALARY ADJUSTMENTS ......c.cccccceccscececsseseeeesecessceesessecesseseesseseeeseeessessessaeeeesesiaeate 7
5.1 2005-2006 SALARIES. 7
5.2 EQUITIES........06 7
5.3 2006-2007 SALARIES. 7
5.4 2007-2008 SALARIES. 8
5.5 2008-2009 SALARIES. 8
5.6 2009-2010 SALARIES. 8
ARTICLE 6 — SALARY ADMINISTRATION 8
6.1 ORIGINAL APPOINTMENT COMPENSATION RATE 8
6.2 ADVANCEMENT IN RATE OF COMPENSATION ... 8
6.3 EFFECT OF CLASSIFICATION CHANGE ON RATE OF COMPENSATIOI 0
6.4 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF SALARY RANGE UPON COMPENSATION 0
6.5 RATE OF COMPENSATION UPON RETURN TO CITY SERVICE 0
6.6 RATES HIGHER THAN THE TOP STEP (Y-RATE). 1
6.7 LONGEVITY PAY. 1

ARTICLE 7 — HEALTH AND WELFARE.

ARTICLE 8 - SWORN HOURS OF WORK

 

CONTRIBUTION TO FULL-TIME AND PART-TIME CAREER EMPLOYEES.
CONTRIBUTION TO NON-CAREER EMPLOYEES
AMOUNT OF CONTRIBUTION
COVERED DEPENDENTS
CASH-BACK LIMITS
LIFE INSURANCE...
ASSOCIATION REPORTING
FLEXIBLE SPENDING ACCOUNT:
RETIREES OR SURVIVOR DEPENDENTS. ........cccccccccessesssesesecsesssseseseeeeeseessssessseeesesseesseeenees

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Be
DAODAATUWWNN

 

HOURS OF WORK.
4/10 PLAN .........
FLEXIBLE HOURS
FURLOUGH/REDUCED WORKWEEK.

 
 
 
 

C©OCOaXD

i
ARTICLE 9 — OVERTIME
9.1 SWORN OVERTIME COMPENSATION
9.2 COURT OVERTIME............5.
9.3 TELEPHONE STANDBY TIME
9.4 TELEPHONE OVERTIME...
9.5 CANCELLATION OF APPEARANCES.
9.6 MISCELLANEOUS APPEARANCES.
9.7 CALL-BACK........:0c000e
9.8 SHIFT CHANGE NOTICE .

 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

NNNNBROSGO

ARTICLE 10 — SWORN SPECIAL ALLOWANCES
10.1 UNIFORMS
10.2 ON-CALL.
10.3 AD & D INSURAN'
10.4 SWORN OUT-OF-CLASSIFICATION PA
10.5 DETECTIVE PAY
10.6 TRAINING OFFICER PAY
10.7 CANINE OFFICER COMPENSATIO!

 

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

 

Nn
AAKKAWWW

 

ARTICLE 11 — SPECIAL POLICE PROGRAMS
11.1 POLICE PROFESSIONAL ACHIEVEMENT PR

 

ARTICLE 12 — PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE PROGRAM
12.1 PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE PROGRAM

ARTICLE 13 — LEAVES
13.1 HOLIDAY BENEFIT.
13.2 SICK LEAVE......
13.3 VACATION ADMINISTRATION
13.4 PREGNANCY DISABILITY LEAVE.
13.5 CATASTROPHIC LEAVE PLAN .
13.6 COURT LEAVE.....
13.7 PERSONAL LEAVE

 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
  

ARTICLE 14 — SENIORITY
14.1 SENIORITY DEFINED
14.2 SENIORITY APPLICATION

ARTICLE 15 — SWORN TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS
15.1 TRANSFER POLICY
15.2 ANNUAL PATROL D!
15.3 FILLING VACANCIES IN PATROL...
15.4 POSTING OUTSIDE OF PATROL AND SPECIALTY ASSIGNMENTS IN PATROL.
15.5 ROTATION IN OFFICE OF INVESTIGATIONS AND SPECIALTY UNITS

 

AARKRBOwW

ARTICLE 16 — LAYOFF
16.1 PURPOSE...
16.2 DEFINITIONS.
16.3 PROCEDURE.
16.4 FRINGE BENEFITS
16.5 RECALL
16.6 POLICE-RELATED OFF-DUTY EMPLOYMEN

 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

GHBDNGADAD

ARTICLE 17 — POLICE-RELATED OFF-DUTY EMPLOYMENT ..
17.1 SUPPLEMENTAL OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT
17.2 OFF-DUTY POLICE OFFICERS ASSIGNED TO PARK PATROL AND OTHER CITY-

SPONSORED EVENTS

 

ARTICLE 18 — DISPATCHERS

 
18.1 AGREEMENT APPLICABILITY
18.2 OVERTIME DEFINED
18.3 4/10 WORK SCHEDULE.
18.4 REST PERIODS
18.5 CALL-BACK...
18.6 OUT-OF-CLASSIFICATION PAY
18.7 SHIFT BIDS AND ASSIGNMENTS.
18.8 UNIFORMS .....c.ccccsesceesseeseeeeees
18.9 DAMAGE TO PRESCRIPTION GLASSE:
18.10 CONTRACTING OUT.
18.11 ©COMMUNICATIONS TRAINING OFF!
18.12 NIGHT-SHIFT PREMIUM PAY
18.13 INCENTIVES

 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 

   

ICER PAY

ARTICLE 19 - COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER
19.1 AGREEMENT APPLICABILITY
19.2 OVERTIME DEFINED.
19.3 LUNCH PERIOD......
19.4 SHIFT BID AND ASSIGNMEN
19.5 VACATION SCHEDULING
19.6 UNIFORMS
19.7 CALL-BACK.
19.8 INCENTIVES .

ARTICLE 20 — DRIVER LICENSE, REGIONAL TRANSIT MONTLHY PASS, AND PARKING. ....5!
20.1 DRIVER LICENSE POLICY ............
20.2 DRIVER LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
20.3 REGIONAL TRANSIT MONTHLY PASS .
20.4 EMPLOYEE PARKING..........
20.5 DISCOUNTED PARKING RATE.
20.6 DOWNTOWN PARKING SUBSIDY

 
 
 
 
 
  

PPRBBRBOO

 

ARTICLE 21 — DISCIPLINE
21.1 IN-LIEU DISCIPLINE PROGRAM
21.2 LETTER OF REPRIMAND
21.3 APPEALS OF FORMAL DISCIPLINE ABOVE A LETTER OF REPRIMAN
21.4 DOCUMENTED COUNSELING

 

 
  
   
 

 

ARTICLE 22 — RETIREMENT
22.1 CIVILIAN PERS RETIREMENT PLAN AND CONTRIBUTION.
22.2 SWORN PERS RETIREMENT PLAN .........::cccessessseseseeees
22.3 SWORN CITY-PAID PERS RETIREMENT CONTRIBUTION

 

 
 
 

ARTICLE 23 — MISCELLANEOUS .
23.1 NON-DISCRIMINATION.
23.2 SAFETY EQUIPMENT...
23.3 REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF DAMAGED UNIFORM ITEMS AND PERSONAL

PROPERTY
23.4 LIGHT DUTY POLICY.
23.5 MEDICAL EXAMINATION:
23.6 INCORPORATION OF PREVIOUS AGREEMENTS.
23.7 SAVINGS CLAUSE
23.8 STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
23.9 PAYROLL ERRORG.......
23.10 TUITION REIMBURSEMENT
23.11 BILINGUAL PAY
23.12 SAFETY ADVISORY COMMITTEE
23.13. TIME OFF FOR EXAMINATIONS...
23.14 EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS
23.15 TECHNOLOGY ALLOWANCE.

 

 

  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

 

 

 

iii
23.16 TERM... eccecccssessecccecscsssesesecseecssscssseeecsescsssnsesecssecssscssseeecesscesssscssaeeecesssasseseseeseasssscstsntesesssesaneetees 59

EXHIBIT A — SALARY SCHEDULE 2005-2006.........ccccccscscscsesesseecscseseescssseesecscscseesesscseseeaneesenees 61
EXHIBIT Al — SALARY SCHEDULE 2006-2007..........cccccsccscseseesessseseseescsssesesecscscsenetessesesensnensenees 62
EXHIBIT A2 — SALARY SCHEDULE 2007-2008..........cccsccccscseseesessscseseescssseseecssscseetesscsessnensesenees 63
EXHIBIT A3 — SALARY SCHEDULE 2008-2009..........c.ccccccscseseceeesscseeescscseseecscscseeetessssesenensesenees 64
EXHIBIT A4 — SALARY SCHEDULE 2009-2010..........cccccccscsesececssseseeescssseseecscscseeesecscsesenenensenees 65

EXHIBIT B —- REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT FOR DAMAGED PERSONAL PROPERTY...

 

EXHIBIT C — CANINE HANDLER AGREEMENT...........cccccccscscsssesssscseeesescseseecssscsssesesscsessasacsenees 68

EXHIBIT D — CITY WORK LOCATIONS ........cccccccscssescsssesetecsesesseetececsessseeanecsesecesscssseeesecscsseeacessees 70

iv
PREAMBLE

This AGREEMENT, hereinafter referred to as the Agreement, entered into by the
CITY OF SACRAMENTO, hereinafter referred to as the City, and SACRAMENTO
POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION, hereinafter referred to as the ASSOCIATION, has as
its purpose the promotion of harmonious labor relations between the City and the
Association, establishment of an equitable and peaceful procedure for the resolution of
differences and the establishment of rates of pay, hours of work, and other conditions of
employment.

ARTICLE 1 —- RECOGNITION
1.1. RECOGNITION

The City hereby confirms its prior certification of the Association as the recognized
employee organization for the employees in the Police Department Unit, as defined in the
City's Employer-Employee Relations Policy. The City agrees to meet and confer and
otherwise deal exclusively with the Association on all matters relating to the scope of
representation pertaining to the said employees as provided under the City's Employer-
Employee Relations Policy and authorized by law.

ARTICLE 2 - CITY RIGHTS
2.1 CITY RIGHTS

The City retains the exclusive right, among others, in accordance with and subject
to applicable laws, civil service and other regulations, and the provisions of this
Agreement, (a) to direct employees of the Police Department; (b) to hire, promote, transfer
and assign employees in positions within the Department consistent with applicable
classification specifications; (c) to dismiss employees because of lack of work or for other
reasonable cause; (d) to reprimand, demote, suspend or discharge employees for proper
cause; (e) to determine the mission of the Department, its budget, its organization, the
number of employees, and the methods and technology of performing its work; and (f) to
take whatever action may be appropriate to carry out its mission in situations of
emergency.

ARTICLE 3 - SPOA RIGHTS
3.1. PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS

a. In addition to continuing existing payroll deductions under plans to which the
City now is or shall hereafter be a contracting party, the City agrees to establish payroll
deductions for members of the Association for: (1) the normal and regular monthly
Association membership dues; and (2) monthly insurance premiums for plans sponsored
by the City or the Association, not to exceed three (3) insurance deductions per member,
including other Association-sponsored programs.
3.2

All the above payroll deductions shall be subject to the following conditions:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Such deductions shall be made pursuant to the terms and conditions
set forth in authorization forms approved by the City. Such forms
shall be those which are currently used. Any changes or
modifications shall be agreed upon between the City and Association.

Such deductions shall be made only upon submission to the Benefits
Section, Department of Human Resources, of the said authorization
form duly completed and executed by the employee and the
Association.

The Association will be responsible for submitting to the Benefits
Section the City payroll deduction input document listing any changes
in the amounts to be payroll deducted from the paychecks of
employees who have authorization forms on file with the City.

The Association agrees to indemnify, defend and hold the City
harmless against any claims made of any nature whatsoever, and
against any suit instituted against the City arising from its deductions
for dues or insurance or other programs sponsored by the
Association.

The City will remit to the Association a check for all of the deductions.

EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

Sworn Employees

(1)

The parties mutually agree to recognize the following paragraphs as a
statement of employees’ rights and incorporate them into the Internal
Affairs (IA) investigation process as follows:

When an employee is notified that he/she shall be subject to
an IA interview, he/she shall be informed whether he/she is a
witness or a principal. The employee shall normally be notified
of the nature of the investigation no later than the day before
the interview. The employee, whether called as a witness or
principal, shall be afforded the opportunity, at his/her request,
to obtain an attorney/representative and have him/her present
during the interview. If alleged misconduct could result in a
criminal prosecution, the employee shall be afforded the
opportunity to contact an attorney and have him/her present
during the criminal interrogation.

To the extent possible, employee investigative interviews shall
be conducted at a time that is consistent with the employee's
work schedule. Except for emergency situations, every effort
shall be made to schedule employee investigative interviews
during the employee's normal work hours, or during the normal
daytime hours of operation for Internal Affairs Section (IAS).

2
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All employee interviews are to be conducted consistent with
rights and privileges secured under the Constitution of the
United States. Except for emergency situations, employee
investigative interviews shall be performed at the Sacramento
Police Department.

The length of employee investigative interviews shall be of a
reasonable duration. Furthermore, the employee shall be
entitled to a reasonable number of break periods for the
purposes of personal hygiene, telephone calls and meals.

After IAS has received a complaint against an officer, such officer
shall be advised of his/her rights, per California Government Code
Section 3300 et seq. (Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights),
prior to any statement or interview being taken pertaining to such
investigation.

No employee shall have any comment adverse to his/her interest
entered in his/her City or Office departmental personnel file without
the employee having first read and signed the instrument containing
the adverse comment indicating he/she is aware that such comment
is being placed in his/her personnel file. Concurrence or an
admission of guilt of the employee is not to be implied from the
signing of the document by the employee.

In no event shall an officer be brought to IAS, for questioning, or be
required to answer allegations regarding minor complaints received
anonymously without independent corroborating information.

Documented disciplinary actions, or other related adverse
documented comments entered in the employee's Office file, shall be
removed from the Office file after one year from the date of
documentation.

b. Civilian Employees

(1)

(2)

3.3. SPOA TIME

Civilian employees shall have all representation rights provided under
applicable laws and court decisions.

No adverse comment shall be placed in an employee's City or
departmental personnel file unless the employee has read the
document containing the adverse comment and he/she is aware that
such comment is being placed in the personnel file. The signing of
the document by the employee acknowledges receipt only and does
not imply concurrence or an admission of guilt.

a. Hours Allowed and Credited The City shall allow a maximum of four
hundred (400) hours per month to the SPOA representation unit for the purpose of
conducting grievance representation and activities within the scope of its duties and
responsibilities as bargaining representative of the subject Unit. It is further agreed that

3
the hours allowed are maximum hours and the SPOA agrees they will use their total
efficiently in an effort to prevent attaining such maximum hours. The City will provide a
monthly accounting of these hours.

Appropriate procedures will be continued to assure both the City and the
SPOA that they have up-to-date information so that in the event there are abuses of this
privilege, appropriate action may be immediately taken by the City and the SPOA. In the
event special meetings are called by the City or an SPOA representative is requested to
engage in such activity by the City, such time shall not be charged against total allowable
SPOA hours.

The following SPOA representatives will charge their downtime for the
purpose of conducting SPOA activity to Cost Center 8131: President, Board members,
officers, and committee chairperson.

If the SPOA so desires, members other than those listed above may utilize
SPOA activity hours. Members other than those listed above shall notify in writing, the
appropriate manager, with twenty-four (24) hour advance notice.

b. Over-Expenditure of Hours In the event the SPOA incurs over-expended
total allowable 8131 Cost Center hours, the SPOA will make payment to the City effective
the first pay period of the month following the month in which over-expenditure occurs.
The payment to the City will be calculated on the basis of 1.30 times the hourly rate of pay
of the top step of the classification of Police Officer (ADV/BA). Such payment shall be
directed to the Accounting Division, Department of Finance, made payable to the City of
Sacramento.

3.4 ACCESS TO NEW EMPLOYEES

The Association will be given a list of career and non-career new hires upon appointment
to classifications represented by the Association. The list shall contain the name of each
new hire. On the first day of orientation, new hires shall be advised that a representative
of the Association will be present to address them at the conclusion of the workday.

ARTICLE 4 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

The City and the Association agree to implement the following grievance
procedure:

4.1 PURPOSE

a. This grievance procedure shall be used to process and resolve grievances
arising under this Agreement except to the extent that the City Charter vests jurisdiction
elsewhere.

b. This grievance procedure shall not be used to resolve any questions as to
whether or not an item is "meet and confer" within the terms of Government Code Section
3500 et. seq.

c. The purposes of this procedure are:

4
(1) to resolve grievances informally at the lowest possible level;

(2) to provide an orderly procedure for reviewing and_ resolving
grievances promptly.

4.2 DEFINITIONS

a. A grievance is a good faith complaint of one or a group of employees, or a
dispute between the City and the Association involving the interpretation, application, or
enforcement of the express terms of this Agreement.

b. As used in this procedure, the term "supervisor" means the individual who
assigns, reviews and directs the work of an employee.

c. As used in this procedure, the term “party” means an employee, the
Association, the City or their authorized representatives.

d. The employee retains all rights conferred by Sections 3500 et. seq., of the
Government Code or Civil Service Rules and Regulations of the City unless waived by
such employee.

4.3. STEP ONE

An employee who believes he/she has cause for grievance may contact his/her
supervisor alone. An employee who believes he/she has cause for grievance may contact
his/her supervisor with his/her representative. If after discussions with the supervisor, the
employee does not feel the grievance has been properly adjusted, the grievance may be
reduced to writing. The grievance statement shall include the following:

a. A statement of the grievance clearly indicating the question raised by the
grievance and the article(s) and section(s) of this Agreement.

b. The remedy or correction requested of the City.

c. The grievance form shall be signed by the grieving employee, the
date and time of presentation affixed thereto, and signed as received by the employee's
Deputy Chief.

d. The grieving employee's Deputy Chief shall assign the first level review to
the employee's supervisor, and will give his/her answer to the grievance in writing within
five (5) standard workdays from the time he/she receives the grievance in writing. The
supervisor's answer shall include the following:

(1) a complete statement of the Office's position and the facts upon
which it is based.

(2) the remedy or correction which has been offered, if any.
44 STEP TWO

An appeal to the second step shall be made within five (5) standard workdays. The
hearing of the grievance will be held within five (5) standard workdays of the second step

5
appeal. The Association representative and designated Department representative will
meet in an effort to settle the matter. The City's answer will be made five (5) standard
workdays after the hearing is held. The employee has five (5) standard workdays to
determine whether or not to appeal the grievance to the third step.

4.55 STEP THREE

a. The Association's representative and the designated representative of the
City will meet to hear grievance appealed to the third step. A grievance appealed to the
third step of the grievance procedure shall be heard within ten (10) standard workdays
after the appeal to the third step of the grievance procedure.

b. A written answer will be made within ten (10) standard workdays after the
hearing, stating the City's position.

4.6 ARBITRATION

a. If the third step answer is not satisfactory to the employee, the Association
may appeal the grievance to arbitration. The request for arbitration must be given in
writing to the designated City representative by the Association within ten (10) standard
workdays from the date of the third step answer.

b. An arbitrator may be selected by mutual agreement between the
Association's representative and the City's representative.

c. Should the representatives fail to mutually agree on an arbitrator, they shall
make a joint request to the State Mediation and Conciliation Service or the American
Arbitration Association for a list of five (5) qualified arbitrators. The parties shall each
strike two (2) names from the list and the remaining person shall be accepted as the
arbitrator. The first party to strike will be determined by the flip of a coin.

d. It is understood that the arbitrator will only interpret this Agreement and will
in no instance add to, delete from, or amend any part thereof. The arbitrator's decision
shall be final and binding on the City, the Association, and employee.

e. All fees and costs will be borne by the party losing the arbitration.

f. Either party to this Agreement shall, upon receipt of a written grievance,
have the right to refuse to handle such grievance if the aggrieved party has not followed
the steps outlined in this Article for processing a grievance.

g. No matter shall be considered as a grievance under this Article unless it is
presented in writing within thirty (30) calendar days after occurrence of the events on
which the grievance was based. With the consent of the City's third step representative
the thirty (30) day time limit for filing grievances may be extended.

h. If the City fails to respond to a grievance within the time limits specified for
that step, the grievant shall have the right to appeal to the next step. However, in the
event the City fails to respond to a third step grievance within ten (10) workdays after the
grievance hearing and the time limits have not been extended by mutual written consent,
and if the Association appeals to arbitration, the City's position at the second step shall be
the City's position at the arbitration.

6
i. The Association representative shall have the authority to settle grievances
for the Association or employees at the respective steps of the grievance procedure.

4.7 TIME LIMITS

Each party involved in the grievance procedure shall act quickly so that the
grievance may be resolved promptly. Every effort should be made to complete action
within the time limits contained in the grievance procedure, but with the written consent of
both parties the time limitation for any step may be extended.
48 WITNESSES

The City agrees that employees shall not suffer loss of compensation for time spent
as a witness at an arbitration hearing held pursuant hereto.

ARTICLE 5 - SALARY ADJUSTMENTS

5.1 2005-2006 SALARIES

Except as provided herein, effective June 25, 2005, salary ranges in terms of bi-
weekly rates shall be adjusted by five percent (5%), and are set forth in Exhibit A.

5.2 EQUITIES

a. Effective June 25, 2005, the salary for the classifications listed below shall
be adjusted as follows:

Police Sergeant 4.5%
Dispatcher II 45%
Dispatcher III 6%
b. Effective June 24, 2006, the salary the classifications listed below shall be
adjusted as follows:
Police Sergeant 2%
Dispatcher II 3%
Dispatcher III 5%
Cc. Effective June 23, 2007, the salary the classifications listed below shall be

adjusted as follows:

Police Sergeant 2%
Dispatcher II 3%
Dispatcher III 4%

5.3. 2006-2007 SALARIES

Effective June 24, 2006, salary ranges in terms of bi-weekly rates shall be adjusted
by five percent (5%), and are set forth in Exhibit A-1.
5.4 2007-2008 SALARIES

Effective June 23, 2007, salary ranges in terms of bi-weekly rates shall be adjusted
by five percent (5%), and are set forth in Exhibit A-2.

5.5 2008-2009 SALARIES

Effective June 21, 2008, salary ranges in terms of bi-weekly rates shall be adjusted
by five percent (5%), and are set forth in Exhibit A-3.

5.6 2009-2010 SALARIES

Effective June 20, 2009, salary ranges in terms of bi-weekly rates shall be adjusted
by five percent (5%), and are set forth in Exhibit A-4.

ARTICLE 6 - SALARY ADMINISTRATION
6.1. ORIGINAL APPOINTMENT COMPENSATION RATE

The rate of compensation upon original appointment shall normally be Step "A/6".
However, if the City Manager or designee finds that the appointee has extraordinary
qualifications, or that a higher step is necessary in order to recruit, appointment at any
step in the range may be made. This provision shall apply to original appointments to
career positions and appointments to non-career positions.

6.2. ©ADVANCEMENT IN RATE OF COMPENSATION

a. Advancement in Steps

(1) Upon successful completion of twenty-six (26) weeks (1,040 hours) of
service, an employee shall be advanced to the next higher step of the
salary range of the classification. Employees who thereafter maintain
a normally satisfactory level of performance shall be advanced
automatically at fifty-two (52) week (2,080 hours) intervals to
succeeding steps of the assigned salary range.

(2) Time spent on leave of absence without pay of ten (10) or less
consecutive workdays shall not affect the step increase eligibility
date. For such leaves in excess of ten (10) consecutive working
days, all leave time shall not count toward step increases.

(3) | An employee who has completed the required probationary period in
his/her current classification and who is at a salary step lower than
the top step may be advanced to any higher step in the salary range
for that classification at any time. Such step advancement under this
provision shall not be subject to the grievance procedure and shall be
at the sole discretion of the Department Head.

(4) This Section shall not apply to non-career employees.
b. Denial of Step Increase and Reduction in Grade

Employees who do not maintain a satisfactory level of performance may be
denied advancement, and may be reduced within grade upon approval of the appointing
authority. Employees in the civil service who are denied advancement, or who are
reduced in grade, shall have the right to appeal to the Civil Service Board in accordance
with its rules and regulations. (This subsection shall not apply to non-career employees.)

c. Effective Date of Payroll Changes

All payroll changes shall be effective on the first day of the bi-weekly pay
period following the date the employee became eligible for a pay increase, which bi-
weekly pay period shall begin at 12:01 a.m. Saturday of the first week, and end at 12:00
midnight on the Friday of the second week.

d. Effective Date of Salary Step Increase Upon Extension of Probationary
Period

(1) If the probationary period is extended due to light duty, sick leave, or
IOD time, the salary step increase will be delayed for the period of the
extension. However, the probationary period shall only be extended if
the time exceeds thirty (30) consecutive calendar days.

(2) For an employee in a classification with a six (6) month probationary
period who successfully completes the extended probationary period,
the period of the extension shall be included in determining the
eligibility date for the salary step increase. For example, an
employee is appointed on January 4, 1986 and works in the regular
assignment until April 11, 1986. On April 12, 1986, the employee is
on IOD time until July 4, 1986 and returns to the regular assignment
on July 5, 1986. The employee successfully completes the
probationary period on September 26, 1986. The effective date on
the salary step increase is July 5, 1986 because the period April 12,
1986 to July 4, 1986 is included in determining the salary step
eligibility date.

(3) | When the probationary period is extended for an employee in a
classification with a twelve (12) month probationary period who has
successfully completed less than twenty-six (26) weeks of service, the
employee shall be eligible for a salary step increase upon successful
completion of twenty-six (26) weeks of service, excluding the period
of the extension. The period of the extension, however, shall be
included in determining the eligibility date for the salary step increase.
The effective date of the salary step increase is determined in
accordance with the example given above.

(4) | When the probationary period is extended for an employee in a
classification with a twelve (12) month probationary period who has
successfully completed more than twenty-six (26) weeks of service
and who successfully completes the extended probationary period,
the period of the extension shall be included in determining the

9
eligibility date for the next salary step increase. The effective date of
the salary step increase is determined in accordance with the
example given above, except fifty-two (52) weeks is required rather
than twenty-six (26) weeks.

(5) If a probationary period is extended due to an unpaid leave of
absence, the period of such extension is excluded in determining the
eligibility date for a salary step increase.

6.3. EFFECT OF CLASSIFICATION CHANGE ON RATE OF COMPENSATION

a. Movement to a Higher Classification

When an employee moves from one classification to another which has a
higher salary, through examination, appointment to an exempt position, temporary
appointment in the absence of an eligible list, or reallocation, the employee shall receive
an increase at least equal to a full in-grade salary step (5%) or Step A/6 of the higher
classification, whichever is greater, but not to exceed the maximum rate of the higher
classification.

b. Movement _to Another Position in the Same _ Classification or to a
Classification With the Same Salary Range

When an employee moves to another position in the same classification or
to another classification with the same salary range, the employee shall maintain the
same salary and same anniversary date.

c. Movement to a Lower Classification

When an employee's position is reallocated to a classification with a lower
salary range, the employee shall suffer no reduction in salary, and the Y-rate provisions of
this Agreement shall apply. The salary of an employee who voluntarily demotes shall be
that salary step nearest but does not exceed such salary paid in the previous
classification.

6.4. EFFECT OF CHANGE OF SALARY RANGE UPON COMPENSATION

Whenever the salary range of a classification is adjusted upward, the salary
rate of each employee in the classification shall be adjusted to the step in the new range
which corresponds to the step received in the former range, and the employee shall retain
the current anniversary date for further increases within the new range.

6.5 RATE OF COMPENSATION UPON RETURN TO CITY SERVICE

a. An employee recalled after layoff, reinstated after a leave of absence, or
reemployed in the same classification after resignation shall return to the same salary step
paid at the time of departure.

b. If the employee is reemployed after resignation to a classification lower than
that in which last employed, the employee may receive any step, but not to exceed the
salary of the classification in which last employed. If that step is other than the maximum
step of the salary range, the anniversary date for subsequent in-grade adjustments shall

10
be twelve (12) months from the date of reemployment and each year thereafter until the
maximum step of the salary range is reached.

6.6 RATES HIGHER THAN THE TOP STEP (Y-RATE)

Whenever the salary of an employee exceeds the top step of the salary range
established for a classification, such salary shall be designated as a "Y-rate". During such
time as an employee's salary remains above the top step, the employee shall not receive
further salary increases, except that upon promotion to a higher classification, the
employee shall immediately advance to the step of the range of the higher classification
next above the "Y-rate", and be eligible for advancement to succeeding steps in the range
as outlined in this Agreement. In the event an employee is "Y-rated" below the top step,
the employee shall be permitted to advance to the maximum step of the original range.

6.7 LONGEVITY PAY

a. Employee Eligibility

For the purpose of determining the year of employee eligibility for longevity
pay as provided under Section 108 of the City Charter, only continuous full-time service
shall be considered.

(1) | Where beginning employment may be intermittent with separate
periods of employment in relief, seasonal, limited-term, temporary or
part-time positions, only that period of intermittent employment (but
excluding employment in part-time positions) immediately preceding
the date of regular full-time continuous employment and without loss
of time shall be considered.

(2) Leaves of absence without pay shall not constitute a break in service,
except such time on leave without pay, when it exceeds twenty (20)
working days in a calendar year, shall be deducted in determining the
year for an employee's eligibility. Leaves of absence granted for
military service shall be considered as full-time continuous service.

(3) Time taken off without pay, where formal leave of absence is not
required, aggregating twenty (20) or fewer days in a calendar year
shall not constitute a break in service and shall be disregarded in
computing the year for an employee's eligibility. However, if such
time taken off without pay exceeds twenty (20) days in any calendar
year, the total amount of time so taken off without pay shall be
deducted in determining the year for an employee's eligibility, but
shall not constitute a break in service.

(4) | Where employment is terminated by resignation or discharge and the
employee is subsequently reemployed, such time accumulated prior
to resignation or discharge shall be forfeited, unless the employee is
reinstated, in which case the time absent from City service shall not
be considered as a break in service, but shall be deducted in
determining the year for an employee's eligibility.

11
(5)

(6)

A layoff shall not constitute a break in service and the time
accumulated prior to the layoff shall be added to the time after
reinstatement for determining the year for an employee's eligibility.

Persons who become City employees pursuant to the provisions of
City Charter Section 93 shall receive credit for time accumulated in
the employment of the district, for purposes of determining the year
for employee eligibility.

b. Payment After Eligibility

Once it has been determined that an employee is eligible for longevity pay,
he/she shall receive the allowance as prescribed.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

When authorized leave of absence or time off aggregating twenty (20)
or more working days is taken during any employment year, longevity
payment in the July following shall be made on a pro rata basis.

Upon entrance of an employee into military service, or where an
employee is granted a leave of absence following expiration of sick
leave credits, such employee shall be paid, in the month of July
following the date such leave begins, such longevity pay earned from
his/her anniversary date of employment to the date such leave
begins, on a pro rata basis, but not to exceed the maximum yearly
allowance. Such employee shall not thereafter receive longevity pay
until his/her return to City service, when he/she shall receive, in the
month of July first following his/her return, the pro rata portion of
longevity pay from the date of return.

Upon death or retirement of an employee, such employee shall be
entitled to receive the pro rata portion of longevity earned on the date
of death or retirement, but not to exceed the maximum yearly
allowance; in all other cases of termination, longevity pay which
would have been paid in the July following had employment
continued, shall be forfeited, and there shall be no pro rata payment
for longevity.

The longevity pay granted in July of any year shall be considered to
have been earned during the preceding employment year ending on
or prior to July | of each year.

All payments for longevity shall be made on the payday covering the

first full pay period in July of each year, except as provided under (3)
of this Section.

ARTICLE 7 - HEALTH AND WELFARE

7.1. CONTRIBUTION TO FULL-TIME AND PART-TIME CAREER EMPLOYEES

a. The City agrees to make contributions (City dollars) as defined below.
Except as provided herein, the City dollars shall be applied first to the employee

12
contribution to retirement, and then through the IRS Section 125 Plan toward premiums
for City-sponsored medical, dental, disability, and/or life insurance covering the eligible
employee; and Association-sponsored short-term disability, long-term disability and
cancer intensive care insurance. One-half (1/2) of such contributions will be made to
eligible employees on each of the first two (2) paydays in a calendar month for insurance
coverage the first and second halves of that month, respectively.

b. Eligible employees shall receive a City contribution for each such pay period
if the employee is paid for one or more hours of salary. Employees who are paid less
than one hour salary per payday may continue elected coverage limited to the City's
medical, dental, and life insurance plans for up to six (6) months, by personal remittance
or other arrangement for payment of the full premiums of any insurance elected to be
continued.

c. All terms and conditions of medical, dental, disability, and basic life
insurance sponsored by the City will be as outlined in certificates of coverage and related
insurance contracts. Eligible career employees may apply the City contribution for the
City's disability plan or the Association-sponsored disability income protection plan, but
not both.

7.2 | CONTRIBUTION TO NON-CAREER EMPLOYEES

a. The City agrees to contribute City dollars as provided below, on either a
100% or 50% basis, for non-career (+1,040) employees. Except as provided herein, the
City dollars shall be applied toward the premiums for City-sponsored medical and dental
insurance plans for eligible employees and qualified dependents, if any. The amount of
City contribution for each of the first two (2) pay periods of each month shall be based on
the number of hours for which the employee was paid in that bi-weekly pay period: 64 or
more hours paid = 100% contribution; 40-63.9 hours paid = 50% contribution.

b. To be eligible for City dollars under this Section, the non-career employee
must be paid for a minimum of forty (40) hours of work on each payday. If the employee
fails to be paid for the minimum forty (40) hours necessary to receive the City contribution,
the City shall deduct from the employee's paycheck the amount needed to pay for the
insurance plans which the employee has selected. If this deduction from the employee's
paycheck cannot be made in its entirety, it is the responsibility of the individual employee
to pay for the remaining amount. Failure to do so before the end of the calendar month
including such paycheck(s) shall automatically drop the employee from the City-
sponsored insurance program until the next open enrollment period.

7.3, AMOUNT OF CONTRIBUTION

a. For full-time employees hired prior to June 30, 2001, enrolled in a City
sponsored health plan for employee only, the City shall contribute as follows:

(1) Effective January 1, 2005, the City contribution shall be $460 per
month.

(2) Effective January 1, 2008, the City contribution shall be $460 per
month or a contribution equal to lowest cost City health and dental
rate, whichever is greater.

13
b.
sponsored he
shall be $300

For full-time employees hired after June 30, 2001, enrolled in a City-
alth plan for employee only, effective January 1, 2005, the City contribution
per month or a contribution equal to lowest cost City health and dental rate,

whichever is greater.

Cc.

For a full-time employee enrolled in a City-sponsored health plan for

employee plus one dependent, the City contribution shall be as follows:

d.

1)

2)

©)

4)

5)

6)

Effective January 1, 2005, the City contribution shall be $600 per
month.

Effective January 1, 2006, the City contribution shall be $640 per
month.

Effective January 1, 2007, the City contribution shall be $680 per
month.

Effective January 1, 2008, the City contribution shall be $730 per
month.

Effective January 1, 2009, the City contribution shall be $750 per
month.

Effective January 1, 2010, the City contribution shall be $800 per
month.

For a full-time employee enrolled in a City-sponsored health plan for

employee plus two dependents, the City contribution shall be as follows:

1)

2)

©)

4)

5)

6)

 

Effective January 1, 2005, the City contribution shall be $790 per
month.

Effective January 1, 2006, the City contribution shall be $830 per
month.

Effective January 1, 2007, the City contribution shall be $880 per
month.

Effective January 1, 2008, the City contribution shall be $920 per
month.

Effective January 1, 2009, the City contribution shall be $1,000 per
month

Effective January 1, 2010, the City contribution shall be $1,125 per
month.

Part-time employees shall be prorated as indicated in 7.2(a).

14
7.4 COVERED DEPENDENTS

a. An employee who has a domestic partner, and is registered with the City
Clerk, may cover the domestic partner under the employee's City-sponsored health plan.
The employee will pay for the premium difference for the domestic partner coverage as an
out-of-pocket employee cost. In no event will the City's monthly health and welfare
contribution be used to pay for the cost of the domestic partner's coverage.

b. The definition of dependent child for purposes of health and dental
insurance shall be an unmarried dependent child from birth to age 24 if the child qualifies
as an exemption under Internal Revenue Service (IRS) rules and regulations. Dependent
child includes a grandchild living in the employee grandparent’s home, step-children,
adopted children, wards and foster children provided they qualify as the subscriber’s or
subscriber's lawful spouse’s dependent under IRS rules and regulations.

7.5 CASH-BACK LIMITS

The cash-back of City dollars from the IRS Section 125 Plan shall be limited to
career employees as follows:

a. Effective July 1, 2005, for employees hired before June 22, 2002, who waive
City-sponsored health insurance, the cash-back limit shall be $435 per month, and for
employees hired on or after June 30, 2002, who waive City-sponsored health insurance,
the cash-back shall be $300 per month.

b. Effective January 1, 2006, for employees hired before June 22, 2002, who
waive City-sponsored health insurance, the cash-back limit shall be $350 per month, and
for employees hired on or after June 30, 2002, who waive City-sponsored health
insurance, the cash-back shall be $300 per month.

c. Effective January 1, 2007, employees enrolled in a health plan for employee
only, will receive a maximum of $460 per month after retirement and IRS Section 125
benefits are deducted from that amount, and for employees who waive City-sponsored
health insurance, the cash-back shall be $275 per month.

d. Effective January 1, 2008, the cash-back for employees who waive City-
sponsored health insurance shall be $200 per month.

e. Effective January 1, 2006, employees enrolled in a health plan for employee
only, will receive a maximum of $460 per month after retirement and IRS Section 125
benefits are deducted from that amount.

f. Effective January 1, 2006, the cash-back for new hires who waive City-
sponsored health insurance shall be limited to $200 per month.

g. Part-time employees shall be prorated as indicated in 7.2(a).
7.6 LIFE INSURANCE

The City will provide basic life insurance in an amount of $4,000 to each eligible
career employee at no charge if the employee is paid one or more hours of salary per
payday on the same basis as in subsection 8.1(b). The use of the City contribution for the

15
purchase of additional life insurance shall not exceed a total of $46,000 City-sponsored
term life insurance.

7.7 ASSOCIATION REPORTING

The Association agrees to furnish to the City, on request, information on each
employee's enrollment in Association-sponsored insurance to which the City contribution
under subsection 7.1(a) of this Article may be applied. This information shall be furnished
so that the proper amounts of City contribution and employee contribution toward
insurance premiums can be clearly distinguished. Such information may include, but not
limited to, types of coverage, individual premiums, copies of enrollment cards or
application for coverage, premium rate schedules, and/or copies of itemized premium
billings.

7.8 FLEXIBLE SPENDING ACCOUNTS

The City shall establish the following Flexible Spending Accounts (FSA) as
permitted by Internal Revenue Service Regulations:

a. Out-of-pocket costs for City-sponsored health and dental insurance
premiums;
b. Unreimbursed health care expenses up to $4,800 per plan year effective

each January 1; and
c. Dependent care reimbursement.

Administrative costs shall be paid by the employees participating in Sections 7.8(b)
and (c).

7.9 RETIREES OR SURVIVOR DEPENDENTS

Eligible City retirees or survivor dependents shall receive City-paid health
insurance contributions and dental insurance benefits under the following provisions:

a. Retiree Health Insurance Contribution Rates and Dental Insurance Benefits

 

Effective January 1, 2006, the maximum monthly City-paid health insurance
contribution for eligible retirees shall be $300 per month for the retiree only and $365 per
month for the retiree with dependents.

b. Employees Retiring On or After July 1, 1992

(1) Except as provided below, to be eligible for the City contribution to
health insurance and for the City-paid dental benefit for retiree only,
the employee must retire from active service with a minimum of ten
(10) full years of City service for a service or ordinary disability
retirement, and age 50.

(2) Employees retiring with thirty (30) or more years of service shall be
eligible for the City's health insurance contribution and dental benefit
effective with the date of retirement without regard to age.

16
(3) The City's contribution for health insurance shall be as follows:

(a) Employees with a minimum ten (10) full years of service but
less than fifteen (15) full years of service shall be eligible to a
maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the City's maximum health
insurance contribution identified in subsection (a) above.

(b) Employees with a minimum fifteen (15) full years of service but
less than twenty (20) full years of service shall be eligible to a
maximum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the City's maximum
health insurance contribution identified in subsection (a)
above.

(c) Employees with a minimum of twenty (20) full years of service
shall be eligible for up to one hundred percent (100%) of the
City's maximum health insurance contribution identified in (a)
above.

(4) There shall be no eligibility for the City's health insurance contribution
or dental benefit if the employee elects to take a deferred retirement.

(5) There shall be no City-paid health insurance contribution or dental
benefit for retirees with less than ten (10) full years of City retirement
service.

c. Persons in Deferred Retirement Status As of January 1, 1991

 

Employees who have elected a deferred retirement prior to January 1, 1991
and who then elect to retire on or after July 1, 1992, shall be eligible to the City's health
insurance contribution and dental benefit as follows:

(1) A retiree with at least ten (10) full years of City service shall be
eligible for fifty percent (50%) of the City's health insurance
contribution as identified in subsection (a) above.

(2) A retiree with twenty (20) full years or more of City service shall be
eligible for one hundred percent (100%) of the City's health insurance
contribution as identified in subsection (a) above.

(3) Retirees must be at least 50 years of age.

(4) _ There is no eligibility to such health insurance contribution or dental
benefit for retirees with less than ten (10) full years of City service or
who have not attained the age minimum specified in subsection (b)
above.

d. Industrial Disabled or Death in Line of Duty Survivors

 

Retirees who receive industrial disability pensions or death in-line-of-duty
survivors will be entitled to one hundred percent (100%) of the City-paid health insurance
contribution and dental benefit for retirees regardless of years of service.

17
e. Survivor Dependents Benefits

Survivor dependents of eligible employees or retirees shall be entitled to the
same benefit amount as the employee was eligible to at the time of death.

f. Medicare Supplement

In order to maintain eligibility for the City-paid retiree health insurance
contribution, each eligible retiree and dependent shall enroll in Medicare Parts A and B
immediately after becoming eligible for such benefits.

g. Limitation Clause

No employee or retiree shall have any rights provided by this Section 7.3
after the expiration of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 8 - SWORN HOURS OF WORK
8.1 HOURS OF WORK

a. The workday for uniformed employees in the Office of Operations shall be
as follows:

(1) Patrol Division - ten (10) consecutive hours (overtime after 10 hours)

(2) Metro Division - ten (10) consecutive hours (overtime after 10 hours),
except for the Sergeants in Court Liaison and Reserves/Special
Events.

b. The workday for employees in the "Hit and Run" detail in the Office of
Operations and for employees in the Office of Investigations shall be the 4/10 schedule,
except that the Department may deviate from the 4/10 based on operational needs where
better service or other work requirements are met by such alternate schedule. Employees
on the 4/10 shall have a thirty (30) minute unpaid lunch, except that employees in the
Office of Investigations whose shift begins after 2:00 p.m. shall work a consecutive eight
(8) or ten (10) hour day. Nothing herein prevents the Department from assigning days off
throughout the week, or from establishing alternative hours or days off schedules.

c. Employees assigned to the Office of the Chief may work the 9/80 schedule.

d. The workday for all other employees shall be nine (9) consecutive hours,
which shall include a one hour unpaid lunch period.

e. Notwithstanding the above, the workday for employees who are removed
from their regular duty assignment to participate in training, shall be determined by
management. The hours of work for the remainder of the workweek after the training will
be scheduled by management in consultation with the employee.

f. The workweek shall consist of forty (40) hours.

18
8.2 4/10 PLAN

a. The City and the Association agree on the implementation of a 4/10 work
schedule to officers assigned to the Patrol Division within the Office of Operations, on July
1, 1979.

b. The City retains the unilateral right to make changes in the basic concept in
the following areas:

(1) Numbers of officers assigned to any one shift.
(2) Shift hours.

(3) Ratio of one officer to two (2) officer units.

(4) Geographic boundaries of districts and sectors.

c. Management retains the right to discontinue the 4/10 Plan, and revert to the
5/8 Plan on the date such subsequent Agreement terminates, if it appears that police
services are impaired.

d. The Association may request the right to discontinue the 4/10 Plan on the
date each subsequent Agreement terminates, and the City will revert to a 5/8 Plan.

8.3. FLEXIBLE HOURS
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 8.1 and 8.2 above, employees may alter

their assigned schedules through the use of flexible hours under the following
circumstances:

a. With approval of the supervisor; and

b. On a voluntary basis for the employee; and

c. Within the limitation of a maximum of forty (40) hours worked in the
workweek.

d. An employee may elect to work beyond the eight (8) or ten (10) hour
scheduled day, and take off an equal amount of time during the same workweek.

e. Such flexed hours shall not be considered overtime hours for purposes of
contract overtime.

f. The five (5) day notice provisions of Section 9.8 shall not apply to such
flexed hours in any assignment.

8.4 FURLOUGH/REDUCED WORKWEEK

a. Pursuant to the Furlough/Reduced Workweek Policy the City may establish
for full-time career employees a voluntary work furlough/reduced work week program
consisting of a full day of unpaid leave on a variable schedule or a work schedule which is
modified on a regular fixed basis to less than forty (40) hours per week.

19
b. The City agrees to provide thirty (30) days written notice to the Association
prior to any changes to the Furlough/Reduced Workweek Policy and agrees to meet with
the Association in accordance with Section 1.1 of the Agreement.

ARTICLE 9 - OVERTIME
9.1 SWORN OVERTIME COMPENSATION

a. Overtime shall be compensated at the rate of time and one-half. Employees
shall be entitled to overtime compensation by payment or compensating time off (CTO) at
the employee's option. Use of CTO must be approved by the Department Head or
designee. Use of CTO may be denied based on the need for backfill or emergency
needs.

b. Employees may accrue up to eighty (80) hours of CTO.

c. Employees may request a cash-out of forty (40) hours of accrued CTO time
at the regular rate of pay to be paid on or before the first paycheck in November.
Employees must request the cash-out on or before September 10th.

d. The City will not arbitrarily change nor reschedule days off or watches
(shifts) in order to prevent the payment of overtime to any employee.

e. The City can temporarily reschedule officers for work for any police service
the officer performs, except court overtime.

f. No overtime shall be paid as a result of any medical treatment or
examination.

9.2 COURT OVERTIME

a. This Section applies when an employee is subpoenaed to appear in the
litigation of a public offense in his/her capacity as a Sacramento Police Officer or City
employee. For the purposes of this Section "subpoenaed to appear" shall be defined as
being served with either a subpoena as defined in California Penal Code Sections 1326
through 1332 or a “subpoena request form" used by the Sacramento Police Department.

b. When an employee is subpoenaed to appear in court and is not scheduled
to be on duty during the time of his/her appearance, upon reporting to the court the
employee will receive a minimum of four (4) hours pay at time and one-half, or the actual
amount of time spent in court, whichever is greater.

c. When such court appearance on off-duty time requires the employee to be
in attendance before and after the lunch recess, such lunch time will be included in
determining the employee's court overtime pay.

d. When the employee's court appearance is scheduled within two (2) hours

after the end of the employee's work hours, the employee will be compensated at the rate
of time and one-half for a minimum of two (2) hours for such court appearance.

20
e. If the employee's court appearance extends beyond the two (2) hour
minimum, the employee will receive four (4) hours pay at time and one-half, or the actual
amount of time spent in court, whichever is greater.

f. When the employee's court appearance is scheduled within two (2) hours
prior to the beginning of the employee's work hours, the employee will be compensated at
the rate of time and one-half for a minimum of two (2) hours for such court appearance.

g. When an employee is on vacation more than two hundred (200) miles from
Sacramento and the vacation is interrupted by a court appearance, the employee shall be
paid a minimum of four (4) hours pay at the rate of double time for such court appearance,
and shall be given an additional vacation day for each day of court appearance and travel
time if such travel time is at least one full day. (Travel time is defined as seven (7) hours.)
However, for an employee to be eligible for compensation under this subsection the
employee must, upon receiving the subpoena, notify both his/her Division Commander
and the Court Liaison Unit of the scheduled vacation/court appearance conflict.

9.3. TELEPHONE STANDBY TIME

When an employee is placed on telephone standby by the District Attorney or the
judge of the court, the employee is required at no cost to the City to notify the Court
Liaison Unit and the employee's Division Commander of the court order. If the standby
requirement has been confirmed by the Department, the employee will be compensated at
the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times his/her regular rate of pay for only those hours
that the court is actually in session.

9.4 TELEPHONE OVERTIME

a. It is the responsibility of all employees to make all requested court, District
Attorney, and Court Liaison Unit telephone calls, so far as possible, during their normal
working hours. The employee shall make all requested calls as expeditiously as possible.

b. When an employee, whose entire scheduled shift falls between 1700 hours
and 0800 hours, is directed by the Court Liaison Unit to call the court or District Attorney
on his/her off-duty time on a scheduled workday, he/she shall receive two (2) hours pay at
the rate of time and one-half for completing the requested telephone call.

c. When an employee is directed by the Court Liaison Unit to call the court or
District Attorney on a scheduled day off, or at a specific time while not scheduled to be on
duty, he/she shall receive two (2) hours pay at the rate of time and one-half for completing
the requested telephone call.

d. All telephone calls must be completed to the specific person requesting the
call for the employee to be eligible for any compensation under this Section. However,
this provision shall not apply when an employee is directed to make telephonic contact at
a specific time. If an employee calls the District Attorney and the call is incomplete the
employee need only make one call.

e. When an employee is directed by the Court Liaison Unit to call that office
while not on duty, the employee shall receive two (2) hours pay at the rate of time and
one-half if the employee is advised by the Court Liaison Unit that he/she will not be
required to appear in court as scheduled. If the employee is advised by the Court Liaison

21
Unit that he/she will be required to appear in court, the employee will be entitled to the
four (4) hour minimum court overtime pay which will begin from the time of the telephone
call to the Court Liaison Unit.

f. All authorized telephonic overtime must be supported by an authorization
slip from the Court Liaison Unit.

g. In no case will an employee be compensated in the same day for 1) more
than one telephone call on the same case, or 2) both court overtime and telephone
overtime on the same matter. In the latter case the employee will receive the court
overtime pay as provided in Section 9.1 of this Article. If the employee is entitled to court
overtime for telephone calls or appearances in separate matters, payment shall not be
made more than once for the same period of time.

h. There shall be no telephonic overtime for an employee merely answering
his/her personal telephone.

i. This Section does not preclude the employee from contacting the court,
District Attorney, his/her office, or the Court Liaison Unit at his/her own discretion.
However, these calls will not be compensated.

9.5 CANCELLATION OF APPEARANCES

Notice of cancellation will be given to employees three (3) hours prior to court or at
the end of last shift prior to court. In the event that such notice is given within the three (3)
hours employees will receive two (2) hours of overtime at the rate of time and one-half.
Notification to employees prior to three (3) hours will eliminate overtime compensation.

9.6 MISCELLANEOUS APPEARANCES

a. When an employee is subpoenaed to appear before a hearing board or in a
Civil Court case in his/her capacity as a Sacramento Police Officer or City employee, and
is not scheduled to be on duty, the employee shall be compensated in accordance with
the court overtime provisions as set forth in subsections (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) of
Section 9.2 of this Article.

b. When an employee is requested by the City to either appear before the
City's Accident Review Board or to testify in a formal disciplinary appeal case, and is not
scheduled to be on duty, the employee shall be compensated for two (2) hours pay at the
rate of time and one-half or the actual amount of time spent, whichever is greater, for such
appearance.

9.7 CALL-BACK

When an officer is called back to work from off the police facility prior to the start of
his/her next regularly scheduled shift, the officer shall be compensated for a minimum of
four (4) hours pay at the overtime rate.

9.8 SHIFT CHANGE NOTICE

The City shall pay overtime at the rate of time and one-half for the first rescheduled
shift the officer works with less than a five (5) day notice. This Section shall not apply to

22
employees in the classification of Dispatcher I/II/IIl, employees on administrative leave,
IOD or modified/light duty, and to officers assigned to the following:

Office of the Chief

Personnel Services Division

Special Investigations Division

Gang Unit

Neighborhood Abatement Program
Career Criminal Apprehension Team

ARTICLE 10 - SWORN SPECIAL ALLOWANCES
10.1 UNIFORMS

Effective June 25, 2005, the City agrees to reimburse sworn employees in the
amount of $35.00 bi-weekly for regulation items of uniform and personal equipment that
the Police Department requires to be worn as a condition of employment.

10.2 ON-CALL

a. Effective the pay period following approval of the contract by the City
Council, sworn employees in the following assignments who are designated as “on-call”
by their respective Deputy Chief of Police shall be paid $175.00 per week in addition to
regular compensation:

Homicide Section

Sexual Assault/Child Abuse Section

Emergency Ordinance Demolition Unit

Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT)

Special Investigations Division (Limited to supervisory
employees and their alternates assigned to the rotation list)

Traffic Section

Internal Affairs Section

Professional Standards Unit

Hostage Negotiators

Career Criminal Apprehension Team (CCAT)

Gang Unit

Robbery Unit

Burglary Unit

Night Investigations/Felony Assault

b. In exceptional circumstances, with the approval of the Captain of the
employee to be contacted, the City will pay the on-call daily rate to employees who are
called when off-duty and who are required to spend more that thirty (30) minutes providing
advice to an on-duty employee.

10.3. AD &D INSURANCE

The City agrees to provide Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance in the
principal amount of $200,000 to officers while they are performing the Emergency

23
Ordinance Demolition (E.O.D.) duties, Air Operations flights, SWAT call-out duties and
Motorcycle enforcement duties.

10.4 SWORN OUT-OF-CLASSIFICATION PAY

a. When a vacancy arises above the grade of Police Officer, or when an officer
above the grade of Police Officer is absent or unavailable for his/her regularly assigned
duties, an officer from the next lower rank may be temporarily assigned by management
at the rank of Captain or higher to perform substantially all the duties of the higher
classification until such time as the absent or unavailable officer returns or the vacancy is
filled. The officer working out-of-classification shall be compensated for the duration of
the out-of-classification assignment by the payment of five (5) percent of the regular salary
he/she received prior to the out-of-classification assignment.

b. Substantially performs means, actively engaged in the supervisory functions
of the Sergeant or Lieutenant (disciplinary action, employee counseling and review,
managing and directing the employees, laying out and planning work activity). In and of
itself performing any “one” of the above tasks does not lend itself to out-of-classification
pay.

c. Eligibility for out-of-classification assignment, other than in the Patrol
Division, shall be limited to an officer on a promotional list who has been assigned for six
(6) months to the Section where the vacancy arises, unless the Police management
determines the officer to be sufficiently familiar with the new assignment.

d. Out-of-classification work shall be assigned as follows:

(1) Acting Sergeant - rotation among the Police Officers within the team
(Sergeant's command) within the Office of Operations, or Unit in the
remainder of the Department on the current or most recent Sergeant's
eligible list or a certified FTO assigned to the shift.

(2) Acting Lieutenant - rotation among the Sergeants within the Watch in
the Patrol Division or Section in the remainder of the Department on
the current or most recent Lieutenant's eligible list.

In instances where there is no officer on a current eligible list as stated
above, out-of-classification assignments shall be made at the discretion of Police
management. This Section shall not apply to out-of-classification assignments under
Section 10.6.

10.5 DETECTIVE PAY

a. Police Officers who are permanently assigned to the Office of Investigations,
Special Investigations Section, Internal Affairs Section, Warrants Unit, and Hit and Run
Detail shall receive detective pay in the amount of five percent (5%) of pay bi-weekly
during the term of such assignment. Officers assigned as School Resource Officers will
not receive this additional pay. When such assignment is terminated pursuant to Articles
14 or 15, and the officer is no longer entitled to detective pay, such loss of detective pay
shall not be considered a “punitive action" under Government Code Section 3303.

24
b. Officers temporarily assigned to the above positions shall not be entitled to
detective pay.

c. Any dispute regarding termination of an assignment as described in (a)
above shall be processed in accordance with the grievance procedure as set forth in this
agreement.

d. Nothing in this Article shall prohibit involuntary transfers and/or assignments
for just cause.

10.6 TRAINING OFFICER PAY

a. Any Police Officer who is assigned as a Training Officer (TO) shall be paid
eight and one-half percent (812 %) rate for such assignment.

b. When such assignment is terminated pursuant to Article 14 or 15, and the
Police Officer is no longer entitled to TO pay, such loss of TO pay shall not be considered
a “punitive action” subject to Government Code Section 3303.

c. An involuntary transfer or reassignment from TO shall be for just cause.

d. Any dispute including but not limited to transfer, termination of an
assignment, or reinstatement to TO status shall be processed in accordance with the
grievance procedure as set forth in this Agreement.

10.7 CANINE OFFICER COMPENSATION

a. A canine officer utilizes up to four-tenths (4/10) of an hour each day of off-
duty time caring for the dog.

b. The rate of pay for such time shall be at the rate of time and one-half (1-1/2).

c. Dog care time shall not be considered time worked for purposes of overtime
during the labor agreement.

d. To the extent required by law, dog care time shall be included in determining
the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) “hours worked" for the twenty-eight (28) day FLSA
work period, and the pay for such dog care hours shall be computed in accordance with
the FLSA.

e. Canine officers shall not be eligible for off-duty assignment pursuant to
Section 17.2 of the Agreement.

f. The Police Department shall provide food for the canines consistent with
veterinary dietary recommendations.

g. Canine officers will execute the Canine Handler Agreement (Attachment C).

25
ARTICLE 11 - SPECIAL POLICE PROGRAMS
11.1 POLICE PROFESSIONAL ACHIEVEMENT PROGRAM

The Police Professional Achievement Program shall be implemented as follows:

a. Police Officers and Police Sergeants shall receive the following educational
incentives:
Bachelors Degree 5% above base rate
Intermediate P.O.S.T. certificate 5% above base rate
Advanced P.O.S.T. certificate 5% above base rate
b. Incentives shall be additive but shall not be compounded.
c. Officers who serve a probationary period upon reemployment after

resignation, and new Police Officers hired under the lateral entry program, shall be eligible
to receive incentive pay. All other probationary officers in the classification of Police
Officer shall not be eligible to receive incentive pay until such time as they have passed
probation and attained permanent status in their classification.

ARTICLE 12 - PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE PROGRAM
12.1 PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE PROGRAM

Sworn officers hired on or after July 1, 1984, shall be required, as a condition of
continued employment, to pass on an annual basis a physical performance test. Refusal
to take the required testing or failure to pass the physical performance test shall subject
such officer to disciplinary action, up to and including termination. The City shall validate
the test as to gender and age.

ARTICLE 13 - LEAVES
13.1 HOLIDAY BENEFIT

a. The number of recognized holiday hours shall be one hundred and twelve
(112) per fiscal year which shall accrue at four (4) hours and forty (40) minutes holiday
credit on a bi-weekly basis over twenty-four (24) pay periods per year, which shall be the
first two (2) pay periods of each month. Employees in paid status for less than forty (40)
hours in a bi-weekly pay period shall accrue no holiday credit. Employees in paid status
for forty (40) or more hours shall accrue a percentage based on hours worked from 50%
up to 100%.

b. At the option of the City, the employee shall be given one day off with pay

for accrued holiday credit on a one-day for one-day basis. An employee who terminates
employment shall be paid at straight time for accrued holiday credit.

26
c. Holiday accumulations shall be limited to a total of one hundred and twelve
(112) hours. All accrued holiday time in excess of one hundred and twelve (112) hours in
any bi-weekly pay period shall be paid to the employee at his/her straight-time hourly rate.

d. Accumulated holiday time may be used in conjunction with any regularly
scheduled vacation.

e. Employee(s) may request to cash-out forty (40) hours of accrued holiday
time at the regular rate of pay to be paid on or before the first paycheck in November.
The employee must request the cash-out on or before September 10th.

f. Employees may request holiday time off in forty (40) hour increments after
all vacation bidding has been completed. The employee must have an accrued balance
of holiday time available to cover the requested time when such holiday time is approved,
or within sixty (60) days of the date scheduled off. In addition, the employee may request
holiday time off in increments of less than forty (40) hours within thirty (30) days of the
month in which it is to be used. The employee is solely responsible to insure that all time
off is available at the time of use. If the time is not accrued and available, approval of the
requested time off shall be revoked.

g. In the event that an officer's previously scheduled holiday is canceled with
less than five (5) days notice, the officer shall be compensated at the rate of time and one-
half for all hours worked and receive eight (8) hours pay in exchange for being charged
the holiday. If an officer requests a holiday with less than five (5) days notice, no above
premium payment shall be made if cancellation is made.

13.2 SICK LEAVE

a. A full-time employee shall accumulate sick leave credits at the rate of one
day per month (4 per bi-weekly pay period) on each of the first two (2) paydays in a
calendar month of employment which may be used at the discretion of the employee in
the event of illness or injury which is not job-related; however, in accordance with the
Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service Board, one-third (1/3) of accrued sick leave
may be used after exhaustion of IOD time. Such usage shall not exceed the maximum
amount of the employee's accumulation. A non-career (+1,040) employee shall earn sick
leave on a pro rata basis.

b. An employee in active service of the City eligible to accumulate sick leave
credits shall in January each year, receive a cash payment for twenty-five percent (25%)
of the unused portion of sick leave credits accumulated during the preceding calendar
year from January 1 through December 31, provided the employee shall have to his/her
credit on December 31, immediately preceding the date for payment, a total of at least
sixty (60) sick leave days accumulated. The employee shall be paid for such percentage
of sick leave accumulation at the rate of pay which the employee was receiving on
January 1 of each year in which payment is made. The amount of time for which an
employee is paid shall be deducted from the employee's total accumulation.

c. Notwithstanding the above, an employee, otherwise eligible, may elect not to

receive cash payments for accumulated sick leave by notifying the Accounting Division of
the Department of Finance in writing of such election no later than January 1 of each year.

27
d. For employees hired on or before June 30, 2005, upon retirement of an
employee eligible to accumulate sick leave credits after service for a period of not less
than twenty (20) years, such employee (or those entitled by law to the possession of the
estate of a deceased employee) shall receive payment for thirty-three and one-third
percent (33-1/3%) of the total sick leave credits accumulated (to the nearest full day) by
the employee on the date of such retirement or application of the sick leave accrual
toward PERS service credit. No employee whose services are terminated by reason of
discharge for cause, or by reason of resignation or layoff prior to the completion of twenty
(20) years service, shall be eligible for payment of any portion of accumulated sick leave
credits.

e. Employees hired on or after July 1, 2005, shall not be eligible for sick leave
cash-out, regardless of years of service.

f. The estate of a sworn officer who is killed in the line of duty shall receive
payment for one hundred percent (100%) of accumulated sick leave credit.

g. Any employee who is laid off and receives payment for thirty-three and one-
third percent (33-1/3%) of his/her total accumulated sick leave credits shall be credited
with the remaining sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66-2/3%) of his/her accumulated sick
leave credits if and when said employee is recalled. If said employee thereafter leaves
City service after being recalled and is entitled to payment of his/her accumulated sick
leave credits under this Section, said employee shall only receive payment for thirty-three
and one-third percent (33-1/3%) of those sick leave credits which accrued after the date of
recall.

h. No payments made or sick leave credits accumulated shall be construed or
deemed to constitute retirement benefits payable to employees of the City.

i. The Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service Board relating to the
administration of sick leave privileges and benefits shall apply to all eligible employees.

13.3. VACATION ADMINISTRATION

a. The time at which the employee shall be granted a vacation is at the
approval of the Department Head or designee. However, in an effort to accommodate the
employee's requested vacation schedule, the Department shall open to bid vacation
scheduling prior to January 1st of each year. Classification seniority shall govern where
more than one employee bids for the same period.

b. Non-career (+1040) employees shall be eligible to bid for vacation after all
career employees have bid. Date of last hire shall determine seniority for non-career
employees. Non-career employees shall bid for vacation on the basis of said seniority.

c. The final vacation schedule as approved by the Department Head or his/her
authorized designee shall be permanently posted in the employee work area not later than
the first Saturday in January.

d. Annual vacations applied for other than during the open bid period will be
granted with the approval of the Department Head or his/her authorized designee.

28
e. Where a career employee sustains an injury covered by workers’
compensation and has utilized all of the one year !OD/Section 4850 time and
consequently is receiving straight workers' compensation temporary disability payments,
the employee will be allowed to utilize (while off work) accrued vacation time in addition to
receiving workers’ compensation payments. The employee must take a full day's vacation
pay for each day off work. As a condition of so using such accrued vacation, however, the
employee is required to continuously utilize accrued vacation until accrued vacation is
exhausted or he/she returns to work, so that the employee is off the City payroll at the
earliest possible date. This provision also applies to holiday pay accrued and vested.

13.4 PREGNANCY DISABILITY LEAVE

The pregnancy disability benefit shall be applicable to female employees as
follows:

a. Full-time career employees who are pregnant shall be eligible for a
maximum City-paid pregnancy disability leave of four (4) weeks consisting of up to one
hundred-sixty (160) hours of continuous paid time off. Part-time career employees who
are pregnant shall be eligible for up to eighty (80) hours of continuous City-paid time off
during the four (4) week pregnancy disability leave. Unused pregnancy disability leave
shall have no cash value. Non-career employees are not eligible for the four (4) weeks of
City-paid pregnancy disability leave.

b. To be eligible for the paid leave the employee must have completed at least
2,080 hours of service from the most recent date of hire preceding the request for
pregnancy disability leave.

c. To obtain pregnancy disability leave, the employee shall submit a request for
time off and verification of medical disability for the duration of such leave.

d. Upon return from pregnancy disability leave on the date previously
authorized, employees shall be reinstated in the former department and in the
classification last held.

e. In addition to pregnancy disability leave, an eligible employee may request
parental leave for a maximum of seven (7) months of leave by utilizing accrued and
available hours of vacation, compensatory time off (CTO), holiday, sick leave and/or
unpaid leave.

13.5 CATASTROPHIC LEAVE PLAN

a. A benefit-qualified employee may donate to or receive from an
unrepresented employee, or a represented employee whose bargaining agreement
provides for such donation or receipt, usable vacation, floating holiday, management
leave, or compensating time off hours. Participation in this plan shall be voluntary. Sick
leave may not be donated under this plan.

b. All donations shall be made and accepted in writing using City-provided
forms.

c. The donation in any category must be a minimum of eight (8) hours of
usable time.

29
d. Donations shall be on an hour-for-hour basis, regardless of the pay rates of
the donor and recipient, except hours transferred between employees on the Fire
Suppression (56 hours) schedule and the non-Fire suppression (40) hours schedule shall
be adjusted by a factor of 1.4 to 1.

e. Hours to be donated shall be kept in a pledge status until used. As needed,
pledged hours shall be debited from the donor's leave balance and credited to the
recipient's usable vacation accrual balance. Once credited, the donation becomes
irrevocable. A donor terminating for any reason shall be paid for pledged but unused
leave time.

f. Management employees may only receive donations from management
employees. A non-management employee may not receive donations from a subordinate
employee where a direct supervisor/subordinate relationship exists. Any exception to this
paragraph must be approved by the City Manager or designee.

g. To be eligible to use donations, an employee must:

(1) be incapacitated and unable to work due to a prolonged catastrophic
non-industrial illness or injury which is estimated to last for at least
thirty (30) calendar days;

(2) have exhausted all usable balances, including sick leave;
(3) be on an approved leave of absence.
h. All donated hours must be used on a continuous and uninterrupted basis
and will be paid at the rate of pay and normal work schedule of the recipient, along with all

usable hours accrued, until the earliest of the following events occurs:

(1) All leave balances, including both donated and accrued leave, are
exhausted; or

(2) | The employee returns to work at his/her normal work schedule; or
(3) | The employee's employment terminates.

i. Donations received while a recipient is still utilizing previously donated and
related accrued leave time may be used immediately thereafter. Hours donated
subsequent to exhausting all donated hours shall be accumulated and utilized along with
related accrued leave hours in amounts equal to the recipient's normal bi-weekly work
hours.

j. Used donated leave time shall count toward the application of City service
and benefits in the same manner as when the employee is on paid vacation leave.

k. Used donated leave time shall be subject to the recipient's normal payroll
deductions.

I. The City shall promulgate a policy and procedure to implement and
administer catastrophic leave.

30
13.6 COURT LEAVE

a. When an employee is absent from work to testify in response to a subpoena
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction in a matter to which the employee is not a
party, or to serve on a jury or to report for jury duty examination, the employee shall be
granted pay for those hours which the employee is absent for such reason. The City may
require the employee to elect to be on telephone alert and remain on the job until such
time as called to serve jury duty. When an employee is required to be on telephone alert,
the employee will cooperate with the jury commissioner and the City will be responsible to
insure that the employee is available. Pay for work time lost shall be computed at the
employee's regular rate of pay at the time of such absence. The employee shall return all
witness fees or jury remuneration received, less transportation allowance, to the City.

b. If a swing shift or graveyard shift employee has served in excess of one-half
of the scheduled shift in court or on jury duty, he/she will notify his/her supervisor in
advance of his/her start time so he/she can be excused from his/her shift. If the employee
is on jury duty less than one-half the scheduled shift, he/she will be required to work.

c. In lieu of the shift after service on jury duty, a graveyard shift employee may
request to take off the shift prior to jury duty, provided that if the employee serves less
than one-half of the shift, he/she will be required to use vacation or other leave accruals to
cover the shift.

d. To receive pay for work time lost, an employee must provide the City with a
statement signed by an official of the court certifying the employee's service as a witness
or juror or appearance in court for such purposes, the date or dates of attendance, the
time released from attendance and the compensation paid exclusive of any transportation
and subsistence allowance.

e. This Section shall not apply to appearances arising out of the employee’s
course and scope of employment which are covered by the Court Overtime provisions of
Section 9.2 of this Agreement.

f. At the option of the employee who is assigned to serve on a jury for periods
in excess of one week, such employee may have his/her schedule adjusted to a Monday -
Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. schedule for the duration of the assignment.

13.7 PERSONAL LEAVE

a. Full-time career employees who have completed ten (10) full years of
service shall be credited with twenty-four (24) hours of personal leave. Part-time career
employees shall be credited with a prorated amount of time based on their regular
schedule.

b. Personal leave shall be posted each fiscal year until the employee has
reached fifteen (15) years of service and vacation accrual of one hundred sixty (160)
hours after which time it shall no longer be posted.

c. Use of the personal leave shall not cause overtime.

d. Personal leave shall not accumulate from fiscal year to fiscal year and shall
have no cash value. If an employee is unable to use all of the time by the end of the fiscal
31
year based on operational need, the department may approve carry-over to the next year.
In all other cases, the time shall be forfeited.

ARTICLE 14 - SENIORITY
14.1 SENIORITY DEFINED

a. Effective June 22, 1996, seniority list placement shall be defined as the date
the employee was hired as a full-time Police Officer with the Police Department.
Academy time as a Cadet shall count toward seniority if such time was part of continuous
service. Reserve Police Officer time shall not be counted toward seniority. When two (2)
or more employees are assigned to the payroll on the same date, seniority shall be
determined by the ranking in the Academy, excluding physical performance testing. In the
event of a tie in Academy scores, the tie shall be broken by lot.

b. Seniority list placement for Police Sergeants shall be based on the date of
hire to the rank. Where two (2) or more employees are promoted to the same rank on the
same date, placement on the list shall be based on relative standing on the respective
eligibility lists.

c. Placement on the seniority list shall not be affected by authorized leaves of
absence, including IOD time where such medical disability was incurred in the course and
scope of the employee's duties.

14.2 SENIORITY APPLICATION
a. Seniority list placement qualifies an employee for:

(1) Vacation preference pursuant to written procedures in each Office of
the Police Department. An employee will be permitted to exchange
previously scheduled vacation time with another employee in the
same classification and same vacation seniority unit. The employee
requesting the exchange must receive signatory approval of all
affected senior employees and submit such approval to his/her
supervisor prior to the effective date of the vacation exchange. The
vacation exchange may be denied for reasonable cause by the
Division Commander. Grievances on vacation exchange denial may
be initiated at Step 2 of the Grievance Procedure.

(2) Days off preference based on the following work units:
(a) by team in the Narcotics Division;
(b) by team in Special Enforcement Section, including Crime
Suppression Unit and Special Weapons and Tactics, and

Traffic Section, except Hit and Run Unit;

(c) Patrol Division, except preference is determined by specialty
within specialized assignments such as Canine; and

(d) by section in all other assignments.
32
b. All things being equal in terms of skill, ability, training and experience,
seniority list placement qualifies an employee for:

(1) Shift assignment preference;
(2) Specialized assignments in the Patrol Division; or
(3) Intra-department transfers.

The criteria that are considered in the category of skill, training, ability, and
experience shall be reasonably related to the particular job or assignment for which the
employee is applying.

c. If an employee is absent from his/her position for a period of six (6)
consecutive months due to a leave of absence, or twelve (12) consecutive months due to
IOD, the Department may, at that time, fill that position on a permanent basis in
accordance with the provisions of this Agreement. When the absent employee returns to
full duty, he/she will be assigned to an available opening; and if said opening is other than
in the Patrol Division, the assignment(s) will be on a temporary basis until such time as
the employee can return to the Patrol Division or receive a permanent assignment through
the intra-department transfer process.

d. Nothing in this Article shall prohibit involuntary transfers and/or assignments
for just cause.

ARTICLE 15 - SWORN TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS
15.1 TRANSFER POLICY

Any sworn member of the Unit shall have a minimum of two (2) years of continuous
service in a sworn capacity with the Sacramento Police Department prior to being eligible
for consideration for any intra-departmental transfer from uniform police work to a non-
uniform police position or specialty assignment. This Section shall not apply to any
members of the units who are assigned to any "undercover" investigations.

15.2 ANNUAL PATROL DIVISION SIGN-UP

a. There will be an annual watch and job sign-up in the Patrol Division, which
shall be implemented on the first Saturday of the first pay period in January. Officers shall
sign-up based on seniority in accordance with Section 15.2(e). In filling positions,
management may deviate from seniority for just cause. Additionally, all known vacancies
on November 1, which the Department plans to fill, shall have an effective date of transfer
to coincide with this Patrol Division implementation date.

b. The sign-up process shall include all positions in patrol, and FTO cars,
excluding specialized assignments such as K-9, Special Weapons and Tactics, Traffic,
Problem-Oriented Policing, Bicycle Beats, Mounted Unit and Air Ops.

c. All Sergeants assigned to the Patrol Division on the last Friday in October
shall be included in the sign-up. Sergeant(s) who have submitted a transfer request to

33
available positions in the Patrol Division sign-up by the first Friday in October shall be
included in the sign-up based on seniority if a vacancy exists.

d. All officers assigned to the Patrol Division on the last Friday in October shall
be included in the sign-up. Officer(s) who have submitted a transfer request to available
positions in the Patrol Division by the first Friday in October shall be included in the sign-
up based on seniority if a vacancy exists.

e. Sign-up shall be conducted in person, by proxy, or by telephone at the time
assigned to each officer based on descending seniority. At the time of sign-up the officer
shall select the watch, days off, car, team for assignment, and vacation. Once the sign up
is completed the final listing by watch shall be posted. An officer’s sworn seniority will be
used for the purpose of determining primary district seniority on overlap days. The “junior”
officer may be moved for the needs of the Department in the event the two primary district
officers work on the same day. This assignment will be decided at shift sign-ups and will
not change over the course of the patrol year.

f. At the time of sign-ups, an FTO may choose an FTO car or elect to drop out
of the program and choose an available patrol spot based on their seniority.

15.3 FILLING VACANCIES IN PATROL

a. When a permanent vacancy as defined in subsection (c) below arises in a
primary car which is defined as a district car or patrol wagon position which provides the
officer a biddable right to a specific assignment, excluding specialty assignments, the
decision to fill such vacancy shall be at management's discretion. If the position is to be
filled, it shall be posted on Department bulletin boards for fourteen (14) calendar days
prior to the filling of the vacancy. The posting shall indicate the anticipated date upon
which the vacancy will be filled. Primary cars which become vacant as a result of such
post and bid process shall be filled at the discretion of management in the same manner.

b. The position shall be filled by seniority from among the applicants in that
classification in the Patrol Division except that management may deviate from seniority for
just cause. Management may fill the position at its discretion pending the completion of
the post and bid process.

c. Permanent vacancies are those which arise due to retirement, death,
removal, resignation, promotion, or where the employee is absent from a position for a
period of six (6) consecutive months due to paid or unpaid leave of absence, or twelve
(12) consecutive months due to IOD. A return to work of one hundred sixty (160) hours or
less shall not constitute a break in consecutive time off, provided that a new illness or
injury shall constitute a separate episode.

d. Temporary vacancies, including leaves of absence of less than six (6) or
twelve (12) months as applicable, may be filled on a temporary basis. If such position is
to be filled for the duration of the temporary vacancy it shall be posted as in Section
15.3(a). The employee assigned as a result of the posting shall have no right to their prior
bid position if any, or to the temporary vacancy upon return of the incumbent employee,
and shall be assigned a position at the discretion of management.

34
e. Nothing in this Section shall preclude management from posting positions
when there is no contractual obligation to do so, including as-assigned cars.

f. In the event there is no response to the posting, management may fill the
vacancy based upon transfer requests or reassignment of probationary officers or those
with less than six (6) months off probation.

g. Nothing in this Article shall preclude the Department's right to assign
probationary employees as needed to accomplish training needs and to make temporary
assignments of employees, not to exceed ninety (90) calendar days, to meet operational
needs.

15.4 POSTING OUTSIDE OF PATROL AND SPECIALTY ASSIGNMENTS IN PATROL

a. When a permanent vacancy arises as defined in Section 15.3 (c), and said
vacancy or vacancies are to be filled by transfer request, a notice of such vacancy or
vacancies shall be posted on selective Department bulletin boards fourteen (14) calendar
days prior to the regular filling of a vacancy or vacancies. This Section shall not apply to
any position in the Office of the Chief, or to Patrol vacancies.

b. A vacancy or vacancies resulting from the filling of the original posted
opening shall not be subject to this procedure during the sixty (60) calendar day period. If
a resulting vacancy or vacancies is not filled within the sixty (60) calendar day period, that
vacancy will be posted as described above.

c. It is the employee's responsibility to submit transfer requests for each
position to which they wish to transfer. Such transfer requests shall be valid for one year
from date of submission.

d. In the event of a job posting, the posting announcement, including selection
criteria, shall be forwarded to the Association five (5) working days prior to its being
posted. Upon request of the Association, the City will consult with the Association on any
changes to the selection criteria prior to the implementation of such a change.

e. Nothing in this Article shall preclude the Department's right to assign
probationary employees as needed to accomplish training needs and to make temporary
assignments of employees to meet operational needs.

f. Should a candidate not be chosen for an assignment, the candidate may
request a written or verbal explanation for the denial. This request shall be completed
within thirty (30) days.

15.5 ROTATION IN OFFICE OF INVESTIGATIONS AND SPECIALTY UNITS

a. All officers and sergeants in the Office of Investigations and specialty
assignments in the Offices of Operations and Technical Services shall be assigned a
rotation date upon assignment. The normal rotation shall be after three (3) years. Such
employees may be extended in one year increments to a maximum of five (5) years at the
discretion of the Deputy Chief.

b. Additional extensions beyond the five-year limit may be granted at the
discretion of the Chief of Police, or his designee.

35
c. All specialty assignments as described above shall have an annual review
for retention.

d. Employees currently assigned to the Office of Investigations and specialty
assignments in the Offices of Operations and Technical Services who have not been
assigned a rotation date shall be grandparented with no rotation date, subject to annual
review for retention as indicated in (c) above.

ARTICLE 16 —- LAYOFF
16.1 PURPOSE

This Article provides the procedure to be followed when an employee is to be
displaced/laid off from his/her position due to layoff.

16.2 DEFINITIONS

a. Layoff: A layoff shall be defined as the dismissal of at least one employee
due to lack of work, lack of funds, abolishment of position.

b. Seniority:

(1) Sworn seniority shall be as defined in Section 14.1, subsections (a),
(b) and (c).

(2) Seniority placement for civilian classifications shall be based on
classification seniority, defined as the effective date of probationary
appointment to the employee's present job classification including any
prior time in the classification or time spent in a higher classification,
but less any time spent in a lower classification due to downgrade.
The term higher classification shall mean a job classification in which
the top rate of pay is greater than the top rate of pay of the
employee's present classification. For those classifications which
have flexible staffing as defined in the Civil Service Board Rules and
Regulations and provided for in the classification specifications,
classification seniority shall be defined as the effective date of
probationary appointment to the lowest classification in the
classification series. When two (2) or more employees have the
same classification seniority ties shall be broken by the City service
seniority. City service seniority is defined as the effective date of
appointment to the employee's first career classification, or the
effective date of appointment to the employee's first full-time
classification(s) which immediately preceded a career appointment,
whichever is greater. For employees appointed to the classifications
of Community Service Officer and Dispatcher |, in the event of a tie,
seniority ranking shall be based on the Academy test ranking. In the
event of a tie in such scores, seniority shall be determined by lot.

c. Seniority Adjustments: Seniority shall be adjusted (reduced) in calendar
days to reflect:

36
(1) Time spent on layoff, if the employee accepts layoff in lieu of
downgrade as provided in Section 16.3.

(2) That period between an employee's resignation and subsequent
reinstatement to the same classification. An employee who is
reinstated and who then completes the probationary period, if any, in
the position to which he/she was reinstated may count the seniority
which he/she accumulated prior to resignation.

d. Termination of Seniority: Termination of seniority shall occur upon:
(1) Resignation, except as provided in Section 16.2 above.
(2) Discharge.
(3) Retirement.
(4) Layoff in excess of five (5) consecutive years out of the City service.

(5) Failure to comply, report, or respond to a recall notice within fourteen
(14) calendar days from the date of postmark on the recall notice.

e. Downgrade: A downgrade shall be defined as a change in job classification
of which the top salary is less than the top salary of the employee's present classification,
due to a layoff. Sworn employees shall only be allowed to downgrade to the appropriate
classification in which the employee held a sworn position. Salary as referred to in this
Article shall be the monthly salary range and respective salary step for the affected
classification as identified in the salary schedule. An employee who is downgraded
pursuant to this Article shall be paid in the new classification the salary range step closest
to the monthly pay rate received immediately prior to downgrade.

16.3 PROCEDURE
In the event of a layoff the following procedure shall be utilized:

a. In the affected job classification the employee(s) with the least classification
seniority shall be the first displaced.

b. An employee who is displaced from the classifications of Police Sergeant
and Police Lieutenant shall be entitled to downgrade by asserting an earlier date of rank in
the new classification. In the event a Police Lieutenant is laid off who has never held the
rank of Sergeant, he/she shall downgrade to Police Officer by date of rank. If such a
downgrade occurs, the downgrading employee shall replace the employee in the new job
classification with the most recent date of rank.

c. An employee who is displaced from the classification of Dispatcher III shall
be entitled to downgrade to Dispatcher II, provided that the downgrading employee has
greater City service seniority. The displaced employee shall then be laid off.

d. An employee may accept a layoff in lieu of a downgrade under Section
16.3(b) or (c) of this Article, by written notification to the Office of Labor Relations within
forty-eight (48) hours of receiving notice of layoff. Where the employee accepts a layoff in

37
lieu of a downgrade, said employee shall forfeit all recall rights except to a vacancy within
the same classification from which the employee was laid off.

e. The application of this procedure is not intended to extend job assignment,
work organization, or departmental preference to any employee affected by a layoff.

f. In the event of a layoff, the City shall send by certified mail a layoff notice to
all affected employees. Such notice shall be postmarked at least fourteen (14) calendar
days in advance of the effective date of layoff. Such layoff notice shall be mailed to the
employee's address currently printed on the employee's paycheck, and shall be deemed
appropriate notice. The employee(s) who is on a paid or unpaid leave shall be affected by
the layoff in accordance with the provisions of this Article in the same manner as all other
employees. However, the employee who is on sick leave or IOD status on the date of the
layoff notice shall not be laid off or downgraded until the employee returns to work; except
that the effective date for recall purposes shall be the date of actual layoff as stated on the
layoff notice.

16.4 FRINGE BENEFITS

a. Employees laid off shall be paid sick leave, vacation, holiday accrual,
longevity, and similar benefits per applicable ordinances and rules. Employees being
recalled who received a sick leave payoff at the time of layoff, shall have the
uncompensated portion of their sick leave balance restored; provided, however, that only
those sick leave hours accrued after recall shall be applied to sick leave payoff related to
a subsequent termination.

b. Employees enrolled in City insurance programs may continue elected
coverage limited to the City's medical, dental, and life insurance plans for a period up to
six (6) months by advanced personal remittance for each month's premium for the cost of
such coverage.

c. Assistance with this insurance option, unemployment benefits, and the
availability of retirement benefits or refunds as governed by the City Charter will be
provided by the Personnel Services Division, Department of Human Resources, on the
request of laid off employees.

16.5 RECALL

a. When a vacancy occurs in a classification, the employee(s) eligible to return
to that classification shall be recalled on the basis of date of rank in that classification for
sworn employees, and City service date for civilian employees. Employees with
permanent status shall be entitled to recall rights, for a period of five (5) consecutive years
from the date of layoff/displacement. When a recall list exists and an employee is on a
reinstatement list due to a medical leave of absence, such employee will be merged with
employees on the established layoff eligibility list based on seniority. Employees with
probationary status shall have recall rights for a period of two (2) consecutive years from
the date of layoff/displacement, but upon recall, shall start a new probationary period. An
employee who has downgraded and has not been recalled to the classification where
permanent status is held within the five (5) year period shall lose all recall rights and shall
gain permanent status in the classification to which the employee downgraded.

38
b. When a vacancy exists and employees are to be recalled, notice of the
opening(s) shall be sent to the last mailing address as furnished by the laid off employee.
To expedite the recall, more than one employee may be notified of an opening, but priority
will be given to employees with the earliest date of rank in the classification where the
vacancy exists. This recall notice shall be by certified mail and the employee shall have
fourteen (14) calendar days to report to work from the postmark date on the recall notice.
An employee who is laid off shall be given a physical examination prior to or at the time of
layoffs and upon his/her recall. Upon being recalled the employee shall meet the medical
standards established by the layoff physical, with consideration of normal changes of
physical condition (aging) occurring while laid off. The standard shall be established on
an individual basis.

16.6 POLICE-RELATED OFF-DUTY EMPLOYMENT

During the period of any layoffs, Article 17, Police-Related Off-Duty Employment,
shall be amended to provide first call for any off-duty employment to those officers who
have been laid off or downgraded until such employee is employed as a sworn officer in
another jurisdiction, or declines a recall offer. This will amend Section 17.1(d) so that all
laid off or downgraded officers will not be on a rotating list but will be first called for any
job. If there are not sufficient laid-off officers to fill the needs of a job requirement then
Section 17.1(d) will apply.

ARTICLE 17 —- POLICE-RELATED OFF-DUTY EMPLOYMENT

The Sacramento Police Department will administer police-related off-duty
employment in accordance with the following policy:

17.1. SUPPLEMENTAL OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT
a. General

The Sacramento Police Department shall allow citizens and governmental
agencies to contract with the City for additional police service in the form of uniformed
Police Officers providing foot patrol of an event or a piece of property. The Chief of Police
or designated representative shall determine which events officers will be allowed to work
pursuant to this Article. The City, by virtue of this Article, shall not be limited in its use of
private security. Use of reserve officers shall be in accordance with the letter of
understanding dated October 7, 2004.

b. Officer Assignment

(1) The officers assigned will be volunteers working off of an
availability/rotation list. The number and rank of officers assigned will
be determined by the Chief's designated representative.

(2) Sergeants may work in assignments designated for Police Officers,

however, they will be paid at the rate of the top step Police Officer
(ADV/BA) at time and one-half (1-1/2).

39
(3)

(4)

(5)

An officer will receive a minimum of four (4) hours supplemental
outside employment pay for each assignment regardless of actual
time worked.

Officers who desire to be placed on the availability/rotation list must
have completed their Police Officer probationary period. Officers on
sick leave, IOD leave, "light duty", leave of absence, or on suspension
shall not be eligible. No officer will be assigned from the
availability/rotation list within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of the
shift of a day taken as sick leave. Officers, while assigned to jobs
under the supplemental outside employment rate, shall be subject to
all rules, orders, and procedures of the Police Department. In no
event shall an officer performing supplemental outside employment
work be assigned to a job site where a labor union picket line has
been established.

There must be at least an eight (8) hour spread between the end of a
supplemental outside employment assignment and the start of a
regular assignment.

c. Rate of Pay

The supplemental off-duty employment rate for hours worked under this
program will be time and one-half (1-1/2) the regular rate of pay. The cost charged to
citizens or agencies will be the supplemental outside employment rate, plus administrative
costs, including, but not limited to, workers' compensation, liability insurance, and clerical

costs.

d. Procedure

(1)

(2)

(3)

All eligible officers who desire employment at the supplemental off-
duty employment rate will complete a written request form stating
name, address, telephone number, rank, present duty assignment,
normal work hours, and days off. The form will be forwarded to the
Chief's designated representative where the names will be placed on
an availability/rotation list in alphabetical order. Each officer will be
responsible for updating information on the form.

The availability/rotation list will be the basis for all assignments of
officers. Citizens or agencies may request the same officer(s) at a
series of events or jobs. In such cases the officer's name shall be
temporarily removed from the availability/rotation list until the number
of hours worked, in a month, by all officers is approximately the same.

Any officer who fails to accept three (3) assignments within a two (2)
month period without a valid excuse (sick, vacation or shift changes)
will be removed from the list. An officer who is removed from the
availability/rotation list is not eligible for reinstatement for a period of
six (6) months.

40
(4) As officers apply for placement on the availability/rotation list, their
names will be placed in alphabetical order on the list.

17.2 OFF-DUTY POLICE OFFICERS ASSIGNED TO PARK PATROL AND OTHER
CITY-SPONSORED EVENTS

a. Off-duty Police Officers may volunteer to work as foot patrol security at City
parks and other City-sponsored events. Police Officers will be selected from the
supplemental outside employment availability/rotation list. If there are not sufficient
volunteers to fully staff the Park Patrol Program or the City-sponsored events, the City
may exercise its right to use Reserve Police Officers to supplement the staffing.

b. The rate of pay for a Police Officer, Police Sergeant, and Police Lieutenant
shall be the same as that in Section 17.1(c). A Police Sergeant or Police Lieutenant not
assigned as a supervisor or middle manager shall receive the rate for Police Officer.

c. Off-duty Police Officers may work under this Section a maximum of twelve
(12) hours within a twenty-eight (28) day work period. To the extent required by law, the
hours worked under this Article shall be included in determining the Fair Labor Standards
Act “hours worked" for the twenty-eight (28) day work period, and the pay for such hours
shall be computed in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act.

d. The hours worked and pay received in Park Ranger or City-sponsored
events employment shall not be credited towards years of service or counted in the
highest year(s) average for retirement benefits.

e. Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of the Supplemental Off-Duty
Employment Section shall apply to this Section.
ARTICLE 18 - DISPATCHERS
18.1 AGREEMENT APPLICABILITY
Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this Agreement, only the following

provisions shall be applicable to the classifications of Dispatcher |, Dispatcher II, and
Dispatcher III:

Article Section Subject
1 11 Recognition
2 2.1 City Rights
3 3.1 Payroll Deductions
3.2b Civilian Employees
3.3 SPOA Time
3.4 Access to New Employees
4 All Grievance Procedure
5 All Salary Adjustments

41
13

16

18
20

21
22

23

All
All

8.3
8.4

9.2

9.5
9.6

13.1a-f
13.2
13.3
13.4
13.5
13.6
13.7

16.1
16.2
16.3
16.4
16.5

All

20.1
20.3
20.4
20.5
20.6

All
22.1

23.1
23.4
23.5
23.6
23.7
23.8
23.9
23.10
23.11
23.12
23.13
23.14
23.15

Salary Administration
Health and Welfare

Flexible Hours
Furlough/Reduced Workweek

Court Overtime

Telephone Standby Time
Cancellation of Appearances
Miscellaneous Appearances

Holiday Benefit

Sick Leave

Vacation Administration
Pregnancy Disability Leave
Catastrophic Leave Plan
Court Leave

Personal Leave

Purpose
Definitions
Procedure
Fringe Benefits
Recall

Dispatchers

Driver License Policy

Regional Transit Monthly Pass
Employee Parking

Discounted Parking Rates
Downtown Parking Subsidy

Discipline
Civilian PERS Retirement Plan and Contribution

Non-Discrimination

Light Duty Policy

Medical Examinations

Incorporation of Previous Agreements
Savings Clause

Strikes and Lockouts

Payroll Errors

Tuition Reimbursement

Bilingual Pay

Safety Advisory Committee

Time Off for Examinations
Employee Performance Evaluations
Term

 

42
18.2 OVERTIME DEFINED

a. Employees required to work in excess of eight (8) hours per workday or forty
(40) hours per workweek shall be compensated for such work at one and one-half (11%)
times their regular rate of pay.

b. Regular overtime is time worked adjacent to and immediately before or after
the employee's regular shift, and is compensated at the overtime rate for all time actually
worked.

c. Scheduled overtime is work required to be performed outside of the
employee's regular shift with twenty-four (24) hours notice or more. Scheduled overtime
shall be compensated for a minimum of one hour at the overtime rate for days which are
included in the employee's regular shift, and two (2) hours at the overtime rate for days on
which the employee is not otherwise regularly scheduled to work.

d. Voluntary overtime is at the request of and with the consent of the employee
and is compensated at the overtime rate for all time actually worked.

e. Overtime compensation shall be paid by cash payment or with
compensating time off (CTO) at the request of the employee. The scheduling of CTO
must be approved in advance by the appointing authority or designee and may be denied
based on the need for backfill or emergency needs.

f. Employees may accrue up to eighty (80) hours of CTO.

g. Employees may request a cash-out of forty (40) hours of accrued CTO time
at the regular rate of pay to be paid on or before the first paycheck in November.
Employees must request the cash-out on or before September 10th.

h. The City shall not adjust a regular workweek schedule during said workweek
to avoid payment of overtime.

18.3 4/10 WORK SCHEDULE

Effective with sign-ups for 2002, on a one-year pilot basis, the City will establish
4/10 work schedules in the Communications Division where feasible. Such schedule shall
be reviewed every six (6) months for effectiveness and efficiency, including productivity,
use of sick leave and overtime.

18.4 REST PERIODS

Employees shall be afforded rest periods of fifteen (15) minutes during the first half
of the employee's shift, and fifteen (15) minutes during the last half of the shift.

18.5 CALL-BACK
a. When an employee is called back to work from off the communications

facility prior to the start of his/her next regularly scheduled shift, the employee shall be
compensated as follows:

43
(1) for shift work, consisting of police dispatch positions or complaint
desk, a minimum of four (4) hours pay at the overtime rate.

(2) for all other assignment purposes, a minimum of two (2) hours pay at
the overtime rate.

b. Call-back pay is not applicable to scheduled overtime.
18.6 OUT-OF-CLASSIFICATION PAY

a. When a vacancy arises above the level of Dispatcher II, or when an
employee above the level of Dispatcher II is absent or unavailable for his/her regularly
assigned duties, an employee may be temporarily assigned in writing by management to
perform substantially all the duties of the higher classification until such time as the absent
or unavailable employee returns or the vacancy is filled. The employee so temporarily
assigned shall be compensated for the duration of the out-of-classification assignment by
the payment of five (5) percent of the regular salary he/she received prior to the out-of-
classification assignment.

b. Substantially performs means, actively engaged as the radio supervisor
monitoring radio traffic; scheduled as the complaint desk supervisor; performing the
supervisory functions of the higher classification (disciplinary action, employee counseling
and review, managing and directing the employees, laying out and planning work activity);
or performing the administrative functions of the position. In and of itself performing any
“one" of the above tasks does not lend itself to out-of-classification pay.

c. Out-of-classification assignment(s) shall be rotated among qualified
employee(s) currently working on the affected shift, as follows:

(1) "Qualified" is determined based on training, skill and ability to perform
the specific position available for out-of-classification assignment.

(2) The order of preference for assignment among qualified employees
who are available for the entire out-of-classification assignment shall
be based on:

(a) employee(s) on the eligible list for the classification without
regard to placement;

(b) Department-authorized Certified Training Officer(s) not
assigned to a trainee for the shift;

(c) volunteer(s) on the affected shift; or
(d) employee(s) not presently training.
(3) | Within each category of preference, when training, skill and ability are

equal, seniority shall be used to determine the out-of-classification
assignment.

44
18.7 SHIFT BIDS AND ASSIGNMENTS

a. Career employees in the classifications of Dispatcher |, Il and II] who have
completed their probationary period by the Saturday of the first pay period in January shall
be permitted to annually bid for work shift preference, days off and vacation based on
classification seniority. Management may deviate from seniority for just cause.

b. The annual shift bid shall be scheduled during the month of November.

c. When a vacancy arises for a Dispatcher II or III position, the decision to fill
such vacancy shall be at management's discretion. If the position is to be filled, a notice
shall be posted on Department bulletin boards for seven (7) calendar days prior to the
filling of the vacancy. The posting shall indicate the anticipated date upon which the
vacancy will be filled. The position shall be filled by classification seniority from among
the applicants in that classification, except that management may deviate from seniority
for team integrity for Dispatchers III, availability and distribution of shift composition and/or
just cause. A vacancy or vacancies resulting from the filling of the original posted opening
shall not be subject to this procedure.

d. Permanent vacancies are those which arise due to retirement, death,
removal, resignation, promotion, or where the employee is absent from a position for a
period of six (6) consecutive months due to paid or unpaid leave of absence, or twelve
(12) consecutive months due to IOD. A return to work of one hundred sixty (160) hours or
less shall not constitute a break in consecutive time off, provided that a new illness or
injury shall constitute a separate episode.

e. Temporary vacancies, including leaves of absence of less than six (6) or
twelve (12) months as applicable, may be filled on a temporary basis. If such position is
to be filled for the duration of the temporary vacancy it shall be posted as in Section
18.5(c). The employee assigned as a result of the posting shall have no right to their prior
bid position if any, or to the temporary vacancy upon return of the incumbent employee,
and shall be assigned a position at the discretion of management.

18.8 UNIFORMS

Effective June 25, 2005, the City agrees to reimburse career employees in the
amount of $22.00 bi-weekly for regulation items of uniform and personal equipment that
the Police Department requires to be worn as a condition of employment.

18.9 DAMAGE TO PRESCRIPTION GLASSES

a. The City agrees to repair or replace prescription glasses damaged or
destroyed while the employee is actively at work provided that the employee furnishes
satisfactory proof to the City of such loss.

b. The prescription shall not be more than twenty-four (24) months old to

qualify for reimbursement under this Section. All costs to update the prescription shall be
borne by the employee.

45
18.10 CONTRACTING OUT

a. The City shall not contract out for goods and services performed by
bargaining unit employees which will result in any career employee being laid off without
prior consultation with the Association concerning the impact on the terms and conditions
of employment of employees covered by this Agreement.

b. Any layoffs resulting from the City's action shall be made pursuant to the
layoff provisions of this Agreement.

18.11 COMMUNICATIONS TRAINING OFFICER PAY

A Dispatcher II who is certified and assigned as a Communications Training Officer
(CTO) shall be paid the eight and one-half percent (8%%) rate for such out-of-
classification assignment. Employees who are designated by management to perform
CTO functions will be paid eight and one-half percent (812%) for each hour of that
assignment.

18.12 NIGHT-SHIFT PREMIUM PAY

a. Effective June 25, 2005, career and non-career (+1,040) dispatchers who
work five-eighths (5/8) or six-tenths (6/10), as applicable, or more of their regular shift in
the period extending from 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m., shall be compensated therefore, by
payment for the entire shift of an additional two and one-half percent (2.5%) of their base
pay for that shift. Said employees who work less than five-eighths (5/8) or six-tenths
(6/10), as applicable, of their work shift in the period extending from 6:00 p.m. to 12:00
a.m., shall be compensated for those hours worked (to the nearest one-half) within this
period by payment of an additional two and one-half percent (2.5%) of their base pay for
such hours.

b. Effective June 25, 2005, career and non-career (+1,040) dispatchers who
work five-eighths (5/8) or six-tenths (6/10), as applicable, or more of their regular shift in
the period extending from 12:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m., shall be compensated therefore, by
payment for the entire shift of an additional five percent (5%) of their base pay for that
shift. Said employees who work less than five-eighths (5/8) or six-tenths (6/10), as
applicable, of their regular work shift in the period extending from 12:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
shall be compensated for those hours worked (to the nearest one-half hour) within this
period by payment of an additional five percent (5%) of their base pay for such hours.
This differential shall be flexibly applied to minimize any negative impact based on
changes to shift start and stop times.

c. Effective June 24, 2006, the premium pay referenced in 18.12(a) above, will
be reduced to one and one-quarter percent (1.25%), and the premium pay referenced in
18.12(b) above, will be reduced to two and one-half percent (2.5%).

d. Effective June 23, 2007, the night-shift premium pay will be eliminated.
18.13 INCENTIVES

a. Effective June 25, 2005, a Dispatcher II or III with a bachelors degree (BA or
BS) or higher from an accredited college or university shall receive an educational
incentive of five percent (5%) above base salary.
46
b. Effective June 25, 2005, a Dispatcher II or Ill with an associates degree (AA
or AS) from an accredited college or university shall receive an educational incentive of
two and one-half percent (22%) above base salary.

c. A Dispatcher | with a bachelors degree (BA or BS) or higher from an
accredited college or university, and five (5) years of City service, shall receive an
educational incentive of five percent (5%) above base salary.

d. A Dispatcher | with an associates degree (AA or AS) from an accredited
college or university, and seven (7) years of City service, shall receive an educational
incentive of two and one-half percent (242%) above base salary.

e. An employee is eligible to only one of the above educational incentives.

f. The incentive shall be effective in the pay period following presentation of
the certificate of degree from the institution to the Personnel Services Division of the
Police Department.

ARTICLE 19 - COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER
19.1 AGREEMENT APPLICABILITY

Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this Agreement, only the following provisions
shall be applicable to Community Service Officers (CSOs):

Article Section Subject
1 11 Recognition
2 2.1 City Rights
3 3.1 Payroll Deductions
3.2b Civilian Employees
3.3 SPOA Time
3.4 Access to New Employees
4 All Grievance Procedure
5 All Salary Adjustments
6 All Salary Administration
7 All Health and Welfare
8 8.1(b) Hours of Work (in Investigations)
8.2 4/10 Plan (in Patrol)
8.3 Flexible Hours
8.4 Furlough/Reduced Workweek
9 9.2 Court Overtime
9.3 Telephone Standby Time
9.4 Telephone Overtime

47
 

 

95 Cancellation of Appearances
9.6 Miscellaneous Appearances
9.8 Shift Change Notice (in Patrol)
10 10.5 Detective Pay (in Investigations)
13 13.1a-f Holiday Benefit
13.2 Sick Leave
13.3 Vacation Administration
13.4 Pregnancy Disability Leave
13.5 Catastrophic Leave Plan
13.6 Court Leave
13.7 Personal Leave
16 16.1 Purpose
16.2 Definitions
16.3 Procedure
16.4 Fringe Benefits
16.5 Recall
19 All Community Service Officer
20 All Driver License, Regional Transit Monthly Pass,
and Parking
21 All Discipline
22 22.1 Civilian PERS Retirement Plan and Contribution
23 23.1 Non-Discrimination
23.2a Safety Equipment
23.3 Repair or Replacement of Damaged Uniform
Items and Personal Property
23.4 Light Duty Policy
23.5 Medical Examinations
23.6 Incorporation of Previous Agreements
23.7 Savings Clause
23.8 Strikes and Lockouts
23.9 Payroll Errors
23.10 Tuition Reimbursement
23.11 Bilingual Pay
23.12 Safety Advisory Committee
23.13 Time Off for Examinations
23.14 Employee Performance Evaluations
23.15 Term
19.2 OVERTIME DEFINED
a. Employees required to work in excess of eight (8), nine (9) or ten (10) hours

per workday or forty (40) hours per workweek shall be compensated for such work at one
and one-half (114) times their regular rate of pay.

48
b. Regular overtime is time worked adjacent to and immediately before or after
the employee's regular shift, and is compensated at the overtime rate for all time actually
worked.

c. Scheduled overtime is work required to be performed outside of the
employee's regular shift with twenty-four (24) hours notice or more. Scheduled overtime
shall be compensated for a minimum of one hour at the overtime rate for days which are
included in the employee's regular shift, and two (2) hours at the overtime rate for days on
which the employee is not otherwise regularly scheduled to work.

d. Voluntary overtime is at the request of and with the consent of the employee
and is compensated at the overtime rate for all time actually worked.

e. Overtime compensation shall be paid by cash payment or with
compensating time off (CTO) at the request of the employee. The scheduling of CTO
must be approved in advance by the appointing authority or designee and may be denied
based on the need for backfill or emergency needs.

f. Employees may accrue up to eighty (80) hours of CTO.

g. Employees may request a cash-out of forty (40) hours of accrued CTO time
at the regular rate of pay to be paid on or before the first paycheck in November.
Employees must request the cash-out on or before September 10".

h. The City shall not adjust a regular workweek schedule during said workweek
to avoid payment of overtime.

19.3 LUNCH PERIOD

The lunch period for a CSO shall be established based on their assignment and
schedule. Patrol assignments shall generally include a paid lunch, and investigations and
administrative assignments shall generally include an unpaid lunch of thirty (30) minutes
or one hour.

19.4 SHIFT BID AND ASSIGNMENT

a. CSO assignments, except for the Office of the Chief and Patrol, shall be
posted for fourteen (14) days prior to filling a position. Career employees in the
classification of CSO who have completed the probationary period may request transfer.
The announcement shall include the nature and duration of the assignment, shift and days
off, and criteria to be used in filling the position. The selection shall consider skill, ability,
training, experience, education, performance, and all other things being equal, seniority
shall prevail.

b. Career employees in the classification of CSO who desire assignment in
Patrol, and who have completed their probationary period by the Saturday of the first pay
period in January, shall bid for Patrol work shift preference, station, days off and vacation
based on classification seniority. Management may deviate from seniority for just cause.
The annual shift bid shall be scheduled during the month of November. Assignments may
be moved based on operational need.

49
19.5 VACATION SCHEDULING

CSOs shall annually bid vacation schedules based on seniority prior to January 1
of each year.

19.6 UNIFORMS

Effective June 25, 2005, the City agrees to reimburse career employees in the
amount of $30.00 bi-weekly for regulation items of uniform and personal equipment that
the Police Department requires to be worn as a condition of employment.

19.7 CALL-BACK

a. When an employee is called back to work after leaving his/her assignment at
the end of the day and prior to the start of his/her next regularly scheduled shift, the
employee shall be compensated as follows:

(1) for additional work, consisting of normal CSO activities, a minimum of
four (4) hours pay at the overtime rate.

(2) for all other assignment purposes, a minimum of two (2) hours pay at
the overtime rate.

b. Call-back pay is not applicable to scheduled overtime.
19.8 INCENTIVES

a. Effective June 25, 2005, a CSO who has successfully completed probation,
with a bachelors degree (BA or BS) or higher from an accredited college or university shall
receive an educational incentive of five percent (5%) above base salary.

b. Effective June 25, 2005, a CSO who has successfully completed probation,
with an associates degree (AA or AS) from an accredited college or university shall
receive an educational incentive of two and one-half percent (212%) above base salary.

c. A CSO is eligible to only one of the above educational incentives.

d. The incentive shall be effective in the pay period following presentation of

the certificate of degree from the institution to the Personnel Services Division of the
Police Department.

ARTICLE 20 - DRIVER LICENSE, REGIONAL TRANSIT MONTLHY PASS, AND
PARKING
20.1 DRIVER LICENSE POLICY

The Association is in agreement with the Driver License Policy as presented by the
City in negotiations on July 24, 1984.

50
20.2 DRIVER LICENSE REQUIREMENTS

An employee, as a condition of continued employment, shall comply with the
applicable Federal and State laws and regulations mandating the type of classes of
commercial vehicle licenses and endorsements to legally operate City vehicles and
related equipment. The City shall determine the classifications and identify the class of
commercial license and endorsements required for all or some job assignments. The City
agrees to meet and confer with the Association prior to implementation of changes in
driver license requirements mandated by State or Federal law.

20.3. REGIONAL TRANSIT MONTHLY PASS.
a. Sacramento Regional Transit District (SRTD)

Full-time career civilian employees who utilize the Sacramento Regional
Transit District (SRTD) for home-to-work transportation are eligible for an eighty percent
(80%) price discount on a SRTD monthly pass. Part-time career civilian employees shall
be eligible for a fifty percent (50%) price discount. The employee must notify the
Department of Finance, Revenue and Collections Division, on or before the fifth day of the
month to obtain the monthly pass discount for that month.

b. Other Bus Transportation

Eligible full-time career civilian employees who regularly utilize other bus
transportation regulated by the Public Utilities Commission (i.e., buses, vanpools, rail) for
home-to-work commuting are eligible for monthly reimbursement up to eighty percent
(80%) of the cost of the monthly pass. Eligible part-time civilian employees, as described
above, shall be eligible for a fifty percent (50%) monthly reimbursement. The employee
must present the required proof of purchase to the Department of Finance, Revenue and
Collections Division, on or before the fifth day of the month to obtain reimbursement. The
amount of monthly reimbursement shall not exceed one hundred ($100) dollars.

20.4 EMPLOYEE PARKING

Free parking at police substations will be provided to assigned officers when such
substations become operational.

20.5 DISCOUNTED PARKING RATE

Discounted parking will be available to employees, on a first-come, first-serve
basis, for parking spaces on the fifth and sixth floors of Lot "I" at seventy percent (70%) of
the regular monthly Lot "I" rate. This means that the employee discounted rate is thirty
percent (30%) off the full monthly rate. This provision will remain in effect until further
notice by the City.

20.6 DOWNTOWN PARKING SUBSIDY

Full-time career employees who are permanently assigned to a location in the
downtown area and do not already receive free parking shall receive a parking subsidy of
forty-five ($45.00) dollars per month, to be paid the first two pay checks of each month.
Part-time career employees shall receive twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per month. The
downtown area shall be as designated in Attachment D.

51
ARTICLE 21 — DISCIPLINE
21.1 IN-LIEU DISCIPLINE PROGRAM

By mutual agreement between the Chief of Police or designee and the employee,
an employee suspended from duty without pay may forfeit accumulated holiday and/or
vacation credits equal to the number of hours of suspension in-lieu of such suspension. If
the suspension is reduced or reversed at the conclusion of the appeal process, the City
shall reinstate the forfeited holiday/vacation credits. An employee who has forfeited
accumulated vacation credits may utilize accumulated holiday credit for an approved
vacation period. This Section shall not be subject to the Grievance Procedure.

21.2 LETTER OF REPRIMAND

a. A letter of reprimand shall not be appealable to the Civil Service Board,
except the employee may have an administrative review of the reprimand by submitting a
request in writing within seven (7) calendar days to the Director of Labor Relations. The
Director or designee will schedule a private meeting within seven (7) calendar days of
receipt of the written request to hear the employee's response. A final written decision will
be rendered by the Director or designee within seven (7) calendar days of the meeting.
This Section shall not be subject to the Grievance Procedure.

b. Such letter will be withdrawn from an employee's official personnel file two
(2) years from the date of issue provided there has not been additional formal discipline
imposed during the two-year period.

21.3. APPEALS OF FORMAL DISCIPLINE ABOVE A LETTER OF REPRIMAND

Appeals of all formal discipline above letter of reprimand will be heard by a third
party neutral arbitrator using one of the two following processes, at the employee’s
discretion.

a. Expedited Arbitration Hearing

(1) A mutually agreed upon arbitrator will serve a one (1) year term.
Either party may request a change in arbitrator by giving sixty (60)
calendar days notice in writing to the other party. Each party may
only request a change of arbitrator once in a one-year period.

(2) | The expedited arbitrations will be held one day a month to resolve
cases which have been referred for hearing. The hearing will be held
at a mutually agreed upon location.

(3) Each party will have two and one half (2-1/2) hours to present its
case, including whatever time it takes to reserve for rebuttal. The
presentation of evidence will be made by submitting a statement of
facts stipulated by the parties and/or the presentation of witness and
documentary evidence. A court reporter will transcribe the
proceedings, but a transcript will only be prepared at the request of
either party. After presentation of the evidence, each party will have
thirty (30) minutes to make an oral argument before the arbitrator. No
briefs will be submitted.

52
c.
the following:

(4)

Prior to the decision, the parties may agree to mediation. At the
conclusion of the case presentation, the arbitrator will announce the
decision orally to all parties. The decision of the arbitrator shall be
reduced to writing in order to be presented as the joint
recommendation of the parties and shall be advisory to the Civil
Service Board, however the decision of the arbitrator will not be used
as precedent in any other case.

Formal Arbitration Hearing

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The City and the Association agree to a hearing process which
utilizes a third party neutral arbitrator. The parties may agree upon
the selection of a third party neutral arbitrator. If the parties are
unable to agree upon the selection of a third party neutral arbitrator,
the arbitrator shall be chosen by striking names from a panel provided
by the State Mediation and Conciliation Service.

The City and the Association shall agree upon the parameters of the
request to the State Mediation and Conciliation Service for a list of
arbitrators.

The arbitrator shall attempt to mediate the appeal if the mediation is
jointly requested by the parties.

The decision of the arbitrator, which shall be presented as the joint
recommendation of the parties, shall be advisory to the Civil Service
Board.

Both the expedited and formal arbitrations will be held in accordance with

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The hearings will be conducted pursuant to Rule 12.1 through 12.8 of
the Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service Board. The arbitrator
may only sustain, modify or deny the discipline that is being
appealed.

The arbitrator’s decision becomes the jointly recommended proposed
decision or the parties may agree to enter into a settlement
agreement which adopts the arbitrator’s decision.

The parties will equally share the expenses of the arbitrator, court
reporter, and transcript, if requested.

City employees will not suffer a loss of pay for time spent participating
in an arbitration.

21.4 DOCUMENTED COUNSELING

A documented counseling shall be maintained in an employee’s Division file for a
period of one year at which time the document shall be removed and not be used for
purposes of further disciplinary action. Once removed, the documented counseling may

53
not be used to enhance subsequent discipline but may be used to demonstrate that the
employee is aware of the issue and/or for impeachment purposes.

ARTICLE 22 - RETIREMENT
22.1 CIVILIAN PERS RETIREMENT PLAN AND CONTRIBUTION

a. Miscellaneous employees in the Police Department Unit are covered by the
following PERS plan:

Modified 2% at age 55
One-year highest compensation
2% COLA

25% survivor continuation

50% industrial disability

Military service credit

b. The City will pay three percent (3%) of the miscellaneous member
contribution to the PERS retirement plan, and in lieu of such contribution for Sacramento
City Employees Retirement System (SCERS) members, one hundred dollars ($100.00)
monthly as an add-on to the City's health and welfare contribution (City dollars).

22.2 SWORN PERS RETIREMENT PLAN
Police safety employees are covered by the following PERS plans:
Tier | (SCERS Safety to PERS)

Modified 3% at age 50
One-year highest compensation
3% COLA

50% survivor continuation

50% industrial disability

Military service credit

Peace Corps service credit

Tier Il (PERS hired on or after 1977)

Modified 3% at age 50
One-year highest compensation
2% COLA

50% survivor continuation

50% industrial disability

Military service credit

Peace Corps service credit

22.3. SWORN CITY-PAID PERS RETIREMENT CONTRIBUTION

The City shall pay nine percent (9%) of the member's contribution to the PERS
Retirement Plan.

54
ARTICLE 23 - MISCELLANEOUS
23.1 NON-DISCRIMINATION

The City and Association agree not to discriminate against any employee for
Association activity, race, creed, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, political affiliation
or physical handicap.

23.2 SAFETY EQUIPMENT
a. The City will issue safety equipment to all sworn personnel and CSOs.

b. Sworn personnel will be required to carry the Department-issued or a
personally owned SIG-Sauer P-225 (9mm), P-226 (9 mm), P-230 (.380 caliber), P-232
(.380 caliber), or P-239 (9 mm).

Personnel assigned to only administrative tasks with no enforcement duties
may be authorized to carry the SIG-Sauer P-232 (.380 caliber) on a case-by-case basis
provided the officer submits a written request to the Chief of Police through the chain of
command.

c. The following conditions shall apply to sworn personnel who choose to carry
an optional weapon:

(1) No cost to the City, including the annual safety certificate for the Colt
Python;

(2) City-issued ammunition shall be used; and
(3) Qualification at Departmental shoots.

Sworn employees also have the option to carry a personally owned SIG-
Sauer P-220 (.45 caliber), P-226 (.40 caliber), P-228 (9 mm), P-229 (.40 caliber or 9 mm),
P-234 (.40 caliber), or P-245 (.45 caliber).

d. Sworn personnel must use either the Department-issued holster or an
optional holster approved by the Sacramento Police Department Rangemaster, purchased
at the officer's expense.

e. When an officer’s weapon is taken by the Department as a result of an
officer-involved shooting, a replacement gun will be provided from guns available within
the Department or from guns provided by the Association which shall be provided to and
kept by the Department armorer.

23.3. REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF DAMAGED UNIFORM ITEMS AND PERSONAL
PROPERTY

The City agrees to reimburse sworn employees and CSOs in the Police
Department for the repair or replacement of uniform items, and for other personal property
damaged, lost or stolen in the course of employment and performance of their assigned
duties without fault or negligence on the part of employees, other than normal wear and

55
tear in accordance with the policy provisions attached hereto and incorporated herein as
Exhibit B.

23.4 LIGHT DUTY POLICY

a. In the event an employee is unable to perform his/her duties as a result of
an injury, he/she shall not be assigned to "light or limited" duty until authorized to do so by
the City physician.

In the event the employee disagrees with the opinion of the City physician to
either return the employee to work on a “light or limited" duty basis, or not to return ona
“light or limited" duty basis, he/she shall have the right to have an examination by another
physician of the employee's choice.

In the event that the two (2) physicians’ opinions are in conflict, a third
opinion shall be obtained by a physician mutually acceptable to both parties. The third
opinion shall be binding.

Costs of all examinations shall be borne by the City, only in connection with
injuries incurred on the job. In cases where the employee is directed to a City physician,
costs of such examination shall be borne by the City.

b. When an employee is prescribed physical/occupational therapy for an
industrial injury, the therapy shall be provided on release time (IOD) to the extent
practicable. It is anticipated that each therapy appointment will take no longer than two
(2) hours including travel time and, to the extent feasible, the employee will arrange the
therapy appointments for the beginning or end of the shift.

If the therapy cannot be arranged during the shift but is at the beginning or
end of the shift, the employee may request that the shift be flexed to accommodate
therapy. No overtime or time off will be granted for therapy except as provided herein.

23.5 MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS

If the City institutes disability retirement without the consent and concurrence of the
employee or reassigns the employee out of the Police Department, or otherwise acts to
terminate, reduce in rank, remove or otherwise significantly adversely change his/her
conditions of employment because of medical reasons, such employee shall be granted
reasonable time off with pay for a medical examination by a doctor of the employee's
choice at the employee's expense.

23.6 INCORPORATION OF PREVIOUS AGREEMENTS

This Agreement sets forth the understanding of the parties to all issues contained
herein, and supersedes all other Agreements and supplements.

If, during its term, the parties hereto should mutually agree to modify, amend or
alter the provisions of this Agreement in any respect, such change(s) shall be effective
only when reduced to writing and executed by the authorized representative of the City
and the Association. Any such changes validly made shall become a part of this
Agreement and subject to its terms.

56
23.7 SAVINGS CLAUSE

If any provision of this Agreement, or the application of such provision should be
rendered or declared invalid by any decree of a court of competent jurisdiction or by
reason of any existing or subsequently enacted legislation, the remaining parts or portions
of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect.

23.8 STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS

For the term of this Agreement, the Association and its members agree that they
shall not call or engage in any strike, slowdown, suspension or stoppage of work activity,
or sanction any such conduct by Unit employees, and the City agrees that it shall not
cause or engage in any lockout.

23.9 PAYROLL ERRORS

a. In the event an error has been made in the payment of an employee's
salary, overtime payment or leave accruals, balances or usages, the City shall, for
purposes of future compensation, adjust such compensation to the correct amount, giving
written notice to the employee.

b. In the event an employee received an overpayment in wages,
reimbursement to the City shall be accomplished by:

(1) Lump sum payment by the employee;

(2) | A one-time deduction from usable vacation or holiday credit balances
equivalent to the overpayment at the employee's current hourly rate;

(3) | Arepayment schedule through payroll deduction; and/or
(4) Other means, as may be mutually agreed between the parties.

No repayment schedule shall exceed fifty-two (52) pay periods in duration,
except that if the employee does not agree to a voluntary repayment schedule, the
overpayment collection shall not exceed twenty-six (26) pay periods.

c. No action shall be taken to enforce repayment of an overpayment, or to
correct an underpayment, unless action is taken within two (2) years from the ending date
of the pay period in which the error is discovered. "Action is taken" as used in this Section
shall mean written notice to the employee in the case of an overpayment, or written or oral
notice to the City in the case of an underpayment error.

23.10 TUITION REIMBURSEMENT

The City agrees to reimburse career employees for the cost of tuition, books, and
fees, excluding parking, up to a maximum of $750.00 per calendar year pursuant to the
City’s existing policy for such education reimbursement. This provision shall not apply to
employees eligible for an educational incentive program, except that it may be applied to
approved AA and BA course work for civilian employees.

57
23.11 BILINGUAL PAY

a. As soon as practicable, the City may authorize bilingual pay when it is
determined to be necessary for the operation. The City shall determine what languages
are appropriate for such pay and the number of employees to be certified. To be eligible
for bilingual pay the employee must be determined to be verbally proficient, and if
necessary for the assignment, proficient in the written language. The City will arrange the
certification and testing process and authorize the bilingual pay.

b. Bilingual pay shall be paid at the rate of $20 bi-weekly for any pay period in
which the employee is certified. An employee who is receiving bilingual pay may be
required to provide assistance to any City operation.

23.12 SAFETY ADVISORY COMMITTEE

a. The City shall continue to provide for the safety of employees during the
hours of their employment. In this regard, the City agrees that it will receive and consider
written recommendations with respect to unsafe working conditions or other safety ideas
in the area of working conditions from any employee or the Association; and the
employees and the Association agree that they will direct their safety recommendations
and ideas to the City.

b. To facilitate this process, a Safety Advisory Committee consisting of three
(3) representatives of the City and three (3) representatives of the Association shall meet
every three (3) months as needed to consult on such safety matters. Up to three (3)
career Association representatives may attend such meetings without loss of pay or
benefits. Either side may request to convene a special meeting of the Committee within
ten (10) working days of written notice to the other side.

23.13 TIME OFF FOR EXAMINATIONS

If a request is made by an employee, such employee shall be released from duty
without loss of compensation while competing in City examinations and interviews. The
employee must give the immediate supervisor at least three (3) working days’ advance
notice. Employees shall not be compensated for examination and interview time which
occurs during non-duty hours.

23.14 EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS

a. The City shall have the right to conduct employee performance appraisals
for career and/or non-career employees at the discretion of the appointing authority.

b. Performance evaluations shall be maintained in the employee’s personnel
file to be used for the usual and customary employment purposes including, but not
limited to, transfers and salary step increases.

c. An employee in probationary status shall receive performance evaluations,
at reasonable intervals, during the probationary period at the discretion of the appointing
authority.

d. A career employee who disagrees with a performance evaluation may within
ten (10) workdays from the date of the performance evaluation:

58
(1) write a rebuttal statement for attachment to the performance
evaluation form; and

(2) informally appeal to the supervisor of the reviewer, and in no case
higher than the Department Head.

e. Appeals on employee performance evaluations are not subject to the
grievance procedure.

f. Employees who do not meet standards will be given a documented
evaluation and will be coached, trained, and given up to ninety (90) days to improve their
work performance. Should they fail to meet standards after this period of informal
coaching and development, they may be removed from assignment for up to six (6)
months and placed on performance improvement program (PIP). This reassignment is
subject to the grievance and arbitration section of this agreement, but this action is not
considered disciplinary in nature.

23.15 TECHNOLOGY ALLOWANCE

a. Effective June 25, 2005, Police Sergeants shall be authorized a monthly
technology allowance of $50. The technology allowance will be approved for a Police
Sergeant in-lieu-of using a City-provided cellular telephone. Use of City-provided cellular
telephones will be discontinued upon receipt of the technology allowance by the Police
Sergeant.

b. Upon approval of the monthly technology allowance, the Police Sergeant will
obtain, at his/her own expense and as a private individual, a personal cellular telephone
and monthly cellular service contract that may be used to conduct City-related business.
The Police Sergeant will provide the cellular telephone number to Department
management.

23.16 TERM

a. This Agreement shall remain in full force and effect from June 24, 2005, to
and including June 18, 2010.

b. The provisions of this Agreement shall be effective on the effective date
stated above except as otherwise specifically provided.

SIGNATURES ON NEXT PAGE

59
DATED: May 14, 2005

SACRAMENTO POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION CITY OF SACRAMENTO

vm hee Omteaees

Dee Contreras

 

Co-Lead Negotiator Director of Labor Relations
| LDE. Top Ler bheteh
Dafid Topaz Lisa Hutchin
President/Co-Lead Negotiator Chief Negotiator
SPOA BOARD OF DIRECTORS: SPOA NEGOTIATIONS TEAM:
Brent J. Meyer Dave French
Tim Davis David E. Topaz
E. Paul Brown Michael Cooper
Aaron Donato Judy Kovanda
Mark Tyndale Janeane Ramirez
George Whitcomb Aaron Donato
Don Graham Tim Davis
Don Gilbertson Brent J. Meyer
Judy Kovanda Mark Tyndale

Darryl Gould
Dustin A. Smith

60
EXHIBIT A - SALARY SCHEDULE 2005-2006

 

REP CITY OF SACRAMENTO
CODE SCHEDULED MONTHLY/BI-WEEKLY/HOURLY-RATES.
TITLE STEP A/6 STEP B/7
Year 1 -
REPO2 3,209.65 1,555.45
02036/52036 1,481.38 1,555.45
COMM SERVICE OFF (C-D-E) 18.5172 19.4431
Year 1
REPO2 3,027.47 1,467.16
02049/52049 1,397.30 1,467.16
DISPATCHER 1 17.4662 18.3395
Year 1
REPO2 3,491.40 1,691.98
02050/52050 1,611.42 1,691.98
DISPATCHER II 20.1427 21.1498
Year 1
REPO2 3,895.68 1,887.91
02051/52051 1,798.01 1,887.91
DISPATCHER III 22,4751 23.5989
Year 1
REPO2 4,015.53 1,945.98
02027/52027 1,853.32 1,945.98
POLICE OFF 23,1665 24.3248
Year 1
REPO2 5,042.93 2,443.88
02015/52015 2,327.50 2,443.88
POLICE SERGEANT 29.0938 30.5485
Page 61

GOVERNMENT HUMAN RESOURCES SYSTEM

STEP C/8

3,538.65
1,633.22
20.4153

3,337.79
1,540.52
19.2565

3,849.27
1,776.58
22.2073

4,294.99
1,982.30
24.7788

4,427.11
2,043.28
25.5410

5,559.82
2,566.07
32.0759

STEP D/9

3,715.59
1,714.89
21.4361

3,504.68
1,617.54
20.2193

4,041.73
1,865.42
23.3177

4,509.73
2,081.42
26.0177

4,648.47
2,145.45
26.8181

5,837.81
2,694.38
33.6797

(2005-2006 Salary Schedule)

STEP E/10

3,901.37
1,800.63
22.5079

3,679.92
1,698.42
21.2303

4,243.82
1,958.69
24.4836

4,735.22
2,185.49
27.3186

4,880.89
2,252.72
28.1590

6,129.71
2,829.10
35.3637
EXHIBIT A1 - SALARY SCHEDULE 2006-2007

 

REP CITY OF SACRAMENTO GOVERNMENT HUMAN RESOURCES SYSTEM
CODE SCHEDULED MONTHLY/BI-WEEKLY/HOURLY RATES <

TITLE STEP A/6 STEP B/7 STEP C/8 STEP DID STEP E/10
Year 2 :

REPO2 3,370.14 1,633.22 3,715.59 3,901.37 4,096.44
02036/52036 1,555.45 1,633.22 1,714.89 1,800.63 1,890.66
COMM SERVICE OFF (C-D-E) 19.4431 20,4153 21.4361 22.5079 23.6333
Year 2

REPO2 . 3,178.85 1,540.52 3,504.68 3,679.92 3,863.91
02049/52049 1,467.16 1,540.52 1,617.54 1,698.42 1,783.34
DISPATCHER I 18.3395 19,2565 20,2193 21.2303 22.2918
Year2 .

REPO2 3,775.95 1,829.86 4,162.98 4,371.14 4,589.69
02050/52050 : 1,742.74 1,829.88 1,921.38 © 2,017.45 2,118.32
DISPATCHER Il 21.7843 22.8735 24.0172 25,2181 26.4790
Year 2

REPO2 4,294.99 2,081.42 4,735.22 4,971.98 5,220.57
02051/52051 1,982.30 2,081.42 2,185.49 2,294.76 2,409.50
DISPATCHER III 24.7788 26.0177 27.3186 28.6845 30,1187
Year 2

REPO2 4,216.30 2,043.28 4,648.47 4,880.89 5,124.95
02027/52027 1,945.98 2,043.28 2,145.45 2,252.72 2,365.36
POLICE OFF 24,3248 25.5410 26.8181 28.1590 29.5670
Year 2

REPO2 5,400.96 2,617.39 5,954.57 6,252.31 6,564.91
02015/52015 2,492.75 2,617.39 2,748.26 2,885.68 3,029.96
POLICE SERGEANT 31,1594 32.7174 34.3533 36.0710 37.8745

Page 62 (2006-2007 Salary Schedule)
REP
CODE
TITLE

Year 3

REPO2

02036/52036 .
COMM SERVICE OFF (C-D-E)

Year 3

REPO2
02049/52049
DISPATCHER I

Year 3

REPO2
02050/52050
DISPATCHER II

Year3

REPO2
02051/52051
DISPATCHER IIT

Year 3
REPO2
02027/52027
POLICE OFF

Year 3

REPO2

02015/52015
POLICE SERGEANT

Page 63

CITY OF SACRAMENTO

EXHIBIT A2 - SALARY SCHEDULE 2007-2008

SCHEDULED MONTHLY/BI-WEEKLY/HOURLY RATES

STEP B/7

GOVERNMENT HUMAN RESOURCES SYSTEM

 

STEP A/6 STEP C/8 STEP DS STEP E/10
3,538.65 1,714.89 3,901.37 4,096.44 4,301.27
1,633.22 1,714.89 1,800.63 1,890.66 1,985.20

20.4153 21.4361 22.5079 23.6333 24.8150
3,337.79 1,617.54 3,679.92 3,863.91 4,057.11
1,540.52 1,617.54 1,698.42 1,783.34 1,872.51

19.2565 20,2193 21.2303 22.2918 23.4064
4,083.70 1,979.02 4,502.28 4,727.39 4,963.76
1,884.78 1,979.02 2,077.98 2,181.87 2,290.97

23.5598 24,7378 25.9747 27.2734 28.6371
4,690,411 2,272.90 5,170.85 5,429.39 5,700.86
2,164.66 2,272.90 2,386.54 2,505.87 2,631.17

27.0583 28,4112 29.8318 31.3234 32.8896
4,427.11 2,145.45 4,880.89 5,124.95 5,381.20
2,043.28 2,145.45 2,252.72 2,365.36 2,483.63

25.5410 26,8181 28.1590 29.5670 31.0454
5,784.45 2,803.23 6,377.35 6,696.21 7,031.02
2,669.74 2,803.23 2,943.39 3,090.56 3,245.09

33.3718 35.0404 36.7924 38.6320 40.5636

(2007-2008 Salary Schedule)
EXHIBIT A3 - SALARY SCHEDULE 2008-2009

 

REP CITY OF SACRAMENTO GOVERNMENT HUMAN RESOURCES SYSTEM
CODE SCHEDULED MONTHLY/BI-WEEKLY/HOURLY RATES __:

TITLE STEP A/6 STEP B/7 STEP C/8 STEP Di9 STEP E/10
Year 4 :

REPO2 3,715.59 1,800.63 4,096.44 4,301.27 4,516.34
02036/52036 1,714.89 1,800.63 1,890.66 1,985.20 2,084.46
COMM SERVICE OFF (C-D-E) 21.4361 22.5079 23.6333 24.8150 26.0558
Year 4 -

REPO2 . 3,504.68 1,698.42 3,863.91 4,057.11 4,259.96
02049/52049 1,617.54 1,698.42 1,783.34 1,872.51 1,966.14
DISPATCHER I 20.2193 21.2303 22.2918 23.4064 24.5767
‘Year 4

REPO2 4,287.89 2,077.98 4,727.39 4,963.76 5,211.96
02050/52050 1,979.02 2,077.98 2,181.87 2,290.97 2,405.52
DISPATCHER II 24.7378 25.9747 27.2734 28,6371 30.0690
Year 4

REPO2 4,924.61 2,386.54 5,429.39 5,700.86 5,985.91
02051/52051 2,272.90 2,386.54 2,505.87 2,631.17 2,762.73
DISPATCHER IIT 28.4112 29,8318 31.3234 32.8896 34.5341
Year 4

REPO2 4,648.47 2,252.72 5,124.95 5,381.20 5,650.27
02027/52027 - 2,145.45 2,252.72 2,365.36 2,483.63 2,607.82
POLICE OFF 26.8181 28.1590 29',5670 31.0454 32.5977
Year 4

REPO2 6,073.67 2,943.39 6,696.21 7,031.02 7,382.58
02015/52015 2,803.23 2,943.39 3,090.56 3,245.09 3,407.34
POLICE SERGEANT 35.0404 36.7924 38.6320 40.5636 42,5918

Page 64 (2008-2009 Salary Schedule)
CITY OF SACRAMENTO

 

EXHIBIT A4 - SALARY SCHEDULE 2009-2010

STEP B/7

1,890.66
1,890.66
23,6333

1,783.34
1,783.34
22.2918

2,181.87
2,181.87
27.2734

2,505.87
2,505.87
31.3234

2,365.36
2,365.36
29.5670

3,090.56
3,090.56
38.6320

CODE SCHEDULED MONTHLY/BI-WEEKLY/HOURLY RATES
TITLE STEP A/6
yao 3,901.37
REPO2 1901.
02036/52036 1,800.63
COMM SERVICE OFF (C-D-E) 22.5079
Year 5
REPO2 3,679.92
02049/52049 1,698.42
DISPATCHER I 21.2303
nePe2 4,502.28
REPO2 ‘ .
02050/52050 2,077.98
DISPATCHER II 25.9747
Year 5
REPO2 5,170.85
02051/52051 2,386.54
DISPATCHER III 29.8318
Berta 4,880.89
REPO2 ' :
02027/52027 2,252. 72
POLICE OFF 28.15:
REPO 6,377.35
02015/52015 21943 32
POLICE SERGEANT .
Page 65

GOVERNMENT HUMAN RESOURCES SYSTEM

STEP C/8

4,301.27
1,985.20
24.8150

4,057.11
1,872.51
23.4064

4,963.76
2,290.97
28,6371

5,700.86
2,631.17
32.8896

5,381.20
2,483.63
31.0454

7,031.02
3,245.09
40.5636

STEP D/O

4,516.34
2,084.46
26.0558

4,259.96
1,966.14
24,5767

5,211.96
2,405.52
30.0690

5,985.91
2,762.73
34.5341

5,650.27
2,607,82
32.5977

7,382.58
3,407.34
42,5918

(2009-2010 Salary Schedule)

STEP E/10

4,742.16
2,188.69
27,3586

4,472.95
2,064.44
25,8055

5,472.57
2,525.80
31.5725

6,285.21
2,900.86
36.2608

5,932.78
2,738.21
34,2276

7,751.71
3,577.71
44.7214
EXHIBIT B - REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT FOR DAMAGED PERSONAL PROPERTY

1. POLICY

a.

Employees will be reimbursed for the loss, repair or replacement of
personal property damaged in the course of employment while performing
their assigned duties.

The City shall either repair or replace damaged or lost items. The choice
to either replace or repair damaged or lost items shall rest with the City.
The City may return the replaced property to the employee if the City so
desires.

The intent of the policy is to permit reimbursement for the repair or
replacement of such items as eyeglasses, hearing aids, dentures,
watches, personal professional equipment or articles of clothing if
necessarily worn or carried by the employee in the course of his/her
employment. Reimbursement shall be authorized only when the damage
is caused by circumstances which arise out of employment, and not from
ordinary wear and tear or damage. This policy extends to both field and
office personnel.

2. EXCLUSIONS: This Policy shall not apply to:

a.

Page 66

The employee's personal computer, laptop computer, or cellular phone
which are used or carried in the course of the job.

Losses of precious or semi-precious stones, or losses to pieces of
personal jewelry.

Losses to any automobile, vehicles, trailer, motorcycle or any equipment
thereto, except in the course of employment and/or performance of
assigned duties when property authorized.

Losses of money.

Losses resulting from acts of negligence or deliberate destructive acts on
the part of the employee.

Losses resulting from ordinary wear and tear incidental to normal use and
employment.

Any item which is mutually agreed to in writing between the City and the
Association.

(Repair or Replacement of Damaged Personal Property)
3. MISREPRESENTATION

The provisions of this policy shall not apply if it appears that the employee has
concealed or intentionally misrepresented any material fact or circumstance concerning
the subject of the loss, his/her interests therein, or in the case of any fraud or false
statements by the employee relating thereto.

4. VALUATION

Upon acceptance of a claim, the City shall not be liable beyond the actual cash
value of the employee's property at the time any loss or damage occurs, and the loss or
damage shall be ascertained or estimated according to such actual cash value with
proper deduction for depreciation, however caused, and shall in no event exceed what it
would then cost to repair or replace the same with material of like kind or quality.
Deduction for depreciation will be calculated at the rate of ten percent (10%) per year
from date of purchase of damaged item.

5. RECOVERY

If in the event of any loss or damage, the employee shall acquire any right of
action against any individual, firm or corporation for loss or damage to property covered
by this policy, the employee assigns and transfers to the City, at the City's option, all
such rights of action to the extent of the amount paid, and will permit suit to be brought
in the employee's name under the direction of and at the expense of the City.

6. LIABILITY LIMITS

Notwithstanding any of the above, any individual employee shall recover no more
than $200 in any calendar year as a result of this policy. Items of theft, or mysterious
disappearance, shall be reported to the Police Department prior to the preparation of
any loss claim.

Page 67 (Repair or Replacement of Damaged Personal Property)
EXHIBIT C - CANINE HANDLER AGREEMENT

This agreement sets forth the terms and conditions of employment applicable to the
canine handler assignment, and in conjunction with department orders and the labor
agreement, sets forth the rights and responsibilities of that assignment.

Specifically, it is agreed as follows:

1.

2.

Page 68

The City will purchase and own the canine.

The handler will be responsible for the care, maintenance, supervision, and
control and training of the assigned dog.

The City will compensate the handler pursuant to the applicable provisions of
the Agreement.

The City will provide a twenty-four (24) hour retention vehicle for canine
transportation to and from work, and other related police travel.

The City will provide and pay for authorized veterinary care of the canine at its
discretion. Initial emergency lifesaving care if authorized pending receipt of
administrative approval or denial of further treatment. If the City determines
that no further care is authorized due to the nature of the injury, the City will,
at the discretion of the handler, release all interest in the dog to the handler
who shall assume responsibility for all additional veterinary care.

The City will provide all necessary equipment used for the care and training of
the canine.

Upon the request of the handler, the City will provide a portable kennel of
appropriate size up to and including 12 feet by 12 feet.

Except as provided below, the handler will have the right to purchase their
assigned canine from the City with a depreciation rate of twenty percent
(20%) from the original purchase price per year of service.

The handler will assume liability for damage to the real and personal property

of the handler for all of the normal wear and tear and damage associated with
dog ownership.

(Canine Handler Agreement)
10. The handler shall make all reasonable efforts in the off-duty care, supervision,
control and containment of the canine to prevent liability for damage or injury
to third parties or the property of third parties by the canine.

11.This agreement shall be subject to the provisions of the grievance procedure
in Article 4 of the Agreement between the City and the SPOA.

 

Dated:
AGREED TO: AGREED TO:
Sacramento Police Department Canine Handler

Page 69 (Canine Handler Agreement)
EXHIBIT D - CITY WORK LOCATIONS

/ ‘Zz — =e ARD AV
L—~Y e— 2 -.
RIVER prat, __( City work locations
Ph x y a ; |
. & / =

RD

Pp NH /

 

Page 70 (City Work Locations)
