7

Attachment.A

“MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE STOCKTON POLICE
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION AND CITY OF STOCKTON

TERM: July 1,.2012 June 30, 2014

CHY APT Y
REVIEW,
a an 5 2012

797
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

Tabie of Contents

INTRODUCTION... ec ecccceccesecseseeeeseesececececesseeaeseescaenesseceseesacasereeseseeeseeteerenseeneseaereees 3
Section 1. Recognition
Section 2. Association Security
Section 3. Compliance With Local, State & Federal Law:
Section 4. Probationary Period
Section 5.
Section 6. Remployment/Reinstatemen
Section 7. Discipline.............0.
Section 8. Grievance Procedures
Section 9. Leaves... ccc
Section 10. Days And Hours of Work
Section 11. Overtime
Section 12. Holidays.
Section 13. Compensation and Allowances Other Than Base Salary
Section 14. Insurance Plans.
Section 15. Salary Plan
Section 16. Residency
Section 17. Severability of Provisions
Section 18. Past Practices and Existing Memorandua Of Understanding
Section 19. Scope Of Agreement
Section 20. Duration
Section 21. Maintenance Of Operations
Section 22. City Rights
Section 23. Conditional Agreement Re Plan Support And Treatment Of Claims
Section 24. Conclusiveness ....
APPENDIX A. Salary Schedule
APPENDIX B. City Of Stockton Modified Employees Medical PLan With Medical Plan
Changes Effective September 1, 2011 0... cccceeesesecereeccersrsesesacateaeeatecesates 61
APPENDIX C. Union Proposal to Assume Administration of City Medical Plans
(agreement between the City of Stockton and the Employee Coalition
representing all City Unions including the SPOA)..........cccecseseeseeeeseeeeereesetees 66

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 2

798
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

This agreement (the “Agreement” or "MOU”) is made and entered into as of
November __, 2012 by and among the City of Stockton, California (the "City" or
"Stockton) and the Stockton Police Officers. Association (“SPOA”), sometimes
collectively referred to as the “Parties.”

INTRODUCTION

A. The Parties have been in negotiation over the terms of a successor to the
parties’ prior MOU that expired June 30, 2012 as well as the treatment of the claims of
members of the SPOA in bankruptcy that arose as a result of the City’s imposition of
compensation reductions during the term of the prior MOU.

B. Beginning on March 27, 2012, the City commenced the “AB 506 process”
in order to avoid and, if necessary, to qualify for, a chapter 9 bankruptcy filing. The
initial phase of the AB 506 process lasted 60 days, as mandated by statute. Cal. Gov't
Code § 53760.3(r). Upon the agreement of the majority of the City’s creditors who
participated, the AB 506 mediation process was extended by an additional 30 days. Cal.
Gov't Code § 53760.3(r). Despite good faith efforts by the City and the interested
parties, when the AB 506 process concluded on June 25, 2012, the City had not
"resolved all pending disputes with creditors." Cal. Gov't Code § 53760.3.

on During the AB 506 process, the City presented to all the interested parties
a 790-page “ask” (“Ask”), which contained specific proposals relating to each participant
as well as to other creditors that chose not to participate. The Ask was similar to a plan
of adjustment in that it disclosed to all creditors how the City viewed the claims of each
and the likely resolution of such claims in a proposed bankruptcy plan of adjustment.
Although no settlement was reached, the AB 506 process used the Ask as a baseline
for negotiations, and the Ask functioned in part as a de facto draft plan of adjustment
that described to all major creditors the treatment of the individual claims.

D. On June 26, 2012, the City Council adopted a “Pendency Plan” budget
(‘Pendency Plan”), which was based upon the detailed provisions of the Ask.

E. The City filed a chapter 9 bankruptcy petition on June 28, 2012. By order
dated July 11, 2012, the Bankruptcy Court appointed the Honorable Judge Elizabeth
Perris (“Judge Perris”) to serve as judicial mediator in the chapter 9 case. The Parties
conducted four days of mediation with Judge Perris, ending on November 2, 2012. The
Parties used the Pendency Plan as a starting point for negotiations to create a new
2012-2014 Memorandum of Understanding. During this successful mediation process,
the Parties continued earlier extensive efforts at settling disputes between them, both in
the AB 506 process, and in extensive parallel negotiations relating to the SPOA's

CITY OF STOCKTON 3

799
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

collective bargaining agreement(s) with the City, and reached a settlement covering all
disputes.

CITY OF STOCKTON 4

800
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 1. RECOGNITION

1.1. City Recognition

The City Manager or any person or organization duly authorized by the City
Manager, is the representative of the City of Stockton, hereinafter referred to as
the "City" in employer-employee relations as provided in Resolution No. 32,538,
adopted by the City Council on August 4, 1975.

1.2 Association Recognition
The Stockton Police Officers' Association, hereinafter referred to as the
"Association" is the recognized employee organization for the Police Officers'

Unit, certified pursuant to Resolution No. 32,548, adopted by the City Council on
August 11, 1975.

CITY OF STOCKTON 5

801
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 2. ASSOCIATION SECURITY

2.1 Dues Deduction

(a) General. The Association may have the regular dues of its members
within the representation unit deducted from employees' paychecks under
procedures prescribed by the City for such deductions. The Association
has the exclusive privilege of dues deduction for its members.

Payroll deductions shall be for a specified amount and consistent for all
employee members of the Association, and shall not include fines, fees
and/or assessments.

Authorization, cancellation or modification of payroll deduction shall be
made upon forms provided or approved by the City. The payroll deduction
authorization shall remain in effect until canceled or modified by the
employee by written notice to the City or until the first day of the calendar
month following the transfer of the employee to a unit represented by
another employee organization as the representative of the unit to which
the employee is assigned, or until employment with the City is terminated.

Amounts deducted and withheld by the City shall be transmitted to the
officer designated in writing by the Association as the person authorized to
receive such funds, at the address specified.

In addition to the deduction of dues, the City will deduct from the
paychecks of Association members who request it, deductions authorized
and sponsored by the Association. Such deductions shall be made from
either or both of the semi-monthly paychecks and only upon signed
authorization from the employee upon a form satisfactory to the City.
Such authorizations may be made or changed no more frequently than
twice yearly. Such deductions shall be payable to the Association who is
responsible for distribution to sponsored programs. The employee's
earnings must be sufficient after all other required deductions are made, to
cover the amount of the deductions herein authorized. When an employee
is in a non-pay status for an entire pay period, no withholdings will be
made to cover that pay period from future earnings nor will the employee
deposit the amount with the City which would have been withheld if the
employee had been in pay status during the period. In the case of an
employee who is in a non-pay status during a part of the period, and the
salary is not sufficient to cover the full withholding, no deduction shall be
made. In this connection, all other required deductions have priority over
the employee organization deduction.

CITY OF STOCKTON 6

802
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

(b) Indemnity and Refund. The Association shall indemnify, defend and hold
the City harmless against any claim made and against any suit initiated
against the City on account of check off of Association dues or premiums
for benefits. In addition, the Association shall refund to the City any
amounts paid to it in error upon presentation of supporting evidence.

2.2 Use of City Facilities

(a) The Association shall be allowed by the City department in which it
represents employees’ use of space on available bulletin boards for
communications having to do with official Association business, such as
times and places of meetings, provided such use does not interfere with
the needs of the department.

(b) Any representative of the Association shall give notice to the department
head or his/her designated representative when contacting department
employees on City facilities during the duty period of the employees,
provided that solicitation for membership or other internal Association
business shall be conducted during the non-duty hours of all employees
concerned. Prearrangement for routine contact may be made with the
Police Chief and when made shall continue until revoked by the Chief,

(c) City buildings and other facilities may be made available for use by City
employees of the Association or their representatives in accordance with
such administrative procedures as may be established by the City
Manager or department heads concerned.

2.3 Attendance at Meetings by Employees/Association Release Time

Release Time Related to Meet and Confer. City employees who are official
representatives of the Association shall be given reasonable time off with pay, in
accordance with MMBA, to attend meetings with City management
representatives, or be present at administrative hearings where matters within
the scope of representation or grievances related to this unit are being
considered.

The use of release time for this purpose shall be reasonable and shall not
interfere with the performance of City services as determined by the City. Such
employee representatives shall submit a request for excused absence to their
department head, in a manner satisfactory prior to the scheduled meeting
whenever possible. The number of employees excused for release time related
to meeting with City management on meet and confer and grievance matters
shall not exceed five (5), except by mutual agreement.

CITY OF STOCKTON 7

803
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 3. COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL, STATE & FEDERAL LAWS

 

3.1. The City and the Association agree that there shall be no discrimination of any
kind against any employee or applicant for employment because of age (over
40), race, color, religion, national origin (ancestry), veterans status, physical or
mental disability, marital status, sexual orientation, sex (sexual, gender based,
pregnancy/childbirth), political affiliation, legitimate Association activity, or any
other protected trait as determined by federal, state and/or local law.

3.2. The Association shall cooperate with the City in the objectives of Equal
Employment Opportunities as.required by law.

3.3. Fair Labor Standards Act. The Association shall cooperate with the City in the
objectives of the Fair Labor Standards Act.

CITY OF STOCKTON 8

804
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 4. PROBATIONARY PERIOD
4.1 Purpose

The probationary period shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's
work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new employee to his/her
position, and for eliminating any probationary employee whose performance
does not meet the required standards of work.

4.2 Original Entrance Positions

The City agrees that it shall adhere to all applicable City Ordinances, State and
Federal laws relating to the employment of Police Officers, including standards
established by the Peace Officers' Standards and Training Division of the
California Department of Justice.

All original entrance positions shall be tentative and subject to a probationary
period of eighteen (18) months. The probationary period for entrance positions
shall not be extended.

4.3 Promotional Positions

All promotional police appointments shall be subject to a probationary period of
twelve (12) months. The probationary period for police promotional positions
shall not be extended.

4.4  Retention/Rejection of Probationer

The Director of Human Resources shall notify the appointing authority at least
four (4) weeks prior to the termination of any probationary period. At the end of
the probationary period, if the service of the probationary employee has been
satisfactory to the appointing authority, then the appointing authority shall file with
the Director of Human Resources a statement in writing to such effect and stating
that the retention of such employee in the service is desired.

During the probationary period an employee may be rejected at any time by the
appointing authority. Any employee rejected during the probationary period
following a promotional appointment, shall be reinstated to the position from
which he/she was promoted unless charges are filed and he/she is discharged in
the manner provided in the City Charter Article XXXII Section 9, Civil Service
Ordinance and Civil Service Rules.

CITY OF STOCKTON 9

805
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

4.5 Probationer Advanced To Higher Rank
Any promotional probationary police employee who is advanced to a higher
classification or is appointed to the rank of Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of

Police shall receive credit towards his promotional probationary period for the
lower rank while serving in the higher probationary or appointive rank.

CITY OF STOCKTON 10

806
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 5, LAYOFF
5.1 Layoff

Any employee may be laid off by an appointing authority in the event of the
abolition of his position by the City Council, or if a shortage of work or funds
requires a reduction in personnel.

5.2 Layoff Scope
(a) Layoffs shall be within departments of the City.
(b) The departments of the City are defined as follows:

(1) Administrative Services
(2) City Attorney
(3) City Auditor
(4) City Clerk
(5) City Manager
(6) | Community Development
(7) Fire
(8) Housing and Redevelopment
(9) Human Resources
(10) Library Services
) Municipal! Utilities
) Parks and Recreation
(13) Police
) Public Works

5.3 Notice of Layoff

The City will give advance written notice of at least one pay period to employees
who will be laid off.

5.4 Precedence by Employment Status

No permanent employee shall be laid off while employees working in an extra
help, seasonal, temporary, provisional, or probationary status are retained in the
same classification as such permanent employee. The order of layoff among
employees not having permanent status shall be according to the following
categories:

a, Extra help or seasonal c. Temporary

CITY OF STOCKTON 14

807

 
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

b. Provisional d. Probationary

Layoffs shall be by job classification according to service in that class, except as
specified above. For the purpose of this procedure, part-time classes shall be
considered as separate from regular full-time classes.

The following provisions shall apply in computing total continuous service:

(a) Time spent on military leave shall count as service in the event the
leave was taken subsequent to entry in the department.

(b) Time worked in an extra help, seasonal, provisional, temporary,
grant or other limited term status shall not count as service.

(c) Time worked in a permanent or probationary status shall count as
service.

lf two (2) or more employees have the same seniority, the order of seniority shall
be determined by the employees’ examination results and ranking on the same
eligibility list upon which the employees’ were subsequently hired.

5.5 Employee Options
Employees laid off shall have any of the following choices:

(a) Displacing the employee in the same department and in the same or
clearly comparable classification as determined by the Director of Human
Resources as having the least seniority in that classification. This option
shall be exercised before any other option.

(b) | Taking a voluntary demotion within the department to a classification in
which the employee had prior permanent status, thus displacing the
employee working in that classification who has the least seniority in that
classification. The voluntary demotee's seniority in the classification to
which demoted shall be determined by the demotee's dates of hire in the
lower classification.

CITY OF STOCKTON 12

808
Ne

6.1

6.2

STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 6. REMPLOYMENT/REINSTATEMENT
Reemployment

When an employee in the classified service who has been performing his duties
in a satisfactory manner, as shown by the records of the department in which he
has been employed, is laid off because of lack of funds or abolition of his/her
position or has been on authorized leave of absence and is ready to report for
duty when a position is open, the Commission shall cause the name of such
employee to be placed on reemployment list for the appropriate class for
reemployment consistent with Civil Service Rule VII Certification and
Appointment pertaining to Police safety positions, currently in effect.

The order in which names shall be placed on the reemployment list for any class
shall be by seniority, which means "last-laid off, first rehired".

In filling vacancies, eligibles on the reemployment lists take precedence over
eligibles on any other list for the same rank in the department for which the lists
apply.

Reinstatement on a Reemployment List

A permanent employee who has resigned in good standing may, with the
recommendation of the Police Chief, the City Manager, and the approval of the
Civil Service Commission, be restored to a reemployment list of the same
classification upon as held upon resignation within a period of one (1) year from
the effective date of his/her resignation.

CITY OF STOCKTON 13

809
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 7, DISCIPLINE

Disciplinary action, including discharge, suspension, reduction in pay, demotion, or
other employment penalty may be taken against any employee for cause.

The appointing authority may discharge, suspend or demote any employee in the
classified service provided the City Charter provisions and the Rules and Regulations of
the Civil Service Commission and any applicable provisions of law are followed. Such
provisions allow the employee suspended, demoted or discharged to file an appeal to
the Civil Service Commission. The employee may take any one (1) of the following
actions:

(a) File no appeal.

(b) File an appeal with the Civil Service Commission within ten (10) business
days of written notification of the action. (Such filing will foreclose use of
the grievance procedure.)

(c) File a grievance as provided for in Section 8 starting at step two (2) with
the Director of Human resources within ten (10) business days of written
notification of the action, or fourteen (14) business days following the
mailing of a written notice by first class mail to the employee's address
contained in his/her official personnel records.

For purposes of this subsection "business day" means a day on which the Human
Resources Department is open for business to the public.

If the employee fails to do (b) or (c) above within the prescribed time frames, these
rights will have been waived.

CITY OF STOCKTON 14

810
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 8. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES
8.1 Definition

A grievance is any dispute which involves the interpretation or application of
those rules, regulations and resolutions which have been or may hereafter be,
adopted by the City Council to govern personnel practices and working
conditions, including such rules and regulations as may be adopted by either the
City Council or the Civil Service Commission to affect Memoranda of
Understanding which result from the meeting and conferring process.

8.2 Filing Deadline

No grievance involving demotion, suspension, discharge or other employment
penalty will be entertained unless it is filed in writing with the Director of Human
Resources within ten (10) business days of the date of receipt of written
notification of such action, or within fourteen (14) business days following mailing
of written notification by first class mail to the employee's address contained in
his/her official personnel records.

For purposes of this subsection, "business day" shall mean a day on which the
Human Resources Department is open for business to the public.

8.3 Grievance Processing

(a) Step 1 - Departmental Review. Any employee who believes that he/she
has a grievance may discuss his complaint with such management official
in the department in which he/she works as the department head may
designate. If the issue is not resolved within the department within seven
(7) business days from the day of presentation, or if the employee elects
to submit his/her grievance directly to the Association recognized as the
representative of his/her classification, the procedures hereinafter
specified may be invoked.

(b) Step 2 - Director of Human Resources Review. Any employee or any
official of the Association may notify the Director of Human Resources in
writing that a grievance exists stating the particulars of the grievance and,
if possible, the nature of the determination desired. The Director of
Human Resources shall have fourteen (14) business days in which to
investigate the issues, meet with the complainant and attempt to reach a
satisfactory resolution of the problem. No grievance may be processed
under the following two paragraphs which has not first been filed and

CITY OF STOCKTON 15

811
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

investigated in accordance with this paragraph except for the resolution of
compensation complaints.

(c) Step 3 - City Manager Review. Any grievance which has not been
resolved by the procedures hereinabove set forth may be referred to the
City Manager by the complainant or by the Director of Human Resources.
Such referral shall be in writing, detailing the specific issues involved in
the referral together with a statement of the resolution desired. The City
Manager shall designate a personal representative who shall not be the
Director of Human Resources to investigate the merits of the complaint to
meet with the complainant and, if the complainant is not the Association,
to meet also with the officials of the Association and to settle the grievance
or to make recommendations to the City Manager.

Failure to complete this step within sixty (60) calendar days shall result in
the grievance automatically proceeding to step four (4) of the grievance
procedure.

(d) Step 4 - Arbitration. Either the Association or the City may require that the
grievance be referred to an impartial arbitrator who shall be designated by
mutual agreement between the Association and the City Manager. The
fees and expenses of the arbitrator and of a court reporter shall be shared
equally by the Association and the City. Each party, however, shall bear
the cost of its own presentation, including preparation and post hearing
briefs, if any.

(e) Effect of Decision. The decision of the arbitrator on matters properly
before him/her shall be final and binding on the parties hereto except as
provided otherwise herein.

8.4 Scope of Arbitration

No arbitrator shall entertain, hear, decide or make recommendations on any
dispute unless such dispute involves a position in a unit represented by the
Association and unless such dispute falls within the definition of a grievance as
sét forth in paragraph 8.1.

Proposals to add to or change this Memorandum of Understanding or written
agreements or addenda supplementary hereto shall not be arbitrable and no
proposal to modify, amend or terminate this Memorandum of Understanding, nor
any matter or subject arising out of or in connection with such proposal, may be
referred to arbitration under this Section. No arbitrator selected pursuant to this
Section shall have the power to amend or modify this Memorandum of

CITY OF STOCKTON 16

812
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

Understanding or written agreements or addenda supplementary hereto or to
establish any new terms or conditions of employment.

No changes in this Memorandum of Understanding or interpretations thereof
(except interpretations resulting from the arbitration proceedings hereunder) will
be recognized unless agreed to by the City Manager and the Association.

8.5 Other Provisions

If the Director of Human Resources in pursuance of the procedures outlined
above, or the City Manager in pursuance of the provisions outlined above resolve
a grievance which involves suspension or discharge, they may agree to payment
for lost time or to reinstatement with or without payment for lost time, but in the
event the dispute is referred to arbitration and the arbitrator finds that the City
had cause to take the action complained of, the arbitrator may not substitute his
judgment for the judgment of management and if he finds that the City had such
right, he may not order reinstatement and may not assess any penalty upon the
City.

All complaints involving or concerning the payment of compensation shall be
initially filed in writing with the City Manager. Only complaints which allege the
employee is not being compensated in accordance with the provisions of this
Memorandum of Understanding shall be considered as grievances. Any other
matters of compensation are to be resolved in the meeting and conferring
process and if not detailed in the Memorandum of Understanding which results
from such meeting and conferring process shall be deemed withdrawn unti! the
meeting and conferring process is next open for such decision. No adjustment
shall be retroactive for more than thirty (30) days from the date upon which the
complaint was filed, except in cases where the City determines that the basis of
the compensation issue was a result of a clerical error, the adjustment shall be
no more than three hundred and sixty-five (365) days from the date upon which
the complaint was filed.

The provisions of this Section shall not abridge any rights to which an employee
may be entitled under the City Charter, nor shall it be administered in a manner
which would abrogate any power which, under the City Charter, may be within
the sole province and discretion of the Civil Service Commission.

All grievances of employees in representation units represented by the
Association shall be processed under this Section. If the City Charter requires
that a differing option be available to the employee, no action under paragraph
(d) of subsection 8.3 above shall be taken unless it is determined that the
employee is not availing himself/herself of such option.

CITY OF STOCKTON 17

813
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

No action under paragraph (d) of subsection 8.3 above shall be taken if action on
the complaint or grievance has been taken by the Civil Service Commission, or if
the complaint or grievance is pending before the Civil Service Commission.

If any award by an arbitrator requires action by the City Council or the Civil
Service Commission before it can be placed in effect, the City Manager and the

Director of Human Resources will recommend to the City Council or the Civil
Service Commission, as appropriate, that it follow such award.

CITY OF STOCKTON 18

814
9.1

STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU

Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014
SECTION 9. LEAVES

Sick Leave

{a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Accrual. All regular employees, except provisional, temporary, and
part-time employees, shall accrue sick leave at the rate of eight (8) hours
for each full month of service. All regular employees, except provisional,
temporary and part-time employees, working less than a full month shall
accrue sick leave on a prorated basis. Unused sick leave shall
accumulate from year to year. Employees shall continue to accrue sick
leave while off duty on authorized sick leave; provided, however, an
employee shall not accrue sick leave during any leave or leaves of
absence without pay granted to the employee.

Usage. Employees are entitled to sick leave pay for those days, which the
employee would normally have worked, to a maximum of sick leave hours
accrued.

An employee may use sick leave for preventive medical, dental, optical
care, illness, injury or exposure to contagious disease, which incapacitates
him/her from performing his/her duties. This includes disabilities caused
or contributed to by pregnancy, miscarriage, abortion, childbirth and
recovery therefrom.

Usage for Family. Employees may utilize fifty percent (50%) of their
annual accrued sick leave to attend to cases of illness or injury in the
employee's immediate family.

For the purposes of this section immediate family is defined as the
employee's parents, spouse, registered domestic partner, child (child as
defined as biological, step, foster or adopted child; a legal ward; child of
domestic partner; a child to whom the employee stands in loco parentis),
legal dependent, brother, sister, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-
law, sister-in-law, grandparent, and grandchild.

Procedures for Requesting and Approving Sick Leave. When the
requirement for sick leave is known to the employee in advance of his
absence, the employee shall request authorization for such sick leave
from the department head prior to such absence. In all other instances,
the employee shall notify his supervisor as promptly as possible of his
absence.

Before an employee may be paid for the use of accrued sick leave, he
shall complete and submit to his department head a signed statement, on

CITY OF STOCKTON 19

   
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

a prescribed form, stating the dates and hours of absence, the exact
reason, and such other information as is necessary for his request to be
evaluated. If an employee does not return to work prior to the preparation
of the payroll, other arrangements may be made with the approval of the
department head.

(e) Doctor's Certificate or Other Proof. The Police Chief or the Director of
Human Resources may require a doctor's certificate or other reasonable
proof of illness as he/she deem necessary in order for an employee to
teceive an excused absence from work and sick leave pay. The
employee shall be given notice prior to returning to work that he or she will
be required to provide such documentation. Employees who have
unscheduled absences due to illness on a scheduled work day preceding
or following a holiday may be required to bring a doctor's certificate or
other reasonable proof of illness in order to receive an excused absence
and sick leave pay.

(f) Use of Sick Leave While on Vacation. An employee who is injured or who
becomes ill while on vacation may be paid for sick leave in lieu of vacation
provided that the employee:

(1) | Was hospitalized during the period for which sick leave is claimed,
or

(2) Received medical treatment or diagnosis and presents a statement
indicating disabling illness or injury signed by a physician covering
the period for which sick leave is claimed.

(g) Payment for Unused Sick Leave. Except as provided in section (h), all
sick leave shall have no cash value upon separation of employment and
employees shall not be allowed to cash out unused sick leave. Current
employees shall be eligible for CalPERS service credit for unused sick
leave at retirement. Employees hired after the City amends its CalPERS
contract to eliminate service credit for unused sick leave shall not be
eligible for that service credit.

(h) Sick Leave Retention Benefit.
lf, after subtracting the equivalent of one full year of service credit (2080
hours), which may be applied to CALPERS service credit, any balance

remaining upon separation shall be paid as follows to employees who
have remained in City service until the dates specified:

CITY OF STOCKTON 20

816
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

(1) Separation prior to July 1, 2014, no payment of unused sick leave at
separation shall occur for separating employees before this date;

(2) Separation between July 1, 2014 and June 30, 2015, payment of
unused sick leave which the employee held on 2/16/12 shall be paid at
35% of its cash value to separating employees between these dates;
and

(3) Separation after July 1, 2015, payment of unused sick leave which the
employee held on 2/16/12 shall be paid at 50% of it’s cash value to
separating employees after this date.

(4) Service credit for unused sick leave shall be in accordance with PERS
regulations.

9.2 Military Leave

An employee of the City who is a member of the National Guard or Naval Militia
or a member of the Reserve Corps or force of the Federal Military, Naval, or
Marine service and is ordered to duty shall be granted leave with pay while
engaged therein, provided the leave does not exceed thirty (30) days in any
calendar year.

All regular employees in the service of the City shall be allowed leave of absence
without pay for the duration of a national emergency who have been inducted
into the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or any other branch of the Military
Service of the United States or the State of California. Said employees shall be
reinstated in the position they held when they were inducted into Military Service,
except as hereinafter stated, providing they are physically fit as shown by a
medical examination by the City Physician or other physician appointed to make
a medical examination.

In the case of a probationary employee having served his minimum probationary
period of eighteen (18) months at the time of induction, it shall be optional with
the department head and the City Manager to grant regular status to said
employee before induction.

All probationary employees inducted into Military Service not having served the
minimum probationary period of eighteen (18) months, or having served the
minimum probationary period of eighteen (18) months, but not having received
regular status shall be allowed leave of absence without pay for the duration of a
national emergency, but said employees shall be placed at the head of the
eligible list for such position in the order of their seniority of employment and
when appointed to a vacant position, they must be physically fit as above
CITY OF STOCKTON 21

817
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

specified and shall serve the balance of their probationary period before attaining
the status of a regular employee.

Two or more regular employees granted military leave of absence without pay
from the same position shall be reemployed according to their seniority of
employment providing they are physically fit as above specified.

9.3 Court Appearance

Upon approval by the department head, an employee, other than a provisional or
temporary employee, shall be permitted authorized absence from duty for
appearance in court because of jury service, in obedience to subpoena or by
direction of proper authority, in accordance with the following provisions:

(a) Said absence from duty will be compensated for actual hours the
employee serves on the jury or is required to remain in court to testify as a
witness in a criminal case, other than as a defendant, including necessary
travel time. As a condition of receiving such full pay, the employee must
remit to the City Treasurer, through the employee's department head,
within fifteen (15) days after receipt all fees received except those
specifically allowed for mileage and expenses.

(b) Jury duty or witness duty appearances shall be considered in terms of
actual hours spent performing those duties. If an employee is not due to
appear for jury duty or as a witness until afternoon court session, he/she
will be expected to work his usual morning schedule. If an employee is
required to appear for morning court session and is released before noon
and not required to return to court in the afternoon, he/she shall work the
remainder of his/her usual afternoon schedule.

(c) Said absence from duty will be without pay when the employee appears in
private litigation to which the City of Stockton is not a party.

Any fees allowed, except for reimbursement of expenses incurred, shall
be remitted to the City Treasurer through the employee's department
head.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, attendance in court in connection with an
employee's official duties or in behalf of the City of Stockton in connection
with a case in which the City of Stockton is a party, together with travel
time necessarily involved, shall not be considered absent from duty within
the meaning of this Section.

9.4 Bereavement Leave
CITY OF STOCKTON 22

818
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

In the event of a death in the immediate family of an employee, the employee
shall, upon request be granted up to three (3) days bereavement leave with pay
without charge to his/her accumulated sick leave credits or vacation eligibility.
The City Manager may grant an additional three (3) days bereavement leave
upon request which shall be charged against the employee's accumulated sick
leave credits in cases where extensive travel is required to attend the funeral.

For the purposes of this Section, the immediate family shall be restricted to the
employee’s parents, spouse, registered domestic partner, child, step child,
brother, sister, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, — sister-in-law,
grandparent, and grandchild.

In the event of the death of a person not immediately related to an employee as
defined above, the employee's department head may grant up to three (3) days
bereavement leave upon request which shall be charged against the employee's
accumulated sick leave credits.

9.5 Workers Compensation Leave

Forms and Procedures. Workers’ compensation processing shall be consistent
with City procedures and in accordance with state workers’ compensation
regulations. An employee who sustains a work-related injury or illness shall
immediately inform his/her supervisor no matter how minor an on-the-job injury
may appear. An employee who sustains a work-related injury or illness requiring
medical care is required to seek medical care at facilities designated by the City
unless they have filed a pre-designation of personal physician prior to sustaining
the work-related injury or illness. For a list of City designated medical care
facilities and/or physicians, please contact Human Resources.

9.6 Leave of Absence

Employees shall not be entitled to leaves of absence as a matter of right, but only
in accordance with the provisions of law and the City of Stockton Municipal Code.
Unless otherwise provided, the granting of a leave of absence also grants to the
employee the right to return to a position in the same classification or equivalent
classification, as the employee held at the time leave was granted. The granting
of any leave of absence shall be based on the presumption that the employee
intends to return to work upon the expiration of the leave.

: CITY OF STOCKTON 23

819
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

All approval authority over leaves of absence exercised by the department head
under this Section shall be subject to review by the City Manager, whose ruling
shall be final.

Employees on authorized leaves of absence without pay shall not be entitled to
payment by the City of the premiums for their health and dental insurance,
except as provided hereinafter.

The entitlement to City payment of premiums shall end on the last day of the
month in which the employee was paid except that employees on an authorized
leave of absence may continue enrollment in the City health insurance plan by
prepayment of the monthly premium during the authorized leave of absence.

Authorized absence without pay which exceeds thirty (30) consecutive calendar
days, except military leave, shall not be included in determining salary
adjustment rights, based on length of employment. Periods of time during which
an employee is required to be absent from his/her position by reason of an injury
or disease for which he/she is entitled to and currently receiving Workers’
Compensation benefits shall be included in computing length of service for the
purpose of determining that employee's salary adjustments.

9.7 Leave of Absence Without Pay

(a) Purpose and Length. Only employees occupying regular positions on a
permanent basis are eligible for leaves of absence without pay under the
provisions of this Section.

An appointing authority may grant a leave of absence without pay for
personal reasons up to a maximum of twelve (12) months with approval of
the Director of Human Resources.

Leaves of absence without pay on account of illness or injury which are
not job-incurred may be granted for a maximum period of twelve (12)
months with approval of the Director of Human Resources. This includes
disabilities caused or contributed to by pregnancy, miscarriage, abortion,
childbirth and recovery therefrom.

Such a leave will be granted only after all accrued sick credits have been
used and shall be substantiated by a physician's statement.

(b) Application for and Approval of Leaves of Absence Without Pay. In order
to receive leave without pay, an employee must submit a request on the
prescribed form to his department head and the City Manager describing
the reasons for the request and all other information required for the

CITY OF STOCKTON 24

820
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

department head, or his representative, to evaluate the request. Leaves
without pay may be canceled by the department head at any time.

9.8 Absence Without Leave

(a) Refusal of Leave or Failure to Return After Leave. Failure to report for
duty or failure to report for duty after a leave of absence request has been
disapproved revoked or canceled by the department head or City Manager
or at the expiration of a leave, shall be considered an absence without
leave.

(b) Voluntary Resignation. Any employee of this bargaining unit absent
without leave for two (2) or more consecutive days or absent an aggregate
of either sixteen (16) hours or twenty (20) hours in any calendar month
without a satisfactory explanation shall be deemed to have voluntarily re-
signed from the City of Stockton except if the absence is due to a verified
illness or injury.

9.9 Vacation Leave

(a) Vacation Allowance. All regular employees, excluding provisional,
temporary and part-time employees shall accrue vacation leave with pay
semi-monthly in accordance with the following schedule:

Less than 1-1/2 years continuous employment ..
After 1-1/2 years up to 7 1/2 years
After 7-1/2 years up to 15 years
After 15 years up to 25 years...

... 80 hours/year

108 hours/year
. 144 hours/year
.... 189 hours/year

 

 
 

 

Seven (7) additional hours hence for each completed year of service in
excess of twenty-five (25) years.

(b) Vacation Accumulation. Effective July 1, 2012, the following maximum
vacation accruals shall take effect. Employees reaching the maximum
hours provided here shall stop accruing additional vacation hours until
they are below the caps listed here. No vacation hours may be added to
sick leave balances without exception.

Employees who, on July 1, 2012, have vacation balances that exceed
their maximum shall have until June 30, 2013 to use sufficient vacation
satisfy the maximum allowed. If an employee does not satisfy the
maximum by June 30, 2013, he/she shall retain his/her existing earned
vacation, but shall not earn any additional vacation until the employee's

CITY OF STOCKTON 25

821
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30; 2014

vacation balance is under the maximum vacation accrual allowed.

The maximum number of vacation hours that employees on a 40 hour
workweek shall accrue are as follows:

Under 1.5 years 120 hours
1.5—-7.5 years 240 hours
7.5 — 15 years 280 hours
15 — 25 years 320 hours
26 years 328 hours
27 years 336 hours
28 years 344 hours
29 years 352 hours
29 plus years 7 hours each additional year

(c) Vacation Schedule. The time at which employees shall be granted
vacation leave shall be at the discretion of the department head with due
regard for the wishes of the employee and needs of the City.

(d) Vacation Allowance for Separated Employees

(1) When an employee is separated from the service between
February 17, 2012 and July 1, 2014, the employee’s remaining
vacation allowance, if any, shall be paid as follows:

a. Upon separation, employees shall receive one third (1/3) or
$10,000, whichever is greater, of the total of his/her unused
accumulated vacation hours.

b. On the one year anniversary of employee’s separation,
he/she shall receive the second payment of one third (1/3) or
$10,000, whichever is greater of the balance of his/her
unused accumulated vacation hours.

c. On the second year anniversary of employee’s separation
he/she shall receive payment for the balance of the unpaid
accumulated vacation hours.

d. Employees who are involuntarily separated shall have their
remaining vacation allowance, if any, added to his/her final
compensation.

CITY OF STOCKTON 26

822
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

{2) An employee who has resigned in good standing and is
subsequently reinstated within one (1) year from the date of his
resignation shall have his prior service counted in determining
eligibility for vacation benefits, deducting therefrom the amount of
time between the date of resignation and the date of reinstatement
which shall not be counted in determining eligibility.

CITY OF STOCKTON 27

823
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 10. DAYS AND HOURS OF WORK

10.1 Regular Workweek

The normal! workweek for Police Unit employees shall consist of five (5) eight (8)
hour days or a minimum total of forty (40) hours. Where operational
requirements of a department require deviations from the present schedule, the
City Manager may institute alternate work schedules, consistent with provisions
of the State Law.

10.2 Regular Workweek for Patrol

The work schedule for patrol is the current 4/10 work schedule. The Chief of
Police may change the start/finish time of a shift after providing written
notification.

10.3 Meai Periods

Phase shift employees normally receive a one-half (1/2) hour meal with pay each
day.

Other Police Unit employees will normally receive a one (1) hour meal period
without pay.

10.4 Work Furloughs

(a) 62 Furlough Hours. Effective the pay period that includes July 1, 2012
through June 30, 2014, each employee shall take sixty two (62) unpaid
furlough hours in each fiscal year in accordance with (c) and (d) of this
section for a total of one hundred and twenty four (124) hours of unpaid
furlough hours. The parties agree that the City shall have the complete
authority to reduce or eliminate, but not increase the 62 hours per fiscal
year furlough requirement, at any time during the term of this contract
upon written notice from the City to the SPOA.

(b) Equalized Payroll Deductions. Payroll deductions for the sixty two (62)
furlough hours per fiscal year of this contract described in section 10.4,
paragraph (a) herein above shall be equalized so that each bargaining unit
employee shall have three percent (3%) of the employee’s regular hourly
tate of pay deducted from each of the twenty-four (24) pay warrants in
each fiscal year.

(c) | Eurlough Bank. On or after the first pay period in July of 2012 and July of
CITY OF STOCKTON 28

824
Ne

STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 —- June 30, 2014

2013, sixty two (62) furlough hours per fiscal will be placed in a furlough
bank. There shall be no cash value provided for any furlough hours since
the start of the furlough program in 2009 and all furlough bank hours shall
be used in accordance with 10.4 d below.

(d) Use of Furlough Hours. All furlough leave shall be scheduled in advance
with the employee’s supervisor. All Furlough must be scheduled and used
prior to the date of separation in accordance to City’s leave policies.

CITY OF STOCKTON 29

825
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 11. OVERTIME

11.1 Authorization

All compensable overtime must be authorized by the Chief of Police or the
Chief's designated representative in advance of being worked. If prior
authorization is not feasible because of emergency conditions a confirming
authorization must be made on the next regular work day following the date
which the overtime was worked.

11.2 Compensation

The following provisions pertaining to authorized statutorily required overtime
work shall apply to employees whose normal work period is eight (8) hours per
day and forty (40) hours per week, or (10) hours per day and forty (40) hours per
week:

(a) Statutory overtime shall be paid on actual time worked in excess of forty
(40) hours in any workweek. Such overtime shall be paid for at time and
one-half (1-1/2) including employees employed on a per hour or per day
basis or except as provided elsewhere herein.

(b) | Ona holiday observed by the City an employee shall be paid for a regular
day plus time and one-half (1-1/2) for actual time worked.

(c) Hours worked shall include all actual time worked. Furlough hours taken,
holiday hours taken and observed holidays where the City is closed shall
be considered as time worked and those positions in this unit are not
required to report to work. Sick leave, vacation, or other compensated
time off shall not be considered as actual time worked.

41.3 Court Appearance Pay While in Off Duty Status

(a) An employee required by proper authority to appear in court during off-
duty hours shall receive compensation of three (3) hours at time and
one-half (1-1/2) or actual time worked at the appropriate rate, whichever is
greater.

(b) — Voluntary Court Standby.

Police Unit employees who voluntarily place themselves on standby for
court appearance while off duty shall receive one (1) hour of pay at the
regular rate for the four (4) hours of standby for the a.m. and, if required to

CITY OF STOCKTON 30

826
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

remain on standby, one (1) additional hour at the regular rate of pay for
the additional four (4) hours of standby for the p.m.

11.4 Call-Back Policy

When an employee is called back to work from an off-duty status, the employee
shall be compensated for a minimum of three (3) hours at time and one-half (1-
1/2) or actual time worked at time and one-half (1-1/2), if eligible for overtime as
defined in Section 11.2, above, whichever is greater.

11.5 Compensatory Time

(a) Definition - As used in this Section, the term Compensatory Time refers to
that time which an employee is entitled to be absent from duty with pay for
hours worked in addition to or excess of their normal work schedule. Such
time has previously been referred to as Earned Time.

(b) Accrual - For all hours in excess of forty (40) hours in a seven (7) day
work period, for which the employee is in a paid status, the Association
agrees that compensatory time shall be earned at the rate of time and
one-half (1-1/2).

No more than eighty (80) hours (fifty-six and one-third hours [56-1/3])
worked at time and one-half (1-1/2) may be carried on the books at any
time. When the time card is filled out, employees may elect to accrue
Compensatory Time or be paid cash.

(c) Use - Use of Compensatory Time shall be scheduled with due
consideration for the wishes of the employee and so as to not interfere
with the normal operation of City business. Approval of requests for use
of Compensatory Time shall be at the sole discretion of the department
head, but once approved, cannot be. changed unless an emergency
situation arises.

(d) | Payment - Once eighty (80) hours of Compensatory Time is accrued on
the books, all other hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours in a seven
(7) day work period will automatically be paid. At the end of each calendar
year, all Compensatory Time will be carried forward (forty (40) hours
maximum), unless the employee elects to have the compensatory balance
paid. Carryover Compensatory Time cannot exceed the forty (40) hours
maximum.

11.6 Standby Compensation
CITY OF STOCKTON 31

827
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

Employees who are placed on standby on Saturday or Sunday or their normal
day off shall be paid at the rate of $3.00 per hour for each hour on standby
assignment. An employee shall earn time and one-half (1-1/2) for all actual time
worked while on standby duty status only if eligible for overtime as defined
above. An employee shall not continue to receive the “standby” premium during
aciual time worked or for any hours paid as overtime or call back. Standby is not
considered as time in “paid status because of work performed” for purposes of
calculating overtime.

Employees who are placed on standby after their normal tour of a regular work
day shall receive $3.00 per hour for each hour of standby. An employee shall
earn time and one-half (1-1/2) for all actual time worked while on standby duty
status only if eligible for overtime as defined above. An employee shall not
continue to receive the “standby” premium during actual time worked or for any
hours paid as overtime or call back. Standby is not considered as time in “paid
status because of work performed” for purposes of calculating overtime.

Employees who are placed on standby shall take a City vehicle and a beeper
when required to stand by. The vehicle and beeper shall be turned in at the
conclusion of each standby assignment.

While in such standby status employees shall leave with the Command Center a
telephone number at which they can be reached. Such employees shall be
within forty-five (45) minute response time availability to the Police Department.

11.7 No Standby Compensation for Time Worked
Employees shall not simultaneously receive compensation for court appearance,
voluntary court standby, standby, or call back pay provided in Sections 11.3(a),

11.3(b), 11.4 or 11.6. Employees are eligible to receive overtime only in
accordance with Section 11.2 above.

CITY OF STOCKTON 32

828
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 —- June 30, 2014

SECTION 12. HOLIDAYS
12.1 Holiday Compensation

(a) All regular and probationary Police Unit employees shall receive, in
addition to their normal compensation, one day's pay for each of the
holidays listed.

(b) Police Unit employees required to work a holiday shall be compensated
an additional day's pay at one and one-half (1-1/2) times the straight time
rate. This compensation can be in the form of direct payment or
compensatory time. Compensatory time overtime hours shall be limited to
a maximum accumulation of eighty (80) hours at any point. Police Unit
employees requesting payment for compensatory time shall, prior to July
1, each year, declare on a form provided by the City their intention to
receive equivalent compensatory time for holidays which they may have to
work.

12.2 Holidays Observed by the City

Employees shall receive the following holidays on full pay not to exceed eight (8)
hours for any one (1) holiday, unless otherwise provided in this section.

(1) New Years Day oo. cee cer creeenereenesecneneraenenrcemetneeee (January 1)
(2) Martin Luther King’s Birthday . (Third Monday in January)
(3) Lincoln's Birthday ..... (Second Monday in February)
(4) Washington's Birthda .(Third Monday in February)

 

 
 

 

 

(5) Cesar Chavez’ Day ... (March 31)
(6) Memorial Day (Last Monday in May)
(7) Independence Day oo... ccceceseeseteescsneeeesescseeeeseseeeseseceseeesnenerecens (July 4)

 
 
 

(8) Labor Day.....
(9) Columbus Day.
(10) Veteran's Day..
(11) Thanksgiving ...
(12) Day following Thanksgiving
(13) Christmas Day

First Monday in September)
. (Second Monday in October)
(November 11)
. (Fourth Thursday in November)
(Fourth Friday in November)
(December 25)

 

 

  
 

 

For employees on a Monday through Friday workweek, if holidays fall on a
Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed. If holidays fall on Saturday, the
preceding Friday shall be observed.

CITY OF STOCKTON 33

829
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

For employees on 4/10 alternative work schedule, employees may flex the
remaining two hours of a scheduled holiday within the same FLSA work period
with prior approval of their supervisor.

For employees on 9/80 alternative work schedule, employees may shift their

work schedule so that their eight (8) hour day falls on designated holiday with
prior approval of their supervisor.

CITY OF STOCKTON 34

830
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 - June 30, 2014

SECTION 13. COMPENSATION AND ALLOWANCES OTHER THAN BASE
SALARY

13.1 Retirement Contribution Supplement

(a) The City contributes an amount equal to nine percent (9%) of the
employee's current base salary and other compensation as qualified by
State law toward P.E.R.S. benefits. Such amounts will be applied to the
employee's individual account in accordance with Government Code
Section 20691.

(b) The City will make application to P.E.R.S. to provide California
Government Code section 20692 (Employer Paid Member Contributions
Converted to Payrate during the Final Compensation Period) as an
additional P.E.R.S. benefit, to be effective upon adoption by the Stockton
City Council and the P.E.R.S. Administration Board. The Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) Code 414H(2), whereby employee contributions
shall be tax deferred (not subject to taxation until time of constructive
receipt) will be concurrently implemented with P.E.R.S. California
Government Code section 20692.

At the beginning of employee's last year of employment, such employee
shall pay their employees’ nine percent (9%) retirement contribution
through an automatic payroll deduction. The City shall increase the
employee’s base salary by the same nine percent (9%) for the last twelve
(12) months of employment.

(c) Legacy employees hired on or before December 31, 2012 shall pay nine
(9%) of the employee’s current base salary (employee contribution) and
other compensation as qualified by state law towards the Public
Employees’ Retirement System (PERS) towards the employee’s share of
cost for PERS pension. Such amounts will be applied to the employee’s
individual account in accordance with Government Code section 20691.

(d) Non Sworn Police Officer Trainee. The City and the Association agree
that employees hired into the Non Sworn Police Officer Trainee
classification shall be members of the “local miscellaneous” retirement
plan rather than the “local safety” retirement plan.

The employee shall contribute seven percent (7%) of the employee’s
current base salary and other compensation as qualified by State law
toward the P.E.R.S. Local Miscellaneous Members Plan. Such amounts

CITY OF STOCKTON 35

831
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

will be applied to the employee's individual account in accordance with
Government Code section 20691.

Upon satisfactory completion of basic recruit training, the Non Sworn
Police Officer Trainee (Local Miscellaneous Member) shall be transferred
to Sworn Police Officer plan (Local Safety Member).

13.2 Military Service Credit

The City shall provide for military service pursuant to the provisions of
Government Code Section 21024, formerly Section 20930.3 and Section
20930.33, at the employee's expense.

13.3 P.E.R.S. Fourth Level Of 1959 Survivor Benefits

The City provides P.E.R.S. California Government Code section 21574 (Fourth
Level of 1959 Survivor Benefits) as an additional retirement benefit, to be
effective upon adoption by the Stockton City Council and the P.E.R.S.
Administration Board.

13.4 P.E.R.S. 3% At Age 50 Retirement for Employees Hired on or before
December 31, 2012

 

On July 21, 2000, the City made application to PERS to provide P.E.R.S.
California Government Code section 21362.2 (3% at age 50) as an amendment
retirement benefit, to be effective upon adoption by the Stockton City Council and
the P.E.R.S. Administration Board.

13.5 PERS Benefits for Employees hired on or after January 1, 2013

(a) | Employees hired on or after January 1, 2013 shall be subject to the new
AB340 PERS pension formula of 2.7%@57 with no optional pension
enhancements. Employees shall pay 50% of the City normal cost rate for
the 2.7% @57 as determined by CalPERS.

(b) As soon as administratively possible, the City shall amend its CalPERS
contract to eliminate sick leave conversion and the enhanced survivor
benefits for all employees hired on or after the effective date of the
contract amendment.

13.6 Uniform Allowance
(a) Employees in this unit shall receive as additional annual compensation, a

uniform allowance in the amount of nine hundred fifty dollars ($950.00).
CITY OF STOCKTON 36

832
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

Payment shall be made in two equal installments of one-half (1/2) of the
annual value of uniform allowance to eligible employees during the
months of April and October.

(b) Protective Vests - The City shall provide safety protective vest and annual
testing by lot number.

13.7 P.O.S.T. Incentive Pay

(a) The City will pay three percent (3%) of the Police Officer top salary step
for employees who attain an Intermediate P.O.S.T. Certificate and six
percent (6%) of the Police Officer top salary step for employees who attain
an Advanced P.O.S.T. Certificate.

(b) Effective January 1, 1999, the City will pay three percent (3%) of the
Police Sergeant top salary step for employees who attain an Intermediate
P.O.S.T. Certificate, and six percent (6%) of the Police Sergeant top
salary step for employees who attain an Advanced P.O.S.T. Certificate.

(c) | The Personnel and Training Division of the Police Department will submit
the appropriate paperwork to the Human Resources Services Department
confirming and authorizing P.O.S.T. Educational Incentive Pay for eligible
employees.

Compensation shall be effective the first of the month following the date of
eligibility for the certificate.

13.8 Longevity Increment Pay for Police Officer for Grandfathered Employees
Only

Effective August 1, 2011, Longevity Increment Pay for Police Officer shall be
eliminated, Those members who were receiving Longevity Increment Pay as of
July 31, 2011, shall be grandfathered, and effective August 1, 2011 their
Longevity Increment Pay shall be reduced by 5% and shall remain frozen at that
level and no additional increments shall be earned, as described herein.

(a) For those members who as of July 31, 2011 were receiving five percent
(5%) of top salary step in rank for longevity, upon completion of six (6)
continuous years of service as a public safety officer with the Stockton
Police Department, effective August 1, 2011 those members shall no
longer receive longevity increment pay. This longevity increment pay shall
remain frozen at this level and no additional increments shall be earned.

CITY OF STOCKTON 37

833
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July.1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

(b) For those members who as of July 31, 2011 were receiving seven percent
(7%) of top salary step in rank for longevity, upon completion of nine (9)
continuous year of service as a public safety officer with the Stockton
Police Department, effective August 1, 2011 the City shall pay two percent
(2%) of top salary step in rank for longevity pay. This longevity increment
pay shall remain frozen at this level and no additional increments shall be
earned.

(c) For those members who as of July 31, 2011 were receiving twelve percent
(12%) of top salary step in rank for longevity, upon completion of twelve
(12) continuous years of service as a public safety officer with the
Stockton Police. Department, effective August 1, 2011 the City shall pay
seven percent (7%) of top salary step in rank for longevity pay. This
longevity increment pay shall remain frozen at this level and no additional
increments shall be earned.

(d) | For those members who as of July 31, 2011 were receiving fourteen
percent (14%) of top salary step in rank for longevity, upon completion of
eighteen (18) continuous years of service as a public safety officer with
the Stockton Police Department, effective August 1, 2011 the City shall
pay nine percent (9%) of top salary step in rank for longevity pay. This
longevity increment pay shall remain frozen at this level and no additional
increments shall be earned.

(e) | For those members who as of July 31, 2011 were receiving nineteen
percent (19%) of top salary step in rank for longevity, upon completion of
twenty-four (24) continuous years of service as a public safety officer with
the Stockton Police Department, effective August 1, 2011 the City shall
pay fourteen percent (14%) of top salary step in rank for longevity pay.
This longevity increment pay shall remain frozen at this level and no
additional increments shall be earned.

(f) For the limited purpose of defining continuous service under this Section
of the Memorandum of Understanding, continuous service shall include
leaves without pay for less than one (1) year as long as the public safety
officer did not withdraw the his or her contributions to P.E.R.S.

(g) Effective July 1, 2012, Section 13.8(a) through (f) are modified _as
follows:

Employees who are receiving Longevity Pay as described above shall
have their Longevity pay reduced an additional 4% effective July 1, 2012,
except that individuals whose 2011 reduction of the following amounts

CITY OF STOCKTON 38

834
13.9

13.1

13.1

13.1

STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

(Reductions of Longevity pay, elimination of Master Officer Pay,
elimination of Educational Incentive and payment of employees PERS
contribution) was 22% shall have their Longevity amount reduced by 1%.
The longevity increment pay shall remain frozen at this level and no
additional increments shall be earned nor additional persons shall qualify
for this pay.

Longevity Increment Pay For Police Sergeant

The 5% Longevity Pay received by Sergeants is frozen effective July 1, 2012 and
no additional persons shall qualify for this pay.

0 Canine Handler Compensation

Employees assigned canine responsibilities shall be paid a maximum of ten (10)
hours per month, at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) time. Compensation
shall be for time spent by officers on their off-duty time to feed and exercise the
dog and to clean the kennel.

1 Motorcycle Officer Compensation

Effective the first full pay period after the effective date of this contract,
employees assigned motorcycle responsibilities shall be paid a maximum of four
and one-quarter (4.25) hours per month, at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2)
time. Compensation shall be for the time spent by officers on their off-duty time
to clean, wax and generally maintain their assigned motorcycles.

2 Explosive Ordinance Disposal Compensation

Effective July 1, 2005, the pay for unit members assigned to EOD shall be paid a
maximum of five (5) hours per month at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) time.

13.13 SWAT Compensation

Effective the first full pay period after the effective date of this contract, the pay
for unit members assigned to SWAT shall be paid a maximum of four and one-
quarter (4.25) hours per month at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) time.

13.14 Field Training Officer Compensation

Effective July 1, 2005, the pay for unit members assigned to Field Training
Officer shall be five percent (5.0%) of the top salary step of rank.

CITY OF STOCKTON 39
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

13.15 Bilingual Pay

Effective July 1, 2005, the pay for qualified and approved bilingual skill will be two
and one-half percent (2.5%) of the top salary step of rank.

To be eligible for this differential pay, an officer must be certified to meet the
functional needs of the Department. The Chief of Police has the sole discretion
in determining the number of officers needed for bilingual services, the
languages that will be recognized, and the functional language skills needed for
the Department.

13.16 Acting Pay
Any employee who is assigned by proper authority to work in a higher paid
classification and who performs a majority of the duties of that higher position

shall receive that rate of pay in a step of the higher classification which would
have been received if the employee had been promoted into that classification.

CITY OF STOCKTON 40

836
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 14. INSURANCE PLANS
14.1 Health Insurance And Related Benefits

a. Choice of Health Plans. Employees in this bargaining unit shall have a
choice of enrolling themselves and their eligible dependents in any of the
City sponsored medical, dental and vision plans. Each plan shall offer an
Employee only, Employee plus One and Employee plus two or more
dependents coverage. The City shall offer two or more medical plans to
regular employees. As soon as administratively possible after the
ratification and adoption of this MOU by the City Council, an HMO (Kaiser)
will be added as a plan choice for employee’s in this unit.

b. Eligibility. Employees shall become eligible for Medical insurance on the
first day of the month subsequent to completion of thirty (30) days of
continuous service with the City. Employees shall become eligible for
Dental insurance on the first day of the month subsequent to completion of
sixty (60) days continuous service with the City. An eligible employee and
eligible dependent may be enrolled in a City offered medical plan either as
a subscriber in a City offered medical plan or, as the dependent
spouse/registered domestic partner or another eligible City employee, but
not both. If an employee is also eligible to cover their dependent child, the
child will be allowed to enroll as a dependent on only one employee plan
(i.e., an employee and his or her dependent cannot be covered by more
than one City-offered health plan).

c. City Contribution Towards the Cost of Insurance Programs. Effective
September 1, 2011:

(1) The City shall contribute up to $481.00 per month toward the cost
of the monthly premium for employee-only medical/dental/vision
plan coverage.

(2) The City shall contribute up to $875.00 per month toward the cost
of the monthly premium for employee plus one dependent
medical/dental/vision plan coverage.

(3) | The City shall contribute up to $1165.00 per month toward the cost
of the monthly premium for employee plus two or more dependents
medical/dental/vision plan coverage.

These contributions are based on full-time employment; regular part-time

employees shall receive a prorated contribution based on their percentage
CITY OF STOCKTON 41

837
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 - June 30, 2014

of fulltime employment. Insurance plan premiums that exceed the City's
monthly contribution shall be paid by the employee through payroll
deductions. The City shall maintain its IRS 125 Plan to allow for employee
contributions for medical/vision/dental to be pre-tax premium conversion.

d. Plan Rules. Employees may insure themselves and their eligible
dependents under the medical/vision and dental plans provided by the
City, in accordance with the rules and regulations applicable to the
selected Plan. Benefits in the Plan shall be in accordance with the Plan

document.

e. Plan design changes to the City’s Modified Plan for employees are
effective September 1, 2011 (see Appendix B for details of Plan
modification).

f. It is understood that a coalition of the City’s unions, including SPOA, are

exploring the possibility of providing a health plan for all city employees
and retirees, independent from the City. On or before October 1, 2012,
the Unions shall notify the City of whether they in fact are proposing to
assume the provision of medical plans for employees and retirees.
Should the City and unions in fact agree upon the unions administering
their own plan, the terms of that assumption shall be established through
meet and confer, as set forth in the Appendix C. The terms of such plan,
once agreed upon shall supersede this section to the extent inconsistent,
provided the City’s contribution to such plan for active employees in this
unit shall not exceed the maximum contributions set forth subsection c.

14.2 Retirement Medical Allowance
a. Eligibility.

An eligible retiree and eligible dependent may be enrolled in a City offered
medical plan either as a subscriber in a City offered medical plan or, as
the dependent spouse/registered domestic partner or another eligible City
employee/retiree, but not both. If an employee/retiree is also eligible to
cover his/her dependent child, the child will be allowed to enroll as a
dependent on only one employee or retiree’s plan (i.e., a retiree and his or
her dependent cannot be covered by more than one City-offered health
plan). The City does not provide any retiree medical program, allowance,
or City contribution for employees hired on or after July 1, 2011.

b. City Contribution for the Period of July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2013.
CITY OF STOCKTON 42

838
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

The City shall provide to employees retiring from the City the following
contribution towards the cost of retiree medical insurance from July 1,
2012 through June 30, 2013:

1. Employees retiring with over 10 years of full time service with the City
of Stockton as a regular employee shall receive a City contribution of
$150 a month towards the cost of retiree medical insurance.

2. Employees retiring with over 20 years of full time service with the City
of Stockton as a regular employee shall receive a City contribution of
$300 a month towards the cost of retiree medical insurance.

3. Employees retiring with over 30 years of full time service with the City
of Stockton as a regular employee shall receive a City contribution of
$450 a month towards the cost of retiree medical insurance.

4. Employees with less than 10 years of service for the City shall not be
eligible for a city contribution towards retiree medical.

5. Benefits for part time employees who retire are prorated based on their
full time equivalent.

6. The City contributions shall end with the death of the retiree and no
survivor benefits are provided.

7, a. Retirees may enroll themselves or their dependents at their own
expense in City sponsored medical plans only (dental and vision are
not offered to retirees). The City reserves the right to set benefit levels
in medical plans for retirees and at its exclusive option only provide
fully insured plan choices to retirees for enrollment. The City reserves
the right to discontinue inclusion of retirees in City sponsored medical
plans at any time.

b. The City’s commitment to provide retiree medical benefits during
the 2012-2013 fiscal year is to the retiree and shall end upon the death
of the retiree. Surviving spouses shall not be eligible for any City paid
benefit after the death of the City retiree. Any benefits previously paid
to surviving spouses have been paid in error and without the approval
of the City Council.

c. Elimination of Retiree Medical Program effective June 30, 2013.
Effective June 30, 2013, the City shall no longer provide a contribution
towards the cost of retiree medical insurance for current employees

CITY OF STOCKTON 43

839
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

(future retirees) and current retiree.
14.3 Alternative Retirement Medical Plans

The parties have negotiated that employees may choose to enroll in one or more
additional health plans instead of the City Modified Plan (including but not limited
to Kaiser Sr. Advantage).

This language sets forth the conditions in which current employees, when they
retire from the City and otherwise qualify for a retiree medical benefit from the
City as stated in Sections 14.2 and 14.4 of this MOU, may also choose to enroll
in City sponsored alternative plans in the same manner as when they were
employees, as well as retiree only medical plans. The following conditions shall
apply:

(a) If an employee is in a City sponsored alternative plan at the time of
retirement, the employee shall be allowed to continue in that Plan.
Employees in the union sponsored plans authorized by the City at the time
of retirement shall be allowed to continue in that Plan. Employees not in
an alternative Plan at the time of retirement shall not be allowed to enroll
in any alternative plan except that any retiree may voluntarily enroll in a
City sponsored retiree only Plan.

A retiree may only enroll in alternative plans other than the City Modified Plan when:

(a) The retiree selecting plans other than the City’s Modified Plan agrees that
the City’s financial contribution to a premium payment for any other Plan
shall not exceed the current contribution amount the City would pay if the
retiree is enrolled in the City Modified Plan, and;

(b) The individual retiree will be required to sign a form that indicates
agreement with these conditions.

The City reserves the right to eliminate these additional plans and the choice of
multiple plans is not a vested right. As with the City Modified Plan, the City
reserves the right to make plan design changes as necessary in these Alternative
Plans.

144 Medicare Supplemental Coverage Requirements only for Employees hired
on or before June 30, 2014

 

The City reserves the right to terminate reimbursement payments for Part A
CITY OF STOCKTON 44

840
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

Medicare coverage, in which event the retiree will receive the City’s modified
medical plan which includes medical design changes effective September 1,
2011 as the primary health coverage, with the premiums for such coverage to be
paid by the City. The coverage provided pursuant to this section shall apply to
the retiree and his/her spouse. Refer to section 14.2 regarding Elimination of
Retiree Medical Plan effective June 30, 2013.

Under the federal Health Care Reform Plan, sponsors may modify the medical
benefits provided to retirees only. The City will modify its retiree health care plan
to reflect the following:

(a) | Return Plan benefits for Acupuncture to 12 visits per year (instead of
unlimited) and returns the payment percentage paid to 60% (instead of
80%);

(b) Return Plan benefits for Alcohol and Drug Treatment admissions to 30
days and 3 lifetime admissions (instead of unlimited);

(c) Return Plan benefits for Outpatient Mental Health or Nervous Disorder
services to 15 visit maximum (instead of unlimited);

(d) | Change Plan benefits for Preventative care and wellness to 80% instead
of current 100%;

(e) Return Plan benefits on the lifetime cap on plan benefits to $2.5 million
(instead of unlimited);

(f) Return Plan benefits on the maximum age of dependent children to be
enrolled in the Plan to age 19 unmarried, and not serving in the armed
forces to 23 if attending school full time and qualifies as a dependent for
federal income tax purposes.(instead of age 26);

(g) | Change Plan benefits for Emergency room benefits.

If portions or whole of the Federal Affordable Care Act is modified subsequent to
the adoption of this memorandum of understanding, the City and POA will meet
and confer over any identifiable negotiable impact to those modifications.

14.5 Retiree Medical Trust

The City will cooperate with the SPOA to amend the documenis related to the
SPOA Retiree Medical Trust ("RMT") to reflect that the City relinquishes all of its
right to designate any trustees under the RMT and any and all rights, obligations,
or responsibility under the RMT so that only the SPOA designated Trustees will
administer the RMT.

The City has no objection to the transfer of all current assets in the RMT to

another trust (the "Receiving Trust") selected by the SPOA designated RMT
CITY OF STOCKTON 45

841
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1,.2012 — June 30, 2014

Trustees so long as the Receiving Trust agrees to hold those assets for the
exclusive benefit of eligible retirees. Further, the SPOA and the City agree that
the transfer of assets will be contingent on the SPOA and Receiving Trustees
agreeing that on and after the transfer of the assets of the RMT to the Receiving
Trust (i) the City's only obligation with respect to such Receiving Trust will be to
make any agreed upon contributions to the Receiving Trust, and (ii) the SPOA
and the Receiving Trustees further agree. that on and after the transfer of the
assets of the RMT to the Receiving Trust, to indemnify and hold harmless the
City and the City designated trustees from any claim whatsoever by the SPOA,
any unit member, or any beneficiary of the Receiving Trust with respect to the
Receiving Trust. Such claims include, but are not limited to, (i) any claim for
benefits under the Receiving Trust or any plan funded by the Receiving Trust, (ii)
any claim regarding the administration of, or fiduciary duties under, the Receiving
Trust, (iii) any claim regarding the tax treatment of contributions to the Receiving
Trust (So long as the City complies with applicable federal law and guidance from
the Internal Revenue Service), and (iv) any claim regarding the terms of the
Receiving. Trust or selection of trustees.

The City's obligation to contribute to the RMT has ceased. The City agrees to
meet and confer at the request of the SPOA with regard to a contract
amendment for employee contributions to be made to the Receiving Trust to
provide medical care benefits for retirees in a manner that will make the
employee contributions excluded from employee's income tax whether that
means they will be by salary reduction whereby the employee forgoes salary in
exchange for the contribution or salary deduction whereby the employee
contribution is deducted from the employee's paycheck . No contributions will be
made to the Receiving Trust until the tax consequences of such employee
contributions to such Receiving Trust are resolved.

The rights of unit members to distributions and amounts of those distributions
from the RMT or the Receiving Trust shall be determined under the terms of the
trust plan document and Section 14.4 of the prior labor agreement except to the
extent modified by this Agreement.

14.6 Life Insurance

Effective July 1, 2012, the City shall provide each employee group term life
insurance coverage with a face value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).

14.7 Long Term Disability Insurance

Effective July 1, 2012, the City shall reduce the base pay of employees in this
unit by twenty dollars ($20.00) per month, and instead shall provide to each

CITY OF STOCKTON 46

842
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

bargaining unit member twenty dollars ($20.00) per month for the purpose of
purchasing Long Term Disability Insurance. The Association recognizes and
agrees that it is their responsibility for purchasing a Preferred Long Term
Disability Program for its represented employees or otherwise investing such
payments pursuant to this section as it deems appropriate.

CITY OF STOCKTON 47

843
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 15. SALARY PLAN

15.1 Salary

During the term of this agreement there shall be no salary increases. Effective
July 1, 2012, salaries for classifications in this unit shall be as attached in
Appendix A.

15.2 Salary Ranges

The salary ranges for all classifications in the aforementioned representation unit
will be as set forth in Appendix A, which are attached hereto and made a part
hereof. The rates of pay set forth in the Appendix A, represent for each classi-
fication the standard rate of pay for full-time employment, effective on the dates
noted in the Appendices, unless the schedule specifically indicates otherwise.

15.3 Salary Upon Appointment

Except as herein otherwise provided, the entrance salary step for a new
employee entering the classified service shall be the minimum salary step for the
class to which appointed. When circumstances warrant, the City Manager may
approve an entrance salary, which is more than the minimum salary step for the
class to which that employee is appointed. Such a salary may not be more than
the maximum salary for the class to which that employee is appointed.

15.4 Salary Equivalents

Any monthly, daily or hourly rate of pay may be converted into any equivalent
rate of pay or to any other time bases when in the judgment of the City Manager,
such a conversion is advisable. In determining equivalent amounts on different
time bases, the City shall provide tables or regulations for the calculation of
payment for service of less than full-time, and for use in converting monthly
salaries to hourly rates, as well as for calculating hourly rates.

15.5 Effective July 1, 2005 — Salary Step Pian — Police Officers Appointed On Or
After January 1, 1999

 

There were nine (9) salary steps for the classification of Police Officer, however,
salary steps 1, 2, and 3 for Police Officers were eliminated effective July 1, 2012.
There shall be six (6) salary steps for the classification of Police Sergeant.
Eligible employees will be moved to the next step every 12 months. Any
reference in this MOU to a different schedule for step increase shall be adjusted
accordingly. In a case where a person possesses unusual qualifications, the City

CITY OF STOCKTON 48

844
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

Manager may authorize appointment above the first salary step after receiving
the recommendation of the department head. The same provisions shall apply to
hourly-paid and part-time persons.

All step references below are to the salary schedule for the Police Officer
classification. Non-Sworn Police Officer Trainees are hired at the rate identified
in the single step salary classification for Police Officer Trainee.

The first salary step shall be the minimum salary rate and shall be the normal
hiring rate for the classification of Police Officer.

The second salary step shall be paid upon the employee’s satisfactory
completion of twelve (12) months service at the first salary step and upon the
written recommendation of the department head.

The third salary step shall be paid upon the employee’s satisfactory completion
of twelve (12) months service at the second salary step and upon the written
recommendation of the department head.

The fourth salary step shall be paid upon the employee's satisfactory completion
of twelve (12) months service at the third salary step and upon the written
recommendation of the department head.

The fifth salary step shall be paid upon the employee’s satisfactory completion of
twelve (12) months service at the fourth salary step and upon the
recommendation of the department head.

The sixth salary step shall be paid upon the employee’s satisfactory completion
of one (1) year of service at the fifth salary step and upon the recommendation of
the department head.

Regardless of an employee's length of service, salary step advancements in any
given class may be made upon recommendation of the department head with the
approval of the City Manager, but not above Step 3 for a given range.

Salary step increases shall be effective the first day of the pay period following
appointment or revision. If the date of appointment or revision is the first day of a
pay period, salary step increases shall be as of that date.

lf a department head recommends to withhold salary increases because an
employee has not achieved the level of performance required to the position, the
recommendation of notice must be received by the City Manager at least four (4)
weeks in advance of the employee's eligibility date. The affected employee shall
be furnished a copy of the department head’s recommendation.

CITY OF STOCKTON 49

845
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

Changes in an employee's salary because of promotion, demotion,
postponement of salary step increase or special merit increase will set a new
salary anniversary date for that employee, which date shall be as stated in the
preceding paragraph.

Salary range adjustments for the classification will not set a new salary
anniversary date for employees serving in that classification.

15.6 Salary Step Plan — Non-Sworn Police Officer Trainee Status

An employee with only the status of Non-Sworn Police Officer Trainee shall be
paid at Step 1 of the salary range. Upon passing all the requirements of the
Basic Peace Officer Academy and transfer to the sworn position of Police Officer,
the employee shall be paid at Step 2 of the salary range of Police Officer. The
Trainee shall not qualify for Safety status while in the Academy.

15.7 Salary Step After Military Leave

All employees who have been granted a military leave shall, upon their return to
the City service, are entitled to the automatic salary advancements within the
range scale of the established wage schedule of their classifications for the
period they were in the military service.

15.8 Salary Step When Salary Range Is Increased

Whenever the monthly schedule of compensation for a class is revised, each
incumbent in a position to which the revised schedule applies shall be entitled to
the step in the revised range which corresponds to the employee's step held in
the previous range, unless otherwise specifically provided by the City Manager.

15.9 Salary Step After Promotion or Demotion

When an employee is promoted from a position in one class to a position in a
higher class, and at the time of promotion is receiving a salary equal to, or
greater than, the minimum rate for the higher class, that employee shall be
entitled to the next step in the salary scale of the higher class which is
approximately five percent (5%) but in no case less than four percent (4%) above
the rate he has been receiving, except that the next step shall not exceed the
maximum salary of the higher class. When an employee is demoted, whether
such demotion is voluntary or otherwise, that employee's compensation shall be
adjusted to the salary prescribed for the class to which he is demoted, and the
specific rate of pay within the range shall be final.

CITY OF STOCKTON 50

846
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

15.10 Salary On Reinstatement
If a former employee is reinstated in the same position previously held or to one
carrying a similar salary range, his salary shall not be higher than his salary at

the time of his separation unless there has been an increase within the salary
range.

CITY OF STOCKTON 51

847
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 16. RESIDENCY

All sworn public safety officers in the employ of the City of Stockton shall reside within a
geographic area from which they can reach City Hall within forty-five (45) minutes.

SECTION 17. SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS

 

In the event that any provision of the Memorandum of Understanding is declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal or unenforceable, that provision of the
Memorandum of Understanding shall be null and void but such nullification shall not
affect any other provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding, all of which other
provisions shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 18. PAST PRACTICES AND EXISTING MEMORANDUA OF
UNDERSTANDING

 

Continuance of working conditions and practices not specifically authorized by
ordinance or by resolution of the City Council is not guaranteed by this Memorandum of
Understanding.

This Memorandum of Understanding shall supersede all existing Memoranda of
Understanding between the City and the Association.

SECTION 19. SCOPE OF AGREEMENT

Except as otherwise specifically provided herein this Memorandum of Understanding
fully and completely incorporates the understanding of the parties hereto and consti-
tutes the sole and entire agreement between the parties on any and all matters subject
to meeting and conferring. Neither party shall, during the term of this Memorandum of
Understanding, demand any change therein nor shall either party be required to
negotiate with respect to any matter; provided that nothing herein shall prohibit the
parties from changing the terms of this Memorandum of Understanding by mutual
agreement.

SECTION 20. DURATION

All provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding shall be effective July 1, 2012, and
shall remain in full force and effect to and including the 30th day of June, 2014.

CITY OF STOCKTON 52

848
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 21. MAINTENANCE OF OPERATIONS

(a) It is recognized that the need for continued and uninterrupted operation of City
services is of paramount importance. Therefore, the Association and each
employee represented hereby agrees that during the course of negotiations
necessary to conclude a successor Agreement to this Memorandum of
Understanding, the Association or any person acting in its behalf, or each
employee in a classification represented by the Association shall not cause,
authorize, engage in, or sanction a work stoppage, slowdown, refusal of overtime
work, refusal to operate designated equipment (provided such equipment is safe
and sound), or picketing, other than informational picketing, against the City or
the individual or concerted failure to report for duty or abstinence from the full
and faithful performance of the duties of employment, including compliance with
the request of another labor organization or bargaining unit to engage in such
activity in an attempt fo induce a change in wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of employment.

(b) | An employee shall not be entitled to any wages or City paid benefits whatsoever
if the City Council, by majority vote, determines to its satisfaction, that the
employee is, or has, engaged in any activity prohibited by subsection (a) of this
Section. The City may take other action which it deems appropriate.

(c) If the City Council, by majority vote, determines to its satisfaction, that subsection
(a) of this Section has been violated by the Association, the City may take such
remedial action as it deems appropriate.

(d) The Association recognizes the duty and obligation of its representatives and
members to comply with the provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding
and to make every effort toward inducing all employees in this unit to fully and
faithfully perform their duties. In the event of any activity prohibited by
subsection (a) hereinabove, the Association agrees to take supererogatory steps
necessary to assure compliance with this Memorandum of Understanding.

CITY OF STOCKTON 53

849
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 22. CITY RIGHTS

(a) The Association recognizes that the rights of the City derive from the Constitution
of the State of California and the Government Code and not from the
Memorandum of Understanding. All matters not specifically addressed in this
Memorandum of Understanding are reserved to the City.

(b) The Association recognizes and agrees that the exercise of the express and
implied powers, rights, duties and responsibilities by the City, such as, the
adoption of policies, rules, regulations and practices, and the use of judgment
and discretion in connection therewith shall be limited only by the specific and
express terms of this Memorandum of Understanding.

(c) | The Association recognizes that the City has and will continue to retain, whether
exercised or not, the unilateral and exclusive right to operate, administer and
manage its municipal services and work force performing these services limited
only by the specific and express terms of this Memorandum of Understanding.
The exclusive rights of the City shall include but not be limited to, the right to
determine the organization of City government and the mission of its constituent
agencies; to determine the nature, quantity and quality of services to be offered
to the public and to determine the means of operations, the materials and
personnel to be used, the right to introduce new or improved methods or
facilities, and to change or alter personnel, methods, means, materials and
facilities, to exercise control and discretion over its organization and operations
through its managerial employees; to establish and effect rules and regulations
consistent with applicable law and the specific and express provisions of this
Memorandum of Understanding; to establish and implement standards of
selecting City personnel and standards for continued employment with the City;
to direct to workforce by determining the work to be performed, the personnel
who shall perform the work, assigning overtime and scheduling the work; to take
disciplinary action; to relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or
funds; to determine whether goods or services shall be made, purchased or
contracted for; and to otherwise act in the interest of efficient service to the
community.

In cases of emergency when the City determines that an ordinance, rule,
resolution or regulation must be adopted immediately without prior notice or
meeting with a recognized employee organization, the City shall provide such
notice and opportunity to meet at the earliest practicable time following the
adoption of such ordinance, rule, resolution or regulation.

CITY OF STOCKTON 54

850
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 23. CONDITIONAL AGREEMENT RE PLAN SUPPORT AND TREATMENT
OF CLAIMS

4. Confirmation of Plan. The City agrees to use its best efforts to obtain confirmation
of, and to implement, a plan of adjustment (“Plan”) that is consistent with the terms of
this MOU, or as applicable, its successor MOU. All of the provisions of this Article
except 2(c) shall be null and void in the event that the Plan contemplated by this
Agreement is not confirmed and does not become effective.

2. SPOA’s Claims. SPOA alleges that its members have claims in the bankruptcy case
against the City relating to the City’s modification of its 2009 Memorandum of
Understanding (“2009 MOU’), pursuant to Declarations of Fiscal Emergency beginning
on or about May 26, 2010 and continuing in effect thereafter, and in connection with the
treatment of the claims of SPOA and its members under the Pendency Plan
(collectively, the “Claims”), and that, in the aggregate, the Claims exceed thirteen million
dollars ($13,000,000). The City disputes the Claims and contends that the Claims would
not be allowed in the chapter 9 case. It further asserts that, if the Claims were allowed,
they would be allowed in an amount aggregating less than thirteen million dollars
($13,000,000).

In consideration of resolving the above differences and agreement on the MOU, the City
agrees that the Claims shall be provided for in the Plan as follows:

(a) The Claims will be deemed allowed in the chapter 9 case in the aggregate
amount of eight million, five hundred thousand dollars ($8,500,000) (the
“Allowed Claims”). In consideration for the reduction in the amount of the
Claims, SPOA members employed during fiscal year 2010-2011 and/or 2011-
2012 shall be credited , upon final approval of the MOU by the Parties and, if
necessary, by the Bankruptcy Court, twenty-two (22) additional hours of paid
leave in fiscal year 2012-2013. These additional hours of paid leave shall
have no cash value and shall be utilized any time prior to the date upon which
the SPOA member leaves employment with the City. Only those employees
who were employed during some portion of the period July 1, 2010 and July
1, 2012 and who were still current employees upon the effective date of this
Agreement shall be entitled to this treatment.

(b) The Allowed Claims shall be satisfied under the Plan by the City by crediting
SPOA members employed during fiscal year 2010-2011 and/or 2011-2012,
eleven (11) additional paid leave hours in the fiscal year of approval of the
Plan and eleven (11) additional paid leave hours in the fiscal year after
approval of the Plan. This benefit shall only apply to those employees who
were employed during some portion of the period July 1, 2010 and July 1,

CITY OF STOCKTON 55

851
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

2012 and who are current employees as of the date the Plan is approved by
the Bankruptcy Court. The total additional paid leave per SPOA member
under paragraphs 2(a) and 2(b) of this article shall equal forty-four (44) hours.
These additional paid leave hours shall have no cash value, and shall be
utilized any time prior to the date upon which the SPOA member leaves
employment with the City. It is understood that the provision of these hours
shall be the sole compensation for the Claims of SPOA and its members,
The additional twenty-two (22) hours additional paid leave credit contained in
this paragraph 2(b) shall be contingent upon confirmation of the Plan and on
the Plan becoming effective.

(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the Plan is not confirmed and
does not become effective, the Claims shall not be allowed as specified
herein, and both SPOA and the City agree that the Claims will be considered
unresolved, with each Party reserving the right to assert or contest the
Claims; provided, however, that the monetary equivalent of any paid leave
hours taken pursuant to this Article shall serve as a credit against the Claims.

3._ Implementation of 2012-2014 SPOA MOU. The City shall include in its proposed
Plan provisions that give effect to, and comport with the terms of this Agreement.

4. Plan Support. SPOA agrees to use its best efforts to support the Plan,. the
provisions of which include the treatment of the Claims as described above, and which
are consistent with the terms of the MOU. SPOA’s support for the Plan shall include
statements in papers filed in the Bankruptcy Court and in appearances by its counsel in
Bankruptcy Court. SPOA shall use its best efforts to cause its members to vote to
approve the Plan, to withdraw any proofs of claim they have filed which are inconsistent
with the MOU and not object to, or otherwise commence any proceeding against, or
take any other action opposing any of the terms of the MOU, the Plan or any disclosure
statement filed in connection with the Plan. At the City’s request, such support may
also include the execution by SPOA of an agreement to recommend that its members
vote in favor of the Plan.

5. Further Assurances. The Parties agree to execute and deliver such other
instruments and perform such acts, in addition to the matters herein specified, as may
be reasonably appropriate or necessary, from time to time, to effectuate the agreements
and understandings of the Parties, whether the same occurs before or after the date of
this Agreement.

6. Release of Claims. Except for the Parties’ respective obligations stated in the
MOU, SPOA, on behalf of all employees in its bargaining unit, and the City hereby
telease and discharge each other, and: their respective past or present parents,
subsidiaries, successors, predecessors, assigns, and their respective officers, directors,
CITY OF STOCKTON 56

852
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 ~- June 30, 2014

employees, agents, attorneys, and each of them, from and against any and all
defenses, claims, demands, losses, damages, and causes of action of whatever kind or
nature, whether known or unknown, suspected or unsuspected, which either of them
may now or hereafter have against the other in any way related to the Claims and or
Litigation Claims (as such term is defined below). This release shall include, but is not
limited to, within thirty days of approval of the Plan, dismissing with prejudice litigation
and cross litigation claims (‘Litigation Claims”) pertaining to San Joaquin County
Superior Court case number 39-2010-00245197-CU-WM-STK, San Joaquin Superior
Court Case number 39-2010-00253803 and Third Appellate District appellate case
numbers C070347 and C068723. These cases shall remain stayed until the occurrence
of the effective date of the Plan or the dismissal of the chapter 9 case. The Parties
agree to waive any and all claims for attorneys’ fees or costs associated with the
Litigation Claims.

The Parties, and each of them, hereby waive the provisions of Section 1542 of the
California Civil Code, which reads as follows:

A general release does not extend to claims which the creditor
does not know or suspect to exist in his or her favor at the time of
executing the release, which if known by him or her must have
materially affected his settlement with the debtor.

The Parties, and each of them, understand that if the facts with respect to which this
release is given turn out to be different from the facts now known or believed by either
of them to be true, each of them expressly assumes the risk of the facts turning out to
be different, and agrees that this release shall be in all respects effective and not
subject to termination or rescission by any such difference in facts.

This release shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the Parties and their
respective past or present parents, subsidiaries, successors, predecessors, assigns,
and their respective officers, directors, employees, agents, attorneys, including but not
limited to all bargaining unit employees, and each of them.

This release shall not apply to any pending disciplinary cases, or grievances pertaining
to those disciplinary cases, but shall apply to any lawsuits filed related to those
disciplinary cases.

7. Resolution of Dispute regarding the Property at 1132 N. Country Club Rd., Stockton
CA (‘the Property”). SPOA shall continue renting the Property to third parties. No
SPOA member, family member, agent or person within SPOA’s control shall apply to
rent the Property.

CITY OF STOCKTON 57

 
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

a) In renting the Property, SPOA shall utilize a licensed third party rental
agent not affiliated with SPOA or its agents.

b) SPOA shall sell the Property not later than November 1, 2015, unless
this provision is waived in writing by the City.

c) The Property shall be maintained in its present state and SPOA shall
exercise its best efforts to ensure that its tenants not interfere with the
City Manager's quiet enjoyment of his home.

d) SPOA shall not seek to change the use of the Property as a single
family residence (maximum two unrelated adults, or two adults and two
children).

e) Notwithstanding the effective date and expiration date of the MOU, this
section 7(a) shall be effective November 1, 2012, and shall apply to the
SPOA’s current efforts to lease the Property. It shall expire upon the
sale of the Property, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties.

8. No Admissions.. Except to acknowledge responsibility to perform the terms of this
Article or to enforce those terms, the Parties agree that nothing contained in this Article
or any action taken or the failure to take any action pursuant to this Article ever is to be
construed as an admission or evidence tending to establish the validity of either Party's
claims, including the initial Claims.

9. Rules of Construction. The Parties agree that any rule of construction to the effect
that ambiguities are resolved against the drafting party shall not apply to the
interpretation of this Article, since both Parties have reviewed it with counsel of their
respective choice. Otherwise, this Article shall be governed by and interpreted in
accordance with the law of the State of California and the Bankruptcy Code.

CITY OF STOCKTON 58

854
(b)

(c)

STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

SECTION 24. CONCLUSIVENESS

The specific provisions contained in this Agreement constitute the entire and sole
agreement between the City and the Association and shall prevail over existing
City ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, policies, procedures and
practices wherever there is a direct conflict between previous written policies and
practices and a specifically contradictory term of this Agreement. Existing written
policies, rules, regulations, ordinances and resolutions shall be amended to
conform to the terms of this Agreement. Only those policies and practices
directly and expressly revised by this Agreement shall be deemed to be modified
by this Agreement.

All matters not addressed specifically and expressly by this Agreement are, and
shall continue to be, within the exclusive decision-making authority of the City
and shall not be in any way, directly or indirectly, subject to any grievance
procedure.

This Agreement may be altered, changed, added to, deleted from, or modified
only through the voluntary consent of the City and the Association in a written
and signed amendment to this Agreement.

CITY OF STOCKTON 59

855
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

APPENDIX A. SALARY SCHEDULE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Classificat

Police Officer 4,970.39 | 5,225.81 | 5,494.96 | 5,776.54 | 6,074.37 | 6,385.88
Police Officer

Recruit 4,275.10

Police Officer

Trainee 4,275.10 i

Police Sergeant | 5,876.26 | 6,179.04 | 6,495.54 | 6,829.48 | 7,180.86 | 7,549.69
CITY OF STOCKTON 60

856
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

APPENDIX B. CITY OF STOCKTON MODIFIED EMPLOYEES MEDICAL
PLAN WITH MEDICAL PLAN CHANGES EFFECTIVE SEPTEMBER 1, 2011

 

Plan Feature

Coverage Amount

 

When Provided by a
Participating Provider

When Provided by a
Non- Participating

 

Calendar year deductible
(only Allowable Charges for
Covered Services in Article 3
of this document can be
applied toward the
deductible)

$500 per person;
$1,500 maximum per
family

$1,500 per person;
$3,000 maximum per
family

 

Calendar year out-of-pocket
maximum on Allowable
Charges (only Allowable
Charges for Covered
Services in Article 3 of this
document can be applied
toward the out-of-pocket
maximum))

$5,000 per person;
$10,000 maximum
per family

None

 

Overall lifetime
maximum benefit

None

None

 

Hospital

 

Inpatient confinement

80% of Allowable
Charges after a
copayment of $75 per

50% of Allowable
Charges after a
copayment of $200 per

 

Outpatient department

80% of Allowable Charges

50% of Allowable Charges

 

Emergency room

80% of Allowable Charges;
50% of Allowable

Charges if it is

determined that an
Emergency did not exist
refer to Article 1 for the

80% of Allowable Charges;

50% of Allowable Charges

if it is determined that an

Emergency did not exist
refer to Article 1 for the
lan’s definition of

 

 

 

 

 

lan’s definition of Emergency)

Skilled Nursing Facility 80% of Allowable 50% of Allowable
Charges after a Charges after a
copayment of $75 per copayment of $200 per

CITY OF STOCKTON 61

857

 
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU

Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

 

Outpatient therapy
(physical, respiratory,
cardiac & speech)

80% of Allowable Charges

50% of Allowable Charges

 

Home health care

80% of Allowable Charges

Not covered

 

Hospice care

 

 

80% of Allowable Charges

 

Not covered

 

 

CITY OF STOCKTON

62

858
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 —- June 30, 2014

 

Plan Feature

Coverage Amount

 

When Provided by a
Participating Provider

When Provided by a
Non- Participating

 

Mental or nervous disorder

 

Inpatient confinement

80% of Allowable
Charges after a
copayment of $75 per

50% of Allowable
Charges after a
copayment of $200 per

 

Outpatient services

80% of Allowable Charges

50% of Allowable Charges

 

Substance abuse treatment

 

Inpatient confinement

80% of Allowable
Charges after a
copayment of $75 per

50% of Allowable
Charges after a
copayment of $200 per

 

Outpatient services

80% of Allowable Charges

50% of Allowable Charges

 

 

dialysis treatment

Outpatient diagnostic 80% of Allowable Charges | 50% of Allowable Charges
tadiology &

Radiation therapy, 80% of Allowable Charges | 50% of Allowable Charges
chemotherapy &

 

Physician services

 

Office & hospital visits

80% of Allowable Charges

50% of Allowable Charges

 

Emergency room care

80% of Allowable Charges;
50% of Allowable
Charges if it is
determined that an
Emergency did not exist
(refer to Article 1 for the

 

Surgery

80% of Allowable Charges

80% of Allowable Charges;

50% of Allowable Charges

if it is determined that an

Emergency did not exist

(refer to Article 1 for the

| Plan’s definition of ____|
50% of Allowable Charges

 

 

Anesthesia and
its administration

 

 

 

80% of Allowable Charges

50% of Allowable Charges

 

 

 

CITY OF STOCKTON

63
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

Term:

 

Preventive Care (physical
exam, screenings, tests &
immunizations as
recommended by certain
government agencies — refer
to the definition of Preventive
Care Services in Article 1)

Not subject to the
calendar year deductible;
100% of Allowable
Charges

Calendar year deductible
applies; 50% of
Allowable Charges

 

Dental treatment

Not covered except 80%
of Allowable Charges for
treatment of Accidental
Injury to natural teeth

Not covered except for
50% of Allowable Charges
for treatment of Accidental
Injury to natural teeth

 

Chiropractic services

80% of Allowable Charges

50% of Allowable Charges

 

Pregnancy & childbirth

 

(dependent children Covered on the same Covered on the same

are not covered by this basis as an illness basis as an illness
benefit)

Infertility 80% of Allowable Charges | 50% of Allowable Charges

 

Organ & tissue transplants

Payable on the same
basis as any other illness

Payable on the same
basis as any other illness

 

Ambulance service

80% of Allowable Charges

50% of Allowable Charges

 

Prosthetics & orthotics

80% of Allowable Charges

50% of Allowable Charges

 

Durable medical equipment

80% of Allowable Charges

50% of Allowable Charges

 

Hearing aids

No Coverage

No Coverage

 

Prescription Drug
Program (no calendar

When Dispensed at a
Participating
Pharmacy

When Dispensed at a
Non- Participating
Pharmacy

 

vear deductible applies)
Retail pharmacy (30
day supply limit)

 

 

$10 copayment for a
generic drug; $35
copayment for a non-
generic formulary drug; no
coverage for non-
formulary drugs

 

Not covered

 

 

CITY OF STOCKTON

64

860
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

 

 

Mail service pharmacy $20 copayment for a Not covered
(90 day supply limit) generic drug; $70
copayment for a non-
generic formulary drug; no
coverage for non-
formulary drugs

 

 

 

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 65

861
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

APPENDIX C, UNION PROPOSAL TO ASSUME ADMINISTRATION OF CITY
MEDICAL PLANS (AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF STOCKTON AND
THE EMPLOYEE COALITION REPRESENTING ALL CITY UNIONS

INCLUDING THE SPOA)

City Counter Proposal Regarding Union Assumption of Medical Plans

The City is supportive in concept of the unions taking over responsibility for providing
medical insurance plan, and pledges its full cooperation in providing the necessary data
to permit the Unions to assess the viability of such a plan. Acceptance of the plan by
the City shall be subject to the following terms and conditions:

1. Such plan would not be City sponsored and the City would not have any
responsibility for such plan including administration of the plan and client
services, and unions/vendor will hold city harmless for any actions taken by
vendor or union in its management of their plans. The City will pay its
contributions for employee insurance coverage as set forth in individual MOUs
and remit them to the plan administrator per any administrative agreement. City
will process employee’s deductions and remit to vendor and such costs of
providing this service is part of administrative expense to be paid by union per
any agreement as described in #11 below.

2. Plan participants to pay all administrative costs of the plan, including HR support
and computer/data transfer/integration.

3. Such plan would include all city employees and eligible retirees. All plan
enrollees would have same benefits, plan choices, eligibility, access to the
network and premium costs and be treated in the same manner . The only
exception would be for over age 65 retirees where plan benefits would be
integrated with Medicare.

4, The plan would be fully insured, such that all risks would be borne by the insuring
company without the possibility of underfunding the benefit

5. The Unions will not propose CalPERS medical plans.

6. Implementation shall be by January 1, 2013, provided the Unions provide at least
90 days notice to the City.

7. The City will pay all run out claims from the Modified and Original medical plans
with respect to any claim incurred prior to January 1, 2013, regardless of when
the claim is paid The City shall make all reasonable efforts to insure that all

CITY OF STOCKTON 66

862
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
Term: July 1, 2012 —June 30, 2014

claims received are processed timely during the claims run out period. If any
funds remain in the ISF fund, the parties will meet to discuss the status of the
funds.

8. It is understood that the union plans would stay in effect for at least five years,
and the Unions will give the City at least 1 year’s notice if they intend to terminate
this arrangement. The City may only terminate the agreement with good cause
regarding the failure of the plan to provide agreed upon benefits, and with
evidence of continuing coverage for affected employees and retirees in the
succeeding City sponsored plans. The City makes no commitment to any future
arrangement of City administered medical insurance should the union plans be
discontinued by the union’s actions.

9. The City retains the right to terminate the sponsorship by the unions of any
health plan as a result of any legislation that would require the City to provide
plans to its employees or pay penalties in lieu of providing such plans, for
example, as under the Affordable Care Act or any additional or successor
legislation

10. Existing limits on City contributions to medical/dental/vision (agreed or imposed)
remain unchanged.

11. It is understood that once the unions obtain quotes for coverage, the parties will
meet and confer regarding significant issues regarding the implementation and
viability of such plan, including, but not limited to the following:

¢ Coverage of “tail” claims; Fully fund all reserves for Incurred but Not
Reported and Pended Claims

e Calculation and method of paying administrative costs;

e Hold harmiess to City for any actions taken by vendor/union coalition;

e Union plan may discontinue Original Plan benefits for retirees.

The City retains the right to accept or reject any union proposals on a union sponsored

plan(s) during meet and confer following union receipt of bids, based upon financial,
operational, legal or coverage concerns.

CITY OF STOCKTON 67
STOCKTON POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (SPOA) SUCCESSOR MOU
. Term: July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2014

IN WITNESS WHEREOF this Memorandum of Understanding was ratified by a
membership vote of the Association on December 4, 2012 and by an affirmative vote of
the Stockton City Council on December 11, 2012. The SPOA and the City of Stockton

have hereto executed this Memorandum of Understanding this (hb day of February :
2013.

For the Stockton Police Officers Association

 

KATHRYN NANCE

City Manager President
ho - 2
(becca Kian
TERESIA HAASE WILLIAM HUTT!
Director of Human Resources Vice-President
=. C
Approved as to form: “Je e/ EE
John Luebberke, City Attorney DAVID E. MASTAGNI

Attorney for Association

 

By:

4
DANIA TORRES-WONG

Negotiator for the City

aT

ae

ATTEST:
BONNIE PAIGE
CITY CLERK

LZiwd &

  
    

De
BS

<P
BONNIE PAIGE
City Clerk |

CITY OF STOCKTON 68
