 

AMENDMENT TO THE
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE
CITY OF STOCKTON AND THE
STOCKTON POLICE MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
Amendment to the July 1, 2012 - June 30, 2013 MOU

WHEREAS, The City of Stockton (the “City”) and the Stockton Police Management
Association (SPMA) are parties to a Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) covering
the period of July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2013.

WHEREAS, all other terms and conditions of the MOU including the relative appendices
will remain in effect, the parties hereto agree that the following sections of the MOU are

hereby amended and shall read as follows:

41.0 Term
The parties have agreed that the term of this MOU shall be extended to June 30, 2014.

1.3 Reopener
The Association agrees to meet at the City’s request for the purpose of meeting and

conferring on any changes that would be a mandatory subject of bargaining that may
tesult from any City proposal on organizational, operational or staffing changes that are
a result of efficiency measures during Fiscal Year 2013/2014.

9.1 (c) Vacation Sell-back.

An employee on a forty (40) hour workweek may sell back forty (40) hours of his/her
unused accumulated vacation balance after the use of scheduled vacation of forty (40)
hours or more, This option may be exercised once per calendar year, except during
furlough or fiscal emergency periods and during the contract term of July 1, 2013
through June 30, 2014.

13.8 Longevity Increment Pay for Grandparented Employees Only

1. Effective July 1, 2012 the longevity increment shall be effective the first pay
period following the anniversary date of hire of the employee as follows:

(a) The City shall pay three-quarters of one percent (.75%) of top
salary step in rank for longevity pay, upon completion of twelve (12) years
of continuous service as a public safety member of the Stockton Police
Department.

BR COB CF

ASIAS/ “AZ 49-UleZ
Amendment to the Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Stockton and
the Stockton Police Management Association

Page 2 of 3

(b) The City shall pay an additional one and three-quarters percent
(1.75%) for a total of two and one half percent (2.5%), upon
completion of eighteen (18) years of continuous service as a public
safety member of the Stockton Police Department.

(c) The City shall pay an additional two percent (2%) for a total of
percent (4.5%), upon completion of twenty-four (24) years of continuous
service as a public safety member of the Stockton Police Department.

(d) | Members of the bargaining unit promoting from the POA bargaining
unit during the term of this agreement will be placed at the level of
longevity appropriate to their years of service, and will be grandparented
at that level.

(e) For the limited purpose of defining continuous service under this
Section of the Memorandum of Understanding, continuous service shall
include leaves without pay for less than one (1) year as long as the public
safety officer did not withdraw his or her contribution from P.E.R.S.

14.0 Reopener Clause for Health Insurance

The Association agrees at the City’s request, to meet and confer on any changes that
are within the mandatory scope of bargaining in any City proposals related to its City
sponsored medical plans that may be related to the implementation of the Affordable
Care Act (ACA) during Fiscal Year.2013/2014.

14.1 Health Insurance And Related Benefits

(c) Employee Medical Insurance Contribution. Effective July 1, 2013:

(1)

(2)

(3)

The City shall contribute up to $522.00 per month toward the cost of the
monthly premium for employee-only medical/dental/vision plan coverage.

The City shall contribute up to $950.00 per month toward the cost of the
monthly premium for employee plus one dependent medical/dental/vision
plan coverage.

The City shall contribute up to $1,262.00 per month toward the cost of the
monthly premium for employee plus two or more dependents
medical/dental/vision plan coverage.

All other terms and conditions set forth in the MOU not specifically changed by ‘this

Amendment shall remain in full force and effect.
Amendment to the Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Stockton and

the Stockton Police Management Association

Page 3 of 3

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this Amendment has been attested to by the City Clerk, the

City Seal affixed hereto, and the document subscribed to by the City of Stockton

Employee Relations Officer and the duly authorized Representatives for the Stockton

Police Management Association on the Te day of fez 2013.

STOCKTON POLICE MANAGEMENT
ASSOCIATION

 

By: WAZ ZZ

Its: Vice-President

Approved as to form:
Goyette& Associates, Inc.

By: Cnn

Its: Legal Counsal or Labor Representative

 

CITY OF STOCKTON, a Municipal
Corporation

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

   

By:

 

DEIS
City Manager

By:
TERESIA HAASE
Director of Human Resources
Employee Relations Officer

 

Approved as to form:

 

y:
MARCIKARREDONDO
Deputy City Attorney
