POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

PREAMBLE

The Stockton Police Management Association and representatives of the City of
Stockton have met and conferred in good faith regarding wages, hours and other terms
and conditions of employment of employees employed in the representation unit
identified in Section 1, have exchanged freely information, opinions and proposals and
have endeavored to reach agreement on all matters relating to the employment
conditions and employer-employee relations of such employees.

This Memorandum of Understanding is entered into pursuant to the
Meyers-Milias-Brown Act (Government Code Sections 3500-3511) and has been jointly
prepared by the parties.

This Memorandum of Understanding shall be presented to the Stockton City Council as
the joint recommendations of the undersigned for salary and employee benefit
adjustments for the period commencing July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2013. This
agreement shall supersede all other existing agreements on this matters set forth
herein.
Section 1.
Section 2.
Section 3.
Section 4.
Section 5.
Section 6.
Section 7.
Section 8.
Section 9.
Section 10.
Section 11.
Section 12.
Section 13.
Section 14.
Section 15.
Section 16.
Section 17.
Section 18.
Section 19.
Section 20.
Section 21.

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

TABLE OF CONTENTS

RECOQIIEON wccssaisassasivisssxnonss saunas seqavceessetssonsscssesausteragy guid target susan dessevsactzenrenTaee 3

Association Security.

 

Non-Discrimination.

 

 

Probation
LOY OFT ecsstoacsurinrrsiivercenensnemmntrnmn sue eae ne Ee RANE 9
Rieeiniploymentls unses4srsc eds ida es oink eee sk Ge er 12
Discipline.

 

  
 

Grievance Procedures...

Leaves si
DAYS Bnd HOUTSIOL WOU sates, .eszersvecdresnsinanctenktioe dM Sinataetesatacien penn MAY 27
OVETIM Gian Mrnat a cdingridiaj none h Slo EAA MEE a
PHONG AS  «ccaccscatvcss sereturooers ent saureastaanscepaieeeesemieeeuysaacesuadessprussntzomerneyyecaoisy

Compensation and Allowances other than Base Salary

Insurance Plans

 

DEV FEIN 5.2. ota 9: satzeleaiesodigche cha eR ROR GS ATE Eh oops agp aap reps
SOPaARADIiily:Of RIOVIGIONG iteseasesessecerepsepeserosisermeras ceammenrennenal 44
Practices and existing Memoranda of Understanding................:0::cseeee 44

Scope of Agreement

 

Duration of Agreement

 
 

Maintenance of Operations
Bankruptcy

AB PONIGIK AT halls ys Sew ben uicena tates see aa estxdooaa cae ee ea AGA erat 48

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 2
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

 

SECTION 1. RECOGNITION
1.1. City Recognition

The City Manager, or any person or organization duly authorized by the City
Manager, is the representative of the City of Stockton, hereinafter referred to as
the "City" in employer-employee relations as provided in Resolution No. 32,538,
adopted by the City Council on August 4, 1975.

1.2 Association Recognition

The Stockton Police Management Association, hereinafter referred to as the
"Association" is the recognized employee organization for the Police Service
Management Unit, certified pursuant to Resolution No. 38,738, adopted by the
City Council November 23, 1981.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 3
21

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 2. ASSOCIATION SECURITY
Dues Deduction

(a) General. The Association may have the regular dues of its members within
the representation unit deducted from employees’ paychecks under procedures
prescribed by the City for such deductions. The Association has the exclusive
privilege of dues deduction for its members.

Payroll deductions shall be for a specified amount and consistent for all
employee members of the Association and shall not include fines, fees and/or
assessments.

Authorization, cancellation or modification of payroll deduction shall be made
upon forms provided or approved by the City. The payroll deduction authorized
shall remain in effect until canceled or modified by the employee by written notice
to the City or until the first day of the calendar month following the transfer of the
employee to a unit represented by another employee organization as the
representative of the unit to which the employee is assigned, or until employment
with the City is terminated.

Additional authorization shall not be required for deduction of increased
membership dues when such increase has been duly approved by the
Association. Notification of such approval shall be forwarded to the City in the
form of written notice on official Association letterhead and signed by the
Association President or other duly authorized Association official. Upon receipt
of notification, the City shall authorize the payroll deduction of the increased
amount.

Amounts deducted and withheld by the City shall be transmitted to the officer
designated in writing by the Association as the person authorized to receive such
funds, at the address specified.

In addition to the deduction of dues, the City will deduct from the paychecks of
Association members who request it, deductions authorized and sponsored by
the Association. Such deductions shall be made from either or both of the semi-
monthly paychecks and only upon signed authorization from the employee upon
a form satisfactory to the City. Such deductions shall be payable to the
Association who is responsible for distribution to sponsored programs.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 4
2.2

2.3

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

The employee's earnings must be sufficient after all other required deductions
are made, to cover the amount of the deductions herein authorized. When an
employee is in a non-pay status for an entire pay period, no withholdings will be
made to cover that pay period from future earnings nor will the employee deposit
the amount with the City which would have been withheld if the employee had
been in a pay status during that period. In the case of an employee who is in a
non-pay status during a part of the pay period, and the salary is not sufficient to
cover the full withholding, no deduction shall be made. In this connection, all
other required deductions have priority over the employee organization
deduction.

(b) Indemnity and Refund. The Association shall indemnify, defend and hold the
City harmless against any claim made and against any suit initiated against the
City on account of check off of Association dues or premiums for benefits. In
addition, the Association shall refund to the City any amounts paid to it in error
upon presentation of supporting evidence.

Use of City Facilities

The Association shall be allowed by the City department in which it represents
employees’ use of space on available bulletin boards for communications having
to do with official Association business, such as times and places of meetings,
provided such use does not interfere with the needs of the department.

Any representative of the Association shall give notice to the department head or
his/her designated representative when contacting department employees on
City facilities during the duty period of the employees, provided that solicitation
for membership or other internal Association business shall be conducted during
the non-duty hours of all employees concerned. Prearrangement for routine
contact may be made with the Police Chief and when made shall continue until
revoked by the Chief.

City buildings and other facilities may be made available for use by City
employees or the Association or their representatives in accordance with such
administrative procedures as may be established by the City Manager or
department heads concerned.

Members of the Association are prohibited from using City equipment and/or time
for their own personal use.

Advance Notice

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 5
2.4

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

Except in cases of emergency, reasonable advance written notice shall be given
to the Association if affected by any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation
directly relating to matters within the scope of representation proposed to be
adopted by the City and shall be given the opportunity to negotiate, if requested,
with the designated management representatives prior to the adoption.

In cases of emergency when the foregoing procedure is not practical or in the
best public interest, the City may adopt or put into practice immediately such
measures as are required. At the earliest practicable date thereafter, the
Association shall be provided with the notice described above and be given an
opportunity, if requested, to negotiate changes to the content of said notice with
the management representatives designated by the City Manager.

Attendance at Meetings by Employees

Release Time Related to Meet_and Confer. City employees who are official
representatives of the Association shall be given reasonable time off with pay, in
accordance with MMBA, to attend meetings with City Management
representatives where matters within the scope of representation or grievances
related to this unit are being considered.

The use of release time for this purpose shall be reasonable and shall not
interfere with the performance of City services as determined by the City. Such
employee representatives shall request an excused absence, prior to the
scheduled meeting whenever possible. Except by mutual agreement the number
of employees excused for release time shall not exceed three (3) per recognized
bargaining unit.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 6
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 3. NON-DISCRIMINATION

The City and the Association agree that there shall be no discrimination of any kind
against any employee or applicant for employment because of age (over 40), race,
color, religion, national origin (ancestry), veterans status, physical or mental
disability, marital status, sexual orientation, sex (sexual, gender based,
pregnancy/childbirth), political affiliation, legitimate Association activity, or any other
protected trait as determined by federal, state and/or local law.

The Association shall cooperate with the City to achieve the objectives of Equal
Employment Opportunity as defined by Federal and State regulations.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 7
41

4.2

4.3

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 4. PROBATION

Promotional Appointments

Promotional appointments in this Unit except Deputy Chief of Police shall be
subject to a probationary period of twelve (12) months. The probationary period
for police promotional positions shall not be extended.

Probationer Advanced to Higher Rank

Any promotional probationary Police Management employee who is advanced to
a higher classification or is appointed to the rank of Chief of Police or Deputy
Chief of Police shall receive credit towards his promotional probationary period
for the lower rank while serving in the higher probationary or appointive rank.

Retention/Rejection of Probationer

The Director of Human Resources shall notify the appointing authority at least
four (4) weeks prior to the termination of any probationary period. At the end of
the probationary period, if the service of the probationary employee has been
satisfactory to the appointing authority, then the appointing authority shall file with
the Director of Human Resources a statement in writing to such effective and
stating that the retention of such employee in the service is desired.

During the probationary period an employee may be rejected at any time by the
appointing authority. Any employee rejected during the probationary period
following a promotional appointment, shall be reinstated to the position from
which he/she was promoted unless charges are filed and he/she is discharged in
the manner provided in the City Charter XXXII, section 9, Civil Service Ordinance
and Civil Service Rules.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 8
5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 5. LAYOFF
Layoff

Any employee may be laid off by an appointing authority in the event of the
abolition of the employee's position by the City Council, or if a shortage of work
or funds requires a reduction in personnel.

Layoff Scope
(a) Layoffs shall be within departments of the City.
(b) The departments of the City are defined as follows:

(1) Administrative Services
(2) City Attorney

(3) City Auditor

(4) City Clerk

(5) City Manager

(6) Community Development
(7) Fire

(8) Housing and Redevelopment
(9) Human Resources

(10) Library

(11) Municipal Utilities

(12) Parks and Recreation
(13) Police

(14) Public Works

Notice of Layoff

The City will give advance written notice of at least one pay period to employees
who will be laid off.

Precedence by Employment Status

No permanent employee shall be laid off while employees working in an extra
help, seasonal, temporary, provisional or probationary status are retained in the
same classification as such permanent employee. The order of layoff among
employees not having permanent status shall be according to the following
categories:

CITY OF STOCKTON 9
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU

TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

5.5

(a) extra help (c) temporary
(b) provisional (d) probationary

Layoffs shall be by job classification according to continuous service in class,
plus all higher classes, except as specified above. For the purpose of this
procedure, part-time classes shall be considered as separate from regular
full-time classes.

The following provisions shall apply in computing total continuous service:

(a) Time spent on military leave shall count as service in the event the leave
was taken subsequent to entry in the department.

(b) Time worked in an extra help, seasonal, provisional, temporary, grant
or other limited term status shall not count as service.

(c) Time worked in a permanent or probationary status shall count as
service.

If two (2) or more employees have the same seniority, the order of seniority shall
be determined by the employees’ examination results and ranking on the
respective eligibility list upon which the employees’ were subsequently hired.

Employee Options
Employees laid off shall have any of the following choices:

(a) Displacing the employee in the same department and in the same or clearly
comparable classification as determined by the Director of Human Resources as
having the least seniority in that classification. This option shall be exercised
before any other option.

(b) Taking a voluntary demotion within the department to a classification in which
the employee had prior permanent status, thus displacing the employee who has
the least seniority in that classification. Employees who exercise this option shall
be placed on a permanent eligibility list for reinstatement to the higher
classification. Ranking on the reinstatement list shall be by the employee's
seniority in the higher classification. All employees on the list, who are still
employed by the City of Stockton, shall be reinstated to the higher classification
before any new promotions can be made to that classification.

CITY OF STOCKTON 10
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

(1) If the employee is in a probationary status in the higher
classification, the probationary status shall resume upon
reinstatement with full credit for previous time served in that
classification.

5.6 Health and Welfare Benefits During Layoff

Permanent employees who are laid off will have an option of maintaining their
existing health and welfare benefits for thirty-six (36) months (the thirty-six (36)
months runs concurrently with any COBRA benefits) from the date of layoff,
provided timely payments of the premiums by the employee are made to the City,
according to City regulations, and provided the employee otherwise meets the
requirements of Federal and State regulations.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 14
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 6. REEMPLOYMENT
6.1 Reemployment

When an employee with classified service whose performance evaluation
conducted by the employing department reflects that the employee is performing
duties satisfactorily and whose position is abolished, is laid off due to lack of
funds or on authorized leave of absence and is ready to report for duty when a
position is open, the Civil Service Commission shall cause the name of the
employee in the appropriate class to be placed on the reemployment list as
follows:

(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) below, the Civil Service
Commission shall cause the name of each employee laid off in accordance with
these rules to be place on the reemployment list for the appropriate class for
teemployment within two (2) years thereafter when vacancies occur.

(b) An employee who receives a notice of layoff and exercises the option to
demote to a previously held lower classification shall be placed on the
reemployment list for the position from which the employee demoted, as provided
for in subsection (a), above, and remain on the list either until the employee is
appointed to the position or the employee declines appointment to the position.
The reemployment rights granted by this subsection are applicable only to
employees who demote to a previously held lower classification after receiving a
notice of layoff.

The reemployment list for any class shall be established by a Civil Service
resolution as needed.

In filling vacancies, eligibles on the reemployment lists take precedence over
eligibles on any other list for the same rank in the department for which the lists
apply.

An employee who waives reemployment to a full time position three times shall

have his/her name removed from this reemployment list unless mutually agreed
to by the Department and employee.

CITY OF STOCKTON 12
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

 

SECTION 7. DISCIPLINE

Disciplinary action, including discharge, suspension, reduction in pay, demotion, or
other employment penalty may be taken against any employee for cause.

The appointing authority may discharge, suspend, or demote any employee in the
classified service provided the City Charter provisions and the Rules and
Regulations of the Civil Service Commission and any applicable provisions of law
are followed. Such provisions allow the employee suspended, demoted or
discharged to appeal such action, The employee may take any one (1) of the
following actions:

(a) File no appeal.

(b) File an appeal with the Civil Service Commission within ten (10)
working days of written notification of the action. (Such filing will
foreclose use of the grievance procedure).

(c) File a grievance as provided for in Section 8.5 within ten (10)
working days of written notification of the action.

lf the employee fails to do (b) or (c) above within the prescribed time frames, these
rights will have been waived.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 13
8.1

8.2

8.3

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 8. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES
Definition

A grievance is any dispute which involves the interpretation or application of those
rules, regulations and resolutions which have been, or may hereafter be, adopted
by the City Council to govern personnel practices and working conditions, including
such rules, regulations and resolutions as may be adopted by either the City
Council or the Civil Service Commission to affect Memoranda of Understanding
which result from the meeting and conferring process.

Filing Deadline

No grievance involving demotion, suspension, discharge or other employment
penalty will be entertained unless it is filed in writing with the Director of Human
Resources within ten (10) working days of the time at which the affected employee
received written notification of such action. All other grievances must be filed within
thirty (30) calendar days from the time the employee knew or had reason to know of
the facts giving rise to the grievance.

Grievance Processing

(a) Step 1 - Departmental Review. Any employee claiming to have a grievance
may discuss the complaint with such management official in the department where
employed as the department head may designate. If the issue is not resolved
within the department within ten (10) working days from the day of presentation or if
the employee elects to submit the grievance directly to the Association recognized
as the representative of that employee's classification, the procedures hereinafter
specified may be invoked.

(b) Step 2 - Director of Human Resources Review. If the employee is not satisfied
with the response at level one, then the employee may appeal the grievance to the
Director of Human Resources within ten (10) working days of the receipt of written
response at level one. Such appeal must state with particularity; 1) the specific
policy, rule or provision which is alleged to have been violated; 2) the statement of
facts comprising the violation; and 3) the requested remedy. The Association may
file and process grievance(s) on behalf of the specifically named employee.

CITY OF STOCKTON 14
8.4

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

The Director of Human Resources shall have twenty (20) working days in which to
investigate the issues and respond to the appeal. No grievance, except for the
resolution of compensation complaints, may be processed under the following two
(2) paragraphs which has not first been filed and investigated in accordance with
this paragraph unless the Director of Human Resources fails to respond within the
time limit.

(c) Step 3 - City Manager Review. Within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of
the level two (2) response, the grievance may be appealed to the City Manager or
his designee. Such referral shall be in writing, detailing the specific issues involved
in the referral together with a statement of the resolution desired. The City
Manager shall designate a personal representative who shall not be the Director of
Human Resources to investigate the merits of the complaint, to meet with the
complainant and, if the complainant is not the Association, to meet also with the
Officials of the Association, and to settle the grievance or to make recommendations
to the City Manager. A written response to the appeal will be provided within thirty
(30) calendar days of the date of appeal.

(d) Step 4 - Arbitration. If the grievant or the Association is dissatisfied with the
response at Step 3, or if the City Manager fails to respond within the time limit, the
matter may, within ten (10) working days, be referred to an arbitrator mutually
selected by the parties, or if the parties are unable to mutually agree, from a list of
seven (7) arbitrators provided by the State Conciliation Service. The arbitrator shall
be chosen by the alternative strike method, with first choice being determined by
lot. The fees and expenses of the arbitrator and of a court reporter shall be shared
equally by the Association and the City. Each party, however, shall bear the cost of
its own presentation, including preparation and post hearing briefs, if any.

(e) Effect_of Decision. Decisions of arbitrators on matters properly before them
shall be final and binding on the parties hereto except as provided otherwise herein.

Scope of Arbitration

No arbitrator shall entertain, hear, decide or make recommendations on any dispute
unless such dispute involves a position in a unit represented by the Association and
unless such dispute falls within the definition of a grievance as set forth in section
8.1.

Proposals to add to or change this Memorandum of Understanding or written
agreements or addenda supplementary hereto shall not be arbitrable and no
proposal to modify, amend or terminate this Memorandum of Understanding, nor
any matter or subject arising out of or in connection with such proposal, may be

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 15
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

 

8.5

referred to arbitration under this Section. No arbitrator selected pursuant to this
section shall have the power to amend or modify this Memorandum of Understand-
ing or written agreements or addenda supplementary hereto or to establish any new
terms or conditions of employment.

No change in this Memorandum of Understanding or interpretations thereof (except
interpretations resulting from arbitration proceedings hereunder) will be recognized
unless agreed to by the City Manager and the Association.

Other Provisions

If the Director of Human Resources in pursuance of the procedures outlined above,
or the City Manager in pursuance of the provisions outlined above resolve a
grievance which involves suspension or discharge, they may agree to payment for
lost time or to reinstatement with or without payment for lost time, but in the event
the dispute is referred to arbitration and the arbitrator finds that the City had cause
to take the action complained of, the arbitrator may not substitute his judgment for
the judgment of Management and if he finds that the City had such right, he may
not order reinstatement and may not assess any penalty upon the City.

All complaints involving or concerning the payment of compensation shall be initially
filed in writing with the City Manager. Only complaints, which allege the employee
is not being compensated in accordance with the provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding, shall be considered as grievances. Any other matters of
compensation are to be resolved in the meeting and conferring process and if not
detailed in the Memorandum of Understanding which results from such meeting and
conferring process shall be deemed withdrawn until the meeting and conferring
process is next open for such decision. No adjustment shall be retroactive for more
than thirty (30) days from the date upon which the complaint was filed.

The provisions of this Section shall not abridge any right to which an employee may
be administered in a manner that would abrogate any power which, under the City
Charter, may be within the sole province and discretion of the Civil Service
Commission.

All grievances of employees in the representation unit represented by the
Association shall be processed under this Section. If the City Charter requires that
differing options be available to the employee, no action under paragraph (d) of
subsection 8.3 above shall be taken unless it is determined that the employee is not
availing himself/herself of such option.

No action under paragraph (d) of subsection 8.3 above shall be taken if action on

CITY OF STOCKTON 16
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

the complaint or grievance has been taken by the Civil Service Commission, or if
the complaint or grievance is pending before the Civil Service Commission.

If any award by an arbitrator requires action by the City Council or the Civil Service
Commission before it can be placed in effect, the City Manager and the Director of
Personnel Services will recommend to the City Council or the Civil Service
Commission, as appropriate, that it follow such award.

CITY OF STOCKTON Ae
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 9. LEAVES
9.1 Vacation

(a) Vacation Allowance. Effective July 1, 2012, all employees in this unit shall
accrue vacation leave with pay in accordance with the following schedule
(employees shall accrue vacation on a twice monthly basis):

Less than 1-1/2 years continuous employment ... .... 120 hours/year
After 1-1/2 years up to 7 1/2 years... 148 hours/year
After 7-1/2 years up to 15 years. 188 hours/year
After 15 years up to 25 years .. 229 hours/year

 

  
 

 

Seven (7) additional hours hence for each completed year of service in excess of
twenty-five (25) years.

(b) Vacation Carryover Allowance. Effective July 1, 2012, the following maximum
vacation accruals shall take effect. Employees reaching the maximum hours
provided here shall stop accruing additional vacation hours until they are below
the caps listed here. No vacation hours may be added to sick leave balances
without exception.

For employees who on July 1, 2012 have vacation balances that exceed their
maximum shall have until June 30, 2013 to use sufficient vacation to get under
the maximum allowed. If an employee does not reduce his/her balance below
the maximum by June 30, 2013, he/she shall retain their existing earned
vacation, but shall not earn any additional vacation until they are under the
maximum vacation accrual allowed.

The maximum number of vacation hours that employees on a 40 hour workweek
shall accrue are as follows:

Under 1.5 years 200 hours
1.5 -7.5 years 320 hours
7.5 — 15 years 360 hours
15 — 25 years 400 hours
25 years 408 hours
26 years 416 hours
27 years 424 hours
28 years plus 7 hours each additional year

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 18
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU

TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

9.2

Employees reaching the maximum hours provided here shall stop accruing
additional vacation hours until they are below the caps listed here. No vacation
hours may be added to sick leave balances without exception.

(c) Vacation Sell-back. An employee on a forty (40) hour workweek may sell
back forty (40) hours of his/her unused accumulated vacation balance after the
use of scheduled vacation of forty (40) hours or more. This option may be
exercised once per calendar year, except during furlough or fiscal emergency
periods.

(d) Vacation Allowance for Separated Employees. When an employee is
separated from the service between February 17, 2012 and June 30, 2014, the
employee’s remaining allowance, if any, shall be paid as follows:

% Upon separation, employees shall receive one third (1/3) or
$10,000, whichever is greater, of the total of his/her unused
accumulated vacation hours.

Zi On the one year anniversary of employee's separation, he/shall
shall receive the second payment of one third (1/3) or $10,000,
whichever is greater of the balance of his/her unused accumulated
vacation hours.

3. On the second year anniversary of employee's separation he/she
shall receive payment for the balance of the unpaid accumulated
vacation hours.

4. Employees who are involuntarily separated shall have their unused
accumulated vacation hours, if any, added to his/her final
compensation.

An employee who has resigned in good standing and is subsequently reinstated
within one (1) year from the date of his resignation shall have his prior service
counted in determining eligibility for vacation benefits, deducting therefrom the
amount of time between the date of resignation and the date of reinstatement
which shall not be counted in determining eligibility.

Sick Leave

(a) Accrual. All regular employees, except provisional, temporary and part-time
employees, each shall accrue sick leave at the rate of eight (8) hours for full
month of service. All regular employees, except provisional, temporary and

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 19
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

part-time employees, working less than a full month shall accrue sick leave while
off duty on authorized sick leave; provided, however, an employee shall not
accrue sick leave during any leave or leaves of absence without pay granted to
the employee.

(b) Usage. Employees are entitled to sick leave pay for those days which the
employee would normally have worked, to a maximum of sick leave hours
accrued.

An employee may use sick leave for preventive medical, dental, optical care,
illness, injury or exposure to contagious disease, which incapacitates him/her
from performing his/her duties. This includes disabilities caused or contributed to
by pregnancy, miscarriage, abortion, childbirth and recovery therefrom.

(c) Family Sick Leave. Employees may utilize fifty percent (50%) of their annual
accrued sick leave to attend to cases of illness or injury in the employee's
immediate family, except in instances where the employee is on approved FMLA
or CFRA leave.

For the purpose of this section immediate family is defined as the employee's
parents, spouse, registered domestic partner, mother-in-law, father-in-law, child,
stepchild, brother, sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, legal dependent,
grandparent and grandchild.

(d) Procedures for Requesting and Approving Sick Leave. When the
requirement for sick leave is known to the employee, in advance of his absence,
the employee shall request authorization for such sick leave from the department
head prior to such absence. In all other instances, the employee shall notify his
supervisor as promptly as possible of his absence.

Before an employee may be paid for the use of accrued sick leave, he shall
complete and submit to his department head a signed statement, on a prescribed
form, stating the dates and hours of absence, the exact reason, and such other
information as is necessary for his request to be evaluated. If an employee does
not return to work prior to the preparation of the payroll, other arrangements may
be made with the approval of the department head.

(e) Doctor's Certificate or Other Proof. If an employee's illness results in an
absence from work for more than three (3) consecutive days, then a doctor's
certificate or other reasonable proof of illness will be required by the department
head.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 20
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

The Police Chief or the Director of Human Resources may make such sick leave
usage reviews and may require such physician's documentation, as they deem
necessary to ensure proper use of the sick leave benefit. In addition, the City
may monitor and control the appropriate use of sick leave by employees and if
reasonable cause is articulated, can limit use of sick leave and require additional
verification.

(f) Use of Sick Leave while on Vacation. An employee who is injured or who
becomes ill while on vacation may be paid for sick leave in lieu of vacation
provided that the employee:

(1) was hospitalized during the period for which sick leave is claimed, or

(2) received medical treatment or diagnosis and presents a statement
indicating disabling illness or injury signed by a physician covering the
period for which sick leave is claimed.

(g) Payment for Unused Sick Leave for Unit Employees. Effective February 17,
2012, all sick leave shall have no cash value upon separation of employment and
employees shall not be allowed to cash out unused sick leave. Employees may
be eligible to convert unused sick leave for CalPERS service credit at retirement
based on the PERS contract provisions applicable to their employment.

(h) CalPERS Service Credit for Unused Sick Leave. Employees shall be eligible
for CalPERS service credit for any unused sick leave at retirement not otherwise
compensated for in (i) below. Employees hired after the City amends its
CalPERS contract to eliminate service credit for unused sick leave shall not be
eligible for this service credit.

(i) Sick Leave Retention Benefit. If, after subtracting the equivalent of one full
year of service credit (2080 hours), which may be applied to CALPERS service
credit, any balance remaining upon separation shall be paid as follows to
employees who have remained in City service until the dates specified:

1. Separation prior to July 1, 2014, no payment of unused sick leave
at separation shall occur for separating employees before this date;

2. Separation between July 1, 2014 and June 30, 2015, payment of
unused sick leave which the employee held on 2/16/12 shall be
paid at 35% of its cash value to separating employees between
these dates; and

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 21
9.3

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

3. Separation after July 1, 2015, payment of unused sick leave which
the employee held on 2/16/12 shall be paid at 50% of its cash value
to separating employees after this date.

4. Service credit for unused sick leave shall be in accordance with
PERS regulations.

Other Leaves With Pay

(a) Bereavement Leave. In the event of a death in the immediate family of an
employee, the employee shall, upon request be granted up to three (3) days
bereavement leave with pay without charge to his/her accumulated sick leave
credits or vacation eligibility. The City Manager may grant an additional three (3)
days bereavement leave upon request which shall be charged against the
employee's accumulated sick leave credits in cases where extensive travel time
is required to attend the funeral. For the purposes of this section, immediate
family is defined as the employee’s parents, spouse, registered domestic partner,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, child, stepchild, brother, sister, brother-in-law, sister-
in-law, grandparent and grandchild.

In the event of the death of a person not immediately related to an employee as
defined above, the employee's department head may grant up to three (3) days
bereavement leave upon request which shall be charged against the employee's
accumulated sick leave credits.

(b) Court Appearance. Upon approval by the department head, an employee,
other than a provisional or temporary employee, shall be permitted authorized
absence from duty for appearance in court because of jury service, in obedience
to subpoena or by direction of proper authority, in accordance with the following
provisions:

Said absence from duty will be compensated for actual hours the employee
serves on the jury or testifies as a witness in a criminal case, other than a
defendant, including necessary travel time. As a condition of receiving such full
pay, the employee must remit to the City, through the employee's department
head, within fifteen (15) days after receipt all fees received except those
specifically allowed for mileage and expenses. Jury duty or witness duty
appearances shall be considered in terms of actual hours spent from arrival time
until the time released from Court. If an employee is not due to appear for jury
duty or as a witness until afternoon court session, he/she will be expected to
work his usual morning schedule. If an employee is required to appear for

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 22
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

morning court session and is released before noon and not required to return to
court in the afternoon, he/she shall work the remainder of his/her usual afternoon
schedule.

Said absence from duty will be without pay when the employee appears in
private litigation to which the City of Stockton is not a party.

Any fees allowed, except for reimbursement of expenses incurred, shall be
remitted to the City Treasurer through the employee's department.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, attendance in court in connection with an
employee's official duties or in behalf of the City of Stockton in connection with a
case in which the City of Stockton is not a party, together with travel time
necessarily involved, shall not be considered absent from duty within the
meaning of this Section.

(c) Court Appearance Pay while in Off Duty Status. When an employee is
required by proper authority to appear in court during off-duty hours, said
employee shall receive compensation of three (3) hours at time and one-half (1-
1/2) or actual time worked at the appropriate rate, whichever is greater.

(d) Military Leave. An employee of the City who is a member of the National
Guard or Naval Militia or a member of Reserve Corps or Force of the Federal
Military, Naval or Marine Service and is ordered to duty shall be granted leave
with pay while engaged therein, provided the leave does not exceed thirty (30)
calendar days in any calendar year.

All regular employees in the service of the City shall be allowed leave of absence
without pay for the duration of a national emergency who have been inducted
into the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force or any other branch of the Military
Service of the United States or the State of California. Said employees shall be
reinstated in the service, except as hereinafter stated, providing they are
physically fit as shown by a medical examination by the City Physician or other
physician appointed to make a medical examination.

In the case of a probationary employee having served his minimum probationary
period of twelve (12) months at the time of induction, it shall be optional with the
department head and the City Manager to grant regular status to said employee
before induction.

All probationary employees inducted into the Military Service not having served
the minimum probationary period of twelve (12) months, or having served the

CITY OF STOCKTON 23

 
9.4

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

minimum probationary period of twelve (12) months but not having received
regular status shall be allowed leave of absence without pay for the duration of a
national emergency, but said employees shall be placed at the head of the
eligible list for such position in the order of their seniority of employment and
when appointed to a vacant position, they must be physically fit as above
specified and shall serve the balance of their probationary period before attaining
the status of a regular employee.

Two or more regular employees granted military leave of absence without pay
from the same position shall be reemployed according to their seniority of
employment providing they are physically fit as above specified.

(e) Management Time Leave. The City shall provide forty (40) hours of paid-
management time-leave each fiscal year. The time-leave of forty (40) hours may
not carry over from fiscal year to fiscal year, be used for sell-back purposes, or
paid for any unused leave-time upon separation of City employment.

Workers' Compensation Leave

Whenever any member of this unit, is disabled, whether temporarily or
permanently, by injury or illness arising out of and in the course of his duties,
he/she shall become entitled, regardless of his/her period of service with the City,
to a leave of absence while so disabled without loss of salary, in lieu of
temporary disability payment, if any, which would be payable for the period of
such disability but not exceeding one year, or until such earlier date as he/she is
retired on permanent disability pension.

If injury is claimed to be job related or a recurrence of a previous job related
sickness or injury it must be verified with a written physician's statement
otherwise disability leave will not be allowed. Any absence not so approved will
be charged to sick leave if verification is not received.

(a) Forms and Procedures. Workers’ compensation processing shall be
consistent with City procedures and in accordance with state workers’
compensation regulations. An employee who sustains a work-related injury or
illness shall immediately inform his/her supervisor no matter how minor an on-
the-job injury may appear. An employee who sustains a work-related injury or
illness is required to seek medical care at facilities designated by the City unless
they have filed a pre-designation of personal physician prior to sustaining the
work-related injury or illness. The City shall furnish the association the
appropriate form for distribution. For a list of City designated medical care
facilities and/or physicians, please contact Human Resources.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 24
9.5

9.6

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

Leaves of Absence

Employees shall not be entitled to leave of absence as a matter of right, but only
in accordance with the provisions of law and the City of Stockton Municipal Code.
Unless otherwise provided, the granting of a leave of absence also grants to the
employee the right to return to a position in the same classification or equivalent
classification, as the employee held at the time the leave was granted. The
granting of any leave of absence shall be based on the presumption that the
employee intends to return to work upon the expiration of the leave.

All approval authority over leaves of absence exercised by the department head
under this Section shall be subject to review by the City Manager, whose ruling
shall be final. Employees on authorized leaves of absence without pay shall not
be entitled to payment by the City of the premiums for their health and dental
insurance, except as provided hereinafter.

The entitlement to City payment of premium shall end on the last day of the
month in which the employee was paid except that employees on an authorized
leave of absence may continue enrollment in the City health and dental insurance
plan by prepayment of the monthly premium during the authorized leave of
absence.

Authorized absence without pay which exceeds thirty (30) consecutive calendar
days, except military leave, shall not be included in determining salary
adjustment rights, based on length of employment. Periods of time during which
an employee is required to be absent from his/her position by reason of an injury
or disease for which he/she is entitled to and currently receiving Workers'
Compensation benefits shall be included in computing length of service for the
purpose of determining that employee's salary adjustments.

Leave of Absence Without Pay

(a) Purpose and Length. Only employees occupying regular positions on a
permanent basis are eligible for leaves of absence without pay, under the
provisions of this Section.

An appointing authority may grant leave of absence without pay for personal
reasons, up to a maximum of twelve (12) months, with approval of the Director of
Human Resources.

Leaves of absence without pay on account of illness or injury, which are not job

CITY OF STOCKTON 25
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

incurred, may be granted for a maximum period of twelve (12) months with
approval of the Director of Human Resources. This includes disabilities caused
or contributed to by pregnancy, miscarriage, abortion, childbirth and recovery
therefrom.

Such a leave will be granted only after all accrued sick leave credits have been
used and shall be substantiated by a physician's statement.

(b) Application for and Approval of Leaves of Absence Without Pay. In order to
receive leave without pay, an employee must submit a request on the prescribed
form to his department head and the City Manager describing the reasons for the
request and all other information required for the department head, or his
representative, to evaluate the request. Leaves without pay may be canceled by
the department at any time.

9.7 Absence Without Official Leave (AWOL)

(a) Refusal of Leave or Failure to Return After Leave. Failure to report for duty
or failure to report for duty after a leave of absence request has been
disapproved, revoked, or canceled by the department or City Manager or at the
expiration of a leave, shall be considered an absence without leave.

(b) Voluntary Resignation. Any employee in this bargaining unit absent without
leave for two (2) or more consecutive days or absent an aggregate of sixteen
(16) hours in any calendar month without a satisfactory explanation shall be
deemed to have voluntarily resigned from the City of Stockton except if the
absence is due to a verified illness or injury.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 26
10.1

10.2

10.3

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 10. DAYS AND HOURS OF WORK
Workweek

The normal workweek for Police Service Management Unit employees shall
consist of five (5) eight (8) hour days or a minimum total of forty (40) hours.
Where operational requirements of a department require deviations from the
present schedule, the Police Chief and/or City Manager may institute alternate
work schedules, consistent with provisions of the State Law.

SPMA will meet and confer with the City on any proposed changes in work
schedule.

Meal Periods

Phase shift employees normally receive a one-half (1/2) hour meal with pay
each.

Other Police Service Management Unit employees will normally receive a one (1)
hour meal period without pay.

Work Furloughs

The furlough program shall be continued to achieve a savings of approximately
3% annually for the term of this contract, as set forth below.

(a) 62_Furlough Hours. Effective the pay period that includes July 1, 2012,
through June 30, 2013 each employee shall take sixty-two (62) unpaid
furlough hours in accordance with (c) and (d) of this section.

(b) Equalized Payroll Deductions. For fiscal year 2012 — 2013 payroll deductions
for the sixty-two (62) furlough hours described in section 10.3, paragraph (a)
herein above shall be equalized so that each bargaining unit employee shall
have (2.98%) at the employee’s regular hourly rate of pay deducted from
each of the twenty-four (24) pay warrants in each fiscal year.

(c) Eurlough Bank. The sixty-two (62) furlough hours will be placed in a furlough
bank. The furlough bank may be carried over from one fiscal year to the next.
There shall be no cash value provided for any furlough hours.

(d) Use of Furlough Hours. All furlough leave shall be scheduled in advance with

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 27
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

the employee's supervisor. Furlough hours must be scheduled and used
prior to the date of separation.

(e) Separation from City Service before June 30, 2013. Any employee who
separates from City service before the final 2.98% furlough deduction on July
7, 2013 for the pay period ending June 30, 2013, and after having used
furlough hours, shall have his or her final compensation reduced by the sum
of the number of furlough hours the employee has actually used minus the
number of furlough hours actually deducted from the employee’s pay
warrants multiplied by the employee's regular hourly rate of pay. Conversely,
any employee who separates from City service before June 30, 2013, having
suffered furlough deductions in excess of the actual number of furlough hours
the employee has used, shall have his or her final compensation credited by
like amount.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 28
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 11. OVERTIME
11.1 Eligibility

Police Service Management employees shall not be eligible for overtime for extra
hours worked to perform duties of their assigned positions with the following
exceptions:

(a) When assigned to cover the shift of another employee in a
comparable position.

(b) When assigned to work due to an emergency situation as required
by their department.

(c) When assigned to work on special projects, events, and/or critical
incidents as required by the department.

(d) For any hours worked as a result of exceptions (a) through (c), extra
hours shall only be compensated at overtime rates if that employee
works more than forty hours within the same work week. It is
understood that, notwithstanding the additional compensation provided
under this section, all employees in the bargaining unit are FLSA
exempt.

(e) For the purposes of subsection (d), furlough hours taken, holiday
hours taken and observed holidays when the City is closed shall be
considered as time worked. Sick leave, vacation, or other time taken as
compensated time off shall not be considered as actual time worked.

11.2 Authorization

The Chief of Police must personally approve any overtime pay for Police Service
Management Unit employees.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 29
12.1

12.2

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 12. HOLIDAYS

Compensation for Holidays Worked

(a) Police Service Management Unit employees required to work a holiday shall
be compensated an additional eight (8) hour's pay at one and one-half (1 1/2)
times the straight time rate. This compensation can be in the form of direct
payment or earned time. Earned time overtime hours shall be limited to a
maximum accumulation of forty (40) hours at any point. Police Service
Management Unit employees requesting earned time compensation shall, prior
to July |, each year, declare on a form provided by the City their intention to
receive equivalent compensatory time for holidays which they may have to work.

(b) Regular and probationary Police Lieutenant employees shall receive, in
addition to their normal compensation, one day’s pay for each of the holidays
listed.

Holidays Observed by the City

(1) New Years Day
(2) Martin Luther King’s Birthday. . (Third Monday in January)
(3) Lincoln's Birthday......... . (Second Monday in February)
(4) Washington's Birthday ............c:eeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee (Third Monday in February)

(January 1)

 

   
  
   
 
  
 
 

(5) Cesar Chavez’ Day (March 31)
(6) Memorial Day........ . (Last Monday in May)
C7¥ WMASPSHASNCS! DAY evrscscsecetesccesecsesscsccsasvcovevescetieeewsewsmie’ suevasceacesssereezenn (July 4)

(8) Labor Day......
(9) Columbus Day
(10) Veteran's Day ...
(11) Thanksgiving.....
(12) Day following Thanksgiving
(13) Christmas Day

. (First Monday in September)
.... (Second Monday in October)
(November 11)
(Fourth Thursday in November)
..(Fourth Friday in November)
(December 25)

 

 

 
 
 

 

For employees on a Monday through Friday workweek, if holidays fall on a
Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed. If holidays fall on Saturday, the
proceeding Friday shall be observed.

For employees in the Police Department on a ten (10) hour shift schedule,
holidays that fall on Saturday or Sunday shall be observed on Saturday or
Sunday respectively.

CITY OF STOCKTON 30
13.1

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 13. COMPENSATION AND ALLOWANCES OTHER THAN BASE
SALARY

Retirement Contribution Supplement

(a) Public Employees’ Retirement System (P.E.R.S.). The City shall contribute
an amount equal to nine percent (9.0%) of the employee's current base salary
and other compensation as qualified by State law toward PERS benefits. Such
amounts will be applied to the employee's individual account in accordance with
Government Code section 20691.

(b) P.E.R.S Contribution. Effective July 1, 2010, employees shall pay 4.5%
toward the employer contribution of PERS. Effective July 1, 2011, employees
shall pay an additional 4.5% toward the employer contribution of PERS for a total
of 9%. This section shall not be construed to permit employees to receive a
“double” EPMC benefit, as employees already receive the EPMC benefit
pursuant to section 13.1(c).

Employees hired on or before June 30, 2012 shall pay nine percent (9%) of the
employee's current base salary (employee contribution) and other compensation
as qualified by state law towards the Public Employees’ Retirement System
(PERS) towards employer's share of cost for PERS pension on a post-tax basis
in the form of a payroll deduction. The City will seek a private letter ruling from
the IRS to determine whether or not the IRS permits the employee's contribution
to the employer's share of pension cost to be treated on a pre-tax basis. If the
IRS issues a private letter ruling allowing the employee's contribution towards
employer pension cost on a pre-tax basis, the City will change the deduction from
post-tax to pre-tax as soon as administratively possible after the IRS final
determination. Additionally, the City will work with PERS to determine whether or
not PERS will allow a contract amendment per Section 20516 to allow an
employee contribution in the amount of 9% of the employee’s current base salary
(employee contribution) and other compensation as qualified by PERS towards
the employer's share of cost for PERS pension on a pre-tax basis. If PERS
determines that the maximum contribution through PERS Section 20516
amendment is less that the 9% and/or some or all of the contributions sunset at a
specific time in the future, the parties agree that the City shall deduct the
percentage up to 9% not covered by the PERS amendment process through a
payroll deduction. Additionally, in the event the City reaches agreement with the
SPOA for SPOA members to pay 9% of the employer's contribution through a
PERS section 20516 contract amendment, the parties agree that SPMA would
be subject to that amendment as well, consistent with PERS requirements.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 31
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

(c) Employer Paid Member Contribution Converted to Payrate during the Final
Compensation Period. The City will make application to P.E.R.S. to provide
California Government Code section 20692 (Employer Paid Member
Contributions Converted to Payrate during the Final Compensation Period) as an
additional P.E.R.S. benefit, to be effective upon adoption by the Stockton City
Council and the P.E.R.S. Administration Board. At the beginning of employee’s
last year of employment, the employee will pay their employees’ nine percent
(9%) benefit cost through an automatic payroll deduction. The City will increase
the base salary for those employees by the same nine percent (9%) for the last
twelve months of employment. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Code
414H(2), whereby employee contributions shall be tax deferred (not subject to
taxation until time of constructive receipt) will be concurrently implemented with
P.E.R.S. California Government Code section 20692.

(d) Military Service Credit. The City will provide military service credit pursuant to
the provisions of California Government Code section 21024, formerly Section
20930.3 at the employee's expense.

(e) Credit for Unused Sick Leave. The City will provide P.E.R.S. California
Government Code section 20965 (Credit for Unused Sick Leave) as added
P.E.R.S. benefits.

(f) Fourth Level of 1959 Survivor Benefits. The City wil provides P.E.R.S.
California Government Code section 21574 (Fourth Level of 1959 Survivor
Benefits) as an additional retirement benefit, to be effective upon adoption by the
Stockton City Council and the added P.E.R.S. Administrative Board.

(g) Service Retirement Plan Formula for Employees Hired on or before July 1
2012. The City’s service retirement contract with P.E.R.S. for safety members of
this unit hired on or before July 1, 2012 is 3% at Age 50.

(h) Pension Reform. When SPOA becomes subject to a second tier retirement
formula, this unit will adopt the change and new employees moving into this unit
shall be at the new tier.

(i) Service Retirement Plan Formula for Unit Employees Hired on or after July 1

2012. The City will contract with PERS to provide a new second tier retirement
program of either 2% @ 50 (2.7% @ 55) or 3% at 55 with three year average
salary formula and no other additional PERS enhanced benefits except for those
statutorily required for employees hired on or after July 1, 2012 or as soon as

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 32
13.2

13.3

13.4

13.5

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

administratively possible. Such employees shall pay 9% of the employees’
current base salary towards the employee's contribution towards PERS and any
other compensation as qualified by state law towards PERS retirement benefits
through a payroll deduction.

(j) Employee Cost-Share of Employer Contribution. If bargaining unit employees
hired on or before June 30, 2012 agree to cost-share the employer contribution,
at all times in which there is no CalPERS contract amendment, any additional
employee cost-share of the employer contribution shall be done on a post-tax
basis unless there is an Internal Revenue Service ruling indicating that the
additional employee cost-share may be done on a pre-tax basis.

Uniform Allowance

Effective July 1, 2012, employees in this unit shall receive as annual
compensation, a uniform allowance in the amount of nine hundred fifty dollars
($950.00).

One-half (1/2) of the annual value of uniform allowance shall be paid to eligible
employees during the months of April and October.

No Deferred Compensation

Effective July 1, 2010, the City’s contribution into Deferred Compensation was
converted to salary. Employees will no longer receive a deferred compensation
benefit.

Mileage Reimbursement for Private Vehicle Use

For authorized use of a private vehicle an employee in this unit will be
reimbursed for actual mileage at the current rate established for other
employees.

Police Vehicles

Members of SPMA shall be assigned a police vehicle due to the need for
emergency response and command status at all time. This vehicle shall be
taken home at night, with the manager maintaining radio contact and monitoring
radio traffic until parked. The take-home radius shall be the same distance as
the alternative work site radius (sixty miles for out-of-town training) measured
from the central point of the City.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 33
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

 

13.6 Communication Devices

Members of SPMA shall be provided a communication device that will work as a
cell phone, connect to the internet, and have the ability for two-way and group
electronic communication with other police management, the communication
center, and other emergency management personnel throughout the City in an
appropriately encrypted manner.

13.7 Certificate Incentive Pay

(a) The City shall pay six percent (6.0%) of the top step in rank for employees
who attain a P.O.S.T. Supervisory Certificate.

(b) | The City shall pay an additional three percent (3.0%) for a total of nine
percent (9.0%) of top salary step in rank for employees who attain a
P.O.S.T. Management Certificate or higher, upon completion of two (2)
continuous years of service in rank and upon completion of management
course.

13.8 Longevity Increment Pay for Grandparented Employees Only

1. Effective July 1, 2012 the longevity increment shall be effective the first pay
period following the anniversary date of hire of the employee as follows:

(a) The City shall pay three-quarters of one percent (.75%) of top
salary step in rank for longevity pay, upon completion of twelve (12) years
of continuous service as a public safety member of the Stockton Police
Department.

(b) The City shall pay an additional one and three-quarters percent
(1.75%) for a total of two and one half percent (2.5%), upon completion of
eighteen (18) years of continuous service as a public safety member of
the Stockton Police Department.

(c) The City shall pay an additional two percent (2%) for a total of
percent (4.5%), upon completion of twenty-four (24) years of continuous
service as a public safety member of the Stockton Police Department.

(d) | Members of the bargaining unit promoting from the POA bargaining
unit during the term of this agreement will be placed at the level of
longevity appropriate to their years of service, and will be grandparented
at that level.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 34
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

(e) For the limited purpose of defining continuous service under this
Section of the Memorandum of Understanding, continuous service shall
include leaves without pay for less than one (1) year as long as the public
safety officer did not withdraw his or her contribution from P.E.R.S.

2. Effective June 30, 2013 Longevity Increment Pay shall be eliminated for all
employees in this unit. Section 13.9 in its entirety shall be eliminated and
inoperative.

3. The parties agree in concept to additional employee contributions to the
employers’ share of the PERS contribution, up to 4.1% additional contribution,
provided this can be done on a pre-tax basis. The equivalent dollar amount
of the additional deduction will be directed to maintaining grandparented
longevity payments and/or restoration of other compensation reductions as
the parties may agree. It is the intent of the parties that discussions over
implementing additional employee cost sharing shall commence as soon as
practical, and it is understood that additional pre-tax cost sharing may require
the agreement of the SPOA because it is covered by the same PERS
contract.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 35
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 14. INSURANCE PLANS
14.1 Health Insurance And Related Benefits

(a) Health and Welfare Benefits. Employees in this bargaining unit shall have
a choice of enrolling themselves and their eligible dependents in the City’s
Modified Plan or any other plan that the City shall offer to regular employees.
Each plan shall offer an Employee only, Employee plus One and Employee plus
two or more dependents coverage. The City shall offer two or more medical
plans to regular employees. For the modifications to the City's Modified Plan
which are effective September 1, 2011, the revised annual deductible shall be
effective on January 1, 2012.

(b) — Eligibility. Employees shall become eligible for Medical insurance on the
first day of the month subsequent to completion of thirty (30) days of continuous
service with the City. Employees shall become eligible for Dental insurance on
the first day of the month subsequent to completion of sixty (60) days continuous
service with the City. An eligible employee and eligible dependent may be
enrolled in a City offered medical plan either as a subscriber in a City offered
medical plan or, as the dependent spouse/registered domestic partner or another
eligible City employee, but not both. If an employee is also eligible to cover their
dependent child, the child will be allowed to enroll as a dependent on only one
employee plan (i.e., an employee and his or her dependent cannot be covered by
more than one City-offered health plan).

(c) Employee Medical Insurance Contribution. Effective September 1, 2011:

(1) The City shall contribute up to $481.00 per month toward the cost
of the monthly premium for employee-only medical/dental/vision
plan coverage.

(2) The City shall contribute up to $875.00 per month toward the cost
of the monthly premium for employee plus one dependent
medical/dental/vision plan coverage.

(3) The City shall contribute up to $1165.00 per month toward the cost
of the monthly premium for employee plus two or more dependents
medical/dental/vision plan coverage.

(4) | These contributions are based on fulltime employment; regular
part-time employees shall receive a prorated contribution based on

CITY OF STOCKTON 36

 
14.2

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

their percentage of full-time employment. Insurance plan premiums
that exceed the City's monthly contribution shall be paid by the
employee through payroll deductions. The City shall maintain its
IRS 125 Plan to allow for employee contributions for
medical/vision/dental to be pre-tax premium conversion.

(d) Plan Rules. Employees may insure themselves and their eligible dependents
under the medical/vision and dental plans provided by the City, in accordance
with the rules and regulations applicable to the selected Plan. Benefits in the
Plan shall be in accordance with the Plan document.

(e) The City will keep SPMA informed as to changes to actuarial methods
employed by its actuary which materially affect the rates, and permit the
opportunity for SPMA to discuss such changes. SPMA will meet and confer with
the City mid-term regarding further plan changes. Plan design changes to the
City’s Modified Plan for employees are effective September 1, 2011.

(f) It is understood that a coalition of the City’s unions, including SPMA, are
exploring the possibility of providing a health plan for all city employees and
retirees, independent from the City. On or before October 1, 2012, the Unions
shall notify the City of whether they in fact are proposing to assume the provision
of medical plans for employees and retirees. Should the City and unions in fact
agree upon the unions administering their own plan, the terms of that assumption
shall be established through meet and confer, as set forth in Appendix_A. The
terms of such plan, once agreed upon, shall supersede this section to the extent
inconsistent, provided that the City’s contributions to such plan for active
employees in this unit shall not exceed the maximum contributions set forth in
subsection (c).

(g) If legally permissible, the City agrees to make Medicare contributions for
employees hired in 1985 to 1986 who are not currently covered by Medicare,
provided that such payments shall be on a going forward basis only, and such
unit members shall be required to pay the employee matching contribution to
Medicare. To the extent legally permissible, Unit members may contribute to
Medicare to purchase credit retroactively provided such unit members do so at
their own expense, including both the employee and employer share.

Life Insurance

Each employee in this unit will receive group life insurance coverage paid for by
the City of Stockton equal to a value of $50,000. In addition, employees shall

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 37
14.3

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

 

have the opportunity to purchase additional insurance for a coverage level up to
three times their annual salary at their own expense, provided the City’s
insurance carrier is willing to provide such insurance.

Long Term Disability Insurance

Each employee in this unit will receive long term disability insurance coverage.
Essentially, this is an income protection plan which provides disability income for
management including:

(a) Each disability - Approximately 66 2/3% of salary.

(b) A 30 day waiting period before eligibility for benefit.

(c) Benefit payable until age sixty-five (65).

(d) Effective July 1, 2012 the city’s reimbursement of the cost of LTD
shall be frozen at the monthly amount then being reimbursed

($24.50). SPMA members purchase their own insurance and are
not in the City plan.

14.4 Retirement Medical Allowance

(a) Eligibility. An eligible retiree and eligible dependent may be enrolled in a City

offered medical plan either as a subscriber in a City offered medical plan or,
as the dependent spouse/domestic partner or another eligible City
employee/retiree, but not both. If an employee/retiree is also eligible to cover
their dependent child, the child will be allowed to enroll as a dependent on
only one employee or retiree’s plan (i.e., a retiree and his or her dependent
cannot be covered by more than one City-offered health plan). The City does
not provide any retiree medical program, allowance or City contribution for
employees hired on or after July 1, 2011.

(b) City Contribution for the Period of July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2013.

The City shall provide to employees retiring from the City the following
contribution towards the costs of retiree medical insurance from July 1, 2012
through June 30, 2013.

1. Employees retiring with over 10 years of full time service with the City of
Stockton as a regular employee shall receive a City contribution of $150 a
month towards the cost of retiree medical insurance.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 38
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

2. Employees retiring with over 20 years of full time service with the City of
Stockton as a regular employee shall receive a City contribution of $300 a
month towards the cost of retiree medical insurance.

3. Employees retiring with over 30 years of full time service with the City of
Stockton as a regular employee shall receive a City contribution of $450 a
month towards the cost of retiree medical insurance.

4. Employees with less than 10 years of service for the City shall not be
eligible for a city contribution towards retiree medical.

5. Benefits for part time employees who retire are prorated based on their full
time equivalent.

6. The City contributions shall end with the death of the retiree and no
survivor benefits are provided.

7. Retirees may enroll themselves or their dependents at their own expense
in City sponsored medical plans only (dental and vision are not offered to
retirees). The City reserves the right to set benefit levels in medical plans
for retirees and at its exclusive option only provide fully insured plan
choices to retirees for enrollment. The City reserves the right to
discontinue inclusion of retirees in City sponsored medical plans at any
time.

The City’s commitment to provide retiree medical benefits during the
2012-13 fiscal year is to the retiree and shall end upon the death of the
retiree. Surviving spouses shall not be eligible for any city paid benefit
after the death of the city retiree. Any benefits previously paid to surviving
spouses have been paid in error and without the approval of the City
Council.

(c) Elimination of Retiree Medical Program effective June 30, 2013. Effective
June 30, 2013, the City shall no longer provide a contribution towards the
cost of retiree medical insurance for current employees (future retirees) and
current retiree.

14.5 Alternative Retirement Medical Plans

The parties have negotiated that employees may choose to enroll in one or more
additional health plans instead of the City Modified Plan (including but not limited
to Kaiser Sr. Advantage).

CITY OF STOCKTON 39
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

This language sets forth the conditions in which current employees, when they
retire from the City and otherwise qualify for a retiree medical benefit from the
City as stated in Sections 14.2 and 14.4 of this MOU, may also choose to enroll
in City sponsored alternative plans in the same manner as when they were
employees, as well as retiree only medical plans. The following conditions shall
apply:

(a) If an employee is in a City sponsored alternative plan at the time of
retirement, the employee shall be allowed to continue in that Plan.
Employees in the union sponsored plans authorized by the City at the time
of retirement shall be allowed to continue in that Plan. (Operating
Engineers units). Employees not in an alternative Plan at the time of
retirement shall not be allowed to enroll in any alternative plan except that;
any retiree may voluntarily enroll in a City sponsored retiree only Plan.

A retiree may only enroll in alternative plans other than the City Modified Plan when:

(a) The retiree selecting plans other than the City’s Modified Plan must agree
that the City’s financial contribution to a premium payment for any other
Plan shall not exceed the current contribution amount the City would pay if
the retiree is enrolled in the City Modified Plan, and

(b) The individual retirees will be required to sign a form that indicates their
agreement with these conditions.

The City reserves the right to eliminate these additional plans and the choice of
multiple plans is not a vested right. Like the City Modified Plan, the City reserves
the right to make plan design changes as necessary in these Alternative Plans.

14.6 Medicare Supplemental Coverage Requirements only for Employees hired
on or before June 30, 2011

The City reserves the right to terminate reimbursement payments for Part A
Medicare coverage, in which event the retiree will receive the City’s modified
medical plan which includes medical design changes effective September 1,
2011 as the primary health coverage, with the premiums for such coverage to be
paid by the City. The coverage provided pursuant to this section shall apply to
the retiree and his/her spouse.

Under the federal Health Care Reform Plan, sponsors may modify the medical
benefits provided to retirees only. The City will modify its retiree health care plan

CITY OF STOCKTON 40

 
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

to reflect the following:

(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

(g)

Return Plan benefits for Acupuncture to 12 visits per year (instead of
unlimited) and returns the payment percentage paid to 60% (instead of
80%);

Return Plan benefits for Alcohol and Drug Treatment admissions to 30
days and 3 lifetime admissions (instead of unlimited);

Return Plan benefits for Outpatient Mental Health or Nervous Disorder
services to 15 visit maximum (instead of unlimited);

Change Plan benefits for Preventative care and wellness to 80% instead
of current 100%;

Return Plan benefits on the lifetime cap on plan benefits to $2.5 million
(instead of unlimited);

Return Plan benefits on the maximum age of dependent children to be
enrolled in the Plan to age 19 unmarried, and not serving in the armed
forces to 23 if attending school full time and qualifies as a dependent for
federal income tax purposes.(instead of age 26);

Change Plan benefits for Emergency room benefits.

lf portions or the whole of the Federal Affordable Care Act is modified
subsequent to the adoption of this memorandum of understanding, the City and
SPMA will meet and confer over any negotiable impact of those modifications.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 41
15.1

15.2

15.3

15.4

15.5

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 15. SALARY PLAN

Salary

Except as may be set forth specifically in this MOU, during the term of this
agreement, the salary schedules for classifications in this unit shall remain the
same as those in effect on June 30, 2012, except that unit members will be
required to serve six months at each applicable salary step before advancing.

Salary Equivalents

Any monthly, daily, or hourly rate of pay may be converted into any equivalent
rate of pay or to any other time bases only when in the judgment of the City
Manager, such a conversion is advisable. In determining equivalent amounts on
different time bases the City shall provide tables or regulations for the calculation
of payment for service of less than full-time, and for use in converting monthly
salaries to hourly rates, as well as for calculating hourly rates.

Salary Step After Military Leave

All employees who have been granted military leave, upon their return to the City
service, are entitled to the automatic salary advancements within the range scale
of the established wage schedule of their classifications for the period they were
in the military service.

Salary Step When Salary Range is Increased

Whenever the monthly schedule of compensation for a class is revised, each
incumbent in a position to which the revised schedule applies shall be entitled to
the step in the revised range which corresponds to the employee's step held in
the previous range, unless otherwise specifically provided by the City Manager.

Salary Step After Promotion or Demotion

When an employee is promoted from a position in one rank to a position in a
higher rank and at the time of promotion is receiving a salary equal to, or greater
than, the minimum rate for the higher rank, that employee shall be entitled to a
step in the salary range of the higher rank which is at least five percent (5%)
above the rate the employee has been receiving, except that the next step shall
not exceed the maximum salary of the higher rank. When an employee is
demoted, whether such demotion is voluntary or otherwise, that employee's

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 42
15.6

15.7

15.8

POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

compensation shall be adjusted to the salary prescribed for the rank to which
demoted.

Salary on Reinstatement

If a former employee is reinstated in the same position previously held or to one
carrying a similar salary range, his salary shall not be higher than his salary at
the time his separation unless there has been an increase within the salary
range.

Acting Pay

Any employee who is assigned in writing to work in a higher paid classification
and who performs a majority of the duties of that higher position, shall receive the
rate of pay in a step of the higher classification which would have been received
if the employee had been promoted into that classification.

Special Assignment Pay

The City Manager may approve additional compensation in an amount up to but
not to exceed ninety percent (90%) of the department director's salary when an
employee is assigned, in writing, by the department director and with the
approval of the City Manager, to perform additional duties and responsibilities for
the duration of the special assignment.

CITY OF STOCKTON 43
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 16. SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS

In the event that any provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding are declared
by the court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal or unenforceable, that provision of
the Memorandum of Understanding shall be null and void but such nullification shall
not affect any other provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding, all of which
other provisions shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 17. PRACTICES AND EXISTING MEMORANDA OF UNDERSTANDING

Continuance of working conditions and practices not specifically authorized by
ordinance or by resolution of the City Council is not guaranteed by this
Memorandum of Understanding.

SECTION 18. SCOPE OF AGREEMENT

Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this Memorandum of
Understanding fully and completely incorporates the understanding of the parties
hereto and constitutes the sole and entire agreement between the parties on any
and all matters subject to meeting and conferring. Neither party shall, during the
term of this Memorandum of Understanding, demand any change therein nor shall
either party be required to negotiate with respect to any matter; provided that
nothing herein shall prohibit the parties from changing the terms of this
Memorandum of Understanding by mutual agreement.

SECTION 19. DURATION OF AGREEMENT
Upon its adoption by the Stockton City Council, this Memorandum of Understanding

shall be effective as of the date of execution unless otherwise indicated herein, and
shall remain in full force and effect up to and including the 30th day of June 2013.

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 44
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

SECTION 20. MAINTENANCE OF OPERATIONS

(a) It is recognized that the need for continued and uninterrupted operation of City
services is of paramount importance. Therefore, the Association and each
employee represented thereby agrees to not cause, authorize, engage in,
encourage, or sanction a work stoppage, slowdown, refusal of overtime work,
refusal to operate designated equipment (provided such equipment is safe and
sound), or picketing other than informational picketing, against the City or the
individual or concerted failure to report for duty or abstinence from the full and
faithful performance of the duties of employment, including compliance with the
request of another labor organization or bargaining unit to engage in such activity in
an attempt to induce a change in wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment.

(b) An employee shall not be entitled to any wages or City paid benefits
whatsoever if the City Council, by majority vote, determines to its satisfaction, that
the employee is, or has, engaged in any activity prohibited by subsection (a) of this
section. The City may take other action that it deems appropriate.

(c) If the City Council, by majority vote, determines to its satisfaction, that
subsection (a) of this section has been violated by the Association, the City may
take such remedial action as it deems appropriate.

(d) The Association recognizes the duty and obligation of its representatives and
members to comply with the provisions toward inducing all employees in this unit to
fully and faithfully perform their duties. In the event of any activity prohibited by
subsection (a) hereinabove, the Association agrees to take supererogatory steps
necessary to assure compliance with this Memorandum of Understanding.

CITY OF STOCKTON 45
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

 

SECTION 21. BANKRUPTCY

Stockton Police Management Association (hereinafter “SPMA”), which is defined for the
purposes of this section as including without limitation Stockton Police Management
Association’s members, bargaining unit members, officials, attorneys and affiliates)
agrees that this MOU shall supersede the terms of all prior MOUs, sideletters, and any
other agreements between the parties as to the subjects covered herein. SPMA further
agrees that it has entered into this agreement voluntarily, and that it shall file no claims
in the City’s bankruptcy case based upon the terms of any agreements that precede this
MOU, or based upon the negotiated terms of this agreement. Nothing herein shall limit
claims based up violation of this agreement.

SPMA further agrees that it will not oppose the City’s eligibility for chapter 9 relief.

SPMA agrees to support any plan of adjustment the provisions of which, as to SPMA,
are consistent with this MOU.

CITY OF STOCKTON 46
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

IN WITNESS WHEREOF this Memorandum of Understanding was ratified by a membership
vote of the Association on July __ 2012, and by an affirmative vote of the Stockton City Council
on July 24, 2012.The parties hereto have executed this Memorandum of Understanding this __

day of July 2012.

  
 
 

 

  

Chuck Flesher
Vice President

Approved as to form:
Goyette & Associates, Inc.

ie

 

David Swim
Labor Representative for Association

e vo) ent Agsociation City of Stoc
LA
Bo is
City Manager

 
    

rAt f, Uv;
Teresia Haase
Director of Human Resources

Approved as to form:
John Luebberke, City Attorney

 

egotiator for the City

ATTEST:
BONNIE PAIGE
CITY CLERK

  
    

 

CITY OF STOCKTON

47
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

 

APPENDIX “A”

Appendix A -- Union Proposal to Assume Administration of City Medical Plans (agreement between City and
coalition representing all city Unions)

The City is supportive in concept of the unions taking over responsibility for providing medical insurance plan, and
pledges its full cooperation in providing the necessary data to permit the Unions to assess the viability of such a
plan. Acceptance of the plan by the City shall be subject to the following terms and conditions:

hk.

nN

Such plan would not be City sponsored and the City would not have any responsibility for such plan
including administration of the plan and client services, and unions/vendor will hold city harmless for any
actions taken by vendor or union in its management of their plans. The City will pay it’s contributions for
employee insurance coverage as set forth in individual MOUs and remit them to the plan administrator per
any administrative agreement. City will process employee’s deductions and remit to vendor and such costs
of providing this service is part of administrative expense to be paid by union per any agreement achieved
pursuant to #12 below.

Plan participants to pay all administrative costs of the plan, including HR support and computer/data
transfer/integration.

Such plan would include all city employees and eligible retirees. All plan enrollees would have same
benefits, plan choices, eligibility. access to the network and premium costs and be treated in the same
manner, provided, however, that retirees and active employees may remain in separate risk pools. The only
exception would be for over age 65 retirees where plan benefits would be integrated with Medicare. In
addition, the Union plan may discontinue Original Plan benefits for retirees.

The plan would be fully insured, such that all risks would be borne by the insuring company without the
possibility of underfunding the benefit

The Unions will not propose CalPERS medical plans.

Implementation shall be by January 1, 2013, provided the Unions provide at least 90 days notice to the City
(i.e. not later than October 1, 2012)

The City will pay all run out claims from the Modified and Original medical plans with respect to any
claim incurred prior to January 1, 2013, regardless of when the claim is paid. The City shall make all
reasonable efforts to insure that all claims received are processed timely during the claims run out period. If
any funds remain in the ISF fund, the parties will meet to discuss the status of the funds.

It is understood that the union plans would stay in effect for at least five years, and the Unions will give the
City at least | year’s notice if they intend to terminate this arrangement. The City may only terminate the
agreement with good cause regarding the failure of the plan to provide agreed upon benefits, and with
evidence of continuing coverage for affected employees and retirees in the succeeding City sponsored
plans. The City makes no commitment to any future arrangement of City administered medical insurance
should the union plans be discontinued by the union’s actions.

The City retains the right to terminate the sponsorship by the unions of any health plan as a result of any
legislation that would require the City to provide plans to its employees or pay penalties in lieu of
providing such plans, for example, as under the Affordable Care Act or any additional or successor
legislation

 

CITY OF STOCKTON 48
POLICE MANAGEMENT UNIT SUCCESSOR MOU
TERM: JULY 1, 2012-JUNE 30, 2013

10, Existing limits on City contributions to medical/dental/vision (agreed or imposed) remain unchanged.

11. It is understood that once the unions obtain quotes for coverage, the parties will meet and confer regarding
significant issues regarding the implementation and viability of such plan, including, but not limited to the
following:

e Coverage of “tail” claims; Fully fund all reserves for Incurred but Not Reported and Pending Claims;
* Calculation and method of paying administrative costs;

¢ Hold harmless to City for any actions taken by vendor/union coalition;

The City retains the right to accept or reject any union proposals on a union sponsored plan(s) during meet and
confer following union receipt of bids, based upon financial, operational, legal or coverage concerns.

CITY OF STOCKTON 49
