AGREEMENT

between

CITY OF TAMPA

and

TAMPA POLICE BENEVOLENT
ASSOCIATION, INC.

POLICE LIEUTENANTS BARGAINING UNIT

October 1, 2010 through September 30, 2011
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article Number/Title

Preamble 3
1 Recognition 4
2 Representatives of the Parties 5
3 City's Management Rights 6
4 Grievance Procedure 8
5 PBA Business 13
6 No Strike 16
7 No Discrimination 17
8 Job Duties 18
9 Labor Management Committee 20
10 Safety and Equipment 21
11 Seniority 24
12 Layoff and Recall 26
13 Check-Off 29
14 Wages 31
15 Hours of Work and Overtime 33
16 Off Duty Court Time 36
17 Shift Premium Incentive Pay 38
18 Holidays 39
19 Annual Leave Al
20 Sick Leave 44
21 Absence Without Pay 47
22 Absence Without Leave 48
23 Leave of Absence Without Pay 49
24 Funeral and Bereavement Leave 54
25 Military Leave 55
26 Recall Pay 56
27 Clothing Allowances and Uniforms 57
28 Acting Pay 59
29 Annual Longevity Award 60
30 Special Payments 62
31. Service Training 63
32 Tuition Reimbursement 64
33 Medical Insurance 66
34 Life and Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance 68
35 Promotions/Assignments 69
36 Personnel Records 70
37 Formal Investigations 71
38 Discipline 77
39 Incentive Leave 80
40
41
42

44
45
46

Employee Assistance Program/Drug Testing
Workers' Compensation

Prevailing Rights

Amendments

Severability and Waiver

Contract Constitutes Entire Agreement of the Parties
Duration, Modification and Termination
Appendix A

Appendix B - Payroll Draw Formula
Appendix C - Pension

Appendix D — Pension

City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

81
88
93

95
96
97
99
100
102
103
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

AGREEMENT/PREAMBLE

THIS AGREEMENT is entered into as of this day of 2010

 

between the City of Tampa, Florida, hereinafter referred to as the "City" and the Tampa
Police Benevolent Association, hereinafter referred to as the "PBA." It is the intent and
purpose of this Agreement to assure a sound and harmonious working relationship between
the parties hereto, to provide an orderly and peaceful means of resolving any
misunderstandings or differences which may arise, and to set forth herein basic and full
agreements between the parties concerning rates of pay, wages, hours and other terms and
conditions of employment. There shall be no individual arrangement contrary to the terms
herein provided. Either party hereto shall be entitled to require a specific performance of the
provisions of this Agreement. It is understood that the City and the employees covered by
this Agreement are engaged in furnishing essential public services which vitally affect the
health, safety, comfort and general well being of the public and both parties hereto recognize

the need for continuous and reliable service to the public.
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION

1.1 The City recognizes the PBA as the exclusive bargaining representative as defined
in Chapter 447, Florida Statutes, as amended, effective January 1, 1975, for all Police

Lieutenants (certification #1213).

1.2 The term "Employee," as used in this Agreement, means a full time permanent

employee in the bargaining unit, including probationary employees.
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 2
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE PARTIES

2.1 The City agrees that during the term of this Agreement it will deal only with the
authorized representatives of the PBA in matters requiring mutual consent or other official
action called for by this Agreement. The PBA agrees to notify the City of the name of such
authorized representatives as of the execution of this Agreement and replacement thereof

during the term of this Agreement.
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 3
CITY'S MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

3.1 Except as expressly limited by any provision of this Agreement, the City reserves
and retains exclusively all of its normal and inherent rights with respect to the management of
its operations, whether exercised or not, including, but not limited to, its right to determine,
and from time to time redetermine, the number, location and type of its various operations,
functions and services; the methods, procedures and policies to be employed; to discontinue
the conduct of any operation, function or service, in whole or in part; to transfer its operations,
functions or services from or to, either in whole or in part, any of its departments or other
divisions; to select and direct the working force in accordance with requirements determined
by the City; to create, modify or discontinue jobs; to establish and change working rules and
regulations; to create new job classifications; to establish and change work schedules and
assignments; to transfer, or promote employees; to lay off, furlough, demote or otherwise
relieve employees from work for lack of work, lack of funds, or other legitimate reason; to
suspend, discharge, demote or otherwise discipline employees for just cause; to subcontract;
and to alter or vary past practices and otherwise to take such measures as the City may
determine to be necessary to the orderly and efficient operation of its various operations,

functions and services.

3.2 If in the sole discretion of the Mayor it is determined that civil emergency
conditions exist, including riots, civil disorders, hurricane conditions, similar catastrophes or
disorders, or public employee strikes, the provisions of this Agreement may be suspended by
the Mayor during the time of the declared emergency, provided that wage rates, overtime and
other monetary benefits shall not be suspended and provided further that any disciplinary
action taken during such declared emergency shall be grievable at the end of the declared

emergency.

3.3 The exercise of the above enumerated rights shall not preclude employees or their

representatives from raising grievances, should decisions on the above matters have the
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

practical consequence of violating the terms and conditions of this collective bargaining

agreement.
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 4
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

4.1 A grievance shall be defined as any difference, dispute or complaint regarding the
interpretation or application of the terms of this Agreement including rights or working
conditions, provided however that employees or the PBA shall not be eligible to file
grievances regarding pending file entries except when the pending file entry is the result of a

sustained IA investigation.

4.2 All grievances filed shall refer to the specific section of this Agreement upon
which the grievance is based and shall contain a concise statement of the facts alleged to
support the grievance. Grievances shall be processed in accordance with the following
procedure and shall be determined by application of the terms of this Agreement, the laws of

the United States, the State of Florida, and the Charter and Ordinances of the City of Tampa.

Step 1. The aggrieved employee shall present his grievance in writing on the
appropriate form to his immediate supervisor within twenty-one (21) calendar days of
the occurrence or the date on which he knew or should have known of the action
giving rise to the grievance. The aggrieved employee may request that a PBA
representative be present. Prior to responding to the grievance, the immediate
supervisor shall meet with the aggrieved employee. Discussions will be informal for
the purpose of settling differences in the simplest and most direct manner. The
immediate supervisor shall reach a decision and communicate it in writing to the
aggrieved employee within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date the grievance
was presented to him. Although responses at Step 1 shall not set a precedent, it is the
intent of the grievance procedure to require supervisors to reach decisions and

communicate them through the Step 1 grievance response as provided herein.
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

Step 2. If the grievance is not settled in the first step and the aggrieved
employees desires to appeal the decision in the first step, then within fourteen (14)
calendar days of the date of the answer in the first step, the grievance shall be
presented by the employee to the appropriate Division Commander (or designee). In
the event that the employee is assigned to a bureau which reports directly to an
Assistant Chief then the employee shall present the grievance to the Assistant Chief.
If the employee's bureau reports to the Chief of Police then the employee shall proceed
to Step 3 of the grievance procedure. The Division Commander shall review the facts
concerning the alleged grievance and shall, within fourteen (14) calendar days
following receipt of the written grievance meet with the aggrieved employee. The
aggrieved employee at his option may be accompanied at this meeting by a PBA
representative. The Division Commander (or designee) shall notify the employee of
his decision in writing not later than fourteen (14) calendar days following the meeting

date.

Step 3. If the grievance is not settled at the second step and the aggrieved
employee desires to appeal the decision in the second step, then within fourteen (14)
calendar days of the date of notification from the Division Commander (or designee),
the written grievance shall be presented by the employee to the Chief of Police
through the appropriate Assistant Chief. The Chief of Police shall review the facts
concerning the alleged grievance and shall, within fourteen (14) calendar days
following receipt of the written grievance, meet with the aggrieved employee. The
aggrieved employee at his option may be accompanied at this meeting by a PBA
representative. The Chief of Police (or designee) shall notify the aggrieved employee
of his decision in writing not later than fourteen (14) calendar days following the

meeting date.

Step 4. If the grievance is still unresolved and the aggrieved employee desires

to appeal the decision in the third step, the employee shall submit the grievance and all
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

responses to the Director of Human Resources (or designee) within fourteen (14)
calendar days of the date of the response from the Chief of Police (or designee).
Within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date of submission to the Director of Human
Resources of the grievance, the Director of Human Resources (or designee) shall meet
with the aggrieved employee to discuss the grievance. The aggrieved employee, at his
option, may be accompanied at this meeting by a PBA representative. The Director of
Human Resources (or designee) shall then notify the aggrieved employee of the

decision in writing within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date of the meeting.

4.3 Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent any employee from
presenting, at any time, his own grievances in person or by legal counsel, to the City and
having such grievances adjusted without the intervention of the PBA, if the adjustment is not
inconsistent with the terms of this collective bargaining agreement and if the PBA has been
given reasonable opportunity to be present at any meeting called for the resolution of such
grievances, provided however, that the PBA shall retain exclusively its right to appeal

grievances to final and binding arbitration.

4.4 In the event that the grievance is unresolved, the matter shall be submitted to final

and binding arbitration as provided in this section.

4.4.1 Within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the date of the decision of the Director
of Human Resources, the PBA shall notify the Director of Human Resources of the intent to
arbitrate. The PBA shall request a list of arbitrators within forty-five (45) calendar days.
The City and the PBA shall select the arbitrator from a list of not less than seven (7) names
submitted by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS) within twenty-one (21)
calendar days from receipt of said list. The selection shall be made by alternately striking
names and the remaining name shall be the arbitration. The PBA shall strike the first name.

The PBA shall provide payment of the FMCS filing fee. In the event that the parties mutually

10
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

agree, before any striking of names occurs, that the list of arbitrators is unsatisfactory, a new

panel may be requested.

4.4.2 As promptly as can be arranged but not more than forty-five (45) calendar days
unless mutually agreed by the City and the PBA, the arbitration hearing shall be held. In the
event the arbitrator selected is not available within a reasonable time period the parties may
mutually agree to select another arbitrator from the list. Each party shall pay its own expense
for its representative, counsel and witnesses. The fees of the arbitrator and other expenses of
arbitration, shall be shared equally by the City and the aggrieved party. The decision of the
arbitrator shall be final and binding on both parties. The arbitrator shall limit his decision
strictly to the interpretation, application and enforcement of this Agreement and shall have no

power to amend, add to or subtract from the terms of the Agreement.

4.5 The time limits contained herein shall be extended for fourteen (14) calendar days
upon written notification of either party. Any extension greater than fourteen (14) calendar
days may be extended by mutual agreement in writing. Grievances not appealed to the next
higher step within the prescribed time limits will be considered settled on the basis of the last
answer by Management. Failure by Management to observe time limits for any step of the
grievance procedure shall result in automatic advancement of the grievance to the next step.
However, the grieving employee or the PBA must notify the next step that the time limit has
expired resulting in an appeal to the next step. However, the grieving employee or the PBA
must notify the next step that the time limit has expired resulting in an appeal to the next step.
If the City fails to respond within the time limits specified with respect to Step 4, the City will
forfeit the grievance, however, such forfeiture shall not be considered as a decision on the
merits of the grievance or in any way establish a precedent. Calendar days shall not include

designated City holidays.

4.6 All unit members shall, in any matter involving suspension or dismissal, have the

option of utilizing the Civil Service Appeal procedure or this grievance procedure, but not

11
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

both. The employee shall select the process to be used on the form provided at the time of the
filing of the grievance. The employee shall have the right to be represented by a PBA

representative or any other person of the employee's choice before the Civil Service Board.

4.7 The PBA shall have the right to file grievances in the third step of the grievance
procedure in any nondisciplinary matter involving the interpretation or application of this
Agreement, provided however, that this right shall be strictly limited to those matters where

the PBA can factually demonstrate:

(a) That the matter is covered by a provision of the Agreement; and,

(b) That the matter involves the interpretation or application of that provision; and,

(c) The grievance does not seek to add to or subtract from any provision of the
Agreement; and,

(d) The subject matter of the grievance is general in nature having application to a

majority of the members of the unit.

4.8 Grievances regarding written reprimands, suspensions, demotions, or dismissals
shall enter the grievance procedure at the third step. Said grievance shall be filed with the
Police Chief (or designee) within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the occurrence or the date
on which he knew or should have known of the action giving rise to the grievance. Time
limits for hearings, responses, and further appeal shall be those set forth in Article 4.2 (Step 3
and Step 4) and Article 4.4 of this Agreement and all other provisions of the Agreement shall

apply.

4.9 The PBA may act as the representative of the employee at any step of the

grievance procedure.

12
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 5
PBA BUSINESS

5.1 Neither PBA representatives nor unit employees shall leave their posts or work
stations for the purpose of investigating, presenting, handling or settling grievances without
the express permission of their Shift or Bureau Commander (Captain or higher). PBA
representatives shall not contact any employee or other person concerning grievance matters
or PBA business during either the working hours of the PBA representative or the working
hours of any employee sought to be contacted without the express prior permission of the
Shift or Bureau Commanders (Captain or higher) of the employees involved. Such

permission shall not be unreasonably denied.

5.2 The City shall furnish the PBA with a copy of all written rules and regulations
pertaining to employer-employee relations, including but not limited to: City administrative
orders, City personnel rules, departmental administrative orders, departmental rules and
regulations, standard operating procedures, divisional and training orders and other material

regularly distributed to employees in the bargaining unit.

5.3 The City shall provide the PBA with a listing of all bargaining unit employees, to
include their employment date with the City, their current job classification and the date of
attainment of their current job classification. An updated list shall be provided semi-annually

upon the request of the PBA.

5.4 The City agrees to provide space on departmental bulletin boards for the posting
of notices of meetings or other PBA official notices. The PBA shall have the right to erect a
reasonable number of bulletin boards in nonpublic areas where space permits. No such notice
shall be posted unless it has been signed by a duly authorized PBA representative and

submitted to the Chief's office for approval prior to the time of posting by the union. A copy

13
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

of this Agreement shall be posted on all departmental bulletin boards. The PBA shall have
access to those employee mailboxes available for general distribution. The City agrees that
the PBA may utilize the roll call boards and internal departmental employee email distribution
(excluding MDT’s) for the announcement of general membership meetings. Announcements
are restricted to the time, date and location of the meeting and must have the authorization of

the Police Chief.

5.5 PBA representatives shall have the right to request time off for the purpose of
conducting PBA business including grievance hearings, contract negotiations, City Council
meetings regarding the resolution of collective bargaining impasse procedures, and attending
State PBA conventions and meetings, including local board meetings, provided, however, that
not more than two (2) such representatives shall have the right to receive such permission at
any one time and provided, further, that the PBA gives the City at least 24 hours advance
notice of the time desired off. Such requests shall be submitted to the Chief of Police and
shall not be unreasonably denied. All union leave must be used for conducting PBA business
related to City of Tampa labor relations matters as approved by the Chief. In the event that a
PBA representative participates in lobbying at the request of and on behalf of the City, regular
pay status shall be utilized rather than union leave. The maximum aggregate number of paid

hours under this section shall be 80 hours during one fiscal year.

Annually up to 2.0 hours of annual leave and/or 2.0 hours of sick leave may, at the discretion
of the PBA, be transferred from each PBA member’s leave balances to the PBA leave bank.
Any balance remaining in the PBA leave bank at the end of the fiscal year shall be transferred
to the bank for the following fiscal year. Union leave shall be treated as all other approved
leaves. Union leave, as with other approved leave, does not count as hours worked for the
purpose of calculating overtime nor shall it be considered as premium hours for the purpose of

payment of shift premium incentive pay.

14
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

5.6 In the event that the PBA determines that an employee will be on extended union
leave, the employee shall retain his rate of pay (grade and step) and shall receive pay
adjustments in accordance with Appendix A. Said employee will retain his salary review date
and, if 70% or more hours have been spent on City time for the review period, shall be
evaluated solely on the City work assignments performance. If less than 70% of the hours
have been spent on City time, then the employee shall receive a neutral evaluation and shall

receive a satisfactory rating along with step increases as may be applicable for that rating.

15
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 6
NO STRIKE

6.1 The PBA agrees that during the term of this Agreement, it shall not authorize,
instigate, condone, excuse, ratify, support, or acquiesce in any strike, slow-down, picketing or
work stoppage likely to interfere with the efficient operation of the City's affairs engaged in or
supported by members of the PBA and/or employees represented by the PBA or other agents

or representatives of the PBA or its affiliates.

6.2 Should the PBA breach this Article, the City may proceed to the appropriate court
and, without notice, obtain an injunction against such breach; that the City may recover from
the PBA or its successor in interest, such damages as may be incurred, together with punitive
damages and attorney's fees; and that the City may take any other action authorized or

required by law.
6.3 Should any employee participate in a breach of this Article, they shall be subject
to immediate disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. Reemployment of such

individuals shall be consistent with Florida Statute, Chapter 447.

6.4 The question of whether this Article has been breached shall not be subject to the

grievance procedure contained herein.

16
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 7
NO DISCRIMINATION

7.1 The City and the PBA specifically agree that the provisions of this Agreement
shall be equally applicable to all employees covered herein without regard to race, color,
religion, creed, sex, national origin, marital status, sexual preference, membership or
nonmembership in labor organization, age or disability, as provided by law; except that the
PBA shall not be required to process grievances or provide services for employees who are

not members of the organization.

17
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 8
JOB DUTIES

8.1 It is understood by the parties that the Civil Service Law and Rules and
Regulations as established by state law specifically regulate only certain aspects of
employment. This Agreement cannot supercede those regulations except when expressly
provided for by law. In the event that during the term of this Agreement, the Civil Service
Law is repealed, the City and the PBA agree to reopen this Agreement to negotiate the impact
of only those matters specifically covered by the Civil Service Law within fourteen (14)

calendar days.

8.2 There will be thorough and complete job descriptions for all employee
classifications covered by this Agreement. The PBA shall be provided fourteen (14) days
notice and an opportunity to discuss such change in job descriptions. Within this fourteen (14)
day notice period, the PBA can bring to the attention of the City any concerns they might have
regarding said change. This same fourteen (14) calendar day period shall be considered the
time limit for filing a class action grievance at the fourth step. Such proposed change shall be

subject to the grievance procedure contained herein.

8.3 It is understood and agreed by both parties that the duties performed by members
of the bargaining unit cannot always be covered by job descriptions and, therefore, members
of the bargaining unit may be required to perform duties in addition to all those listed within
the current job descriptions which are, in the judgment of the City, related to the purpose of

the Police Department, which judgment shall not be arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable.
8.4.1 Any Police Department Rule or Regulation, Standard Operating Procedure,

Policy, Training Bulletin, Special or General Order, or other directive, determined by the

parties to be in conflict with this Agreement shall be of no force and effect.

18
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

8.4.2 Any policy or directive of the City of Tampa determined by the parties to be in

conflict with this Agreement shall be of no force and effect.

8.5 Prior to implementing any change in Police Department Rules or Regulations
affecting unit members, the PBA shall be provided thirty (30) days notice and an opportunity
to discuss such change. Within this thirty (30) day notice period, the PBA can bring to the
attention of the City any concerns they might have regarding said change. This same thirty
(30) calendar day period shall be considered the time limit for filing a class action grievance at
the fourth step regarding such change. Such proposed change shall be subject to the grievance

procedure contained herein.

19
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 9
LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

9.1 The Labor Management Committee, established in the Agreement between the
City and the PBA bargaining unit representing Police Officers through Sergeant, shall include
participation for Police Lieutenants. No additional committee members shall be appointed,
provided, however, that the PBA may select a Lieutenant as one of the four PBA
representatives. The purpose of this Committee shall be to meet and confer concerning
problems of a general nature, including safety, which may from time to time arise in the
Department and to make recommendations to the Chief concerning resolution of any such
problems. The Committee shall determine its own rules of operation. Should the meeting
occur during a participant's tour of duty, there shall be no loss of pay or benefits. These
meetings will take place on the first Tuesday of each month between the hours of 9:00 AM
and 3:00 PM. The Department will notify the PBA of the specific time and place for each

meeting.

9.2 In any matter involving a deficiency in an item of equipment supplied by the City
where specific action has been requested in writing and no such action has been taken within a
reasonable time of the date of submission, the memorandum shall be submitted to the Labor

Management Committee for such recommendatory action as they shall deem appropriate.

20
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 10
SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT

10.1 The City shall provide and maintain safe, adequate and appropriate equipment
sufficient for a specific job requirement it deems necessary for the performance of the police

lieutenant’s function.

10.2 No employee shall be required to operate a marked passenger automobile or
prisoner transport van which is not equipped with the manufacturer's police package including
protection cages where feasible. Either portable or mounted spotlights will be provided on
each such vehicle. All new marked vehicles will be equipped with bucket seats, mounted
spotlights, power windows. After qualifying and purchase of approved shotgun or rifle, rifle
or shotgun racks of a type approved by the City will be installed as determined by the Police
Chief. The City shall provide safety equipment for unmarked vehicles, when appropriate, to
include lights, siren, and a radio charger/system. Keyless entry shall be provided when

included in the manufacturer’s package as a standard feature.

10.3. The City will make every reasonable effort to provide and maintain safe
working conditions sufficient for a specific job requirement. To this end, the PBA will
cooperate and encourage the employees to work in a safe manner and shall present

recommendations through the Labor Management Committee.

10.4‘ The take home car program as it currently exists shall be a mandatory subject
of bargaining. During the term of this agreement, City shall not remove the take home car
program. Nothing contained herein shall interfere with any management rights set forth in
this Agreement including, but not limited to, the City’s unilateral right to exercise control over

its assets, assign work, and discipline its employees. The assignment of a take home car shall

21
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

not be considered an economic benefit. Nothing contained herein shall effect SOP 609.1, as

may be revised from time to time, subject to Article 8.5 and Article 42 of this Agreement.

10.4.1 The City shall provide an endorsement to its Certificate of Self Insurance or
an insurance policy secured from a private insurance carrier to defend employees and pay
any claims, judgements or awards for property damage and personal injury to third parties
to the extent permitted by law resulting from the employee’s operation of an assigned
vehicle as provided in 10.4 (above). Coverage shall be limited to $100,000 per claimant
and $200,000 per event. Under no circumstances shall any coverage pursuant to this
paragraph provide any liability coverage for any claims, judgements or awards of any kind
in excess of $100,000 per claimant and $200,000 per event.

Coverage shall require that each of the following conditions be fully satisfied at the
time of any incident: (1) the employee was authorized to operate the motor vehicle
pursuant to departmental and city policies; (2) the employee was not operating the motor
vehicle in violation of any departmental or city policies; (3) the employee was not engaged
in the commission of a crime; (4) the employee was not operating the motor vehicle in
violation of any law, other than non-criminal traffic law; (5) was not using, or impaired by
use of, alcohol or any controlled substance; (6) was not intentionally seeking to cause
injury to his or her person, and (7) was not operating the vehicle in a manner that was
reckless, grossly negligent, or otherwise in willful or wanton disregard for human life or
property.

Any legal counsel assigned to defend the employee shall be selected and assigned at
the sole discretion of the City Attorney. The employee shall be required to fully participate
and cooperate in his or her defense.

Coverage provided pursuant to this section (10.4.1) is supplemental to any other
applicable insurance coverage. In no event shall coverage provided pursuant to this section

(10.4.1) provide any liability coverage for punitive damages.

22
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

Coverage shall not result in alteration of the assigned vehicle program or SOP 609.1
including the non-pay, off-duty status of the officer when traveling to and from work or other

functions as specifically authorized in SOP 609.1.

23
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 11
SENIORITY

11.1 Definition. Seniority is hereby defined as continuous length of service with the

City of Tampa and/or the Tampa Police Department as follows:

(a) Total City Seniority is total length of continuous service within the employment
of the City of Tampa.

(b) Departmental seniority is the total length of continuous service with the Tampa
Police Department.

(c) For purposes of this Article, classification seniority is the total length of
continuous service as a Police Lieutenant. The Sunday of the work week of the promotion is
the effective date for classification seniority dates.

(d) Continuous service is defined as the period of employment not interrupted by
resignation, dismissal, retirement, quitting without notice, or any other termination of
employment. Time spent greater than thirty (30) calendar days on leave of absence (except
for a Workers’ Compensation Leave of Absence), layoff, or suspension shall not be credited
in the calculation of seniority dates. Seniority dates are not adjusted due to absences while on

Workers’ Compensation.

11.2 Vacation Selection. Employees shall be entitled to select vacations by
departmental seniority within the unit to which they are assigned. In order to exercise
seniority, an employee must select his vacation schedule on or before March 1 of the year in
which the vacation is to be taken. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement, the
department shall have the right to reschedule vacations where the business of the department
will be interfered with. Any decision to cancel a scheduled vacation of one week or more may
be appealed to the appropriate shift or bureau commander (Captain or higher) without going

through the normal chain of command.

24
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

11.3 Seniority shall be considered when determining the shift assignment.

25
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 12
LAYOFF AND RECALL

12.1 Definition. A layoff is a reduction in the number of employees within the
Department due to lack of work, lack of funds, or for any reason other than the acts or

delinquencies of the employee. The City will lay off employees as hereinafter provided.

12.2.1 Order of Layoff. Once the City has determined that selected positions shall be
eliminated, the City will lay off employees in reverse order of their classification seniority as

defined in Article 11.1.

2.2.2. The City may retain junior officers with specialized skills who are assigned
special duties or junior officers who are on special assignment. When such special assignment
is completed, the most senior officer on layoff shall be notified of his right to displace such

junior officer.

2.2.3. Entrance probationary employees shall be laid off prior to any regular

employee.

2.2.4 In the event that two or more employees have the same length of classification
seniority, department seniority shall prevail. Should departmental seniority also be equal, the

City shall determine the method to break such ties.

2.2.5 An employee affected by layoff will first be given the opportunity to apply his
seniority into a lower classification within the Tampa Police Department, provided that the

employee held the lower classification and can perform the work. (For example, an individual

 

who is the least senior Lieutenant could apply his seniority as a Police Sergeant provided he

previously held the classification and can do the work. All service completed in higher

26
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

classifications or assignments shall also count for the seniority as police officer. However,
service completed as a Police Officer or any other classification or assignment shall not count

in the classification seniority for the higher classification or assignment.

12.3. Notice of Layoff. Employees being laid off shall be given twenty-one (21)

calendar days' written notice in advance. The PBA shall be furnished a copy of such notice.

12.4 Order of Recall. Employees shall be recalled from layoff in reverse order of
classification seniority provided that they are currently qualified to perform the work in the
job classification to which they are recalled as provided by this Article. No new employee
shall be hired until the employee on layoff has been given an opportunity to return to work at
his original seniority date and position; provided, that after twelve (12) months of lay off such

re-employment rights shall cease.

12.5 Employment Status. An individual who has been laid off shall not be considered
as having completely terminated from the City's employment so long as the individual
remains on a preferential re-employment list. However, when an individual's name is
removed from the preferential list because he rejects an offer of re-employment or requests
that his name be removed from the list because of no interest in re-employment or otherwise
removed due to death or disability, the removal of the name from the lists shall constitute

complete termination from employment.

12.6 Benefit Status. During the period during which an employee remains on a
preferential re-employment list, the employee shall not receive termination payments (i.e.,
annual leave, sick leave, pension, longevity). All benefits shall cease during the layoff period.

Health and life insurance may be continued at the employee's expense.

27
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

12.7 Retirement/Resignation. Individuals who are identified for layoff who are
eligible and choose to retire or take deferred retirement shall not be placed on preferential re-

employment lists. Employees who retire or resign will be treated as in normal policies.

12.8 Recall Procedures. The City shall notify employees to be recalled by United
States certified mail. All employees on layoff shall have the obligation of providing the City
with their correct mailing address. A recalled employee shall immediately inform the City of
his intent to accept or reject the recall order. An individual's name shall be removed from the
preferential lists when the employee fails to respond within four working days after the City's
transmittal of the notice of recall or the employee notifies the City of acceptance of recall but
fails to report at the specified time or the employee accepts or rejects any employment with

the City or the employee has been on layoff for a period of one year.
12.9 Calculation of Benefits. For purposes of benefits, an individual recalled from a

preferential employment list shall not suffer a break in service. However, the time spent on

layoff greater than 30 days shall not be credited in the calculation of benefits.

28
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 13
CHECK-OFF

13.1 The City shall deduct dues owed by the employee to the PBA on a bi-monthly
basis; provided, that prior to such deduction the PBA has provided the City with a signed
authorization from each employee whose dues are to be deducted that such deduction is
authorized. Deductions shall be made from the first and second paychecks each month and
forwarded to the PBA within ten (10) days of said deductions. Any deductions for items other
than PBA dues, initiation fees, or uniform assessments must be approved semi- annually by

the Director of Human Resources.

13.2 Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any authorization for dues
deduction may be canceled by the employee upon thirty (30) days written notice to the City
and the PBA. The City shall not cancel the dues deduction until the notice to the PBA has
been provided and the PBA processes the cancellation to the City. In the event that the PBA
fails to process to the City a dues cancellation request effective with the next deduction thirty
days from the date notice was received, then the PBA shall refund the deduction(s) to the

employee.

13.3 The PBA shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from any and all claims,
demands or expenses in connection therewith based upon the City's participation in dues

deduction.

13.4 Nothing contained herein shall require the City to deduct from a salary or be

otherwise involved in the collection of any fine, penalty or special assessment.
13.5 Any changes in the amount to be deducted for monthly dues increase shall be

implemented after written notification from the PBA is received by the City. Said notification

shall be provided to the City a minimum of four weeks prior to the first pay date on which the

29
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

dues increase is to be effective. Individual changes to deduction amounts for employees shall
be processed to the City by the PBA in accordance with the Payroll/Personnel System
Processing Schedule. The City will accept the PBA notice as authorization for the change by
the employee. Any disputes regarding employee authorization shall be resolved between the

PBA and the employee per Article 13.3.

13.6 The City shall charge the PBA 30¢ per member per deduction but not more than

one percent of the total amount deducted.

30
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 14
WAGES
14.1 Wages. The salaries paid employees of the unit shall be those set forth in

Appendix A of this Agreement.

14.1.2 Effective with the paycheck of August 13, 2010, the City shall suspend
adjustments currently in progress, memorialized in the Memorandum of Understanding, dated

May 20, 2010 for the FY2010 imposed annualized salary amounts.

14.1.3 Upon ratification of this Agreement by the bargaining unit employees and
City Council, the adjustments for the imposed annualized salary amounts shall cease and the

union will withdraw with prejudice the unfair labor practice charge (CA-2010-80).

In the event that this Agreement does not receive ratification by the bargaining unit
employees and/or City Council, said suspension per 14.1.2 shall cease and the imposed
annualized salary amounts shall resume and continue beyond October 1, 2010 until

completed.

14.2 Promotions/Assignments. Employees who are promoted to Lieutenant shall be
placed at the first step of the pay grade or the step, which provides an increase in pay
whichever is higher. If the promotion is within 90 days of the employee's annual salary
review date, then the employee is placed at the rate of pay which is one step beyond the rate of

pay that the employee would have received but for the promotion.
14.3 Promotional Probation. Employees shall serve a promotional probationary

period of six months and shall be eligible for a step increase after one year of satisfactory

performance and annually thereafter up to the maximum step of the pay grade.

31
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

14.4 Demotions. Employees who are demoted from promotional positions (see
Article 35) after completion of the promotional probationary period shall be placed at the step
of the new pay grade as follows: A voluntary demotion shall be to the step of the new pay
grade with the same rate of pay if available or the next lowest rate of pay, or the highest step
of the new pay grade, whichever is lower; a disciplinary demotion shall be to the step of the
pay grade equivalent to the employee's length of service with credit for any step increases that
the employee achieved during the promotion, provided that placement shall not exceed the
maximum step of the new pay grade. An employee demoted during the promotional
probationary period shall be placed at the same pay which the employee had prior to the

promotion.

14.5 Salary Review Dates. (Anniversary Step Increases). The City shall continue its
current policy that in the event that an employee is on a suspension, leave of absence, or layoff
for a cumulative period in excess of 30 days, the employee's salary review date is delayed by
the number of days over the 30 days; for employees serving probationary periods the salary

review date is delayed for the complete cumulative period (including the 30 days).

32
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 15
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME

15.1 Work Week. The work cycle and schedule for employees shall be defined as
40.0 hours during a seven day cycle. The work cycle and schedule for employees assigned to
the modified work schedule shall be defined as 160 hours in a four week (28 days) work
cycle. The City continues to reserve the right to schedule or reschedule employees for work
provided that overtime is compensated in accordance with Article 15.3. The payroll period
for employees assigned to the modified work schedule shall be four weeks with a payroll draw
(payment) every two weeks. The bi-weekly draw for employees assigned to the modified
work schedule shall be based on the four week average which is 80 hours bi-weekly. It is
understood that employees in this bargaining unit are exempt, salaried employees. The
provisions of “B2.2 Work Hours — Exempt Employees” in the City of Tampa Personnel

Manual shall apply.

15.2  Definition-Hours Worked. Employees shall be compensated for all hours
worked. The term hours worked shall include all time actually worked on active duty, on and
off duty court time, and recall pay. Travel time to and from work or to and from court on off
duty hours shall not be considered hours worked. Travel time to and from designated areas of
work or court outside of Hillsborough County shall be considered hours worked. In the event
that an employee is recalled to work on Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day, or New Year’s

Day, then holiday pay shall count for purposes of calculating overtime.

15.2.1 If during off duty hours, an employee is required or volunteers to appear before
or serve as a member of a Complaint Review Board, the employee's normal day(s) off and
working hours may be adjusted by the Department so that the employee is on duty and is
compensated for the time during which he is involved with the proceedings of the Complaint

Review Board.

33
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

15.2.2 In the event that an employee is called back to duty or must work beyond his
normal tour of duty for more than six (6) hours, and the employee's next scheduled tour of
duty is less than eight hours from the time the employee is released from call-back or extended

tour, the employee may:

(a) Continue working for a period of time equal to his next scheduled normal tour of duty,

and be credited with working that next scheduled tour of duty;

(b) Have his duty hours rescheduled to permit up to eight (8) hours of rest between the

extended/call-back tour of duty and the next scheduled tour of duty;

(c) Use annual or compensatory leave to permit up to eight (8) hours of rest between the
extended/call-back tour of duty and when he reports during the next scheduled tour of

duty;

(d) Report for the next tour of duty as scheduled.

Management will preserve the right to deny option "d" if in the opinion of the employee's
supervisor, it would be detrimental to the health and safety of the employee or the liability of

the department. Section 15.2.2 shall not apply to court time.

15.3 Overtime. Employees shall receive credit for all hours actually worked in excess
of 40.0 hours in a seven (7) day cycle. Hours actually worked in excess of 40 in a 7 day cycle
shall be credited at 100%. Overtime for employees assigned to the modified work schedule
shall be credited at 100% for all hours actually worked in excess of the assigned 34.3 hours or
45.7 hours as applicable. A maximum of 80 hours of accrued compensatory time may be
carried past the end of the payroll calendar year. Any accumulation above the maximum of

80 hours shall be forfeited. Upon separation of any kind, employees do not receive payment

34
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

for unused, accrued compensatory time. Compensatory time taken off shall first be deducted

from the compensatory time-bank.

35
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 16
OFF DUTY COURT TIME

16.1 Off duty court time shall be computed in the following manner: the normal
witness fee and expenses shall be retained by the employees and an additional three hours of
credit shall be given for the first court appearance in any given calendar day, subject to the

provisions set forth herein.

6.1.1 In the event that the court appearance begins less than three (3) hours prior to

the assigned tour of duty, time actually worked to the beginning of the shift shall be credited.

6.2 For each court appearance in excess of three (3) hours, an officer shall receive

credit for all hours during which his attendance is required.

6.3 Multiple court appearances in the same calendar day shall be credited separately

or as one continuous appearance, whichever is least expensive to the Department.

6.3.1 If treated as one continuous appearance, time spent from the beginning of the

first appearance to the conclusion of the last appearance will be credited.

 

6.3.2 If treated as separate appearances, the officer will be guaranteed a three (3)
hour minimum credit for the additional appearances providing there is a three (3) hour lapse

between the subpoena release and a subsequent subpoenaed appearance.

16.4 Standby. When standby is required by the department during off duty hours,
employees will be issued a beeper upon request. Beepers may be checked out for standby
purposes and must be returned after completion of the standby period. There shall be no

compensation for off duty hours spent on standby.

36
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

16.5 Credit For Off Duty Court Time as provided in this Article shall be at the rate
of straight time (100%). At the employee’s option, time credited shall be compensated to the

employee by payment or credit to the employee’s compensatory time bank.

37
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 17
SHIFT PREMIUM INCENTIVE PAY

17.1 Shift Premium Incentive Pay is defined as premium pay based on scheduled
hours worked. Employees regularly assigned to the Evening or Midnight shift shall receive

shift premium as provided herein.

17.2 All employees who work a regularly scheduled shift, which meet the above
conditions are eligible. A regular schedule is any shift which is repeatedly and routinely
scheduled by the department, in advance, as the normal course of work for employees.
Neither employees nor the department may reschedule employees for the sole purpose of

qualifying for shift premium.

7.3 Payment shall be 60¢ per hour for the hours of premium work per week and will
not be compounded by overtime. Effective the second payroll period in January 2007,
payment shall be 80¢ per hour and is provided on the basis of 53¢ per hour at 150% for the
hours of premium work per week and will not be compounded by overtime; employees
working shifts which start on or after 6:30 p.m. or on or before 12:00 a.m. (midnight shift)
shall be paid per these provisions at a rate of $1.00 per hour (66¢ at 150%). Payment for leave
time shall be at the employee's regular rate of pay and shall not include any shift premium pay.
Payment shall be to the employee actually working the premium shift. Eligible employees
may receive up to a maximum of 40.0 hours of shift premium incentive pay per week
provided, however that employees assigned to the modified work schedule may receive up to
a maximum of 34.3 hours or 45.7 hours of shift premium incentive pay per week as

applicable.

7.4 Employees who are assigned to an irregular work schedule shall also be eligible

 

for shift premium pay for shifts which meet the eligibility requirements of this Article.

38
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 18
HOLIDAYS

18.1 Designated Holidays. The eleven (11) days during the fiscal year specified by
the Mayor to be official paid holidays shall be observed by the Police Department plus one
additional Floating Holiday as provided in 18.4.

18.2 Eligibility. In order for an employee to receive a holiday off with pay, the
employee shall have worked the last scheduled work day before, and the first scheduled work
day after the designated holiday, unless the absence has been authorized in writing by the
department. An authorized absence is any absence other than Absence Without Leave

(AWL).

(a) Eligible employees who are not required to work on a designated holiday
when it falls on a regularly scheduled work day shall receive 8.0 hours compensation at the

regular rate of pay.

(b) Employees required to work on a designated holiday shall receive
compensation at 100% for all hours actually worked in addition to 8.0 hours of holiday pay at
the regular rate of pay. There is no guaranteed number of hours on a designated holiday.

Employees are relieved from work at the earliest opportunity.

(c) The determination that an employee is or is not required to work on a holiday
per 18.2(a) and (b) shall be at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police and shall require

advance authorization in writing.
(d) Employees may elect to bank holiday compensation in lieu of payment as

provided in sections “a” or “b”. Banked holiday compensation shall be 8.0 hours of holiday

time, 10.0 hours of holiday time, or 11.4 hours (11’25”) of holiday time as applicable to the

39
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

employee’s work schedule. Said holiday time shall be credited to the employee’s Holiday
Bank.

18.3 Holiday Bank. A request for usage of holiday time shall be submitted to the
employee’s immediate supervisor on the appropriate form. Leave may be taken only after
approved by the Department. Every employee shall be afforded the opportunity of utilizing
any accrued holiday time prior to the end of the payroll fiscal year provided that
management’s scheduling needs are met. Banked holiday time shall be utilized prior to the
end of the payroll fiscal year when balances shall be reduced to zero, provided however that a
maximum of 45.7 accrued, unused hours shall be carried over to the next payroll fiscal year.

No payment for unused holiday time shall occur prior to separation or at any other time.

18.4.1 Floating Holiday. Employees with one year of continuous service may request
to observe one Floating Holiday during the payroll fiscal year in addition to the eleven
designated holidays specified in 18.1. A Floating Holiday shall be taken in one 8.0, 10.0, or
11.4 hour increment as applicable to the employee’s work schedule and shall be requested in
advance on the appropriate form and is not authorized without the express approval of the
supervisor. Floating Holiday time off shall not count as hours worked for purposes of
calculating overtime pay. In the event that an employee fails to utilize the Floating Holiday
within the payroll fiscal year, there shall be no carry over of the unused time to the next fiscal
year nor cash payment in lieu of usage. Employees shall not be eligible for payment of

unused Floating Holiday upon separation from employment.

40
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 19
ANNUAL LEAVE

19.1 Rate of Leave. Annual leave shall be granted to all employees for hours actually
worked on the basis of 3.8 hours for each bi-weekly payroll period. All leave shall be

calculated in tenths of an hour.

19.2 Additional Earned Annual Leave. The leave account of each employee shall be
credited with additional annual leave hours for each five (5) years of continuous service as set

forth below:

ADDITIONAL EARNED
FOR SERVICE OF AT LEAST BUT LESS THAN ANNUAL LEAVE HOURS

5 Years 10 Years 22.8
10 Years 15 Years 34.2
15 Years 20 Years 57.0
20 Years 25 Years 68.4
25 Years 30 Years 91.2
30 Years 35 Years 102.6
35 Years AO Years 114.0

Crediting of additional annual leave hours shall occur on the first day of the first payroll cycle

at the beginning of the calendar year.

19.3 Maximum Accumulation. A total of 240 hours of annual leave is the maximum
that may be carried over from one calendar year to the next. Any accumulation above the
maximum of 240 hours shall be transferred to sick leave at the end of the calendar year. This

transfer will occur on the last day of the last payroll cycle of the calendar year.
19.4 Partial Accumulation and Disqualification. In the month in which an employee

is hired or separated, partial annual leave shall accrue according to the first or last day the

employee actually worked or was on paid leave. Any time during which an employee is on

41
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

any type of leave without pay (i.e., suspensions, leave of absence, unpaid military leave,
absence without pay, or absence without leave) shall not be credited towards the calculation of

annual leave accrual for the payroll period.

19.5 Request for Leave. A request for annual leave shall be submitted to the
employee's immediate supervisor on the appropriate form. Leave may be taken only after
being approved by the Department. Requests for leave shall not be unreasonably denied.
Every employee shall be afforded the opportunity of taking at least 80 hours of annual leave
during any year if properly requested, in writing to the employee's immediate supervisor, on
the form provided by the Department. Employees are not charged annual leave for absences
of less than one day. The employee must prepare an Authorized Absent Request Form and

present it to the supervisor for authorization prior to any absence of less than one day.

19.6 Split Vacations. All employees shall receive their vacation schedule in
accordance with Article 11.2 (Seniority). The 80 hours annual leave time may be separated in
equal portions of 40.0 hours and taken separately. Seniority shall prevail on the first 40.0
hours of selection. Seniority shall apply on the second 40.0 hours of split vacations only after
all members of the unit have selected annual leave on the basis of first pick seniority of either
40.0 hours or 80 hours. This section shall not preclude an employee from using annual leave

in one day increments when it does not effect department business.

19.7 Advance Pay. Employees may request advance pay for annual leave that has
been accrued prior to going on annual leave. Such requests must be for 40.0 or more hours of
pay. Requests shall be honored when submitted to the department on the proper form at least
three (3) weeks in advance of going on annual leave. It shall be the responsibility of the
employee to verify that the request is properly submitted and processed by their department to
the Central Payroll Division a minimum of two (2) weeks prior to the first day of the
scheduled annual leave. The employee shall also be responsible for maintaining an adequate

annual leave balance to cover the request for leave.

42
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

If properly requested, submitted and approved, the City shall make every reasonable
effort to provide the employee's advance for annual leave pay on the last pay date preceding
the date upon which the annual leave is scheduled to commence. The amount of the advance
pay for annual leave shall equal the amount that the employee would have received had the
employee not requested the advance pay (i.e., gross pay minus payroll deductions scheduled
for the leave period). If for any reason it is determined by the City that it is necessary to void

a request for advance pay for annual leave, the request shall be cancelled.

19.8 Payment of Unused Leave. When an employee separates, the employee shall be
paid in a lump sum for all unused annual leave, up to and not exceeding 240 hours, except:
(1) If he has less than one (1) year's continuous service with the City;
(2) Ifhe fails to give two (2) weeks (14 calendar days) notice in case of
resignation, he shall lose 8.0 hours of annual leave for each day short of the fourteen (14)

days.

43
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 20
SICK LEAVE

20.1 Rate of Leave. Sick leave shall be granted to all employees for hours actually
worked on the basis of 3.8 hours for each bi-weekly payroll period. All leave shall be

calculated in tenths of an hour.

20.2 Accumulation Unlimited. There shall be no limit on the amount of sick leave

that can be accumulated.

20.3 Partial Accumulation and Disqualification. In the month in which an employee
is hired or separated, partial sick leave shall accrue according to the first or last day the
employee actually worked or was on paid leave. Any time during which an employee is on
any type of leave without pay (i.e., suspensions, leave of absence, unpaid military leave,
absence without pay, or absence without leave) shall not be credited towards the calculation of

sick leave accrual for the payroll period.

20.4 When Sick Leave is Permissible. Sick leave shall be allowed only in cases of
actual sickness or disability of the employee, including necessary appointments with
physicians or dentists or confinement to home because of quarantine. Employees are not
charged sick leave for absences of less than one day. The employee must prepare an
Authorized Absence Request Form and present it to the supervisor for authorization either
prior to the absence or upon return to work as required by department S.O.P. Absences for

full days must comply with Article 20.6.

Any employee may be granted a maximum of 45.7 hours of accrued sick leave per
calendar year in order to provide required care for an ill child, spouse, other legal dependent,
parent or family member, or any other member of the employee’s immediate household. An

employee may be granted a maximum of six (6) continuous weeks use of sick leave for the
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

adoption of a child. An employee who has been authorized the use of sick leave shall not
later receive a negative comment concerning their attendance on the performance evaluation
unless the employee had previously been notified of lacking acceptable medical

substantiation, not adhering to procedures, or otherwise abusing sick leave.

20.4.1 Personal Use. Any employee may be granted a maximum of 45.7 hours of
accrued sick leave per calendar year for personal (non-illness) purposes. Employees with ten
or more years of continuous service may be granted a maximum of 57.1 hours of accrued sick
leave per calendar year for personal (non-illness) purposes. This time may not be utilized

contiguous to the employee's separation from employment.

20.4.2 Family & Medical Leave Act. Any employee, while taking leave under the
provisions of the Family & Medical Leave Act (FMLA), shall utilize sick and/or annual hours

if available.

20.5 Certification by Physician. If the amount of sick leave used is in excess of three
(3) consecutive days, an acceptable certificate from a licensed physician may be required.
However, if the City feels that an employee is using an excessive amount, or is abusing his
sick leave privileges, it may require a physician's certificate acceptable to it before approving
any sick leave request. The City shall continue to require medical substantiation when an

employee utilizes sick leave contiguous with separation from employment.
20.6 Request for Sick Leave. To receive compensation while absent or sick, the
employee shall notify his immediate supervisor his bureau or division commander not less

than one (1) hour prior to his scheduled reporting time.

Requests for sick leave for scheduled appointments with physicians or dentists must be made

in advance on the appropriate form.

45
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

20.7 When Earned Sick Leave is Exhausted. When the employee's accrued sick leave
is exhausted, there shall be no advancement or borrowing of any type of leave on the
employee's own leave account. The employee may be authorized to use annual leave, absence
without pay, and/or a medical leave of absence as provided in this agreement. Employees
shall be eligible for use of the sick leave bank in accordance with authorization of the Director

of Human Resources.

20.8 Unused Sick Leave. Upon separation of any kind, the employee shall lose any
and all claim to unused sick leave accumulation, however, an employee upon normal service
retirement from the City under the pension plan shall be paid in a lump sum at the time of
such retirement, or such death, for one-half (1/2) of the employee's accumulated unused sick
leave account at his rate of pay as of the date of such retirement. Upon the death of an
employee, his/her legal heirs shall receive a lump sum payment equal to 75% of the

employee’s accumulated unused sick leave account at the employee’s last rate of pay.

46
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 21
ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY

21.1 Definition. An absence without pay ("AWP") is an authorized absence for a
work day which is approved in writing by the immediate supervisor. Employees are not

charged Absence Without Pay for absences of less than one day.

21.2 Use of Absence Without Pay.
21.2.1 An absence without pay is only to be administered on an emergency basis. It

may not be used to cover tardiness nor when an employee has accrued annual leave.

21.2.2 In the event that an employee has exhausted annual and/or sick leave balances,
the supervisor may authorize absence without pay for legitimate purposes up to a maximum of
two working days in a calendar year. Additional absences without pay may be authorized at
the discretion of the Chief of Police, however, no employee may be authorized more than

eighty (80) hours of absence without pay in a calendar year.
21.2.3. Additional absences without pay for extraordinary circumstances may be
authorized by the Chief of Police provided that contiguous periods of eighty (80) or more

hours of absence shall require the Leave of Absence status for Article 23.

21.2.4 Absences without pay shall not be credited towards the accrual of sick or

annual leave.

47
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 22
ABSENCE WITHOUT LEAVE

22.1 Definition. Absence without leave ("AWL") is an absence for a work day which
is not approved by the immediate supervisor in writing. Employees are not charged Absence
Without Leave for absences of less than a day, however, an employee whose absence for any

portion of duty time is unauthorized shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action.

22.2 Use of Absence Without Leave.
22.2.1 An absence without leave is administered as corrective disciplinary action and
must be accompanied by written documentation in the form of a reprimand or other

disciplinary action.

22.2.2 An employee who is absent without leave for three consecutive days may be

dismissed as quit without notice.

22.2.3 Absences without leave shall not be credited towards the accrual of sick and

annual leave.

48
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 23
LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY

23.1 MEDICAL AND PERSONAL LEAVE OF ABSENCE

 

23.1.1 Definitions and Eligibility. A personal or medical leave of absence without
pay may be granted to employees who have completed at least one year of continuous service.
A leave of absence is a privilege the City may grant employees, not a right to which they are
entitled. A personal leave of absence without pay may be granted to an employee for special
education, personal business, family illness, and other approved reasons. A medical leave of
absence without pay may be granted to an employee for medical reasons as certified by a
licensed physician. A medical leave of absence request must include a physician's
certification of illness or maternity and an expected return to work date. Medical leave shall
be granted only after all sick leave benefits in excess of 40.0 hours have been exhausted.
Medical leave of absence for maternity reasons will be considered for only the period of actual
employee disability as certified by a licensed physician. Employees may request a personal
leave of absence, to commence upon the expiration of a medical leave of absence for

maternity reasons, for the purpose of extended care of the infant.

23.1.2 Authorization. Prior to reinstatement from a medical leave of absence without
pay, the City shall require a physician's authorization to return to work. Such authorization
must be acceptable to the Director of Human Resources and clearance by any physician or
other health care provider designated by the Police Chief. A personal or medical leave of
absence may be granted for a specific period greater than fourteen (14) calendar days but not
in excess of six (6) continuous calendar months. The Chief of Police may grant two (2)
extension periods that do not exceed three (3) months each, to the original leave of absence
with the approval of the Director of Human Resources. A period of less than fourteen (14)
calendar days may be granted as excused Leave Without Pay ("AWP") at the discretion of the
Chief of Police.

49
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

23.1.3 Benefits. All employee benefits, except as otherwise provided herein, shall
cease during a personal leave of absence. Health and life insurance can be continued at the
employee's expense. In the event that an employee is granted a medical leave of absence, the
employee shall continue to receive the same health and life insurance benefits as when the
employee was active for a maximum of six (6) months. The total cost of this insurance shall
become the expense of the employee if an extension to a leave of absence is granted. Failure
of the employee to remit said costs to the City shall result in cancellation of insurance and the
employee will be subject to any reenrollment procedures required by the City's group
insurance policies. The length of any leave of absence in excess of thirty (30) consecutive
calendar days shall not be credited towards continuous service for the purpose of calculating

longevity awards, bonus annual leave hours, salary review dates, or seniority.

23.1.4 Reinstatement of Position. Upon the expiration of an approved leave of
absence, the employee shall be reinstated to the classification occupied at the time the leave
was granted. Seniority, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, rate of pay, and other
benefits shall commence upon return to work. No position held by an employee who is on an
approved leave of absence may be filled on a permanent basis; however, the position may be

filled on a limited term basis.

23.1.5 Termination of Leave. The failure of an employee to report promptly to duty
at the expiration of the leave of absence shall be just cause for termination of the employment.
An employee shall be subject to immediate termination if the employee accepts other

employment during the approved leave of absence.

23.2 WORKERS' COMPENSATION LEAVE OF ABSENCE. A Workers'

 

Compensation Leave of Absence is provided to an employee who, after having reached
maximum medical improvement or after twelve (12) months of temporary total disability has

not been able to perform the duties of his/her position; and who is otherwise eligible as

50
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

specified herein. The Workers’ Compensation Leave of Absence enables the employee to

continue to recuperate.

23.2.1 Definitions. Maximum Medical Improvement - The date after which recovery
or lasting improvement can no longer reasonably be anticipated. Only the physician
authorized by the City of Tampa Claims Section is authorized to determine a maximum

medical improvement date.

23.2.2. Temporary Total Disability - The recuperative period of time during which an
individual is not able to perform at full capacity the duties which the employee was
performing at the time of injury. Only the physician authorized by the City of Tampa Claims

Section is authorized to determine the temporary total disability recovery date.

23.2.3 Eligibility. All employees, regardless of length of service, are eligible for a
workers' compensation leave of absence. The decision to place an employee on this leave is at
the discretion of the Chief of Police with the concurrence of the Director of Human

Resources. This action does not require a request from the employee.

23.2.4 Benefits. Benefits shall be in accordance with medical leave of absence
policies in 23.1.3. Continuous service (calculation of longevity award, bonus annual leave
hours, salary review dates, and seniority) is not adjusted due to a Workers’ Compensation
Leave of Absence. The position held by an employee on this leave may be filled on a

temporary or permanent basis as determined by the Director of Human Resources.

23.2.5 Length. A workers’ compensation leave of absence may be granted for a
specific period greater than fourteen (14) calendar days but not in excess of six (6) continuous
calendar months. The Chief of Police may grant two (2) extension periods that do not exceed

three (3) months each, to the original leave of absence with the approval of the Director of

51
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

Human Resources. A period of less than fourteen (14) calendar days may be granted as

excused Leave Without Pay ("AWP") at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

Exception. An employee who is placed on a Workers' Compensation Leave of Absence must
file a complete application (as determined by the applicable pension board) for disability
retirement with the applicable pension board within forty-five (45) calendar days of being
placed on the Workers' Compensation Leave of Absence. An employee who complies with
this requirement shall be granted an additional extension of the Workers' Compensation Leave
of Absence in the event that the employee has not returned to full duty, retired, or voluntarily
resigned per Article 23.2.7. Extensions shall be granted up to thirty (30) calendar days
following the final action of the applicable pension board on the application for disability
retirement, provided however, that under no circumstances shall the Workers' Compensation
Leave of Absence exceed fifteen (15) continuous calendar months unless a special extension
is granted by the Director of Human Resources. The time periods listed above shall also apply

to Light Duty in Lieu of Workers' Compensation Leave of Absence (Article 23.2.8).

23.2.6 Reinstatement. Any reinstatement shall require acceptable medical
substantiation by the examining physician and clearance by any physician or other health care
provider designated by the Police Chief. If the employee's physical condition is such that the
employee is able to perform the job, the employee will be reinstated to the classification
occupied at the time the leave was granted. All benefits shall commence again when an

employee is reinstated to a former or new position.

23.2.7 At the expiration of the workers' compensation leave of absence (or Light Duty
in Lieu of Workers' Compensation Leave of Absence per Article 41.5), an employee will be
terminated unless the employee is physically able to and has returned to City of Tampa
employment or has chosen to voluntarily resign or has retired. An employee shall be subject
to immediate termination if the employee accepts other non-City employment during the

approved leave of absence. The preceding sentence shall not be applicable to the seeking or

52
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

acceptance of employment pursuant to the wage loss provisions of the Workers’
Compensation Act provided that the employee notifies the City of the seeking and acceptance

of such employment.

53
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 24
FUNERAL AND BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

24.1 Funeral leave as provided herein is expressly for periods of bereavement and/or
attending the funeral of a family member or relative. Funeral leave shall be provided in the
amount specified below with the term "day" equal to the employee's assigned hours for that

specific day excluding overtime.

24.2.1 Death in the Immediate Family. The immediate family is defined as spouse,
son, daughter, brother, sister, father, mother, mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandparents,

granddaughter, grandson, or any other member of the employee's immediate household.

24.2.2 In the event of a death among an employee's immediate family, the employee
may be authorized a maximum of three (3) days of paid funeral leave. This leave is not

deducted from the employee's accumulated sick or annual leave.

24.2.3 Based on individual circumstances, the employee may request and the
Department may extend funeral leave to five (5) days. The two (2) extra days are to be

deducted from the employee's sick or annual leave at the employee's discretion.

24.3.1 Death of a Relative. A relative is defined as aunt, uncle, brother-in-law, sister-

in-law, nephew, or niece.

24.3.2. In the event of a death of a relative, an employee may be authorized a
maximum of two (2) days of paid funeral leave. This leave is not to be deducted from the

employee's accumulated sick or annual leave.
24.3.3. Based on individual circumstances, the employee may request and the

Department may extend the funeral leave to four (4) days. The two (2) extra days are to be

deducted from the employee's sick or annual leave at the employee's discretion.

54
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 25
MILITARY LEAVE

25.1 Annual Military Leave. Annual military leave due to the request of the armed
forces to fulfill regular military duties, field training, and/or emergency military obligations,
and not exceeding 240 hours in one calendar year shall be provided to employees.

(1) All employee benefits, including pay, shall continue at the same rate
during annual military leave.

(2) Upon return from annual military leave, the employee shall return to the
same position held prior to taking leave. An employee with temporary status shall be allowed
to return to the position held prior to military leave provided the position has not been

eliminated during the leave.

25.2 Military Leave of Absence. A Military Leave of Absence Without Pay shall be
granted according to State and Federal regulations. The employee has the option to use all
accumulated annual leave prior to the military leave of absence. Any sick leave accumulated
prior to the military leave of absence shall remain available to the employee upon

reinstatement.

55
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 26
RECALL PAY

26.1 Any employee who is recalled to duty after having left for the day, or on a
regularly scheduled day off, vacation day or compensation day, or more than two (2) hours
prior to the start of his regularly scheduled tour of duty, shall be guaranteed a minimum of
three (3) hours work. For the purpose of this section recall is defined as any duty, detail or
response to a lawful order for which the officer can be disciplined for his failure to comply.
Recall Pay shall not apply to court appearances. There shall be no pyramiding of court and

recall guarantees.

56
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 27
CLOTHING ALLOWANCES AND UNIFORMS

27.1 Uniforms. The City shall continue to provide the uniforms currently provided by
the City. Modifications in said policy may be the subject of discussions within the Labor
Management Committee, which committee may render advice to the Chief of Police with

regard to changes in current uniform or equipment policy.

27.2 Plain Clothes Allowances. Employees assigned to plain-clothes duty shall
receive a plain-clothes allowance of $650 annually paid in one (1) annual distribution with
the second payroll cycle in January. Employees assigned to the Quad Squad or the Street
Anti-Crime Squad shall receive a plain clothes allowance of $375 annually paid in one (1)
annual distribution with the second payroll cycle in January. Employees assigned to these
positions after the annual payment shall receive a pro-rata payment for the remainder of the
fiscal year. Said pro-rata payments shall be calculated on a monthly percentage and shall

include a full month's payment for the first partial month of the assignment.

27.2.1 Plain Clothes Attire. At the discretion of the Division Commander (or the
Assistant Chief or Police Chief if applicable for the direct chain of command), employees
assigned to a plain clothes assignment shall be authorized to wear departmental approved

polo-type shirts.

27.3 Protective Vests. Employees who elect to purchase their own protective vest
through the department’s vendor may request credit of up to $400 in lieu of accepting the
departmental issued vests. In order to receive credit, the employee must select a vest that
meets with the approval of the department and comply with any other procedures

implemented by the department for this purpose.

57
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

27.4 Service Weapon, Upon an employee’s longevity retirement of 20 or more years
of service from the City under the pension plan or upon an employee’s disability retirement at
the discretion of the Police Chief, the employee shall retain his service weapon as an award

for years of service to the department.

58
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 28
ACTING PAY

28.1 Any employee assigned by the Chief of Police to act in a higher promotional
classification for a continuous period of 40.0 hours or more shall receive one (1) step
additional salary for the period during which he serves in the acting capacity. Any employee
assigned to the modified work schedule who is assigned by the Chief of Police to act in a
higher promotional classification for a continuous period of 34.3 hours or 45.7 hours per the
assigned schedule shall receive one (1) step additional salary for the period during which he

serves in the acting capacity.

59
ARTICLE 29

City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ANNUAL LONGEVITY AWARD

29.1 Eligibility. A full time employee on the payroll as of November 30, who has

completed at least five (5) years of continuous employment with the City of Tampa shall be

eligible to receive an annual longevity award which is paid after November 30, of each year in

 

the amount as follows:

FOR SERVICE

OF AT LEAST BUT LESS THAN THE AMOUNT IS
5 Years 10 Years $500.00

10 Years 15 Years $750.00

15 Years 20 Years $1,000.00

20 Years 25 Years $1,250.00

25 Years wee $1,500.00

29.2 Pension Fund. The annual longevity award as provided in 29.1 will be included

in earnings subject to deduction for pension fund payment.

29.3 Pro-Rata Awards - Leave of Absence or Suspension. Continuous employment

as per 29.1 shall be the period not interrupted by resignation, dismissal, retirement, quitting

without notice, or other termination. In the event that an eligible employee is suspended, on

leave of absence (except for a Workers’ Compensation Leave of Absence) or layoff for more

than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days during one (1) year, the employee shall have a

prorated longevity award for that year of which one-twelfth (1/12) of the annual award

amount shall be deducted from the award for each appropriate absence of more than thirty

(30) consecutive calendar days. Awards are not adjusted due to absences while on Workers’

Compensation.

60
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

The total number of months that the employee is on a leave of absence (except for a
Workers’ Compensation Leave of Absence), layoff status, or suspension is deducted from the
number of months of continuous service when calculating future longevity awards and the

pro-rated longevity award at the employee’s termination.

29.4 Pro-Rata Awards - Separation. In the event that an employee who has completed
at least five years of continuous service retires or separates from employment with the City of
Tampa, a prorated annual longevity award shall be paid which is equal to one-twelfth (1/12)
of the yearly award for each month of service from the first full month of original employment
up to and including November plus one-twelfth of the yearly award for each month of service
beginning with the previous December up to and including the last full month of employment.
However, an eligible employee who retires or separates after the anniversary of the 5% 10°
15th, 20" or 25" year of employment but prior to November 30, shall receive a prorated award
based on the number of years of completed service and not the amount of the previous year's

award. Pro-rata separation awards shall be based on the dollar amounts listed in 29.1.

61
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 30
SPECIAL PAYMENTS

30.1 Hazardous Device Technician. Employees who are assigned by the Chief of
Police to the assignment of Hazardous Device Technician shall be paid a special payment of

$115 per month. Payment shall be provided on a monthly basis.

30.2 Tactical Response Team. Employees who are assigned by the Chief of Police on
a full time basis as members of the Department's Tactical Response Team shall receive a

special payment of $115 per month. Payment shall be provided on a monthly basis.

30.3 Hostage Negotiations Team. Employees who are assigned by the Chief of Police
on a full time basis as members of the Department's Hostage Negotiation Team shall receive a

special payment of $115 per month. Payment shall be provided on a monthly basis.

30.4 Field Training Squad. Employees assigned by the Chief of Police on a full time
basis as members of the Field Training Squad shall receive a special payment of $230 per
month for any month during which the employee is responsible for training activities
authorized by the Chief of Police in accordance with the Field Training Program. Payment

shall be provided on a monthly basis.
30.5 Dive Team. Employees assigned by the Chief of Police on a full time basis, as
members of the Department’s Dive Team shall receive a special payment of $115 per month.

Payment shall be provided on a monthly basis.

30.6 Should an employee be assigned to more than one of the assignments covered by

section 30.1 through 30.5, the employee shall be eligible to receive only one special payment.

30.8 These special payments will not be compounded by overtime.

62
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 31
SERVICE TRAINING

31.1 The City agrees to make a good faith effort to provide an average per employee
of at least forty (40) hours of service training per year. The term service training shall include
all training provided during working hours. The PBA shall provide its recommendations for

training to the Police Chief by November 1 of each year.

63
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 32
TUITION REIMBURSEMENT

32.1 Amount. The City shall reimburse employees for approved training up to a total
amount of $1,700 per fiscal year for tuition fees. The City will not reimburse an employee

for books, materials, supplies, application fees or transportation.

32.2 Eligibility. Approved training shall include courses which are related to the
employee's present job or to a promotional position which is offered by an approved technical

or trade school or an accredited college or university.

32.3 Recipients of Scholarships. An employee receiving a scholarship or grant for
education may be eligible for reimbursement. The tuition reimbursement application and
grant or scholarship documentation will be reviewed by the Department of Human Resources’
Training and Development Unit for eligibility. Such scholarships and grants include, but are

not limited to, GI benefits, social security benefits and tuition waivers.

32.4 Cancellation of Approval. An employee who resigns or is dismissed from
employment prior to the completion of an approved training course shall not be eligible for
reimbursement. An employee who is laid off or retires during the training shall be eligible for

reimbursement upon successful completion of the training.
32.5 Approval. In order to receive reimbursement, the employee must fulfill the
requirements as outlined by the Department of Human Resources’ Training and Development

Unit.

32.6 State Education Incentive. Pursuant to Florida State Statute Chapter 943.22,

employees are compensated for higher education in criminal justice related programs.

64
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

Employees receiving basic certification prior to July 1, 1980, receive $25.00 per month;
employees having a community college degree or equivalent receive $30.00 per month;
employees having a bachelor's degree receive an additional $50.00 per month; employees
completing qualifying blocks of approved training as established by the State Career
Development Program receive $120.00 per month. The maximum aggregate amount any
employee receives under FSS 943.22 is $130.00 per month. The City of Tampa provides
payments as required under FSS 943.22. These benefits are directed by State Law and are
separate and apart from any Tuition Reimbursement Program sponsored by the City of
Tampa. The parties recognize that should the State alter or cease this program, the City shall

not be held responsible for continuing the payment of said funds.

65
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 33
MEDICAL INSURANCE

33.1 Coverage. The City agrees to make available health and major medical
insurance coverage for employees and their eligible dependents. Such coverage shall include
hospitalization, medical, maternity, and major medical benefits. Consideration for providing
this benefit is included in the determination of wage rates contained herein.

Due to the rising costs of health insurance, the City shall retain the right to develop a

change in plan design to reduce costs.

33.2 The City agrees to continue to pay 100% for the employee's coverage and 50%
for the cost of coverage for the employee's dependents for the health plan selected by the City.
Any additional cost will be paid by the employee through payroll deductions.

33.3 In cases where both spouses are employed by the City of Tampa, only one

family plan is provided.

33.4 Retirement Coverage. An employee who retires or his/her spouse as long as the
spouse receives pension payments, shall be allowed to retain the City's hospitalization

coverage, provided that the cost of such coverage shall be deducted from the pension check.

33.5 The City at its discretion may make available alternative health insurance
coverage plans in which employees may choose to enroll. The City shall pay for the
employee's coverage in the amount equal to the cost for single coverage provided in Article
33.2, the City shall pay for dependent coverage (including the employee coverage) in the
amount equal to the cost for family coverage provided in Article 33.2. Any increased costs

above the amounts specified herein shall be paid 100% by the employee. Employee costs

66
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

shall be paid by the employee through payroll deductions. The union shall continue to

participate in the preparation of plan design and requests for proposals.

67
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 34
LIFE AND ACCIDENTAL DEATH & DISMEMBERMENT INSURANCE

34.1 Coverage. The City agrees to provide Life and Accidental Death and
Dismemberment insurance to employees in the amount equal to the employee's salary up to a
maximum of $100,000 each ($200,000 total). The amount of the annual salary shall be as

indicated in Appendix A based on the employee's grade and step.

Consideration for providing this benefit is included in the determination of wage rates

contained herein.
34.2 Retirement Coverage. An employee who retires shall have the right to retain the

City's life insurance coverage in the amount of $4,000. The cost of such coverage shall be

deducted from the retiree's pension check.

68
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 35
PROMOTIONS

35.1 Promotions. A promotion shall be defined as a permanent elevation in rank from
the classification of Police Lieutenant to Police Captain. All promotions shall be
accomplished in the manner provided in the Civil Service Law, rules and regulations of the

City of Tampa which require that an employee be certified on the eligibility list.

69
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 36
PERSONNEL RECORDS

36.1 Personnel records shall be kept confidential and not released to any person
except officials of the City, or in response to Court Order, or as otherwise provided by law.
However, employees may at their discretion waive this right. The employee shall be provided
one copy free of charge, upon request, at the time the document is issued. In addition to the
provisions of Article 38.6, it shall be the right of any employee, or their legal or Union
representative upon presentation of the employee's written authorization, at reasonable times,
to inspect and make copies, at their own expense, of the employee's personnel file. The cost

of such copies shall be 15¢ per copy.

36.2 Pursuant to law, all documents in the City's personnel file are permanent records.
Letters of counseling are not placed in the City's personnel file. In the event that a one (1)
year period elapses following the date the City became aware of the conduct leading to a letter
of counseling, during which the employee receives neither a subsequent letter of counseling or
disciplinary action, the letter of counseling shall be removed from the department personnel
file. Provided, however that any letter of counseling shall remain in the department personnel
file for a minimum of six months: Where a three (3) year period elapses following the date the
City became aware of the conduct leading to written reprimand, suspension or dismissal, the
written reprimand and associated documents shall be indicated as void in the employee's
personnel file. Provided, however that any written reprimand shall remain in the departmental
personnel file for a minimum of one year. Letters of complaint where there is a finding that
the complaint is false or unfounded shall be voided upon such finding. Voided documents
shall be forwarded to the Employee Relations Division for any retention deemed to be

required pursuant to law.

36.3 Employees shall be required to initial all entries into their pending evaluation

file.

70
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 37
FORMAL INVESTIGATIONS

37.1 Whenever an employee is under investigation and subject to interrogation by the
Internal Affairs Unit or by the Department in a matter which could lead to disciplinary action,
demotion or dismissal of the employee under interrogation, such interrogation of such an

employee shall be conducted in the following manner:

(a) The interrogation shall be conducted at a reasonable hour, preferably at
a time when the employee is on duty, unless the seriousness of the investigation is of

such a degree that an immediate action is required.

(b) The interrogation shall be conducted at the police station or Internal

Affairs Bureau.

(c) The employee shall be advised if he is a witness or is under investigation
and if under investigation shall be informed of the nature of the charge which is under
investigation and the rank, name and command of the officer in charge of the
investigation, the interrogation officer, and all persons present during the interrogation.
In the event that an employee is called as a witness and during interrogation becomes
the subject of an investigation he shall be so informed and shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to exercise the right to representation afforded by this Article. All
questions directed to the employee under interrogation shall be asked by and through
one (1) interrogator at a time. The employee under investigation shall be informed of
the identity of the individual person(s) who are the complainant(s) The employee
under investigation, along with legal counsel or any other representative of his choice,
may review the complaint and all statements regardless of form made by the
complainant and witnesses immediately prior to the beginning of the investigative

interview.

71
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

(d) Interrogation sessions shall be for reasonable periods and shall be timed to

allow for such personal necessities and rest periods as are reasonable.

(e) The employee under interrogation shall not be subjected to offensive
language. No promises or reward shall be made as an inducement to answering any

questions.

(f) The formal interrogation of the employee, including all recess periods,
shall be recorded on audio tape, or otherwise preserved in such a manner as to allow a
transcript to be prepared, and there shall be no unrecorded questions or statements.
Additional recordation may be by the employee or his representative. Upon the request
of the interrogated officer, a copy of any such recording of the interrogation session
must be made available to the interrogated officer no later than 72 hours, excluding

holidays and weekends, following said interrogation.

(g) If the employee under investigation is under arrest, or is likely to be placed
under arrest as a result of the interrogation, he shall be completely informed of all of

his rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation.

(h) Upon the request of an employee who is the subject of an investigation
covered by this Article he shall have the right to be represented by a representative of
his choice including an attorney who shall be present at all times during such
interrogation. Whenever such representative(s) are not immediately available, the
investigation shall be postponed for a reasonable period of time in order to afford the

employee the opportunity to representation.

72
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

(i) The employee shall, if he so requests, receive a copy of his statement, any
transcript which is prepared of the oral questions and answers or any summary of his

testimony prepared by the Department.

(j) Notwithstanding the rights and privileges provided by Florida Statutes
112.532, Florida Statutes 112.532 does not limit the right of the City to discipline or to

pursue criminal charges against an officer.

(k) In any matter where an employee is required to submit a written statement
justifying or explaining his actions in a particular situation, the employee, upon his
request, shall be granted twenty-four (24) hours or until the start of his next scheduled

shift, whichever is sooner, to submit such a statement.
QO Should an employee be charged with Standard of Conduct, the charge
shall were specific in its allegations and shall describe the conduct, which is the basis

of the charge.

(m) The provisions of this section shall apply only to investigations covered

by this section and shall not apply to any other form of investigation.

37.2 In cases where it is decided to relieve an employee from duty pending an

investigation or other administrative action, the employee will remain on full salary and shall

not lose any benefits during this period of time.

37.3. When an investigation by Internal Affairs is completed, the Division

Commander shall determine the disposition of the investigation according to the following:

(a) Sustained: The investigation disclosed sufficient evidence to prove

clearly the allegation made in the complaint.

73
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

(b) Unfounded:
D Not Involved: The investigation disclosed that the named

employee was not involved in the alleged incident.

(2) Exonerated: The acts which provided the basis for the
complaint or allegation occurred; however, investigation

revealed that they were justified, lawful, and proper.

(3) Unwarranted: The allegation was made in good faith without
malicious intent. However, investigation disclosed that the

allegation lacks basis in fact.

(4) False: The allegation is false. The alleged incident never

took place.

(©) Not sustained: The investigation failed to disclose sufficient

evidence to prove the allegation made in the complaint.

(d) New Complaint Not Based On Original Complaint - Sustained: New
substantiated complaint not mentioned in the initial allegation was
disclosed by the investigation and is sustained. Original complaint
unsubstantiated or unfounded. The record of the disposition of the
unfounded or unsubstantiated complaint of misconduct will not be

placed in the employee's personnel file with the sustained complaint.
37.4 In the event that the disposition of the investigation is sustained, the Division

Commander shall so inform the employee. Only sustained investigations will be placed in the

employee's personnel file.

74
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

37.5 In the event that a suspension, demotion, or dismissal is recommended by the
Division Commander as a result of a sustained Internal Affairs complaint, the employee shall
be so informed and provided the opportunity to request a Complaint Review Board. The
Complaint Review Board process will be conducted in accordance with the Tampa Police
Department S.O.P. In the event it becomes necessary to change this procedure, the PBA will

be advised of anticipated changes in accordance with Article 8.5.

37.6 Except as provided in Florida Statutes section 112.532 and as required by Florida
Statutes 112.532 effective July 1, 2005 for actions arising on or after that date, and as required
by Florida Statutes 112.532 effective July 1, 2009 for actions arising on or after that date, no
disciplinary action, suspension, demotion or dismissal shall be undertaken by the Department
against an employee for any act, omission, or other allegation of misconduct if the
investigation of such allegation is not completed within 180 days after the date the department
receives notice of the allegation by a person authorized by the Department to initiate an
investigation of the misconduct. In the event that the Department determines that disciplinary
action is appropriate, it shall complete its investigation and give notice in writing to the
employee of its intent to proceed with disciplinary action, along with a proposal of the specific
action sought, including length of suspension if applicable. Such notice to the officer shall be
provided within 180 days after the date the Department received notice of the alleged
misconduct in accordance with Florida Statutes 112.532, including the exceptions identified

herein.

37.7 When an employee is under investigation, by the Internal Affairs Bureau or the
Department as the result of a third party complaint, neither the employee, the PBA, nor any
member of the Department shall make any public statements concerning the facts of the case
until such time as the investigation has been concluded and action has been taken on result of
such an investigation. This provision shall not preclude the confirmation of the fact that such

an investigation is being conducted.

75
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

37.8 Ifa third party complaint is filed that alleges criminal conduct and, as a result of
the investigation, substantial and competent evidence is adduced which proves that the
charges are false, then such evidence will be submitted to the State Attorney for such action as
he may deem appropriate. The term "third party complaint" as used in this Article shall apply
to any complaint filed by a person who is not a sworn employee of the Tampa Police

Department.

37.9 It shall be the responsibility of any officer who obtains a Court Order to
Expunge, pursuant to Section 943.0585, Florida Statutes, as amended, to provide a certified
copy of such order to the City. Upon receipt of such order, the City shall be responsible for

taking all necessary action to carry out the order.

76
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 38
DISCIPLINE

38.1 The parties recognize that the interest of the community and the job security of

the employees depend upon the City's success in providing proper and efficient services to the

community. To this end, the City and the PBA encourage to the fullest degree, employee

behavior which is positive and supportive of the goals of effective municipal management and

public safety. The parties recognize the need for progressive and appropriate discipline when

an employee's conduct and job performance are inconsistent with said goals.

38.2 No employee shall be disciplined except for just cause. Progressive, consistent,

and appropriate discipline will be administered according to the seriousness of the offense.

(a)
(b)
©
@

(e)
()
(g)

(h)

Oral Admonishment

Letter of Counseling

Written Reprimand

Suspension -- At the discretion of the Police Chief, the employee may work all
or a portion of the suspension period with forfeiture of the equivalent time
through accumulated annual leave in lieu of suspension. At the discretion of
the Police Chief with the concurrence of the Director of Human Resources,
employees not permitted the forfeiture of annual leave may have the
suspension held in abeyance until the grievance process is concluded.
Demotion

Dismissal

Payment for lost or damaged equipment due to negligence up to a maximum
of $350.00. Such payment shall be made through payroll deductions not to
exceed two hours pay per payroll period.

Training. Training costs shall be paid by the City.

77
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

@ In the event that the City plans to establish other progressive or positive
discipline programs, the PBA shall be notified and provided an opportunity to

discuss the matter in accordance with Article 8, Section 4.

38.3 Employees will be advised in writing of the basis for any disciplinary action
resulting in loss of pay or benefits not later than the time provided by law. An employee shall

be furnished a copy of the Notice of Disciplinary Action.

38.4 No employee shall be dismissed, demoted, suspended, transferred, or disciplined
or denied promotion, transfer, or reassignment or otherwise be discriminated against in regard
to his employment, or be threatened with any such treatment by reason of his exercising the

rights granted in this Agreement.

38.5 Any employee who is being interrogated under circumstances where the
employee could be subject to discipline shall have a right to have a PBA representative
present and/or attorney present. It is the employee's responsibility to notify the PBA of the

request for union representation.

38.6 Employees, attorneys and/or their PBA representative may review, upon
reasonable request, any supporting documentation contained in a disciplinary package after
the completion of any investigation of the matter but prior to the predisciplinary hearing
portion of the investigation. This review shall be requested through the appropriate Assistant
Chief. One copy of any of the supporting documentation shall be provided to the employee or
PBA representative free of charge upon request. supporting documentation shall be provided
to the employee or PBA representative free of charge upon request. At the time an employee
receives a letter of counseling, a written reprimand, a suspension, a demotion, or dismissal, he
will also receive any and all supporting documentation contained in a disciplinary package

when the investigation was conducted at the supervisory level. When the investigation was

78
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

conducted by Internal Affairs, the documentation will be provided by Internal Affairs at the

employee’s request.

This section shall not apply in cases in which criminal charges are brought against the
affected employee as a result of the departmental investigation. Records in such cases must be

obtained through the rules of discovery through the State Attorney's Office.
38.7 The City's Employee Relations Division shall forward to the Union a copy of

written reprimands, suspensions, demotions, or dismissals issued to bargaining unit

employees.

79
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 39
INCENTIVE LEAVE

39.1 Incentive Leave. Employees shall be credited 8.0, 10.0 or 11.4 hours, as
applicable to the employee's work schedule hours of Incentive Leave per calendar year for

exceptional performance for safe driving, firearms skills, and/or physical fitness.

39.2 Safe Driving. Incentive Leave shall be accrued if the employee's duties require
the daily and consistent operation of a City vehicle and the employee has not had any at fault

accidents or documented driving violations for one year.

39.3 Firearms. Incentive Leave shall be accrued if the employee receives a master

rating with the authorized service weapon at the annual firearms requalification.

39.4 Physical Fitness. Incentive Leave shall be accrued if the employee receives a
qualified outstanding physical fitness rating. The physical fitness testing and rating shall be
determined by the Tampa Police Department, with the concurrence of the union. Fitness
testing and ratings shall be based on nationally recognized standards and in compliance with

appropriate age and gender factors.

39.5 In the event that at the end of the payroll calendar year the employee has not
utilized accrued Incentive Leave for Safe Driving and/or Firearms (39.2 and 39.3 above), said
remaining Incentive Leave shall be paid at the employee's regular rate of pay at the rate
credited of 8.0, 10.0 or 11.4 hours per Article 39.1. In the event that at the end of the payroll
calendar year the employee has not utilized accrued Incentive Leave for Physical Fitness (39.4

above), time credited shall be forfeited.

80
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 40
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM/DRUG TESTING

40.1 Purpose The City of Tampa and the PBA recognize that an employee's personal
problems may result in a less than optimum, and even a declining, job performance. These
personal problems may include, but are not limited to, emotional or behavioral problems,
marital or family problems, legal problems, financial problems, alcohol abuse, or drug abuse.
In keeping with the mission of the City to provide the finest of services to the citizens of
Tampa and recognizing the importance of the City's human resources, the City has established
an Employee Assistance Program (EAP). The goal of this program is to restore the employee
to full productivity by offering guidance and referral to qualified, professional providers. It is
the City's policy that an employee's participation in the EAP will not jeopardize his or her
future opportunities with the City, however, the EAP shall not replace, alter or be used to

circumvent the City's discipline administration policy.

40.1.1 Substance Abuse. The City of Tampa and the PBA have grave concerns
regarding the abuse of alcohol and other drug substances in the community. It is understood
that City policy prohibits the consumption, possession, or being under the influence of drugs

or intoxicating substances while on duty.

40.2 Eligibility. Employees enrolled in the City's group health insurance plan are
eligible for EAP services. Spouses and/or dependents of employees are eligible if the
employee is enrolled in the City's group health insurance program with family coverage. Any
eligible employee or family member may directly seek EAP services for any personal
problem. Such problems may include, but are not limited to: depression, anxiety, stress or
psychiatric illnesses, difficulties stemming from alcohol or drug abuse or the emotional impact

of problems of another person.

81
40.3

services by:

(a)

(b)

City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

Program Access. Eligible employees or family members may access EAP

Self-Referral Employees or eligible family members may voluntarily and
directly contact the EAP for services. Employees who utilize self-referral due
to a substance abuse problem shall be eligible to utilize sick leave or other
appropriate paid leave (or a medical leave of absence if eligible) in order to
enroll in an appropriate program. Upon completion of the program, the City
shall require medical substantiation regarding fitness for duty and resolution of
drug or alcohol use or dependency prior to reinstatement from the leave.
Reinstatement shall be conditioned on continued monitoring and testing to
ensure continued and complete recovery. Only one substance abuse self-
referral to the EAP shall be permitted. An employee who fails to complete the
program or who resumes use of said substances after the original reinstatement

shall be dismissed.

Supervisor/Department Director Mandatory _ Referral A supervisor/
department director, noting a declining job performance on the part of an
employee which is not related to substance abuse, may mandate referral of an

employee to the EAP for assessment, further referral or counseling services.

D All mandatory referrals to the EAP must be coordinated through the

City's Employee Relations Division.

(2) An employee's job will not be jeopardized by such a referral or by the
employee's refusal to participate in the EAP. However, an employee's
job may be jeopardized by failure to improve job performance, and

such failure will be handled according to the discipline procedures.

82
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

(c) Mandatory Referral for Substance Abuse Testing The City has the authority to
require an employee to complete physical examinations to ensure that the
employee is fit for duty. This includes, but is not limited to, physical
examinations to determine if a specified employee is under the influence of
alcohol on duty; to determine any abuse of prescription or non-prescription
drugs; and, to determine any use of illegal substances. Substance Abuse

Testing is provided in section 40.6.

40.4 Confidentiality. The confidentiality of EAP services is absolutely essential to the
program's acceptance and success. Participants have the right to complete confidentiality
concerning their use of the program, the content of the sessions, and all existing case
information and records. Regardless of the nature of the referral, the EAP Counselor may not
disclose any information about a participating employee to the City without the employee's
written consent. In the case of a supervisory referral, the EAP Counselor may communicate to
the City that the employee has or has not kept appointments. The EAP Counselor may also,
with the employee's consent, work with the employee and the supervisor in defining the job
performance difficulties and in setting work goals for improvement. All counseling records

and information from employee visits are the property of the EAP.

40.4.1 Fitness for Duty Evaluations. The parties recognize that at various times and
for reasonable circumstances the City may require a fitness for duty evaluation by a
professional selected by the City as a condition of being released to full duty. In order to
complete the Fitness for Duty evaluation, such professional may need to speak to or obtain
reports from the EAP counselor. The City agrees that if the employee gives written consent so
that such information may be disclosed by the EAP counselor to the City's professional, that
under no circumstances shall the information obtained by the City's professional be disclosed
any further to any person or entity whatsoever without the employee's further written consent.
The employee shall not be threatened or coerced in any manner whatsoever, directly or

indirectly, into giving that further written consent. In order to insure the confidentiality

83
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

provided by this section, the City shall seek from its professional only his conclusion as to

whether the employee if fit for duty.

Prior to the evaluation, if the employee objects to a fitness for duty evaluation due to a
reasonable belief that a conflict exists between the professional and the employee, the City
shall require that the evaluation be completed by an alternative professional. The selection of

the alternative professional must be approved by the City.

40.5 Appointments. Appointments may be scheduled Monday through Friday
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. An EAP staff member is available on a 24 hour

basis by beeper service for life threatening situations.

(a) Employees and eligible family members may see an EAP staff member or
other participating practitioner for up to three (3) sessions at no cost to the
employee. Subsequent treatment sessions are available to the participating
employee or family member. These services are generally at discounted rates
and may be partially reimbursable under the City's Group Health Care Plan.
The EAP will endeavor to refer participants to providers covered by the City's

health insurance plan, including those listed as Preferred Providers.
(@) Supervisory referrals may be scheduled during the employee's work
hours. Self-referrals are to be scheduled during the employee's own

time through the use of paid or unpaid leave, as applicable.

40.6 Drug Testing. The requirement of an employee to complete a drug test shall be

based on reasonable suspicion and/or the Random Substance Abuse Examination Program.

(1) Reasonable Suspicion

84
(a)

(b)

©

City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

The reasonable suspicion standard requires that the City must have
some "factual foundation and rationale which is interpreted in light of
experience." In other words, a decision to test an employee shall be
based on factors such as changes in job performance; physical
symptoms commonly associated with drug usage such as slurred
speech, altered motor skills and other changes; changes in attention
span or attendance; reports or actual witnessing of possession or use of
substances; changes in appetite or sleeping habits; or other mannerisms

or behavioral changes which indicate the suspicion of drug usage.

The supervisor having reasonable suspicion of the use of alcohol or
drugs shall immediately contact the City's Employee Relations
Division to arrange for referral for testing. The City shall meet with
and inform an employee that, in the opinion of the City, there is a basis
for reasonable suspicion and of the City's intention to schedule a drug
or alcohol screen or test. At said meeting, the City shall consider the
comments from the employee regarding the matter and shall then make
the determination of whether to proceed and require the screen or test.
If it is determined, at the sole discretion of the City, that a drug test will
be required, the employee shall be immediately escorted to the
appropriate facility for tests. Refusal by an employee to submit to said
test shall be grounds for dismissal. The employee shall not be allowed
to drive. Prior to transport, the supervisor shall obtain the employee's
signature on the "Consent to Perform" and obtain a witness of the
signature. The "Consent to Perform" must be presented upon arrival at

the facility for testing.

Pending the results of the test, the employee may be placed on sick

leave. If the employee does not have a sufficient sick leave balance,

85
2)

@

(e)

()

City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

the employee may be placed on annual leave or Absence Without Pay

(AWP) when an insufficient annual leave balance exists.

If an employee tests positive, the employee shall be placed on sick
leave (or a medical leave of absence if eligible when there is an
insufficient leave balance) and shall be referred to the City's Employee
Assistance Program (EAP) for counseling, further drug testing, and/or
enrollment in an appropriate program. Upon completion of the
program, the City shall require medical substantiation regarding fitness
for duty and resolution of drug or alcohol use or dependency prior to
reinstatement from sick leave or the medical leave of absence.
Reinstatement shall be conditioned on continued monitoring and
testing to ensure continued and complete recovery. Only one such
referral to the Employee Assistance Program shall be permitted. An
employee who fails to complete the program or who resumes use of
said substances after the original reinstatement to work shall be

dismissed.

If the employee tests positive for an illegal substance, the employee

shall be dismissed.

If an employee tests negative, any paid or unpaid leave utilized

pending the test results shall be corrected to regular pay status.

Random Substance Abuse Examination Program. The City shall continue the

Random Substance Abuse Examination. The procedures and requirements for

the program shall be provided by SOP. Employees who test positive for an

illegal substance shall be subject to immediate dismissal. Employees who test

positive for a legal substance, usage of which is not verified by prescription for

86
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

the employee or usage of which had not been disclosed to the supervisor, shall

be subject to discipline up to an including dismissal.

CONSENT TO PERFORM - REASONABLE SUSPICION

I, » consent to a medical examination and the collection of blood and/or urine
samples, as requested by the City of Tampa, for the purpose of determining the presence of
alcohol and/or drugs, if any.

I furthermore authorize the release of any and all medical information obtained during the
examination and testing procedure to the City of Tampa.

I understand that my alteration of this consent form, refusal to consent to or cooperate fully
with a medical examination and the collection of the blood and/or urine samples; or my
refusal to authorize release of information to the City of Tampa constitutes insubordination
and is grounds for termination.

I also understand that a positive result for the drugs tested may be considered grounds for
termination or may result in mandatory referral to the City of Tampa's Employee Assistance
Program and required satisfactory completion of any course of treatment prescribed by the
EAP.

Employee Signature Date

Witness

87
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 41
WORKERS' COMPENSATION

41.1 Workers' Compensation. Employees injured on duty shall receive benefits
provided by the Florida Statutes, Chapter 440, Workers' Compensation Law. The City
provides that this benefit begins on the first day of disability.

41.2 Light Duty. In the event that an employee is at any time determined by the City's
designated Workers' Compensation physician to be able to perform light duty work as a result
of an on-the-job injury, the City will evaluate the specific light duty restrictions and may place
the employee in any City light duty job if one is available. However, the City is under no
obligation to create light duty for an employee. Should an employee be placed on light duty
and such duty becomes subsequently no longer available, then the City may terminate or
change the light duty assignment. The provision of light duty for an employee shall not set

precedent for provision of light duty for another employee.

41.3 Supercompensation. Employees, who are injured on duty and who are not
assigned to light duty per Article 41.2, shall receive supercompensation for temporary total

disabilities up to a period of twelve (12) consecutive calendar months.

41.3.1 Supercompensation, when added to Workers' Compensation, shall equal the
employee's "take home salary". "Take home salary" shall be defined as the employee's base
salary (as determined from the amount of the salary for the respective grade and step of the
employee minus the amount deducted from the salary for pension contributions and minus the
amount deducted from the salary for federal withholding taxes. In the event that an

employee's Workers' Compensation is reduced per state law, the amount of

 

Supercompensation shall not exceed the amount the employee would have received but for the

reduction.

88
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

41.3.2 Supercompensation shall cease at the following time, whichever occurs first:

(a) The employee reaches maximum medical improvement, or
(b) The employee has received supercompensation for twelve (12) consecutive
calendar months as defined below, or

(c) The employee has returned to full duty, or full time light duty.

In calculating the twelve (12) consecutive calendar months, the following shall apply:

(a) An employee who has a Workers’ Compensation injury who returns to full
duty, and who is later taken off full duty by a workers’ compensation treating
physician shall be entitled to supercompensation for a period of twelve (12)
consecutive calendar months from the date the employee was taken off full

duty, or the date of maximum medical improvement, whichever occurs first.

(b) An employee who has a workers' compensation injury who returns to either
part-time light duty or full-time light duty, and who is later taken off light duty
by a workers’ compensation treating physician shall be entitled to
supercompensation for a period of twelve (12) consecutive calendar months
from the date the employee was taken off full duty, or the date of maximum

medical improvement, whichever occurs first.

(c) Subsequent injuries or re-injury shall be considered new injuries for purposes
of supercompensation, and for purposes of calculating the "twelve (12)

consecutive calendar months."
41.3.2 In the event that an employee suffers a Workers' Compensation injury meeting

the definition of catastrophic contained in Ch.440, F.S., supercompensation shall cease at the

following time, whichever occurs first:

89
(a)
(b)

©

City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

The employee reaches maximum medical improvement, or
The employee has received supercompensation for 365 cumulative work days
as defined below, or

The employee has returned to full duty, or full time light duty.

In calculating the 365 cumulative work days, the following shall apply:

(a)

(b)

An employee who has a Workers’ Compensation injury who returns to full
duty, and who is later taken off full duty by a workers' compensation treating
physician shall be entitled to supercompensation for a period up to the date
equal to the remainder of the 365 cumulative work days (from the original use
of supercompensation, if any), or the date of maximum medical improvement,

whichever occurs first.

An employee who has a workers' compensation injury who returns to either
part-time light duty or full-time light duty, and who is later taken off light duty
by a workers’ compensation treating physician shall be entitled to
supercompensation for a period up to the date equal to the remainder of the
365 cumulative work days (from the original use of supercompensation, if

any) or the date of maximum medical improvement, whichever occurs first.

41.3.3. The total amount paid for Workers' Compensation and supercompensation

shall not exceed the amount of salary such employee would have received had the employee

not been on Workers' Compensation.

41.3.4 An employee who has not reached maximum medical improvement, but who

to light duty pay, shall equal the employee's

is on part-time light duty, shall receive supercompensation in an amount which, when added

‘take home salary" as specified in Article 41.3.1.

90
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

41.4 Workers' Compensation Leave of Absence. As specified in Article 23, Leave of
Absence Without Pay, an employee who reaches maximum medical improvement, or has
remained on Temporary Total Disability for twelve months may be placed on a Workers’

Compensation Leave of Absence.

41.5 Light Duty in Lieu of Workers' Compensation Leave of Absence. An employee

 

who reaches maximum medical improvement, or has remained on Temporary Total Disability
for twelve months, shall not be placed on a Workers' Compensation Leave of Absence if the
employee is on light duty or returns to work on light duty as of the date the Workers’
Compensation Leave of Absence would have commenced. The City shall notify the
employee in writing that the light duty is provided in lieu of the Workers' Compensation
Leave of Absence for a period of up to six months, with two three month extensions permitted
the same as provided for the Workers' Compensation Leave of Absence. At the expiration of
the time period for which the employee would have been on a Workers' Compensation Leave
of Absence, but for the light duty, the provisions of 23.2.5, 23.2.6, and 23.2.7 shall apply the

same as if the employee had been on a Workers' Compensation Leave of Absence.

41.6 It is further agreed that through the provision for light duty (Article 41.2) and
Light Duty in Lieu of Workers' Compensation Leave of Absence, the City intends to minimize
payments for supercompensation aggressively. In the event that an employee has reached
MMI, the employee shall be responsible for reporting the MMI status to the Police
Department and shall make restoration to the City of any supercompensation payments made

after the date the employee reached MMI.
41.7.1 Retirement. In the event that an employee applies for disability retirement with

the Fire and Police Pension Board and there is disagreement regarding disability between the

pension physicians and Workers' Compensation Physicians, the following shall apply:

91
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

(a) In the event that the pension physicians deny a disability retirement and the
Workers' Compensation physician agrees to return the employee to full duty,
then all Workers’ Compensation benefits shall cease and the employee will
return to full duty. Failure to return to duty on the date specified shall result in

dismissal.

(b) In the event that the employee is denied a disability pension on the grounds
that the employee has reached maximum medical improvement but is not
disabled, then thirty (30) days following final action of the Pension Board, the
employee's Workers' Compensation Leave of Absence shall terminate and the
provisions of Article 23.2.7 shall apply. It is the intent of this provision that
the decision of the Pension Board as to the existence of such a disability shall
be binding upon the City and the employee for the purpose of determining
continued eligibility for Workers' Compensation Leave of Absence or medical
substantiation for return to full duty as specified in Article 23.2.6, but for no

other purpose.

41.7.2 If the employee is entitled to wage-loss benefits under s.440.15(3) and/or
permanent total disability benefits under s.440.14(1), F.S. and City of Tampa Pension
benefits, such City of Tampa benefits shall be primary and the wage-loss benefits or
permanent total disability benefits shall be supplemental only. The sum of the City of Tampa
Pension benefits and wage-loss benefits and/or permanent total disability benefits shall not
exceed 100% of the employee's average weekly wage, and in no event shall the offset work to

reduce said benefits below the average weekly wage.

41.8 The parties agree that all disputes regarding issues covered by Ch.440, Florida
State Statutes shall be handled exclusively through mechanisms provided under Ch.440,
Florida State Statute and that those issues shall not be subject to the grievance and arbitration

procedure.

92
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 42
PREVAILING RIGHTS

42.1 All rights and working conditions enjoyed throughout the Department by the
employees at the present time covered by written order or known to the Chief of Police, which
are not specifically referred to in this Agreement shall not be changed by the City in an
arbitrary or capricious manner; provided, that nothing contained herein shall limit the City's
rights under Article 3, Management's Rights. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the change
or the date on which the PBA knew or should have known of the change, the PBA may notify
the Chief of Police of its interest in discussing the matter. The same thirty (30) calendar day
period shall be considered the time limit for filing a class action grievance at the fourth step
per Article 8.5. Within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of said notification from the PBA,
the Police Chief and the Director of Human Resources shall meet with the PBA in order to

receive and review the PBA's recommendation.

93
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 43
AMENDMENTS

43.1 This Agreement may be amended at any time by the mutual consent of the

parties, but no such attempted amendment shall be of any force or effect until placed in

writing and executed by each party hereto.

94
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 44
SEVERABILITY AND WAIVER

44.1 Each and every clause of this Agreement shall be deemed separable from each
and every other clause of this Agreement to the end that in the event any clause or clauses
shall be finally determined to be in violation of any law, then and in such event such clause or
clauses only, to the extent only that any may be so in violation, shall be deemed of no force
and effect and unenforceable without impairing the validity and the enforceability of the rest
of the contract including any and all provisions in the remainder of any clause, sentence or

paragraph in which the offending language may appear.

44.2 This exercise or nonexercise by the City or the PBA of the rights covered by this

Agreement shall not be deemed to waive any such right or right to exercise them in the future.

95
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 45
CONTRACT CONSTITUTES ENTIRE AGREEMENT OF THE PARTIES

45.1 The parties acknowledge and agree that, during the negotiations which resulted
in this Agreement, each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and
proposals with respect to any subject or matter included by law within the area of collective
bargaining and that all the understandings and agreements arrived at by the parties after the
exercise of that right and opportunity are set forth in this Agreement. Therefore, the City and
PBA, for the life of this Agreement, each voluntarily and unqualifiedly waives the right to
require further collective bargaining, and each agrees that the other shall not be obligated to
bargain collectively with respect to any matter or subject not specifically referred to or
covered by this Agreement except as provided in 45.2 whether or not such matters have been
discussed. This Agreement contains the entire contract, understanding, undertaking and
agreement of collective bargaining for and during its term, except as may be otherwise

specifically provided herein.

45.2 The City and the PBA will meet at the request of either party to negotiate any
proposed changes in those rights and benefits not specifically covered by this Agreement
provided, however, no changes shall be made except when an express waiver exists or where

the change is negotiated in accordance with Chapter 447, Florida Statues.
45.3 In the event that federal or state mandates regarding employees covered by this

Agreement, become effective during the term of this Agreement, either party can request to

reopen the applicable portions of this Agreement.

96
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

ARTICLE 46
DURATION, MODIFICATION AND TERMINATION
46.1 This Agreement shall be effective as of the ___ day of _ __, 2010 and shall
continue in full force and effect until the 30th day of September, 2011. At least ninety (90)
days prior to the termination of this Agreement, either party hereto shall notify the other, in
writing, of its intention to modify, amend or terminate this Agreement. Failure to notify the
other party of intention to modify, amend or terminate, as hereinabove set forth, will
automatically extend the provisions and terms of this Agreement for a period of one (1) year,

and each year thereafter absent notification.

97
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have hereunder set their hands this __ day of

. 2010.

TAMPA POLICE BENEVOLENT

ASSOCIATION, INC.

Greg Stout
President

Rick Cochran
1st Vice President

Paul Southwick
2" Vice President

Tom Singleton
Labor Relations Representative

CITY OF TAMPA

Pam lorio, Mayor
City of Tampa

Kimberly Crum
Director of Human Resources

Jane Castor, Chief
Tampa Police Department

Sarah F. Lang
Employee Relations Manager

Marc Hamlin, Asst. Chief
Tampa Police Department

John Bennett, Asst. Chief
Tampa Police Department

Tarey J. Franxman
Employee Relations Specialist

 
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

APPENDIX A
Grade Title
P-10 Police Lieutenant
Step1 Step 2 Step 3
P-10 44.90 46.80 48.76 Hourly*
3,592.00 3,744.00 3,900.80 Bi-weekly
93,392.00 97,344.00 101,420.80 Annual

* Hourly rates are indicated for computer purposes only.

99
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

APPENDIX B

The following provisions apply to employees on the modified work schedule.

Bi-weekly Payroll Draw Formula:

CA/Hours Worked = RATE
Rate x 80 = Payroll Draw

Definitions

1.

CA = Computer Average. This figure is the annual salary (per appendix of the
Agreement) divided by 2080 hours to equal the Rate. The Rate is multiplied by 80
hours to equal the CA.

2. Hours Worked = Hours actually worked or on paid leave (exclusive of overtime).
Unless unpaid time occurs, this figure would equal 68.6, 80.0, or 91.4.
Example:

$ 28,332.40 / 2080 = $ 13.78
$ 13.78 x 80 = $1,102.40

$ 1,102.40 / 91.4 hours = $ 12.061269 = $ 12.061
$ 12.061 x 91.4 = $ 1,102.38

$ 1,102.40 / 80.0 hours = $ 13.78
$ 13.78 x 80.0 = $ 1,102.40

$ 1,102.40 / 68.6 hours = $ 16.06997 = $ 16.070
$ 16.070 x 68.6 = $ 1,102.40

Leave Accrual Formula:

For computer purposes, the 3.8 hours per bi-weekly paycycle is converted to .0475.

Hours Worked * X .0475 = Accrual Amount

*Definition same as above # 2.

100
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

Example:
80 x .0475 = 3.8

68.6 x .0475 = 3.3
91.4 x .0475 = 4.3

101
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

APPENDIX C

The PBA and the City agree that during the life of the current collective bargaining
agreement, all pension matters are subject to negotiation at anytime upon the request
of either the PBA or the City.

102
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

APPENDIX D - PENSION

The City and the PBA agree to support the Special Act originally submitted for the 2010
legislative session which provides for revision to the City of Tampa Pension Fund for
Firefighters and Police Officers (hereinafter “Pension Fund”) which amends the Pension Fund
to comply with Chapter 2009-97, Laws of Florida, by allowing up to 25% of plan assets in
foreign securities; and by conforming the contract with the practice of allowing elections for
the elective trustees to be held at an election rather than at a meeting and to increase the length
of time to conduct trustee elections from thirty to sixty days, allowing a greater flexibility; and
to allow the Board to retain the services of more than one nationally recognized professional
investment counselor, if it so chooses; to allow DROP participants upon entering the DROP
and annually thereafter to elect a low risk variable rate option for accruing annual interest
utilizing the Fund’s actual short term interest rate on the money market fund with the Fund’s
custodian; to allow retired members to elect to receive a benefit in order to provide a surviving
spouse benefit under certain circumstances; confirming in part the City of Tampa Firefighters
and Police Officers Contract; providing for severability; providing an effective date of

October 1, 2011.

Additionally, the City and the PBA agree to support adding an additional provision to the
Special Act which provides for a buy back of service by employees for up to five years of
prior non-pensionable military or law enforcement service. The qualifications for the service
crediting shall be in accordance with Chapter 175/185, Florida Statutes and said purchase shall
require that the employee pay the entire costs with actuarial certification of no cost impact to
the city or to the pension fund. It is further understood that proceeding with support of this
additional provision to the Special Act is predicated on reaching the required agreement with

the International Association of Firefighters, Local 754.

The foregoing description of the contents of the local bill is intended to be for illustrative

purposes only and the provisions of the attached local bill shall control over such description

103
City of Tampa/PBA- Lts_ 10/1/10 9/30/11

in the event of any conflict. It is further understood that proceeding with support of the Special
Act is predicated on reaching the required agreement with the International Association of

Firefighters, Local 754.

104
