CITY SECRETARY / Ye 79%
cecal

CONTRACT NO.
MEET AND CONFER
LABOR AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
CITY OF FORT WORTH, TEXAS
AND
FORT WORTH POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION

EXPIRES SEPTEMBER 30, 2016

RECEIVED MAR 2 6 2013
TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREAMBLE .
ARTICLE 1 Al
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS........0........
ARTICLE 3 ASSOCIATION RIGHTS
ARTICLE 4 TIME OFF FOR ASSOCIATION BUSINESS
ARTICLE 5 MANAGEMENT RIGHTS ...
ARTICLE 6 NO STRIKE, NO LOCK-OUT
ARTICLE 7 DISCIPLINARY ACTION
ARTICLE 8 DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCEDURE
ARTICLE 9 LABOR RELATIONS CONSULTATION PROCESS.
ARTICLE 10 WAGES.
ARTICLE 11 PROCEDURE FOR FILLING AND PROBATIONARY PERIOD FOR
BEGINNING POSITIONS IN THE FORT WORTH POLICE DEPARTMENT.
ARTICLE 12 COMPENSATORY TIME...
ARTICLE 13 SENIORITY............0..
ARTICLE 14 PHYSICAL FITNESS PROGRAM
ARTICLE 15 PROMOTIONS, DEMOTIONS AND REINSTATEMENT:
ARTICLE 16 VACANT PROMOTIONAL POSITIONS RESULTING FROM
MILITARY LEAVE OF ABSENCE
ARTICLE 17 NON-DISCRIMINATION
ARTICLE 18 MAINTENANCE OF STANDARDS
ARTICLE 19 HOLIDAYS
ARTICLE 20 SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL.
ARTICLE 21 CIVILIANIZATION OF CERTAIN SWORN OFFICER POSITIONS .
ARTICLE 22 TUITION REIMBURSEMENT... os
ARTICLE 23 REOPENER PROVISIONS FOR ‘HEALTHCARE ‘AND. PENSION
ARTICLE 24 OFF-DUTY EMPLOYMENT AT CITY-OWNED FACILITIES.
ARTICLE 25 COMPLETE AGREEMENT.
ARTICLE 26 SAVINGS CLAUSE
ARTICLE 27 DURATION AND TERMINATION
ARTICLE 28 NOTICE... ”
APPENDIX A (Voluntary Payroll Deduction Form
APPENDIX B (Vacation Leave Accrual Chart)
APPENDIX C (Structured Pay Plan Table)
APPENDIX D (Holiday Pay Examples).......
APPENDIX E (Education Reimbursement Policy) .

   
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
PREAMBLE

It is the intent and purpose of this Agreement, entered into by the City of Fort Worth, Texas,
hereinafter referred to as “the City,” and Fort Worth Police Officers Association, hereinafter
referred to as “the Association,” to achieve and maintain harmonious relations between the
Parties and discuss issues of mutual concern, as provided in the Texas Local Government Code
(*TLGC”), Chapter 143, Subchapter I. The Agreement has been reached through the process of
Meet and Confer with the objective of fostering effective cooperation between the City and its
Officers.
ARTICLE 1
AUTHORITY AND RECOGNITION

The City recognizes the Association as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for all covered
Officers, pursuant to Subsection | of Chapter 143 of the TLGC, excluding the rank of Chief of
Police, assistant chief (by statute), deputy chief (by this Agreement), and non-sworn employees.

It is agreed that Officers appointed to deputy chief pursuant to Article 15 of this Agreement shall
be considered as working out of classification for the duration of their appointment, and they will
be covered by an executive pay plan, rather than this agreement’s provisions for pay and
benefits.

The Association has determined that Deputy Chiefs’ benefits under the executive pay plan, and
under the City’s Ordinance pertaining to this rank are, taken as a whole, favorable in the context
of pay and benefits in the Department and that it is reasonable and consistent with the
Association’s duties under Texas law to exclude them from the bargaining unit for all other
purposes, for the duration of this agreement. Should the City repeal said Ordinance, or if said
Ordinance is found by a court of law to be invalid, in whole or in part, the Association shall have
the right to reopen negotiations as to this group of employees only, and only to the extent of the
effect of the repeal or invalidation.

In the event an individual files an action against the Association and the City on account of the
operation of Article 1, the City agrees to defend on behalf of both parties the validity of this
provision adopted by both parties, with counsel of the City’s choice. This provision does not
preclude the Association from retaining its own defense counsel, at its expense, and the City
shall reasonably cooperate with counsel designated by the Association to participate. Any
obligation for back pay or benefits, or the fees or costs of such litigation (not including any
attorneys’ fees paid by the Association to their own separate counsel) resulting from such
litigation shall be the sole responsibility of the City of Fort Worth.
ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS

“Active Duty” means the normal performance of the duties of a sworn position in the Police
Department.

“Agreement” refers to this Meet and Confer Agreement, negotiated between the City of Fort
Worth and the Fort Worth Police Officers’ Association.

“Association” means the Fort Worth Police Officers' Association.

“Board of Directors” means the members of the Association who are duly elected or appointed
and serve as members of the Board of Directors of the organization pursuant to the Constitution
and By-laws of the Association.

“Business Day” means Monday through Friday during normal business hours of 8:00 o’clock
a.m. to 5:00 o’clock p.m. and shall not include weekends or City holidays, except as otherwise
specifically defined in this Agreement.

“Calendar Day” means each day inclusive of weekends and holidays.

“Chief” means the Chief of Police of the City of Fort Worth.

“City” means the City of Fort Worth.

“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Fort Worth.

“Civilianization” or “civilianize” means authorized uses of non-civil service personnel, as set out
in Article 21.

“Commission” means the Fire Fighters and Police Officers Civil Service Commission of the City
of Fort Worth.

“Department” means the Police Department of the City of Fort Worth.

“Dispute” means for purposes of Article 8 any and all disputes related to the interpretation of this
Agreement between the Association and the City.

“Executive Board” means the members of the Association who are duly elected or appointed and
serve as members of the Executive Board of the organization pursuant to the Constitution and
By-laws of the Association.

“Holiday Leave” means up to 8 hours of leave, as set out in Article 19.

“Holiday Pay” means up to 8 hours of compensation, as set out in Article 19.
“Holiday Premium Pay” means compensation paid to an Officer for work performed on a
holiday, as set out in Article 19.

“Meet and Confer Statute” means Subchapter | of Chapter 143 of the TLGC, Section 143.301-
143.313.

“Member” means a member of the Association.

~Member of the bargaining unit” means a sworn Police Officer covered by the provisions of
Subchapter I of Chapter 143 of the TLGC, except as modified in Article 1 of this Agreement.

“Officer” means a sworn Police Officer commissioned and employed in the City of Fort Worth
Police Department who is covered by this Agreement pursuant to Subchapter I of Chapter 143 of
the TLGC.

~Party” or “Parties” means the City of Fort Worth and the Fort Worth Police Officers!
Association.

“Personnel Rules and Regulations” or “PRRs” means those rules and regulations adopted by the
City to govern many of the aspects of the working conditions, pay, and benefits for City
employees, including Officers who are subject to this Agreement.

“Regular rate of pay” means the same as “regular rate of pay” as defined and used in the Fair
Labor Standards Act, 29 USC Section 201, et seq., as revised.

“Strike” means, whether done in concert or individually, a failure to report for duty, the willful
absence from one's position, the stoppage of work, or the abstinence in whole or in part from the
full, faithful, and proper performance of the duties of employment (including, but not limited to,
"slowdowns," "sickouts," and the intentional failure to make arrests), for the purpose of and/or to
have the effect of inducing, influencing, or coercing a change in the conditions, compensation,
rights, privileges, or obligations of employment.

“Supersede” means to the extent that any provision of this Article conflicts with or changes
Chapter 143 or any other statute, executive order, local ordinance, or rule adopted by the City
including a personnel board, or Civil Service Commission, this Agreement shall preempt such
provisions, as authorized by Section 143.307 of the TLGC.

“TLGC” means Texas Local Government Code.
ARTICLE 3
ASSOCIATION RIGHTS

Section 1. Payroll Deductions.

A. The City shall deduct bi-weekly an amount from the pay of each individual Officer who
has voluntarily authorized such deduction for remittance to the Association. After execution of
this Agreement, Officers who wish to join the Association, Black Police Officers Association,
Latino Police Officers Association, Texas Municipal Police Association or Combined Law
Enforcement Associations of Texas (collectively “designated organizations”) will complete and
sign the appropriate City form to authorize the bi-weekly deduction amount. The Association
and designated organizations may change the amount of the deduction with thirty (30) Calendar
Days notice to the City in writing. The City shall notify the Association and designated
organizations in writing regarding all Officers who have authorized automatic payroll deductions
for the Association and designated organizations not later than ten (10) Business Days following
the end of the pay period following the authorized deduction. The City will remit deducted
amounts directly to the Association and designated organizations unless and until such payroll
deductions are modified or revoked by the affected Officer. The City will notify the Association
and designated organizations in writing regarding any such revocations or modifications of any
payroll deductions related to the Association or designated organization. The City will make a
reasonable effort to provide the Association and designated organizations with detail on the
amount of the deduction taken from each Officer.

During the term of this Agreement, automatic payroll deductions and remittance of dues
will be permitted for the Association and designated organizations only. Officers who are
members of the Association or designated organizations on the date this Agreement is ratified by
the members of the Association may continue to utilize automatic payroll deductions, as in the
past. Officers who are having dues deducted as of the date this Agreement is ratified will not be
required to submit new dues deduction forms. After that date, an Officer seeking to become a
new member in a designated organization and to pay dues to that organization by automatic
payroll deductions must join the Association in order to utilize automatic payroll deductions for
the payment of such dues.

B. Any individual member of the bargaining unit wishing to voluntarily withdraw
authorization for deductions must personally sign the appropriate form as required by the City.

Cc. All amounts deducted pursuant to this Article shall be paid to the legally
designated representative of the Association or designated organization in accordance with the
procedures and costs established by the City’s Chief Financial Officer or designee. The current
cost structure of $.05 per deduction shall be maintained until such time as the cost is changed to
reflect a more accurate assessment of cost. The City’s Chief Financial Officer or designee has
the sole discretion to establish charges for deductions. The cost of deductions is subject to
annual review. The actual cost shall not exceed $.10 per deduction for the duration of this
Agreement. The cost per deduction shall be no more than the cost applied to other employee
associations.
Dz. The Association shall defend the City and hold the City harmless against any and
all claims, demands, suits or other forms of legal action that may arise out of, or by reason of,
any actions taken by the City, or any employee of the City in complying with provisions of this
Article. The Association and the City shall jointly select and direct counsel retained for such
defense, and the Association shall further assist and cooperate with the City during said defense.

Section 2. Association Access to Premises.

Subject to reasonable advance notice from the Association and approval from the Chief
or the Chiefs designee, the Association may be permitted reasonable access to the premises of
the Department for the purpose of administering this Agreement, including but not limited to roll
calls, in-service training and the police academy. Such visits shall be limited to the purpose for
which approval was granted and shall be conducted in a manner that does not interfere with the
functions of the Department.

Section 3. Communications.

A. Subject to the Fort Worth Police Department General Orders, the City’s
Administrative Regulations (particularly Administrative Regulation regarding “Electronic
Communications Use Policy”), and the applicable provisions of this Agreement, the Association
may utilize pre-approved electronic communications (“E-mail”) to communicate with members
of the bargaining unit regarding matters of general interest to members of the bargaining unit in
accordance with the following restrictions and limitations:

(1) Prior to any distribution(s), all Association E-mail communications shall be
approved, at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance, by the Chief or the Chief's designee.
The decision of the Chief or the Chief’s designee to approve or disapprove an E-mail
communication shall be final and binding and shall not be subject to dispute resolution
procedures. However, the Association may ask the City Manager or the City Manager’s
designee to review any alleged patterns of repeated disapprovals which the Association
contends unreasonably restricts communications with its members relating to subjects
authorized by this Agreement.

(2) If the E-mail is deemed inappropriate for general distribution, the Chief's
designee will respond to the Association representative with an explanation or suggestion

for change.
B. Association E-mail communications shall relate solely to the following
subjects:

ql) Recreation and Social Affairs of the Association.

(2) Association Meetings.

(3) Association Elections.

(4) Reports of Association Committees,

(5) Rulings or policies of the State or National Association, without added
commentary.
(6) Legislative Enactments and Judicial Decisions Affecting Public Employee Labor
Relations, without added commentary.

Cc. E-mail communications shall not contain any political commentary, any solicitation for
membership in, or financial contributions to, any labor organization, special interest
organization, or political action organization, or any derogatory or offensive propaganda or
commentary which reflects negatively upon the City, its officials, its employees, City employee
associations or groups, or upon citizens of the City. On a case-by-case basis, the Chief or
Chief's designee may consider requests from individual Officers for approval to distribute E-
mail communications regarding solicitations for Officers (or their families) needing financial
assistance or other forms of assistance.
ARTICLE 4
TIME OFF FOR ASSOCIATION BUSINESS

Section 1. Association Business Leave Pool.

A. Each year at the beginning of the first pay period of the calendar year, the City
will allocate 6000 hours of equivalent work-time hours to be utilized as Association Business
Leave (“ABL”), and allocated to an agreed Association Business Leave Pool (“ABLP”). Each
year at the end of the last pay period of the calendar year during this Agreement, unused ABL
will carry over and must be used prior to the end of the next payroll year. All allocations must
be used on a first-in, first-out basis.

B. Notwithstanding Sections 142.0013(b) and (d) and 143.3015(i) of the TLGC, the
vacation leave accrual for each Officer will be reduced by three (3) hours annually, at the
beginning of the first pay period of the calendar year. A comparison of the current vacation
accrual rates and the new vacation accrual rates which will apply under this Agreement is
provided in Appendix B.

c. The ABLP may be utilized starting at the beginning of the first pay period of the
calendar year. The Association shall be allowed to debit the ABLP on an hour-for-hour basis,
during the calendar year when the Association Board members and/or members of the
Association’s Meet and Confer negotiating team are required to engage in Association business
activities. ABL is only available for Association Board members, Association Meet and Confer
negotiating team members, Peer Representatives, and the President unless an exception is
granted by the Chief. The Association will inform the Chief and the Civil Service Director of the
names of these members so that use of ABL can be permitted in the City’s Human Resource
Information System. If the Chief declares an emergency, he or she may order the Association
President or any Association Officers on ABL to report to work for the duration of the
emergency.

Dz. The Association may request the use of ABL for Association business activities
upon five (5) business days advance written notification to and approval by the Chief. Regular
Association business activities are defined as time spent: (a) representing members at
disciplinary hearings (to the extent permitted by law or allowed by Department policy) or
grievance meetings; (b) preparing for and attending formally scheduled Meet and Confer
negotiating sessions with the City; (c) administering the terms of this Agreement; (d) attending
meetings of the Association’s Executive Board; (e) attending regular business meetings of the
Association; or (f) attending other Association meetings, training programs, seminars,
workshops, conferences, or events.
E. ABL is not considered City work time and may not be used to accrue compensatory
time, shift differential pay, holiday premium pay or holiday leave time. ABL hours will not
count as hours worked for the purpose of calculating overtime, except when: (1) ABL hours are
used by an Association negotiating team member due to his or her attendance at a formally
scheduled Association Meet and Confer negotiating session with the City; (2) ABL hours are
used by an Association team member to attend official Association preparation meetings in
advance of a formally scheduled Association Meet and Confer negotiating session with the City,
or (3) an exception is granted by the Chief.

F. Even though ABL hours are not considered as hours worked for other purposes,
ABL hours shall count towards daily and weekly limits on total hours worked. Except in the
event of a declared emergency or when necessary to complete a call at the end of the workday,
an Officer using ABL under this Article shall not be required to work such additional hours for
the City that would exceed the Department’s fourteen (14) hour daily restriction on the total of
hours worked and secondary employment.

G. ABL used shall be considered creditable service time for the accrual of benefits or
other requirements based on years of creditable service.

Section 2. Leave for Association President.

A. For the purpose of filing and maintaining his or her time and attendance reports,
the Association President shall be placed on special assignment and released on ABL. The
President must use 2080 hours of ABL per payroll year unless otherwise approved by the Chief
or the Chief's designee. However, ABL shall not be used if the President is under a suspension
without pay. The President’s ABL will be deducted from the ABLP at the beginning of each
payroll year to cover the President’s time from the first pay period through the last pay period of
each fiscal year covered by this contract. The 2080 hours of ABL for the President will be
deducted at a rate of 1.25 hours for each one (1) hour of time allocated for the President's leave,
for a total of 2600 hours deducted from the ABLP at the beginning of the payroll year. The
additional .25 of an hour will cover the additional cost to the City for the President’s retirement,
Medicare, health insurance and other operating costs associated with being a City employee.

B. While on ABL, the President will continue to accrue his or her usual vacation,
sick leave, personal holiday and family leave. Any leave used by the President that is not ABL
shall be charged against his or her available vacation, sick leave, accrued holiday, personal
holiday, compensatory time, or family leave balances as appropriate. All leave balances are
subject to year-end maximums (use or lose). Personal holiday or accrued holiday will not count
as time worked. The President will maintain a record of leave the President uses that is not ABL.
At the end of each payroll year, the hours of leave used by the President that are not ABL hours
will be credited to the ABLP at the rate of 1.25 hours for each hour of such leave used by the
President.
Cc. No overtime, compensatory time, shift differential, holiday premium pay, or
holiday accrual shall be accrued or paid while the President is on ABL except, with respect to
overtime and compensatory time, when the President is recalled to duty by the Chief and
required to labor in excess of the normal forty (40) hour week. The Chief retains the right to
recall the President to duty during an emergency or special event involving overriding need for
the protection of the citizens of Fort Worth. If the President is recalled to such duty, the City
shall credit hours worked by the President to the ABLP at the rate of 1.25 hours for each hour
worked.

D. ABL shall not be treated as a break in service, and the President shall not lose
seniority, promotional opportunity, sick leave, vacation (subject to the City’s vacation
accumulation restrictions), retirement or any other benefits, including mandatory Texas
Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education (“TCLEOSE”) training,
while on such leave. While on ABL, the President will retain the privileges of his or her
employment and shall be maintained by the Department as a Commissioned Peace Officer in the
State and a classified Civil Service Employee of the City of Fort Worth.

Section 3. Association Negotiating Team.

The Association’s negotiations team shall consist of a Chief Negotiator and no more than five (5)
other members. Additional team members may be present, but no more than eight (8) individuals
total on the Association’s team will be eligible for productive time status during any scheduled
meetings. Each team shall advise the other of the name and position of the individual it intends to
designate as a negotiating team member. Either team may change the members of its negotiating
team by written or electronic notification to the other team.

Section 4. Association Board of Directors.

Within thirty (30) Business Days after the execution of this Agreement, the Association
shall notify the Chief in writing as to the names of the Association’s Board of Directors. The
Association shall thereafter promptly notify the Chief of any change in the composition of its
Board of Directors. To the extent that any designated member(s) of the Association’s Board of
Directors is otherwise scheduled to work, and upon five (5) Business Days advance written
notification to and approval by the Chief, the member shall be permitted to attend the monthly
Association membership meeting and the regularly scheduled Association Board meetings and,
upon 24-hour notice, any specially called Board meetings. All time in such activities will be
deducted from the ABLP.

Section 5. Time Off Without Pay.

The Chief will consider requests for additional time off without pay to attend to other
Association business.
ARTICLE 5
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Section 1. Except as provided for by State or Federal law or as expressly modified,
delegated, or abridged by the provisions of this Agreement, the City shall retain the sole,
exclusive, and vested right and prerogative to manage the Department and the workforce in the
Department in all respects, including, but not limited to: the right to hire, train, promote, demote,
discipline, suspend, discharge, assign, transfer, retain, or lay off employees; the right to establish,
eliminate, or modify the qualifications and minimum requirements for hiring, training,
promotions, transfers, and job assignments; the right to establish, eliminate, classify, reclassify,
or modify the number and types of positions and job classifications; the right to assign and direct
the work of Officers, including the scheduling and assignment of duties, responsibilities, and
hours of work; the right to establish, eliminate, or modify the methods, processes, means, and
personnel by which operations are to be carried out; the right to establish, eliminate, modify,
review, and enforce rules and standards governing job performance, personal conduct and
appearance, uniforms and equipment, safety, training, education, attendance, discipline, and
efficiency; the right to establish, abolish, or modify processes and procedures for investigating
and reviewing Officer conduct and complaints relating to that conduct; and the right to determine
the wages, hours of work, benefits, and working conditions of the Officers in the Department.

Section 2. Except as provided for by State or Federal Law, or as expressly modified,
delegated, or abridged by the provisions of this Agreement, the exclusive rights and prerogatives
of management not expressly mentioned or described in this Article are nevertheless retained by
the City and are not to be interpreted as having been diminished, waived, or ceded in any respect.
If this Agreement does not, by its terms, expressly and specifically restrict, modify, or abridge a
particular right or prerogative of management, then the City retains such right or prerogative of
management, solely and exclusively subject to State or Federal law. Moreover, the City’s
retained rights and prerogatives of management shall not be restricted, diminished, waived, or
ceded by any purported past practice, purported condonation or ratification of prior acts of
employees, or by prior arbitration decisions or civil service hearing decisions.

Section 3. To the extent the City’s vested and exclusive rights and prerogatives of
management described or enumerated in this Article or in other provisions of this Agreement
differ from the provisions of any federal or state statutes, including Chapters 142 and 143 of the
TLGC, the provisions of this Agreement shall supersede and preempt those conflicting
provisions of the TLGC or other statutes, as provided in § 143.307 of the TLGC.

13
ARTICLE 6
NO STRIKE, NO LOCK-OUT

Section 1. The City agrees that it will not lock out any Officer.

Section 2. The Association agrees that neither it nor any of the Officers will permit,
sanction, call, encourage, support, acquiesce or engage in any strike; sit-down; slow-down;
speed-up; sick-out; sympathy strike; picket; or any other work stoppage or interference with the
operation of the City for any reason.

Section 3. It is expressly understood and agreed that the refusal or concerted failure by any
Officer to cross or work behind the picket line of any association, union or other organization
shall constitute a violation of this Agreement. It is likewise understood and agreed that the
refusal or failure of any Officer to faithfully and impartially to enforce the laws of the State of
Texas and the ordinances of the City at the site of or in connection with any labor dispute shall
constitute a violation of this Agreement.

Section 4. Any Officer who participates in any action prohibited by this Article may be
discharged, suspended, demoted and/or otherwise disciplined, at the option of the City. This
Section shall be cumulative of any other rights the City may have by statute, at common-law or
in equity against the Association and/or the Officer.
ARTICLE 7
DISCIPLINARY ACTION

Section 1. Investigations

The Parties agree that TLGC § 143.312(f) shall be superseded as follows: A person may
not be assigned to conduct an administrative investigation or a chain-of-command investigation
if the person is the complainant, the ultimate decision-maker regarding disciplinary action, or a
person who has any personal involvement regarding the alleged misconduct. Provided, however,
that an investigator who discovers additional violations during the course of an administrative
investigation or a chain-of-command investigation may be the reporting party on those violations
and may investigate those violations. An Officer who is the subject of an administrative
investigation has the right to inquire and, on inquiry, to be informed of the identities of each
investigator participating in an interrogation of the Officer.

Section 2. Rights of an Officer who is the Subject of an Administrative Investigation.

A. The term “administrative investigation” as used in this Article means an investigation
conducted by the Internal Affairs Section. This Section only applies to Officers who are the
subject of an administrative investigation conducted by the Internal Affairs Section that could
result in disciplinary action. “Disciplinary Action” means suspension, demotion, or indefinite
suspension. Section 143.312 (b)(5S) is preempted and does not apply.

1. This section does not apply to criminal investigations.

2. This section does not apply to any investigations conducted by the Major Case
Unit, the Special Investigations Section, or an involved officer’s chain of command.

3. This section does not apply to Officers who are witnesses for an administrative
investigation.
4. If an investigation conducted by the Major Case Unit leads to the discovery of

possible misconduct that could result in disciplinary action, that investigation, and all of
the products of that investigation, shall be turned over to Internal Affairs, which will
investigate the possible misconduct pursuant to this Section. When the Major Case Unit
turns over the products of its investigation to Internal Affairs, this will not include any
interview of the involved Officer. Any interview of the involved Officer will be
conducted by Internal Affairs pursuant to this Section.

B. An officer who is the subject of an administrative investigation shall be informed of the
general nature of the investigation forty-eight hours prior to being formally interviewed, except
as provided with situations involving exigent circumstances, (Section 2(F)(4)(j)). A Personnel
Complaint form signed by the complaining’ or reporting party which contains a general
explanation of the allegations shall be served to the officer and shall be considered adequate
notification to the officer regarding the. nature of the investigation, if served forty-eight (48)
hours prior to the interview.
lL. An “officer who is the subject of an administrative investigation” who may also
be referred to herein as the “involved officer” is the person who is the subject of an
administrative investigation resulting from a complaint of misconduct received from any source.

2. A “complaining party” is a person making a complaint that he or she was harmed
by the officer’s alleged misconduct. Section 143.312 (b)(1) is preempted and does not apply.

3. A “reporting party” is a person who is a witness or third party source of
information regarding alleged misconduct, or a member of the Department who becomes aware
of misconduct through personal observation. If the Department has initiated the complaint on the
basis of reported information, a supervisor is a reporting party for the misconduct complaint.

4. An investigator who discovers additional violations during the course of an
investigation may be the complainant or reporting party on those violations and may investigate
those violations.

5. A “Personnel Complaint Form” is a form used by the Department to document
allegations of misconduct by Department employees.

6. A “Peer Representative” is a trained member of the bargaining unit, who is not an
Association Board Member that may act as a representative for purposes of this Section.

7. An “Association Representative” is an Association Board Member who acts as a
representative for purposes of this Section.

Cc. An interview of an officer who is the subject of an administrative investigation shall take
place at a location designated by the investigator. Whenever practical the interview shall take
place during the officer’s normal duty hours. The interview may be conducted at the officer's
residence unless the officer objects, in which event the interview shall be reconvened at another
location designated by the investigator. The officer’s objection to be interviewed at their
residence may not be used against the officer in any manner.

D. Recording devices.

1. Investigators may record all interviews or conversations conducted in the course
of administrative investigations, without prior notice to the officer who is the subject of the
investigation.

2. The officer who is the subject of the investigation, and their Association or Peer
Representative, if any, are prohibited from recording an interview or a conversation with an
investigator.

3. Upon completion of the interview, the Officer and their Association or Peer
Representative may schedule a time with the investigator to obtain a recorded copy of the
interview. The Officer shall supply the investigator with any necessary data storage device at
their own expense to complete the copy and transfer to the officer.

4, The Officer shall not release any recording collected during the course of the
investigation to anyone other than their Association or Peer Representative and the officer’s legal
counsel.

E. Confidentiality.

The Officer shall be required to execute a confidentiality agreement. Nothing in this
Section shall modify the Chiefs ability to order Peer Representatives or Association
Representatives to keep confidential all of the information discussed during the interview of the
involved officer and anything he or she learns in the course of the investigation.

F. During an administrative investigatory interview, the following procedures shall apply:

1. This subsection does not apply to an on-the-scene investigation as set out in
TLCG 143.312(g).

2. An officer who is the subject of an administrative investigation shall be informed
of the rank and name of the assigned investigator and the identity of all persons present during
the interview.

3. Except in exigent circumstances where the seriousness of the complaint warrants
an extended interview or when the time to impose disciplinary action will expire within sixty
calendar days, an officer shall not be required to submit to any single interview for longer than
six (6) hours. Interview sessions may be held on multiple or consecutive days until the interview
process is completed.

4. An officer who is the subject of an administrative investigation has the right to
have an Association or Peer Representative present during an administrative interview. The
officer cannot be punished for making a request for representation.

a. The Association or Peer Representative may not be an officer who is
related to the officer under investigation or a witness to the incident being
investigated. The Association or Peer Representative may not speak, interrupt, or
disrupt the interview in any manner. This includes but is not limited to making
comments, using signs or signals, or making noises which, intentionally or
unintentionally, disrupt the interview, such as sighing, tapping, or repeated
coughing. If the Association or Peer Representative disrupts the interview in any
manner except to make a reasonable request for a break, the investigator may
exclude the Representative from the interview room and continue the interview
without the Representative with the approval of the investigator’s supervisor or
designated supervisor.

17
b. The Association shall maintain a monthly list of ten (10) total Association
and/or Peer Representatives that will be provided to the Chief's office seven (7)
business days before the start of the next month. Individuals on the monthly list
will be on-call during that month to act as a Representative as outlined in this
Section. If an officer who is the subject of an administrative investigation chooses
to be represented by an Association or Peer Representative, the officer must select
a person from the monthly list. The monthly list may be modified by the
Association if the Chief's office is provided with notice fourteen (14) business
days in advance.

c. A Peer Representative will be allowed to use ABL pursuant to Article 4.
An Association or Peer Representative must also obtain prior approval from their
Captain or designee before leaving their assigned duties. Any time spent by an
Association or Peer Representative assisting an officer will not be considered City
work time and shall not be counted as hours worked for the purpose of calculating
overtime unless an exception is granted by the Chief or designee, in advance of
the representative rendering assistance.

d. The Association or Peer Representative does not have a privilege for
representation and advice to an officer in an administrative investigation. This
provision is included to ensure that Officers who are the subject of an
administrative investigation are informed of the process, as well as their duties
and rights under this Agreement and Department Policy. There is no privilege to
protect statements or disclosures to the Officers’ representative in any criminal
matter. It is the expectation of the parties that, in an administrative investigation,
the Department will generally not inquire of the discussions, explanations, and
advice given to the Officers who are the subject of an administrative
investigation, but each Officer of the FWPD is at all times obligated to follow
Department rules and regulations. In appropriate cases the Officers’ representative
may be interviewed or required to testify about statements and admissions made
by the officer who is the subject of an administrative investigation, or other
knowledge or information that the representative has obtained about the charged
misconduct.

e. At a minimum of two hours prior to the scheduled interview, the involved
officer must inform the investigator whether an Association or Peer
Representative will be present during the interview. If so, the name of the
representative must be given to the investigator. Failure to give this notice may
result in the representative not being allowed to be present in the interview with
the approval of the investigator’s supervisor or designated supervisor.

f. The Association or Peer Representative must arrive at the designated
location for the interview and have concluded the consultation with the involved
officer by the scheduled start time of the interview.
g If the Association or Peer Representative is unavoidably delayed, such as
having to complete a dispatched call for service or some important work task, the
representative must contact the investigator by telephone at least one hour in
advance of the scheduled start time of the interview. The investigator has the
option of delaying the interview or rescheduling it with the approval of the
investigator’s supervisor or designated supervisor.

h, If the Association or Peer Representative fails to contact the investigator
as outlined above and good cause for failing to make timely contact is not
provided prior to the scheduled start time for the interview, the investigator may,
with the approval of the investigator's supervisor or designated supervisor,
commence the interview with the officer without the presence of the
representative. The involved officer may not make another request for
representation for that particular interview.

i. If for any reason a representative is not able to attend the interview and the
interview was set to take place within forty-eight (48) hours of the officer being
served with notice of the charges, the involved officer may elect to withdraw his
or her 48-hour waiver so that the interview will be rescheduled for a later time.
Any information obtained prior to the officer’s withdrawal of a 48 hour waiver
may be used against the officer in the investigation.

j. If an exigent circumstance exists that necessitates the immediate interview
of an officer without waiting forty-eight (48) hours, and the officer makes a
request for representation, the investigator shall give the officer an opportunity to
immediately contact an Association or Peer Representative. The Association or
Peer Representative shall be provided two hours from the time of the request for
representation to arrive at the designated location of the interview and consult
with the involved officer. If the Association or Peer Representative does not
respond and complete the consultation within the two hour time frame, the
investigator may conduct the interview without a Representative; and the officer
may not make another request for representation for that particular interview.

5. During the interview, time shall be provided for personal necessities, meals,
telephone calls, and rest periods as deemed necessary and reasonable by the investigator.

6. The officer under investigation shall not be subjected to any offensive language,
nor shall the officer be threatened with transfer, dismissal, or other disciplinary punishment. No
promise of reward shall be made as an inducement to answering questions. Nothing herein is to
be construed so as to prohibit the investigating officer from informing the officer under
investigation that the misconduct being investigated could result in disciplinary action or
termination of employment, or from informing the officer that he or she can be disciplined for
untruthfulness during the investigation.

G. All video recordings, audio recordings, digital files, written statements, other documents,
photographs, GPS/AVL readings, Taser readouts, and any other type of information collected
during the course of an administrative investigation shall remain in the custody of the Internal
Affairs Section.

1. The officer under investigation shall be allowed to review, but not copy verbatim,
photocopy or photograph, any information collected during the course of an administrative
investigation; however, the investigator shall determine at what point in the investigation the
officer shall be allowed this review.

2. Upon request, the officer under an administrative investigation shall be given an
exact copy of the officer's own written statement, however, the officer may not release a copy of
his or her statement to any person, nor may the officer discuss details of the case with any party,
with the exception of his or her Association or Peer Representative. and the officer’s legal
counsel.

H. In investigations where the officer is subject to a companion or concurrent criminal
investigation, the Department shall ensure that any statement of the officer who is the subject of
the investigation, which is gathered as a part of the administrative investigation, shall not be
released to the entity conducting the criminal investigation except as required by a subpoena or
required to be disclosed by law or Court decision. No criminal investigator shall be allowed to
participate in an administrative investigation or interview.

L The refusal by an officer to answer pertinent questions concerning any administrative
matter may result in disciplinary action or termination of employment.

J. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the Chief to conduct
administrative investigations, nor shall anything in this section be construed to relieve the officer
under investigation of the duty to adhere to the rules, regulations, and policies of the Fort Worth
Police Department and the City of Fort Worth, or to provide thorough, complete, and truthful
responses to requests for verbal or written statements and written interrogatories in connection
with an administrative investigation.

K. The procedures and provisions above are in addition to Section 143.312 (c)-(i). Sections
143.312 (j), (k) and (1) are preempted and do not apply.

L. If an Officer in a disciplinary appeal proves that: (1) the Chief or his or her
representatives, after objection by the involved Officer or their Association or Peer
Representative, intentionally or knowingly failed to comply with the provisions of Section 2 of
this Article; (2) the violation adversely affected the involved Officer’s substantive rights
provided in that same section; and (3) the involved Officer proves that the disciplinary outcome
or punishment would have been different, if not for the alleged violation, the hearing examiner
may make such determinations as may be necessary to achieve substantial justice and effectuate
the provisions of this Article. This rule does not automatically require exclusion of any
evidence. The involved Officer shall have the burden of proof on this issue, even though the
City has the burden of proof on the disciplinary violation and reasonableness of punishment. An
involved officer or their Association or Peer Representative must give written notice to the Chief
or his or her representatives of an alleged violation of Section 2 of this Article within 48 hours
after the involved Officer or their Association or Peer Representative knew, or should have
known, of the alleged violation. The notice must specify the sub-section violated and the facts
underlying the alleged violation. If the involved Officer or their Association or Peer
Representative does not provide timely notice of an alleged violation, the involved Officer
cannot raise the issue in any manner during a disciplinary appeal, and the hearing examiner
cannot consider the alleged violation in making his or her decision in the appeal. If the City
takes appropriate actions which are deemed necessary to correct, reverse or cure the involved
Officer's timely asserted alleged violation, the involved Officer cannot raise the issue in any
manner during a disciplinary appeal, and the hearing examiner cannot consider the alleged
violation in making his or her decision in the appeal.

Section 3. Chain of Command Investigations

A. A “complaining party” is a person making a complaint that he or she was harmed by the
officer’s alleged misconduct. Section 143.312 (b)(1) is preempted and does not apply.

B. Sections 4, 5 and 6 of this Article shall apply to procedures subsequent to chain of
command investigations.

Cc. TLGC Section 143.312 shall otherwise apply to chain of command investigations.
Section 4. Disciplinary Suspensions

The Chief or the Chief's designee shall not be required to deliver in person a written
statement of suspension to the Officer being suspended. The written statement of suspension
shall be deemed to have been delivered upon the Officer when the written statement of
suspension (1) is hand-delivered to the suspended Officer by the Chief, the Chief's designee, or
by a designated messenger; or (2) is delivered to an attorney representing the suspended Officer.
A written statement is deemed delivered to the Officer’s attorney by handing it to the attorney or
by leaving it with another attorney in the attorney’s office or a member of the attorney’s staff, or
by delivering it by any other means that the attorney consented to in writing. If the City attempts
in good faith to deliver the written statement as provided herein, but such attempts are
unsuccessful, the written statement may be mailed by certified mail to the last known address of
the suspended Officer. Service is complete upon mailing, and the suspension shall be
automatically appealed to an independent hearing examiner.

Section 5. Procedures After Felony Indictment or Misdemeanor Complaint

The Parties agree that TLGC § 143.056 shall be superseded as follows:
A. If an Officer is indicted for a felony or officially charged with the commission of a
Class A or B misdemeanor, the Chief may temporarily suspend the person with or without pay

for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) calendar days after the date of final disposition of the
specified felony indictment or misdemeanor complaint.

21
B. The Chief shall notify the suspended Officer in writing that the person is being
temporarily suspended for a specific period with or without pay and that the temporary
suspension is not intended to reflect an opinion on the merits of the indictment or complaint.

Cc. If the action directly related to the felony indictment or misdemeanor complaint
occurred or was discovered on or after the 180th day before the date of the indictment or
complaint, the Chief may, within forty-five (45) calendar days after the date of final disposition
of the indictment or complaint, bring a charge against the Officer for a violation of civil service
tules.

Dz. An Officer indicted for a felony or officially charged with the commission of a Class A
or B misdemeanor who has also been charged by the Chief with civil service violations directly
related to the indictment or complaint may delay the civil service hearing for not more than thirty
(30) calendar days after the date of the final disposition of the indictment or complaint.

E. If the Chief temporarily suspends an Officer under this section and the Officer is not
found guilty of the indictment or complaint in a court of competent jurisdiction, the Officer may
appeal to the Commission or to a hearing examiner for recovery of back pay. The Commission or
hearing examiner may award all or part of the back pay or reject the appeal; provided, however,
that if an Officer has pleaded guilty or received probation or deferred adjudication in connection
with another or lesser included offense in order to obtain dismissal of the felony or Class A or B
misdemeanor, the Officer may not receive more than 180 days of back pay in such an appeal.

F, Acquittal or dismissal of an indictment or a complaint does not mean that an Officer
has not violated civil service rules and does not negate the charges that may have been or may be
brought against the Officer by the Chief.

G. Final conviction of a felony shall terminate the employment of an Officer without right
of appeal, and conviction of a Class A or B misdemeanor may be cause for disciplinary action or
indefinite suspension.

H. The Chief may order an indefinite suspension based on an act classified as a felony or a
Class A or B misdemeanor after the 180-day period following the date of the discovery of the act
by the Chief if the Chief considers delay to be necessary to protect a criminal investigation of the
person's conduct. If the Chief intends to order an indefinite suspension after the 180-day period,
the Chief must file with the attorney general a statement describing the criminal investigation
and its objectives within 180 calendar days after the date the act complained of occurred.

 

I. If an Officer is indicted for a felony or officially charged with the commission of a
Class A or B misdemeanor the Officer shall notify the Chief of the charge or indictment within
48 hours of any arrest related to the charge or indictment. Upon conviction, acquittal or dismissal
of a Class A or B misdemeanor or felony the Officer shall within 48 hours notify the Chief.

wu
wv
Section 6. Hearing Examiner List and Selection Process

A. An Officer who appeals a disciplinary action may elect to appeal to an independent third-
party Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner shall be selected pursuant to the procedure set
forth in this Section. Assistant Chiefs and Deputy Chiefs may appeal disciplinary actions
pursuant to this section only if the proposed discipline is: (1) a demotion to any rank below the
rank the Assistant Chief or Deputy Chief occupied when he or she was first appointed as an
Assistant Chief or Deputy Chief, or (2) a demotion to the rank the Assistant Chief or Deputy
Chief occupied when he or she was first appointed as an Assistant Chief or Deputy Chief, plus an
additional sanction, such as a suspension.

B. The Civil Service Director shall maintain a list of five (5) neutral Hearing Examiners
selected by mutual agreement of the City and the Association to serve as Hearing Examiners.
The City and the Association shall meet within thirty (30) calendar days after the execution of
this Agreement to select the Hearing Examiners that will be included on the list. The Hearing
Examiners-who are selected shall serve until December 31, 2013, unless removed or replaced
pursuant to this Section. Thereafter, the Hearing Examiners shall serve a one-year term and be
subject to re-appointment or removal by mutual agreement of the City and the Association;
provided, however, that the City and the Association may at any time remove and/or add agreed-
upon Hearing Examiners. If there is a vacancy, such as by resignation, death, or agreed-upon
removal, the City and the Association shall act promptly to select enough new Hearing
Examiners to ensure that the Hearing Examiner list contains not less than five active members.

Cc. Within ten (10) business days after the date an appeal is filed, the Officer and the Chief
through his or her attorney may agree on the selection of a Hearing Examiner from the list. If
agreement cannot be reached, the Civil Service Director or his or her designee shall select the
first Hearing Examiner on the list.

D. The Hearing Examiner list shall initially be in alphabetical order. After a Hearing
Examiner is selected, by agreement or otherwise, the Civil Service Director or designee shall
notify the Hearing Examiner of the selection. If the Hearing Examiner agrees to hear the appeal,
that person will be designated as the Hearing Examiner for that appeal, and his or her name shall
be moved to the bottom of the Hearing Examiner list. If that person does not agree to hear the
appeal, the Civil Service Director or designee shall select the next Hearing Examiner on the
Hearing Examiner list who is not in the process of considering whether to accept the assignment
of a different appeal, and the notice and designation process described above shall be followed.

E. This process shall apply to any appealable disciplinary action or back-pay appeal and to
all Officers covered by this Agreement, regardless of the Officer’s affiliation with or
membership in the Association or who will represent the Officer in the appeal. Thus, each time
an appeal is filed by an Officer in which the Officer elects to have the appeal heard by an
independent hearing examiner, a Hearing Examiner from the Hearing Examiner list shall be
selected to hear the appeal.
F. In the event the written statement of suspension is delivered by mail, the deadline by
which the Parties have to agree to a Hearing Examiner from the Hearing Examiner list will be
extended until ten (10) business days after the Officer’s actual receipt of the written statement.

G. The deadline by which the Officer and the Chief may agree upon a Hearing Examiner
from the Hearing Examiner list may be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties with notice
to the Civil Service Director or his or her designee.

Section 7. Preemption

It is expressly understood and agreed that all provisions of this Article shall preempt any
statute, Executive Order, local ordinance, City policy or rule, which is in conflict with or is
inconsistent with this Article and the procedures developed hereunder, including for example and
not by way of limitation, any contrary provisions of Texas Local Government Code Chapters
141, 142, and 143, including but not limited to Section 143.312, and Chapter 143, Subchapters
A, B, C and I, as amended, and Texas Government Code Sections 614.021, 614.022 and
614.023.
ARTICLE 8
DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCEDURE

Section 1. Scope of Procedure.

The City and the Association agree that the purpose of the dispute resolution procedure
contained within this Article (herein procedure) is to provide a just and equitable method for
resolving disagreements between the Parties regarding the interpretation of the provisions of this
Agreement. Only matters involving the interpretation, application, enforcement or alleged
violation of a specific provision of this Agreement shall be subject to this procedure.
Disciplinary matters shall be administered pursuant to Chapter 143, TLGC or as otherwise
provided in this Agreement, including Article 7 above, and are not subject to this procedure.

Section 2. Time Limits.

The Parties shall adhere to the time limits as set forth in this procedure. In the event the
Officer or Association fails to meet the time limits at any step of the procedure, the Dispute shall
be considered resolved and no further action shall be taken. Failure by the City to meet the time
limits at any step shall be considered an unsatisfactory response and shall automatically allow the
Dispute to proceed to the next step. Such time limits may be waived, however, by mutual
consent of the Parties in writing.

Section 3. Steps.

A Dispute within the scope of this procedure as defined in Section 1 above shall be
handled as follows:

Step 1. Within thirty (30) Calendar Days of the event or circumstance made the basis of
the Dispute, an Officer shall submit such Dispute in writing to the Association with a copy to the
Chief. The written description of the Dispute must contain: (1) a statement of the facts upon
which the Dispute is based; (2) the Article or provision of the Agreement that is alleged to have
been violated; (3) the remedy sought; and (4) signature of the individual requesting the
resolution. A determination of whether a Dispute exists shall be made by a Dispute Resolution
Committee appointed by the Association or by the Association Board of Directors, at the
discretion of the Association Board. The committee or the Association Board of Directors,
whichever is applicable, shall meet and render its decision in writing within thirty (30) Calendar
Days of the receipt of the written Dispute by the Officer. In the event that the committee or the
Association Board of Directors, whichever is applicable, decides that a Dispute exists, the
Association shall prepare a formal written grievance regarding the Dispute and proceed to Step 2
as the representative of the grievant. Nothing herein shall prohibit the City from challenging
whether a Dispute is timely.
The Association shall judge each grievance in a fair and equitable manner. In its sole
discretion, the Association shall determine whether the grievance is valid or not. The Association
may modify, revise, or amend the grievance if necessary to properly place the dispute in issue for
resolution. Only the Association has standing to initiate, pursue or settle a grievance under the
terms of this Agreement.

It is the intent of the Parties to attempt to resolve Disputes over the application,
interpretation and enforcement of the Agreement at the lowest level. Nothing herein shall prevent
the Association from meeting and conferring with the City, its designees, the Chief or his or her
designees in an attempt to resolve the alleged Dispute before the time limits in Step 1 expire.

Step 2. The Association’s written grievance may be emailed to the office of the Chief or
the Chief's designee at Police.Chief@FortWorthTexas.gov by 5 p.m. on the date the written
grievance is due. A hardcopy of the written grievance shall also be sent in regular mail or hand
delivered personally in writing to the office of the Chief or the Chief's designee. The Chief or the
Chief's designee shall have thirty (30) Calendar Days to act on the Dispute and render a decision
in writing. The Chief’s response may be emailed to the Association at admin@fwpoa.org by 5
p.m. on the date the written response is due. A hardcopy of the written response shall also be sent
in regular mail or hand delivered personally in writing to the Association’s offices.

If the Step 2 decision from the office of the Chief or Chief's designee contains an offer to
settle the dispute, the parties may have additional time to meet and confer at Step 2 as mutually
agreed in writing.

Step 3. If the Dispute is not resolved at Step 2, the Association shall submit its written
grievance to the City Manager and Civil Service Director within seven (7) Calendar Days from
the date that the Step 2 decision is received by the Association.

The City Manager shall review the matter and render a decision in writing within thirty
(30) Calendar Days. The Civil Service Director shall obtain the response from the City Manager
or the City Manager’s designee and inform the President of the Association of the response and
results within seven (7) Calendar Days of the decision of the City Manager or the City
Manager’s designee.

If the Dispute has not been settled at Step 3, the Parties shall have seven (7) Calendar
Days from the date the President of the Association is notified in writing of the Step 3 decision
of the City Manager or City Manager’s designee, in which to appeal the Dispute to arbitration for
adjustment. An appeal from the Association shall be submitted in writing to the Civil Service
Director.

A Dispute protesting action by the City Council or City Manager shall be initiated at Step
3 instead of Step 2.
Section 4. Class Dispute.

The Association may submit a class action Dispute at Step | on behalf of similarly
situated members of the bargaining unit within thirty (30) Calendar Days of the aggrieved
Officer’s actual or constructive knowledge of the occurrence or event made the basis of the
class-wide Dispute.

Section 5. Arbitration.

If a Dispute is submitted to arbitration as provided in Step 3 (above), the City and the
Association shall meet and confer within fourteen (14) Calendar Days regarding the selection of
an Arbitrator. If the Parties fail to agree upon an Arbitrator, a list of seven (7) qualified neutrals
shall be requested from the American Arbitration Association (“AAA”). Within fourteen (14)
Calendar Days from receipt of the AAA list of Arbitrators, the Association and the City shall
alternately strike names on the AAA list. The Arbitrator whose name was not struck shall be
asked to serve as the Arbitrator.

The conduct of the hearing shall be governed by the standard rules of the AAA. The
Parties, by mutual agreement, may request that the hearing be held in accordance with the
Expedited Labor Arbitration Rules.

Upon written request delivered at least seven (7) Calendar Days prior to the date of the
hearing, a Party to the proceeding shall provide to the opposing Party the names and addresses of
witnesses expected to be called at the hearing. In the absence of good or excusable cause, the
Arbitrator may exclude the testimony of a witness upon the failure of a Party to disclose such a
witness. The Parties, in writing, may request discovery from each other concerning the Dispute.
Should the opposing Party not agree to provide the requested information within seven (7)
Calendar Days of the request; the request shall be deemed denied. The requesting Party may then
apply to the Arbitrator, who shall order such discovery as is appropriate to the nature of the case,
consistent with, but not bound by, the rules of discovery in Texas civil cases. In considering the
application, the Arbitrator, shall consider the burden and expense of producing the information,
the need of the requesting Party, the amount of time available prior to the hearing, and such other
matters as he or she may deem material. In no event shall discovery be requested within seven
(7) Calendar Days prior to the hearing.

The Arbitrator shall not have the power to add to, amend, modify, or subtract from the
provisions of this Agreement in arriving at his or her decision on the issue or issues presented
and shall confine his or her decision to the interpretation of this Agreement. The Arbitrator shall
confine himself or herself to the precise issue or issues submitted for arbitration and shall have
no authority to determine any other issues not so submitted to him or her. The decision of the
Arbitrator shall be final and binding upon the City and the Association. Within thirty (30)
Calendar Days after conclusion of the hearing or the filing of briefs the Arbitrator shall issue a
written opinion and award with respect to the issues presented. A copy of the Arbitrator’s
opinion and award shall be mailed or delivered to the Association and the City’s representative.
It is specifically and expressly understood that a grievance under this Article that is
submitted, as its last step, to final and binding arbitration, constitutes an election of remedies and
a waiver of any and all rights by either Party, to litigate or otherwise contest the last answer
rendered through this grievance procedure in any court or other appeal forum, unless the
Arbitrator exceeds the scope of his or her jurisdiction or authority hereunder or the decision was
procured by fraud or other unlawful means, or is based upon a clear and manifest error of law.
In such event, a Court may set aside an award and require arbitration before another Arbitrator.

The City shall bear the expense of any witnesses called by the City. The Association shall
bear the expense of any witnesses called by the Association, which shall include the grievant(s),
Association Officers, and any supporting members not testifying as to matters within their
assigned official role or duty. If the Association calls an Officer as a witness to matters related
to the Officer’s duty, the Parties will coordinate to make the appearance possible on duty, and if
not possible or the City so elects, the City will pay the Officer in accordance with the policy on
Court time appearances. The City and the Association shall share equally the fees and expenses
of the Arbitrator. If a transcript of the proceedings is requested, then the Party requesting it shall
pay for such transcript, unless otherwise agreed to by the Parties.

28
ARTICLE 9
LABOR RELATIONS CONSULTATION PROCESS

The City and the Association, having recognized that communication between management and
employees is indispensable to the accomplishment of sound and harmonious labor relations shall
jointly maintain and support a Labor Relations Consultation process. In Article 1 of this
Agreement, the City has recognized the Association as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent
for all covered Officers pursuant to Subsection I of Chapter 143 of the TLGC, excluding the rank
of Chief of Police, assistant chief, deputy chief, reserve officers, police trainees and non-sworn
employees. Therefore, the Chief will not negotiate with individual representatives of other labor
organizations or committees composed of such representatives regarding wages, hours of work,
working conditions, and other terms and conditions of employment to which the City and
Association have agreed as described in this Agreement.

Nothing in this Agreement prohibits the Chief from creating advisory committees of covered
Officers from other labor organizations acting in an individual (non-representative) capacity and
nothing in this Agreement prohibits the Chief from creating any committees in the Chief's
command staff. It is understood and agreed that this provision is intended to prohibit Officers
from being appointed to a committee primarily because of their office or position in another
labor organization instead of their knowledge, experience, expertise or assignment which would
be beneficial to the work of the committee.

The Chief, or Chiefs designee, shall meet with the Association President and his or her

designated representatives, during each month, in order to discuss issues and working conditions
covered by this Agreement.

29
ARTICLE 10
WAGES

Subject to all the other provisions of this Agreement, the wages of the Officers covered
by this Agreement shall be paid, during the existence of this Agreement, in accordance with the
wage rates, terms, and conditions described in the structured pay plan described in Appendix C,
which is incorporated by reference.

In general terms, the pay plan provides for the following across the board increases: 0%
for Fiscal Year 2012-2013; 1% for Fiscal Year 2013-2014; 2% for Fiscal Year 2014-2015; and
1% for Fiscal Year 2015-2016, with a mid-year adjustment of 2% (Effective the pay period
which includes the date of April 1, 2016).

In addition, during the 2", 3 and 4" years of this Agreement, adjustments and
modifications will be made to the existing pay plan steps and step pay increases for which
covered Officers will be eligible, as described in Appendix C.

In summary, wages will be paid according to the following schedule:

FY 2012-2013: Effective the first pay period for FY 2012-2013; 0% across the
board + annual step pay increases under existing pay plan for those Officers
eligible on their applicable anniversary date.

FY 2013-2014: Effective the first pay period for FY 2013-2014; 1% across the
board + annual step pay increases for those Officers eligible on their applicable
anniversary date.

FY 2014-2015: Effective the first pay period for FY 2014-2015; 2% across the
board + annual step pay increases for those Officers eligible on their applicable
anniversary date.

FY 2015-2016: Effective the first pay period for FY 2015-2016; 1% across the
board + annual step pay increases for those Officers eligible on their applicable
anniversary date effective September 30, 2015 and a mid-year across the board
increase of 2% effective the pay period that includes the date of April 1, 2016.
ARTICLE 11
PROCEDURE FOR FILLING AND PROBATIONARY PERIOD FOR
BEGINNING POSITIONS IN THE FORT WORTH POLICE DEPARTMENT

Section 1. The entry-level hiring procedures and Minimum Standards listed in The City of
Fort Worth Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service Rules and Regulations (“Local
Rules”) will be used for hiring entry-level police officers when not in conflict with this Article.

Section 2. Subject to City Council review, approval, and oversight authority, the Civil
Service Commission (“Commission”) or the Civil Service Director acting as the Commission's
designee, shall maintain authority and jurisdiction over the entry-level hiring process as
described in this Article, including issues related to the enforcement, interpretation, or revision of
the entry-level recruitment and hiring process described in this Article. The Commission shall
approve any changes to the classification structure, entry-level hiring procedures, and Minimum
Standards in the Local Rules. During this Agreement, the City will first discuss with the
Association any changes to be recommended to the Commission relating to entry-level hiring
procedures or Minimum Standards in the Local Rules. The City Council shall establish the
number of positions in the Department and may approve, disapprove, or modify any changes to
the classification structure made by the Commission. For the limited purpose of interpreting this
Article, the provisions of Section 143.021 (a) and (b) of the TLGC will apply to the extent such
provisions are not modified or superseded by the provisions of this Agreement.

Section 3. All entry-level candidates for police officer shall be required to pass the City
authorized medical examination, drug screening and psychological examination to be considered
for employment as a police officer. Any candidate who fails to pass the medical examination or
psychological examination may appeal that result by following the procedures described in the
Local Rules, Section 6.27 (or successor or superseding Sections).

Section 4. Recruitment for police officer candidates shall be a cooperative effort between the
Department and the Human Resources Department. Recruitment methods shall be based on the
needs of the Department to maintain full staffing to the extent possible. In all cases, recruitment
efforts will be publicized and recruitment notices will be posted on the City’s Job Announcement
web page. Recruitment may be conducted on a continuous or periodic basis depending on the
staffing needs of the Department.

Section 5. Eligibility to become a police officer will be determined by a candidate’s ability
to meet the minimum standards established in the Local Rules. Candidates must meet all
minimum standards and requirements to be eligible for future licensing by the Commission on
Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education. A candidate must be between 21 years and
45 years of age by the date of the entry-level test required of that candidate.
Section 6. The selection of a candidate to be a police officer shall be based primarily upon
the candidate’s suitability to serve as a police officer, as determined by the Chief or the Chief's
designee. All testing and selection procedures shall be designed and intended to identify the most
suitable candidates for selection from those who apply and to exclude those candidates who are
deemed not likely to possess the characteristics and abilities to be successful in the performance
of police work. All candidates that are not hired under the Modified Hiring Process For Lateral
Entry Officers as described in Section 13 of this Article, shall be required to pass an entry-level
test intended and designed to measure the candidate’s suitability and ability to perform police
work. A passing score will be established, based on the psychometric characteristics of the test as
recommended by the test publisher. A candidate may be tested only once for a specific eligibility
list. Candidates may be tested at different times and in different locations as long as adequate test
security and test monitoring is used to insure the safety and fairness of the test. The same test
will be used to test all candidates for a specific eligibility list or academy class. Candidates who
have been honorably discharged from military service must provide proof of an honorable
discharge by presenting a DD 214 at the time of their application or at least twenty-four (24)
hours prior to taking an entry-level test. The candidate characteristics for which additional
points shall be added to a passing test score and the point values for such characteristics are as
follows:

Military Veteran 5 points
(with honorable discharge per DD 214)
Associate’s degree or 60+ hours of college credit 1 point
Bachelor’s degree (or higher) 3 points
Resident of Fort Worth for six months

or more at the time of their entry-level

test (includes college students, if

their primary residence is Fort Worth) 2 points

Additional points will be awarded only for the highest educational degree. Example: A
candidate with an Associate’s degree and a Bachelor’s degree will receive additional points for
the Bachelor’s degree only. All college credits and degrees must be from an accredited college or
university. Five (5) points is the maximum cumulative number of additional points which shall
be added to a candidate's passing test score for any combination of such characteristics.

Section 7. Candidates with passing test scores will be placed on an eligibility list in the order
of their overall eligibility scores (test score plus additional points). An eligibility list will be
divided into “stanines” based on the eligibility scores of candidates who pass the entry-level test.
A stanine is created by dividing the number of candidates with a passing score by nine (9). All
candidates within a stanine shall be considered to have an equivalent eligibility score.
Candidates with eligibility scores that span two stanines will be placed in the higher stanine.
More than one eligibility list may exist at any time. In the event of continuous recruitment, the
Department may request the closing of an eligibility list at any time for the purpose of processing
candidates from that list. New eligibility lists may be created while an active list is being
processed. The effective dates of an eligibility list may be set to coincide with the expiration of
an existing list or any other appropriate time period. Candidates may not be hired from an

32
eligibility list that is created after an existing active eligibility list has been established until the
existing list has been exhausted or has expired unless a Lateral Entry Officer (“LEO”) eligibility
list is created. A LEO eligibility list may be processed to provide candidates for a Fort Worth
Academy class prior to the processing of an existing eligibility list. An eligibility list may be
effective for a minimum of three (3) months and a maximum of eighteen (18) months, or until a
specified number of candidates for academy classes are selected from a list. The conditions that
will determine when an active list may be closed must be determined prior to the establishment
of the list. With the approval of the Commission, the Civil Service Director may close an
eligibility list and cancel all candidate processing if sufficient reason, as determined by the
Commission, exists to do so.

Section 8. Candidates will be referred by the Human Resources Department to the
Department by stanine. If more candidates exist in a stanine than can be processed or there are
more candidates than necessary to complete a class, the Department may request a specific
number of candidates and this number of candidates will be referred based on their rank order
within the appropriate stanine. The rank order of candidates having the same eligibility score will
be determined by a lottery. Each such candidate will draw a number from a pool of mixed
numbers randomly chosen for each testing site and testing time. Candidates drawing the lowest
lottery numbers will be assigned the highest rank order among those candidates with the same
eligibility score. Whenever the highest-ranking candidate(s) within a stanine possesses the same
eligibility score as the lowest-ranking candidate(s) in the next-higher stanine, the candidate(s) in
the lower stanine who possess the same eligibility score will be included in the higher stanine.

Section 9. The Department will determine those candidates who are most suitable to be hired
as police officers based on a structured and job-related selection process. The selection process
will include testing for physical ability, personal characteristics linked to the performance of
essential job functions, decision-making, communication skills, and interpersonal skills. The
Department may utilize interview boards, assessment exercises, written tests, polygraph
examinations, background reviews, personal references or other appropriate selection methods to
assess candidates as long as the methods have been reviewed by the Human Resources
Department and found to be objective and job-related and applied consistently in processing
candidates. Pass/fail standards or relative weighting standards may be established for the various
selection methods. A candidate must complete and pass each step in the entry-level hiring
process before being allowed to proceed to the next step in the process. Any candidate needing a
reasonable accommodation in order to complete a step in the process will be afforded an
opportunity to request that accommodation. A final review will be conducted by the Chief or the
Chief's designee who will make the final determination whether to hire a candidate. The Civil
Service Director or designee will review all selection and rejection reasons to insure consistency
and fairness in the selection process, and any corrections or errors not resolved by the Chief or
the Chief's designee shall be referred to the Commission for a decision. Any disagreement on the
hiring or rejection of a candidate between the Chief or the Chief’s designee and the Commission
will be resolved by the City Manager.

33
Section 10. All candidates within a stanine must be processed and either hired or rejected
before candidates from a lower stanine may be hired. In the event there is a delay in processing
candidates that could prevent the Department from the timely seating of an academy class, the
Civil Service Director may, upon written request and appropriate justification by the Chief or the
Chief's designee, allow the candidate(s) to be by-passed and candidates from lower stanines to
be hired. If an Academy class is filled from a stanine prior to processing all candidates from the
stanine, the remaining candidates in the stanine may be processed for hiring consideration and
placement in the next available class. If an eligibility list expires or is closed prior to the next
class, the Department may retain any candidate’s name that was processed from the last stanine
from which candidates were considered, for inclusion in the next available class. If all candidates
within the last stanine processed are either hired or rejected and those suitable for hiring are
retained for the next class, the Department may request this active eligibility list to be closed
prior to an established expiration date. The Department must provide the Commission with an
adequate reason to close an eligibility list prior to an expiration date.

Section 11. (a) All new hires and reappointed officers will serve a probationary period from
the date of hire until completion of Academy training and one year following being
commissioned as a Fort Worth police officer. In the event that a probationary employee is unable
to satisfactorily perform duties or training during the probationary period due to a temporary
physical or mental impairment, or condition, or temporary on duty injury, the Department may
either terminate the employee or suspend the probationary period (as of the date served) and
restart the probationary period when the person is capable of proceeding with the essential
functions and duties of the job and/or training. In the event that a probationary employee is
unable to satisfactorily perform duties or training during the probationary period due to
pregnancy, the Department may suspend the probationary period (as of the date served) and
restart the probationary period when the person is capable of proceeding with the essential
functions and duties of the job and/or training. This provision does not override or modify any
other rights or privileges of the officer independent of Chapter 143 of the TLGC. During the
probationary period, a probationary employee may be terminated without civil service appeal
rights. Upon completion of the probationary period, the employee will have full civil service
protection, except as modified or abridged by this Agreement.

(b) Leave for probationary police officers will be based upon length of continuous service from
date of hire. Probationary police officers will be eligible to use available sick leave after six
months of service from the date of hire. Probationary police officers will be eligible to use
available vacation and family leave after one year of service from the date of hire. Probationary
police officers who terminate after one year of service from the date of hire will be paid for any
accrued but unused vacation time as stated within the City of Fort Worth Personnel Rules and
Regulations.

Section 12. (a) The Chief may reappoint former City of Fort Worth Officers following the
reappointment policy, beginning with the provisions of 6.33 in Chapter 6, entitled
“Reappointment After Resignation For Police Department”, of the City of Fort Worth
Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service Rules and Regulations (Local Rules) (or any
successor or superseding provisions). All former City of Fort Worth Officers who are
reappointed pursuant to this Article will be reappointed at the rank of Police Officer.

34
(b) Reappointed officers must meet the minimum hiring and physical fitness standards to be
eligible for reappointment.

(c) Beginning compensation for Officers who are reappointed twelve months or more after their
last day of work as an Officer for the City will be that of a Police Officer at Step 3 for Officers
who served between 2 — 5 years and Step 4 for Officers who served 6 or more years as described
in the structured pay plan in Appendix C. Leave accruals and longevity pay for these Officers
will be based on their date of reappointment.

(d) Beginning compensation for Officers who are reappointed less than twelve months after their
last day of work as an Officer for the City will be that of a Police Officer, at the step of the
structured pay plan described in Appendix C, based on the reappointed Officer’s years of service
with the City before their voluntary resignation, rounded down to the nearest year. For example,
an Officer who, at the time they voluntarily resigned their employment with the City, was at the
rank of Sergeant with 12 years and six months of service, who is reappointed eight months after
their resignation, would be reappointed at the rank of Police Officer, and their beginning
compensation would be at the step for a Police Officer with 12 years of service. Leave accruals
and longevity pay for these Officers will be based on their adjusted service date.

(e) The Chief may adopt a written policy on commissioning and training requirements of
reappointed officers.

Modified Hiring Process For Lateral Entry Officers

Section 13. The Chief shall establish requirements for applicants for lateral hiring from other
Law Enforcement Agencies. The requirements need not be the same as those established by
Chapter 143 or those applicable to applicants for the position of recruit in the regular training
academy. The requirements may be modified by the Chief, but shall include at least the
following:

1) At the time of application, each applicant must be actively employed as a full-time
paid police officer for a municipal law enforcement agency that serves a population of
100,000 or more. Each applicant must have a total of at least two years of active
service as a police officer for a municipal law enforcement agency.

2) Each applicant shall hold a current intermediate peace officer certificate from the
Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education
(TCLEOSE) or shall meet criteria established by the TCLEOSE for obtaining an
intermediate peace officer certificate.

3) Each applicant will be subject to a background investigation and shall be required to

pass the City authorized medical examination, drug screening and psychological
examination to be considered for employment as a police officer.

35
4)

6)

7)

8)

9)

10)

The Chief shall establish the selection criteria and procedures for the Modified Hiring
Process. Applicants who meet the selection criteria and procedures may be hired
without being placed on an eligibility list.

Upon commissioning with the City of Fort Worth, the applicant will be placed in a
position senior to those applicants in the Department’s regular Training Academy who
have not been commissioned.

The Chief shall establish the training requirements for a Modified Training Academy.
All applicants hired through the Modified Hiring Process must successfully complete
the Modified Training Academy.

All applicants will serve a probationary period from the date of hire until completion of
the Modified Training Academy and one year following being commissioned as a Fort
Worth police officer. In the event that a probationary employee is unable to
satisfactorily perform duties or training during the probationary period due to a
temporary physical or mental impairment or condition, such as pregnancy, or
temporary on duty injury, the Department may either terminate the employee or
suspend the probationary period (as of the date served) and restart the probationary
period when the person is capable of proceeding with the essential functions and duties
of the job and/or training. This provision does not override or modify any other rights
or privileges of the officer independent of Chapter 143 of the TLGC. During the
probationary period, a probationary employee may be terminated without civil service
appeal rights. Upon completion of the probationary period, the employee will have full
civil service protection, except as modified or abridged by this Agreement.

Each applicant will be assigned to a Field Training Officer (FTO) for a minimum of 8
weeks, unless an exception is granted based on a recommendation of the FTO and
approved by the Chief or designee allowing the officer to end the FTO assignment
after 6 weeks. If the exception is granted, one of the six weeks of training will be with
an FTO in plainclothes, commonly referred to as the ghost phase. Otherwise, at least
two weeks of training will be with an FTO in plainclothes, commonly referred to as
the ghost phase.

Regardless of any rank or position the officer previously held in another law
enforcement agency, an applicant who successfully completes the Modified Training
Academy will be placed in the civil service classification of Police Officer and will
automatically become a full-fledged civil service employee with full civil service
protection, subject to successfully completing probation.

The pay rate for lateral hires with 2 — 5 years of law enforcement experience will be
compensated at the Officer Step 3 rate of pay of the structured pay plan described in
Appendix C. The pay rate for lateral hires with 6 or more years of experience will be
compensated at the Officer Step 4 rate of pay of the structured pay plan described in
Appendix C. These Officers will not advance to the next Step rate of pay until their
accumulated service time with the City coincides with the next Step rate of pay.

36
11) Seniority for the purpose of asserting a seniority preference shall be determined by the
date of the commission. If the commission dates are the same for two or more
Officers, seniority will be determined by the Officers’ relative final position in their
Modified Training Academy class. Regardless of the pay rate established for each
Modified Training Academy Officer, seniority for purposes of longevity pay shall
begin when the officer successfully completes the Modified Training Academy.

12) The Modified Hiring Process described by this Article may be used by the Chief to
commission up to thirty applicants for lateral hiring from other applicable Law
Enforcement Agencies each fiscal year.

Section 14. Changes in Process.

The Commission may implement changes in the process or procedures set forth herein if
the City Manager and the Executive Board of the Association approve a Memorandum of
Agreement setting forth the changes deemed necessary to address problems or needs that arise
after the effective date of this Agreement.

Section 15. | Preemption.

In accordance with the provision in TLGC Section 143.307, the Parties expressly agree
that this Article shall preempt and supersede any inconsistent provisions contained in TLGC
Chapter 143, including but not limited to Section 141.032 and Sections 143.021 through
143.037. The parties further expressly agree that this Article preempts any inconsistent
provision in the City of Fort Worth Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service Rules and
Regulations (Local Rules).
ARTICLE 12
COMPENSATORY TIME

As permitted by the Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”), 29 U.S.C. § 207(0), the City
may compensate Officers with compensatory time in lieu of overtime compensation required by
the FLSA, 29 U.S.C. § 207. Such compensatory time will be at a rate of not less than one and
one-half hours for each hour of employment for which overtime compensation is required by 29
U.S.C. § 207. Officers shall accrue overtime based on a 40-hour work week.

The Officer has the option prior to accepting the work assignment to refuse such
compensatory time off and elect to be paid overtime at one and one-half the Officer's regular rate
of pay. This Article supersedes any and all agreements or understandings related to
compensatory time arrived at between the City and any individual member of the bargaining unit
during the term of this Agreement. If this Agreement expires, any lawful contracts or
understandings that were made with individual Officers regarding compensatory time will apply.

Officers shall be allowed to accrue compensatory time up to a maximum accrual of two
hundred and forty (240) hours. The rank of Captain shall be a non-exempt position for the
purpose of earning and paying overtime, in accordance with the FLSA, 29 U.S.C. § 207 and
Texas Local Government Code Section 142.0015.

38
ARTICLE 13
SENIORITY

Section 1. Seniority Defined

A. For persons in the police officer classification, seniority for the purpose of
asserting a seniority preference shall be determined by the date of the commission. If the
commission dates are the same for two or more Officers, seniority will be determined by the
Officers’ relative final position in their academy class.

B. For persons above the police officer classification, seniority for the purpose of
asserting a seniority preference shall be determined by the date of promotion to the person’s
current classification. If the promotion dates are the same for two or more such persons above
the officer classification, seniority will be determined by their position on the eligibility list, from
which they were promoted to their current classification, provided that any officer promoted after
being by-passed shall not be senior to an officer actually promoted first. Seniority applies in
breaking a tie on a promotional list.

Cc. Seniority for Officers who have received a demotion due to a reduction in force
shall be determined by the date of original appointment to the rank to which they are being
demoted.

D. Seniority for Officers who are involuntarily demoted shall be determined by the
effective date of the demotion.

E. Seniority for Officers who are reappointed after voluntary resignation shall be
determined by their date of reappointment.

 

F. Officers in the rank of lieutenant and below may assert seniority preference for
unit and shift assignment in accordance with the General Order, or Special Order, promulgated
by the Chief, for In-House Vacancy Selection of Sworn Personnel. If the Chief determines that a
revision to the above-stated General Order, or Special Order, is necessary, the Chief or the
Chief's designee, and not more than two (2) representatives of the Association will discuss the
proposed changes prior to implementation. The Chief's decision on any revision to the above-
stated General Order or Special Order will be final.

G. Officers may not assert their seniority to bump other Officers from their days off,
holidays, or vacations that have already been set.

H. The Chief may make assignments based upon hardship or other special needs.

L Assignments of the Chief are not subject to challenge or grievance.

39
Section 2. Reappointed Officers

A. The adjusted commission date for Officers who are reappointed twelve months or
more after voluntary resignation shall be determined by their date of reappointment. Such an
Officer’s seniority will be based on the Officer’s adjusted commission date for asserting a
promotional preference.

B. The adjusted commission date for Officers who are reappointed less than twelve
months after voluntary resignation will be based on the years of service prior to the Officers’
resignation. For example, the adjusted commission date for an Officer who resigns after 12
years and three months of service and is reappointed eight months after resignation is 12 years
and three months. Such an Officer’s seniority will be based on the Officer’s adjusted commission
date for asserting a promotional preference.

Cc. This section applies only to the commission date for reappointed officers; all other
provisions related to reappointed officers are in Article 11.

Section 3. Preemption
In accordance with the provision in TLGC Section 143.307, the Parties expressly agree

that this Article shall preempt and supersede any inconsistent provisions contained in TLGC
Chapters 141, 142 and 143, including but not limited to Section 141.032.

40
ARTICLE 14
PHYSICAL FITNESS PROGRAM

Section 1. Applicability

a. Voluntary participation for incumbent Officers. Officers hired prior to October 1,
2009 may voluntarily participate in the mandatory physical fitness provisions of this Article. As
to such Officers, the provisions of Chapter 143 shall continue to apply to any issues of fitness for
duty, light duty, assignment, line of duty injury leave, or disability retirement.

b. Mandatory Participation for Future Officers and Reappointed Officers. Officers
and reappointed officers hired on or after October 1, 2009 shall be required as a condition of
continued employment to be and remain physically fit during their employment with the
Department. The basis for the standards is further delineated below.

c. Exceptions for Officers and Reappointed Officers Between January 1, 2009 and
June 1, 2009. Officers who were hired and reappointed between January 1, 2009 and June 1,
2009 may elect to become a mandatory participant in the Physical Fitness Program as outlined in
this Article.

Section 2. Principles of Agreement

The Parties have agreed that implementing a Department wide physical fitness program
and culture will require different strategies tailored to Officers in various career phases, and a
transition period in order to facilitate the necessary changes and expectations for the program to
work and achieve support. The Parties agree that a combination of these components are
necessary:

(1) Appropriate standards based on actual biometric studies of job tasks, and
taking into account factors such as an Officer’s rank, assignment and duties.

(2) Incentives for physical improvement and conditioning.

(3) A process for application and enforcement which is objective, fair and
provides for an appeal.

(4) Identification of a category of Officers exempted from the mandatory fitness
standards.

Section 3. Physical Fitness Trainer

The City shall designate a physical fitness trainer on a full-time basis to assist Officers to
reach program fitness levels.

41
Section 4. Physical Fitness Incentive Pay

A. Officers hired before October 1, 2009: Officers who achieve voluntary physical
fitness standards established in accordance with the criteria in this Article shall be paid a
physical fitness incentive of $300.00 per year and payable in September of each year in which
the Officer meets the applicable annual physical fitness standard. No Officer shall be eligible for
more than one $300.00 physical fitness incentive payment per year.

B. Officers and Reappointed Officers Hired on or After October 1, 2009: These
Officers and Reappointed Officers shall be required to meet the mandatory physical fitness
standards established in accordance with the criteria in this Article and as recommended by the
Joint Committee on Physical Fitness, which shall be reasonably consistent with the
recommendations outlined in the Healthmetrics study dated March 6, 2008. In return, the City
will establish an individual Health Reimbursement Account (HRA) and deposit an initial amount
of $1,000, paid by the City for each officer.

An additional amount of $300.00 per year will be contributed by the City, in lieu of the
Physical Fitness Incentive in Section 4A above, for each such graduate or reappointed officer
who achieves the physical fitness standards established in accordance with the criteria in this
Article during that year. An Officer shall become eligible to receive reimbursements from the
HRA upon their normal or disability retirement. An Officer’s qualified dependents shall become
eligible to receive reimbursements from the HRA upon the Officer’s death. If an Officer with an
HRA separates from the City prior to normal or disability retirement, the Officer shall forfeit the
funds in his or her HRA consistent with the terms of the City’s Administrative Services
Agreement.

Cc. Officers and Reappointed Officers Who Were Hired Between January |, 2009 and
June 1, 2009: These officers were hired or reappointed after the City’s retiree healthcare subsidy
ceased and before the HRA were established by the 2009 contract between the City and the Fort
Worth Police Officers’ Association. To resolve this, these Officers may elect to become a
mandatory participant in the Physical Fitness Program established in accordance with the criteria
in this Article and as recommended by the Joint Committee on Physical Fitness, which shall be
reasonably consistent with the recommendations outlined in the Healthmetrics study dated
March 6, 2008. Within 30 Business Days atter the effective date of this agreement, Officers that
were hired or reappointed between January 1, 2009 and June 1, 2009 must provide written notice
to the Training Captain or designee, of an election to become a mandatory participant in the
Physical Fitness Program.

If an Officer elects to become a mandatory participant in the Physical Fitness Program,
the City will deposit $1,000.00 into an individual HRA for each of these employees in FY 13.
Beginning after October 1, 2012, an additional amount of $300.00 per year will be contributed
by the City, in lieu of the Physical Fitness Incentive in Section 4A above, for each such Officer
or reappointed officer who achieves the physical fitness standards established in accordance with
the criteria in this Article during the year.

42
An Officer shall become eligible to receive reimbursements from the HRA upon their
normal or disability retirement. An Officer’s qualified dependents shall become eligible to
receive reimbursements from the HRA upon the Officer’s death. If an Officer with an HRA
separates from the City prior to their normal or disability retirement, the officer shall forfeit the
funds in his or her HRA consistent with the terms of the City’s Administrative Services
Agreement.

Officers who were hired or reappointed between January 1, 2009 and June 1, 2009 that
do not elect to become mandatory participants in the Physical Fitness Program will be ineligible
for an HRA. An Officer who voluntarily achieves physical fitness standards established in
accordance with the criteria in this Article shall be paid a physical fitness incentive of $300.00
per year payable in September of each year in which the Officer meets the applicable annual
physical fitness standard. No Officer shall be eligible for more than one $300.00 physical fitness
incentive payment per year. As to such Officers, the provisions of Chapter 143 shall continue to
apply to any issues of fitness for duty, light duty, assignment, line of duty injury leave, or
disability retirement.

Section 5. Other Incentives

The Chief may, at his or her discretion, choose to develop other incentives based upon
performance and/or passing scores. An Officer's ineligibility or non-qualification for any
incentives shall not be the subject of any grievance procedure.

Section 6. Enforcement of Mandatory Standards for Officers Employed After
October 1, 2009

Any Officer employed on or after October |, 2009, who refuses to take part in the
assessment of physical fitness as scheduled without a duly authorized deferment shall be
considered insubordinate and neglecting their duty and may be subject to disciplinary action up
to and including termination. Any such Officer who fails to achieve and maintain their
applicable physical fitness standard shall be subject to disciplinary action up to termination, after
three consecutive assessments, and such failure shall not qualify the Officer for light duty. To
the extent feasible, a physical fitness assessment shall occur at twelve (12) month intervals.

Section 7. Deferments of Mandatory Standards for Officers Employed After
October 1, 2009

The parties have formed a Joint Committee on Physical Fitness. The Committee shall
establish policies regarding deferments from these physical fitness standards, including medical
and administrative deferments or alternative assignments exempt from the provisions of this
article.

Each Party shall maintain three (3) members for the Joint Committee on Physical Fitness.
One member of the City Human Resources staff shall act as an advisor to the Committee in order
to ensure validity of recommended actions. In the event the Committee should reach an impasse,
the Parties will submit the disputed issues to mediation before a mutually selected mediator
within thirty (30) Calendar Days. In the event that mediation fails to resolve the impasse, the
City and the Association shall each designate one representative for a panel determination of any
remaining disputed issues. These two representatives shall select one neutral panel member. The
three (3) person panel shall convene within thirty (30) Calendar Days after the conclusion of
mediation to finally resolve the disputed issues. A meeting or hearing shall be established as
necessary. The panel shall prepare a written decision on any issues and forward the final results
to the Chief. The Chief is authorized to administer a physical fitness assessment program and
physical fitness standards including policies regarding deferments, for all members of the
Department as recommended by the Committee, or resulting from mediation or panel decision.

Issues relating to deferments will be referred to the Joint Committee on Physical Fitness
for recommendations to be made to the Chief. If the Committee votes to deny the deferment, or
if the vote of the Committee results in a tie vote, then the deferment will be denied. If the Chief
disagrees with any recommendation of the Committee, the affected Officer may appeal the
disputed deferment recommendation to the City Manager for a final and binding determination.
The Committee shall establish policies regarding deferments from these physical fitness
standards, including medical and administrative deferments or alternative assignments exempt
from the provisions of this Article.

Section 8. Appeal of Mandatory Standards for Officers Employed After
October 1, 2009

An Officer who is terminated after a third failure to maintain their applicable physical
fitness standard may appeal the accuracy and correctness of the determination to a panel of three
qualified individuals, one selected by the Association, one selected by the City and one selected
by the other two representatives. The panel shall only be authorized to determine if the testing
was properly conducted, the outcomes or scoring were correctly carried out and determined, and
that the standards were applied in a substantially equal manner. If the panel determines that
irregularities in the testing process occurred, the panel may elect to retest the Officer at a date
and time determined by the panel. The panel shall have no authority to modify the testing
standards. The appeal process of TLGC 143.081 shall not apply to this appeal.

Section 9. Preemption

The Parties have expressly agreed that this Article shall preempt contrary statutory
provisions, and to the extent of any conflict with the provisions of TLGC, Chapter 143, any other
statute, executive order, local ordinance, or rule adopted by the City, including any personnel
board, or any Civil Service Commission, the provisions of this article shall prevail; provided,
however, nothing in this Agreement shall preempt the authority of Civil Service Commission to
order a physical and mental fitness for duty examination under TLGC 143.081.

44
ARTICLE 15
PROMOTIONS, DEMOTIONS AND REINSTATEMENTS

Section 1. Definition.

For the purpose of this Article (except for Section 7 herein), the term “demotion” or
“demoted” means a demotion or return to an Officer’s prior tested rank, and reappointment from
assistant chief to deputy chief.

Section 2. Appointment of Assistant Chief
A. The classification previously titled “deputy chief” is now titled “assistant chief.”

B. All promotions to the classification of assistant chief shall be exempt from competitive
examinations, and instead shall be made by discretionary appointment of the Chief. The Chief
will not be required to make promotions to the classification of assistant chief within any specific
time period.

Cc. An Officer appointed to the classification of assistant chief may be demoted at the
exclusive discretion of the Chief, and shall have no right to appeal such a demotion. An Officer
so demoted shall have no right to prior notice, a statement of charges or to file a grievance or
other complaint. Neither the Civil Service Commission nor an Arbitrator shall have any
jurisdiction, power, or authority to investigate or review such demotion or to alter the terms of
such demotion.

Dz. The Chief may provide by policy for Chain of Command coverage for assistant chiefs
and their subordinates.

1. A captain assigned to a position in a chain-of-command which is directly supervised
by an assistant chief shall not be entitled to higher classification pay unless required by a direct
order to actually serve as an assistant chief. In the event that such a captain, who is directly
supervised by an assistant chief, is ordered to serve in the higher classification of assistant chief,
that captain is entitled to the captain’s hourly rate of pay plus a 10% increase for the hours
worked as assistant chief.

Section 3. Appointment of Deputy Chief

A. The classification previously titled “major” is now titled “deputy chief.”

B. All promotions to the classification of deputy chief shall be exempt from competitive
examinations, and instead shall be made by discretionary appointment of the Chief. The Chief

will not be required to make promotions to the classification of deputy chief within any specific
time period.

45
Cc. An Officer appointed to the classification of deputy chief may be demoted at the
exclusive discretion of the Chief, and shall have no right to appeal such a demotion. An Officer
so demoted shall have no right to prior notice, a statement of charges or to file a grievance or
other complaint. Neither the Civil Service Commission nor an Arbitrator shall have any
jurisdiction, power, or authority to investigate or review such demotion or to alter the terms of
such demotion.

Dz. The Chief may provide by policy for chain-of-command coverage for deputy chiefs and
their subordinates.

1. A lieutenant assigned to a position in a chain-of-command which is directly
supervised by a deputy chief shall not be entitled to higher classification pay unless required by a
direct order to actually serve as a deputy chief. In the event that such a lieutenant, who is
directly supervised by a deputy chief, is ordered to serve in the higher classification of deputy
chief, that lieutenant is entitled to the lieutenant’s hourly rate of pay plus a 10% increase for the
hours worked as deputy chief.

2. A captain assigned to a position in a chain-of-command which is directly supervised
by a deputy chief shall not be entitled to higher classification pay unless required by a direct
order to actually serve as a deputy chief. In the event that such a captain, who is directly
supervised by a deputy chief is ordered to serve in the higher classification of deputy chief,
that captain is entitled to the captain’s hourly rate of pay plus a 5% increase for the hours worked
as deputy chief.

Section 4. Additional Requirements

A. Organizationally, the classification of deputy chief will be immediately below the
classification of assistant chief and immediately above the classification of captain. The
compensation rate for the rank of deputy chief and above is not controlled by TLGC 143.041 and
141.033 and will be set according to the City’s annual compensation plan, as approved by the
City Council. The Chief's appointments to assistant chief and deputy chief may be from any
rank, as so provided in TLGC Section 143.014(d).

B. The City Council may choose to create up to ten (10) appointed positions including both
the ranks of Assistant Chief and Deputy Chief.

Section 5. Promotion to Corporal/Detective, Sergeant and Lieutenant.
A. Eligibility for Promotion.

1. Corporal/Detective. An Officer will not be eligible to take a promotional
eligibility examination for promotion to corporal/detective unless the Officer has served in the
Department in the next lower classification or other positions specified by the Civil Service
Commission for at least four (4) continuous years immediately before the date the promotional
eligibility examination is held. An Officer’s promotional eligibility to corporal/detective shall be
determined by their commission date in accordance with the seniority provisions in Article 13.

46
2. Sergeant and Lieutenant. An Officer’s eligibility to take a promotional
examination for sergeant and lieutenant shall be determined by the following criteria:

a. The Officer has served in the Department in the next lower classification
or other positions specified by the Civil Service Commission for at least three (3)
continuous years immediately before the date the promotional eligibility
examination is held.

b. The Officer must satisfactorily complete a supervisory or management
training course of study for the promotional classification before the Officer may
take the promotional eligibility examination. The City will provide reasonable
opportunities, at the City’s expense, for candidates to attend such courses of
study. The Chief shall develop future training programs in-house, or in
conjunction with educational institutions or agencies, which are tailored to
individual supervisory ranks.

B. Promotional Examinations.

lL. Vacant positions in the ranks of Corporal/Detective, Sergeant and
Lieutenant shall be filled from an eligibility list created by a promotional procedure consisting of
a written examination.

2. A study list must be posted for at least 60 calendar days prior to a written
examination being given. Officers must meet all eligibility requirements to apply for the exam
process. Officers will have 15 business days, excluding weekends and holidays, from the date
the list is posted, to apply for the promotion process.

3. The written examination will have a total point value of 100 points. The
written examination must have between 50 and 100 questions. The exam questions may utilize
different styles of test questions as long as all answers to questions can be scored objectively.
The written exam may contain questions from the Department’s mandatory supervisory class that
is required for promotion.

4. Additional points will be added to the final promotional score for
Corporal/Detective, Sergeant or Lieutenant, based on Chart 1, below. Additional points will be
awarded only for the highest educational degree. Example: A candidate with an Associate’s
degree, a Bachelor's degree, and a Master’s degree will receive additional points for the Master’s
degree only. All college credits and degrees must be from an accredited college or university.

47
Chart 1:

 

Points on Corporal
Examination

Points on Sergeant
Examination

Points on Lieutenant
Examination

 

One Point For Each Year of
Service (in rank) = up to 10

One Point For Each Year of
Service (in rank) = up to 10

One Point For Each Year of
Service (in rank) = up to 10

 

60 college hours/Associate of

60 college hours/Associate of

Arts Degree = | Arts Degree = 1

 

Bachelor Degree = 2 Bachelor Degree = 2 Bachelor Degree = 2

 

Master’s Degree = 3 Master’s Degree = 3 Master’s Degree = 3

 

Military = 1

 

 

 

Total Points Allowed = 13 Total Points Allowed = 13 Total Points Allowed = 13

 

 

5. Eligibility lists for promotion to Corporal/Detective, Sergeant and
Lieutenant will expire one year after the date of the written examination.

Cc. Requirements after Promotion to Lieutenant

lL. Within forty-eight (48) months after being promoted, Officers promoted to
Lieutenant shall be required as a condition of maintaining the rank to complete with a passing
grade at least sixty (60) hours of college credits or achieve an Associate’s Degree from an
accredited college or university. Officers who have already satisfied this requirement shall
present proof to the Chief or designee. Officers who fail to provide proof to the Chief or designee
within the specified time period shall be demoted to their previous rank and seniority.

2. If the Officer fails to complete the mandatory college requirements within the
prescribed time period after promotion, the Officer will be allowed to appeal the demotion to the
Chief only if exigent circumstances or an emergency situation occurred which prevented the
Officer from completing the requirements. The Chief has the discretion to allow more time to
fulfill the requirements; however, the requirements will not be waived.

D. Continuation and Life of Eligibility List
Any promotional process which has proceeded to the point of the administration of any
test shall continue to its conclusion, irrespective of the expiration of this Agreement. Any

eligibility list certified after the effective date of this agreement shall remain in effect for a period
not to exceed twelve (12) months, irrespective of the expiration of this Agreement.

48

 
Section 6. Promotion to Captain.
A. Eligibility for Promotion

lL. An Officer's eligibility to take a promotional examination for Captain shall be
determined by the following criteria:

a. The Officer has served in the Department in the next lower classification
or other positions specified by the Civil Service Commission for at least three (3)
continuous years immediately before the date the promotional eligibility
examination is held.

b. The Officer must satisfactorily complete a supervisory or management
training course of study for the promotional classification before the Officer may
take the promotional eligibility examination. The City will provide reasonable
opportunities, at the City’s expense for the candidate to attend such course of

study.
B. Promotional Examination
L. A promotional eligibility list for Captain created prior to October 1, 2014, shall be

in accordance with the promotion examination process outlined in Section 5 of this Article for
promotion to Lieutenant. Beginning on October 1, 2014, the promotion examination process for
filling Captain vacancies will follow the criteria in this section. However, if a promotional
eligibility list for Captain was created prior to October |, 2014, the promotional process outlined
in this Article would not commence until the current list expired or was exhausted after October
1, 2014.

2. The promotional process for filling Captain vacancies set out in this Article will
begin on October 1, 2014, and continue throughout the term of this contract.

3. Vacant positions in the rank of Captain shall be filled from an eligibility list
created by a promotional procedure consisting of a written examination and an assessment
center. Placement on a final eligibility list will be based on the combination of a written
examination score and the score obtained in an assessment center process.

a. Additional points will be added to the final promotional score for Captain

based on Chart 2 below. All college credits and degrees must be from an
accredited college or university.

49
Chart 2:

Captain Examination
Additional Points Written Examination Assessment Center Points
Points

 

 

One Point For Each Year of
Service In Rank = up to 10_| 50 or 100 questions Various exercises

 

 

Master’s Degree = 3

 

 

Total Points Allowed = 13 | Total Points Allowed = Total Points Allowed =
100 100

 

 

 

 

The maximum number of points a captain can receive is 213 (if an assessment is

included). The earliest_an_assessment_center_can_be implemented for captain is
2014.

 

b. A study list must be posted for at least 60 calendar days prior to a written
examination being given. Officers must meet all eligibility requirements to apply
for the exam process. Officers will have 15 business days, excluding weekends
and holidays, from the date the list is posted, to apply for the promotion process.

4. The written examination will have a total point value of 100 points. The written
examination must have between 50 and 100 questions. The exam questions may utilize different
styles of test questions as long as all answers to questions can be scored objectively. The written
exam may contain questions from the Department’s mandatory supervisory class that is required
for promotion. There will be no pass/fail score on the written examination for Captain if an
assessment center process will be part of the final eligibility score. The written examination may
be developed by employees of the Human Resources Department or a consultant hired by the
City. If an assessment center process is part of the final eligibility score, a percentage of the
written exam score will be applied to a promotional candidate's final eligibility score.

Cc. Assessment Center.

1. The Human Resources Department, in coordination with the Department will hire
a consultant to develop an assessment center process in advance of the need to create an
eligibility list for a promotional rank using an assessment center process. If an assessment center
has not been developed or an existing assessment center needs to be revised to include new or
different scenarios or situations and exercises, then following the posting of a vacancy
announcement for the written examination, the assessment center development or revision
process should be initiated.

Due to the complexities and time involved in choosing a qualified vendor to participate in the
development of an assessment center based on the essential job functions of the rank or the
revision of an existing assessment center, a significant amount of time may pass between
creating an eligibility list based on a written exam and conducting the assessment center.

50
2. The portions of the assessment center that require verbal communication from the
Officer, such as Structured Interviews, Role-Playing, Oral Presentation, etc., will be video
recorded. An individual candidate may review, but may not copy, their recorded video responses
on a single occasion after executing a confidentiality non-disclosure form. The Association shall
be entitled to meet with the test designer to review statistical test evaluations, outcomes and
methodology, which shall include the materials associated with rater training and performance,
and any candidate orientation materials. After such meeting, if the Association raises a concern
about failure to comply with the provisions of this Agreement, they may request access to the
video recorded assessments, which shall be considered by the Chief. If denied by the Chief, an
arbitrator appointed in connection with a contract grievance shall be authorized to require
production of the relevant materials. This paragraph shall not prevent access by the Association
to any materials that are public records under state law.

3. The assessment center will be developed based on the professional guidelines for
assessment centers advocated by the American Psychological Association. The Department will
follow City purchasing requirements to select one or more consultants to design and develop an
assessment center for the ranks of Captain. The consultant shall make all final decisions
concerning the design and implementation of the assessment center. Revision of an existing
assessment center to avoid “familiarization” of assessment center content may be done by the
same or different consultant. If necessary, an assessment center will be revised by a consultant if
the revision involves removing unnecessary exercises or adjusting rating scales.

4, The Consulting Company shall also select the assessors who shall meet the
following criteria:

Equivalent rank to the promotion, or above;

Shall not reside in the city of Fort Worth;

Shall not be related within the second degree to any candidate for
promotion;

Shall not personally know any candidate for promotion;

e, Shall have at least two (2) years of experience in the rank being
assessed or an equivalent rank; and

Shall not be a current or former employee of the City, Department
or any other entity legally related to or controlled by the city of
Fort Worth.

SP

gS

5. The consultant will utilize, as appropriate, the following types of exercises
typically found in assessment centers:

In-Basket

Problem Solving/Analysis

Written and Oral Resumes/Structured Interviews
Role-Playing

Memo/Report Writing

Oral Presentation/Plan Preparation

Staff Meeting

meae se

aS
h. Special Event/Operations.

The consultant may utilize other types of assessment exercises or methods if there is
documented research on the validity of the exercise or method for use with assessing the
rank of Captain.

6. The consultant will have responsibility or oversight of the following
administrative functions:

a. Collect data on the essential job duties of the tested rank for test and
exercise development.

b. Conduct transportability study for use of standard assessment
exercise or methods for use with the tested rank.

c Provide any documentation or research supporting the validity of the
exercises or methods used.

d. Provide an Administrators manual if the assessment center is

administered by the Human Resources Department. This should not be
construed as granting authority for Human Resources to write, control or
grade the test.

e. Provide guidance on the selection of assessors.

f. Conduct or provide a training manual for training assessors to
objectively evaluate candidate performance or behavior and rate
candidates on the appropriate rating scales.

g. Provide rating scales and criteria for evaluating candidates on the
appropriate assessment dimensions and a methodology to combine
assessment center scores to place candidates on a rating scale with 100
points.

h. Conduct or provide materials and information for an orientation to the
assessment center process for candidates.

i. Provide guidance or conduct any other administrative function deemed
necessary to insure the fairness or efficiency of the assessment process.

7. The number of Officers on the written examination eligibility list who will move
to the second step of the promotion process (assessment center) will be based on the number of.
vacancies in the promoted rank that were filled from the prior promotion list for the rank. For
each vacancy that was filled from the prior promotion list, the top three Officers on the written
examination list will be eligible to participate in the assessment center. For example, six Officers
will be eligible to participate in the assessment center if two vacancies were filled from the prior
promotion list for the particular rank. Based on the number of prior vacancies, it is possible that
all Officers on the list will be eligible. If there was only one (1) vacancy on the prior promotion
list, the top five (5) Officers on the written examination list will be eligible to participate in the
assessment center.

nn
N
8. The assessment center will have a total point value of 100 points. The scoring of
points are detailed in Chart 2. Scoring in assessment centers relies on human observation and
judgment. Assessors will receive training on the assessment center process. Assessors will also
be provided with rating standards for use in the scoring process. While matters relating to the
written examination can be appealed under TLGC 143.034, due to the subjective nature of
assessment center scores, assessment center contents or results are not appealable to the Civil
Service Commission, a hearing examiner, or District Court.

D. Promotion from an Eligibility List.

Upon finalization of the eligibility list, the Chief or designee will request an eligibility list
of from the Director of Civil Service or designee, in accordance with TLGC 143.036 (b). The
Chief shall select the Officer from the list with the highest combined score, in accordance with
Chart 2, unless the Chief has a valid reason for not appointing the person in accordance with
TLGC 143.036 (f). An eligibility list will expire eighteen (18) months from the date that the
eligibility list is posted by the Civil Service Director or designee or when exhausted. An Officer
referred three times may be struck from the eligibility list at the request of the Chief.

E. Tests/Assessment Centers Occurring During Military Leaves of Absence

Officers who are serving on active military duty as members of the armed forces while
this contract is in force will be eligible to take promotional written examinations according to the
conditions and requirements of the Local Rules, Promotional Examination Policy For Active
Military Duty Employees, 11.28 — 11.33. If the promotional process includes an assessment
center to be placed on a promotional eligibility list and the Officer is eligible to participate in a
promotional assessment center, the Officer will be required to participate in an assessment center
conducted after the Officer returns to work. If the Officer has already taken the written
examination and an assessment center is scheduled within 180 calendar days of the Officer’s
return to work, the Officer may voluntarily participate in the assessment center. Otherwise, the
Officer will participate in the next promotional process after 180 days of returning to work. This
provision is intended to comply with requirements of the federal Uniformed Services
Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA), and to supersede the terms of Section
143.032(b) of the Texas Local Government Code. This Agreement does not prevent the City
from taking steps to comply with USERRA under unique or special circumstances.

F. Requirements after Promotion to Captain

1. | Within sixty (60) months after being promoted, Officers promoted to Captain shall
be required as a condition of maintaining the rank to obtain a Bachelor’s Degree from an
accredited college or university. Officers who have already satisfied this requirement shall
present proof of completion to the Chief or designee. Officers who fail to provide proof to the
Chief or designee within the specified time period shall be demoted to their previous rank and
seniority.

53
2. If the Officer fails to complete the mandatory college requirements within the
prescribed time period after promotion, the Officer will be allowed to appeal the demotion to the
Chief only if exigent circumstances or an emergency situation occurred which prevented the
Officer from completing the requirements. The Chief has the discretion to allow more time to
fulfill the requirements; however, the requirements will not be waived.

3. If an Officer is promoted to the next higher rank before completing the
educational requirements for the previous rank, the time requirements remain in effect for
completion of the appropriate educational requirements for that previous rank. For example, an
Officer is promoted to Lieutenant on January 1, 2014 and has forty-eight (48) months, that is,
until January 1, 2018, to complete sixty (60) hours of college credits or achieve an Associate's
degree. The Officer is promoted to Captain on January 1, 2017 without achieving the college
hours or the degree. The Officer will have until January 1, 2018 to obtain sixty (60) hours of
college credit or an Associate degree. Officers who fail to provide proof to the Chief or designee
within the specified time period shall be demoted to their previous rank and seniority.

G. Continuation and Life of Eligibility List.

Any promotional process which has proceeded to the point of the administration of any
test shall continue to its conclusion, irrespective of the expiration of this Agreement. Any
eligibility list certified after the effective date of this Agreement shall remain in effect for a
period not to exceed eighteen (18) months, irrespective of the expiration of this Agreement.

Section 7. Removal from an Appointed Position

If an Officer is removed from an appointed classification solely at the discretion of the
Chief, and not for disciplinary reasons, the Officer will be reinstated to his or her prior tested
classification with no loss of seniority rights or break in service. The Officer shall be considered
to have continuously served in that prior lower classification from the date he or she was initially
promoted into that rank and will be eligible to take a subsequently scheduled promotional exam
to the next higher classification if the required number of years of service or other eligibility
criteria is met. The removal from an appointed position will not be treated as being for
disciplinary reasons, unless so stated in writing by the Chief.

Section 8. Preemption Provision.

This Article shall preempt any contrary provisions in Chapter 143, including but not
limited to those set forth in Section 2 of this Article and in Sections 143.014, Subchapter B
(143.021-143.038) and 143.072 of the statute, it being expressly agreed and specifically so
provided under the authority of Section 143.307.
ARTICLE 16
VACANT PROMOTIONAL POSITIONS RESULTING FROM MILITARY
LEAVE OF ABSENCE

Section 1. When an Officer in the rank of corporal/detective or higher rank is serving on
active military duty and has taken a military leave of absence, the Commission shall fill the
person’s position in the Department in accordance with the content of this Agreement.

Section 2. If an Officer who is in a promotional rank is on unpaid military leave of absence,
a vacancy occurs as of the date the unpaid leave begins. Military leave includes Officers’ initial
entry into a branch of the service as well as Officers who are recalled to active military duty. An
Officer may request unpaid military leave by making application to the Commission. When an
Officer on military leave must be placed in an unpaid status, this will be construed the same as
making application for unpaid military leave with the Civil Service Commission. If an Officer is
receiving full pay from the City while on military leave, whether through vacation, supplemental
pay or other paid leave, or through substitutions as authorized in TLGC, Chapter 143.072(h), no
vacancy is created. A vacancy only occurs if an Officer is on unpaid military leave of absence.
For the purpose of this Agreement, unpaid military leave shall exist anytime an Officer does not
receive full pay from the City from salary, working agreement, accrued paid leave, supplemental
leave benefit or any combination thereof.

Section 3. The Officer who fills the promotional position is subject to replacement by the
person who was on the military leave at the time the person returns to Active Duty in the
Department unless subsequent vacancies resulting in promotions have occurred in the same rank.
In that case, the person most recently promoted to that rank, and thus having the least seniority
time in that rank, would be returned to their former position in accordance with the provisions
below.

Section 4. If the reinstatement of an Officer who received a military leave of absence causes
that person’s replacement, or the person most recently promoted to that rank, to be returned to a
lower rank and placed on a reinstatement list, the person on the reinstatement list has a
preferential right to a subsequent appointment or promotion to the rank from which the person
was demoted. This preferential reinstatement right is valid for up to one year from the date of the
demotion and has priority over an existing eligibility list. This preferential right is also subject to
the replaced person remaining physically and mentally fit to discharge the duties of that position.
If an eligibility list does not exist, no new eligibility list will be created until an existing
reinstatement list is exhausted or it expires.

55
ARTICLE 17
NON-DISCRIMINATION

Section 1. Discrimination Prohibited.

Neither the Association nor the City shall engage in discrimination against any employee
because of the employees membership or non-membership in the Association or because of the
employee’s race, color, national origin, religion or creed, age, sex or gender, sexual orientation,
military status or veterans’ status, or disability or handicap.

Section 2. Non-interference With Protected Rights.

Neither the Association nor the City shall cause or attempt to cause an Officer to interfere
with, restrain, or coerce an employee from exercising their right to join or support the
Association or other organization or to refrain from joining or supporting the Association or
other organization. Likewise, neither the Association nor the City shall cause or attempt to cause
an Officer to interfere with, restrain, or coerce an employee’s right to engage in lawful
Association activities or to refrain from engaging in lawful Association activities.

Section 3. Association Duty of Fair Representation.

The Association recognizes its responsibility as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent
under the applicable provisions of the TLGC and this Agreement and agrees to represent all
Officers in a non-arbitrary and non-capricious manner, regardless of their membership or non-
membership in the Association or other organization.

Section 4. City Non-Interference.
The City shall not dominate, interfere, or assist in the formation, existence or

administration of any employee organization which is qualified to be a collective bargaining
agent for Officers; or contribute financial support to any such employee organization.

wa
a
ARTICLE 18
MAINTENANCE OF STANDARDS

Section 1. Excluded Items

Save and except for motorcycle pay, take home cars, auto allowance, mileage
reimbursement, military leave pay supplement, retirement benefits, and vacation leave which is
provided herein, existing special pay amounts and leave allowances as set forth in written City
or Department policy as of September |, 2008, shall remain unchanged for the duration of this
Agreement.

Section 2. Past Practices

The City reserves the right to make or change any act or decision that is reserved to the
City in Article 5 of this Agreement, entitled “Management Rights,” and the exercise of that right
cannot be limited by any written or unwritten past practice or policy. The City’s exercise of such
right will not be contrary to this Agreement or the City’s Personnel Rules and Regulations
(“PRRs”), as such PRRs are applicable to members of this bargaining unit. The parties
understand that the City is in the process of revising the PRRs, and that some revisions may
affect members of this bargaining unit. The City will provide to the Association 30 days’
advance notice prior to implementing these revised PRRs. Thereafter, the City will provide to the
Association two weeks advance notice of any subsequent changes to the PRRs. Special Pays
currently in effect shall continue to be calculated and payable in accordance with the existing
PRR’s, however, the exercise of Management Rights may affect or change the specific
employees selected, or the number and frequency of employees entitled to pay under the PRR’s,
as a result of the reserved powers and prerogatives in Article 5. To the extent of a conflict
between this Agreement and the PRRs, this Agreement controls. Any topic that is not covered in
this Agreement, but is covered by City ordinance, state or federal law, or by the PRRs, will be
controlled by the applicable law or the PRRs.
ARTICLE 19
HOLIDAYS

Section 1. Holidays Identified

As of the effective date of this Agreement, the City recognizes and provides paid time off
for the following 8 holidays: New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day (4 of July), Labor/9-11 Remembrance Day, Thanksgiving Day, the Day after
Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day. If the City adds an additional permanent holiday for all City
employees during the term of this agreement, the holiday will be added to the list of recognized
holidays above. For the members of this bargaining unit, these holidays will be observed as
follows: (1) New Year’s Day, Independence Day (4th of July), Thanksgiving Day, the Day after
Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day will be observed on the actual calendar date of the holiday; (2)
Martin Luther King Day, Memorial Day, and Labor/9-11 Remembrance Day will be observed on
the City-designated holiday. Holiday Pay or Holiday Leave accrual for a holiday is limited to 8
hours of the 24-hour day on which the holiday occurs.

Section 2. Holiday Accrual and Pay Upon Separation

Officers may accrue up to 128 hours of Holiday Leave. Maximum payment upon
separation will be limited to 128 hours Holiday accrual. Unused Personal Holiday time will not be
paid upon separation.

Section 3. Personal Holidays

In addition to these paid holidays, Officers who have completed their initial probationary
period are given one (1) Personal Holiday at the beginning of the payroll year that must be used
prior to the end of the payroll year, or the Personal Holiday is forfeited. Personal Holiday time can
be taken on any day of the year that the Officer is scheduled to work, with supervisory approval.

Section 4. Holiday Premium Pay and Eligibility for Overtime

Holiday Premium Pay will be paid as follows: (a) If an Officer works on a holiday and the
hours the Officer works during that week do not result in the Officer being eligible for overtime,
the hours worked by the Officer on the holiday will be paid at 1 1/2 times the Officer’s step rate of
pay; (b) If an Officer works on a holiday and the hours the Officer works during that week do
result in the Officer being eligible for overtime, the hours worked by the Officer on the holiday
will be paid at | 1/2 times the Officer’s regular rate of pay. Hours worked by an Officer on a
Holiday, for which the Officer receives Holiday Premium Pay, will not count as hours worked for
the purpose of calculating eligibility for overtime during the work week that includes the holiday.

58
Section 5. Holiday Pay and Holiday Leave
A. Officers who are not scheduled to work on a holiday.

Officers who are not scheduled to work on a day that is a holiday, as set out in Section 1,
above, and who do not work on that holiday will receive 8 hours of Holiday Leave, to be used at a
later date. In addition to Holiday Premium Pay, Officers who are not scheduled to work on a day
that is a holiday, as set out in Section 1, but who do work on that holiday will be allowed to choose
to receive Holiday Pay, at their regular step rate of pay, or accrue Holiday Leave, for use at a later
date, in an amount of hours equal to the number of hours they worked on the holiday, up to a
maximum of 8 hours. If such Officer works fewer than 8 hours on the holiday, they also will
accrue Holiday Leave, to be used at a later date, in an amount of hours equal to the difference
between 8 hours and the number of hours they worked on the holiday.

B. Officers who are scheduled to work on a holiday.

Officers who are scheduled to work on a day that is a holiday, as set out in Section 1, and
who do not work on that holiday will receive 8 hours of Holiday Pay, at their regular step rate of
pay.

In addition to Holiday Premium Pay, Officers who are scheduled to work on a day that is a
holiday, as set out in Section 1, and who do work on that holiday will be allowed to choose to
receive Holiday Pay, at their regular step rate of pay, or accrue Holiday Leave, for use at a later
date, in an amount of hours equal to the number of hours they worked on the holiday, up to a
maximum of 8 hours. If such Officer works less than 8 hours on the holiday, they also will receive
Holiday Pay, at their regular step rate of pay, in an amount of hours equal to the difference
between 8 hours and the number of hours they worked on the holiday.

C. Daybreaker

If due to a daybreaker schedule, an Officer is scheduled to work less than an entire shift
(e.g., the Officer’s workweek begins at 10:00 pm on the holiday), in addition to receiving Holiday
Premium Pay, the Officer will be allowed to choose to receive Holiday Pay at their regular step
rate of pay, or accrue Holiday Leave for use at a later date, for the number of hours worked. The
Officer will accrue as Holiday Leave the difference between 8 hours and hours worked.

D. Hours paid as Holiday Pay will count as hours worked for the purpose of calculating
eligibility for overtime during that week. Hours accrued by the Officer as Holiday Leave will
count as hours worked for the purpose of calculating eligibility for overtime, in the week that the
leave is taken.

E. Officers who are on paid occupational injury leave, city-compensated military leave, or
jury duty will accrue a holiday (8 hours). Officers may not use any other paid leave on the holiday
to accrue the holiday. Any leave scheduled on a holiday will not be deducted from an Officer’s
leave balance, and the Officer will receive holiday pay instead of using leave time.
Section 6. Scheduling of Non-Essential Personnel On Holidays

Nothing in this Article will prevent the Chief or designee, from implementing requirements
for non-essential personnel regarding scheduling Officers to work on, or observe, actual or City-
designated holidays, and the resulting mandatory use of accrued holiday, or other, leave on such
holidays. For example, the Chief can implement a policy that requires all Officers who were not
scheduled to work, and did not work, on Christmas Day, when it falls on a Sunday, to use the
accrued leave from that holiday on December 26th, the City-designated Christmas holiday.

Section 7. _ Definitions
“Holiday Leave” means up to 8 hours of leave, as set out in this Article.

“Holiday Pay” means up to 8 hours of compensation paid to an Officer at the Officer’s
step rate of pay relating to a holiday.

“Holiday Premium Pay” means compensation paid to an Officer for work performed on a
holiday, paid at the rate of either: (a) 1 1/2 times the Officer’s step rate of pay if the Officer works
on a holiday and the hours the Officer works during that week do not result in the Officer being
eligible for overtime; or (b) 1 1/2 times the Officer’s regular rate of pay, if an Officer works on a
holiday and the hours the Officer works during that week do result in the Officer being eligible for
overtime.

Section 8. | Examples

A number of examples are provided in Appendix D to demonstrate how time will be paid
during a holiday week. The parties agree that these examples correctly state the application of the
provisions of this Article.

Section 9. Preemption

This Article preempts TLGC Section 142.0013(d).

60
ARTICLE 20
SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL

Shift differential will be paid for time worked between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Shift
differential will be paid for only the time worked between these hours regardless of an Officer’s
assigned shift. Shift Differential will be paid as follows: (1) During the first two years of this
Agreement, hours worked between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. will be paid at an additional rate of
5% of base step pay; (2) During the third, fourth and any evergreen year of this Agreement,
hours worked between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. will be paid at an additional rate of 6% of base
step pay.

Shift differential will be paid on the actual hour(s) worked in the shift differential time period
during the workweek when compensatory time is earned. Shift differential will be included in the
calculation of regular rate of pay.

Shift differential will not be paid for any leave time used, including holiday leave, personal
holiday and compensatory time used. Shift differential is also not paid for working eligible hours
on Grant Details (as distinguished from full-time grant-funded positions), Emergency Call Back,
Court Time, DA Time, non-emergency call back time, or the 2 time premium component of
Holiday Premium Pay.

This Article will become effective either during the pay period that includes May 1, 2013 or
during the pay period that includes the effective date of this agreement, whichever is later. K-9
Officers will be paid shift differential as provided herein, and for all hours scheduled for animal
care outside of their regular work hours and on their regular days off or on days when they use
leave.

This Article will control over any inconsistent or contrary provision in Texas Local Government
Code Section 143.047 or any conflicting city ordinances, policies or practices.

6l
ARTICLE 21
CIVILIANIZATION OF CERTAIN SWORN OFFICER POSITIONS

Section 1.

Notwithstanding any provision in this agreement to the contrary (if any), and without altering
any other provision of this Agreement, the City is authorized to civilianize positions in the Jail
Section and Crime Scene Search Unit, and any civilianization action in these two units
heretofore taken by the City is hereby ratified and approved by the Association.

It is understood and agreed, however, that no civilian position will supervise or command sworn
civil service personnel in the Jail Section, Crime Scene Search Unit, or any units in which
civilian positions are created in the future.

It is understood and agreed that the number of authorized sworn positions in the Crime Scene
Search Unit may be reduced during the term of this Agreement only if the City implements a
reduction in force in the Department as a part of its budget process, in compliance with Chapter
143. In such event, any civilian positions and sworn positions shall be reduced, proportionally.

Section 2.
Civilian personnel assigned as Crime Scene Specialist.
Minimum Qualifications:
A. Graduation from an accredited four-year college or university with major course work in
Criminal Justice, Science, or a field related to the job, plus (2) years experience in crime

scene investigation, in a crime laboratory, or in law enforcement.

B. Any combination of experience that would likely provide the required knowledge in
Section 2A can be considered in meeting the minimum qualifications.

Section 3. Jail Staffing

The parties agree that the current practice of using non-sworn employees to perform duties at the
jail complies with the applicable standards under Local Government Code Chapter 143, and that
same practice may continue at the jail or other detention facility operated by the City.

Section 4. Preemption

It is expressly understood and agreed that all provisions of this Article shall preempt any statute,
Executive Order, local ordinance, City policy or rule, which is in conflict with or is inconsistent

with this Article and the procedures developed hereunder, including for example and not by way
of limitation, any contrary provisions of Texas Local Government Code Chapters 141, 142, and

143, including but not limited to Chapter 143, Subchapters A, B, C and I as amended.
ARTICLE 22
TUITION REIMBURSEMENT

The City shall fund and sworn Department employees shall be eligible to participate in the City’s
Tuition Reimbursement or Education Reimbursement program during the term of this
Agreement. The City’s Human Resources Department shall determine eligibility and administer
and oversee the program subject to the terms and conditions set out in the City’s Personnel Rules
and Regulations, with the exception of the funding limitations noted in the Statement of Purpose.

The Education Reimbursement Policy from the City’s Personnel Rules and Regulations is set out
in Appendix E.

63
ARTICLE 23
REOPENER PROVISIONS FOR HEALTHCARE
AND PENSION BENEFITS

Section 1. Employee or Retiree Health Care

In the event that the City negotiates future provisions for health care or retiree health care
with the Fort Worth Professional Firefighter’s Association (not including provisions relating to
any VEBA trust) which are different than those set forth herein, the Association shall be entitled
to reopen Meet and Confer discussions with the City regarding any such asserted differences.
The parties agree that those discussions may result in changes, postponement or reduction in
some benefits in order to provide similar health care or retiree health care benefits. If Meet and
Confer discussions are reopened, they will be limited to such differences in health care or retiree
health care that the Association identifies, in writing, 30 days before the beginning of the
reopened discussions. Such reopened Meet and Confer discussions must be completed within 60
days after the face-to-face discussions begin, unless the Association and the City agree, in
writing, to extend the discussions. Any agreement between the Association and the City that
results from the reopened Meet and Confer discussions will not be effective unless and until it is
approved by the City and the Association, pursuant to the requirements of Article 25 of this
Agreement, either as an amendment to this Agreement or a separate Memorandum of
Understanding.

Section 2. Pension Benefits

In the event that the City negotiates future provisions for pension benefits with the Fort
Worth Professional Firefighter's Association which are different than what are applicable to
Officers, as set out in Ordinance No, 20471-10-2012, adopted by the Fort Worth City Council on
October 23, 2012, the Association shall be entitled to reopen Meet and Confer discussions with
the City regarding any such asserted differences. The parties agree that those discussions may
result in changes, postponement or reduction in some benefits in order to provide similar pension
benefits. If Meet and Confer discussions are reopened, they will be limited to the differences in
pension benefits that the Association identifies, in writing, 30 days before the beginning of the
reopened discussions. Such reopened Meet and Confer discussions must be completed within 60
days after the face-to-face discussions begin, unless the Association and the City agree, in
writing, to extend the discussions. Any agreement between the Association and the City that
results from the reopened Meet and Confer discussions will not be effective unless and until it is
approved by the City and the Association, pursuant to the requirements of Article 25 of this
Agreement, either as an amendment to this Agreement or a separate Memorandum of
Understanding

64
ARTICLE 24
OFF-DUTY EMPLOYMENT AT CITY-OWNED FACILITIES

The parties understand that 29 U.S.C. § 207(p)(1), known as the “special detail
exemption” is part of the Fair Labor Standards Act, and provides that Officers of public
agencies, such as the City, may, at their own option, perform off-duty employment for an
employer who is independent and separate from the City, and the City will not be required to
count those hours worked in calculating overtime, even if the City facilitates the scheduling of
this work or determines the compensation that a third party will pay for the Officers’ off-duty
work. The Association agrees that the City’s procedures regarding facilitating and scheduling
Officers for off-duty work for employers who are independent and separate from the City,
including work at facilities owned by the City, comply with the special detail exemption.

The parties agree that Officers participating in off-duty employment opportunities
facilitated through the City, even at facilities owned by the City, are working off-duty for the
third party who contracted for their services, including lessees of City facilities, and are not
working for the City. This includes any work performed for third parties in facilities owned by
the City, for which the third party is responsible for paying the compensation for the Officers’
work. The parties further agree that the hours worked in such off-duty employment will not
count as hours worked for the purposes of calculating overtime, or accruing comp time, will not
be subject to shift differential, or any type of special or premium pay, and will not be
pensionable earnings, even if the City’s agreement with the third party requires the third party to
pay the compensation owed to the Officers to the City and the City is required to forward that
compensation to the Officers. The Chief shall adopt a written policy to provide for the
scheduling of Officers for off-duty employment on a reasonable and equitable basis.

65
ARTICLE 25
COMPLETE AGREEMENT

Section 1. The Parties agree that each has had the full and unrestricted right and opportunity
to make, advance, and discuss all matters properly within the province of bargaining for a Meet
and Confer agreement. This Agreement constitutes the full and complete Agreement of the
Parties and there are no others, oral or written, except as herein contained. No alteration,
amendment or variation of this Agreement’s terms shall bind the Parties unless made, executed
and voted on by the Parties as required by Subchapter | of Chapter 143 of the TLGC. A failure
of the City or Officer to insist in any one or more instances upon performance of any terms or
condition of this Agreement shall not be considered as a waiver or relinquishment of the right of
the City or the Association to future performance of any such term or condition, and the
obligations of the City and the Association to such future performance shall continue in full force
and effect.

Section 2. In the event that any provision in this Agreement conflicts or is inconsistent with
any provision of Chapter 141, 142 or 143, TLGC, or any other civil service provision or rule or
statute as amended from time to time, ordinance, General Orders or Personnel Rules and
Regulations setting standards or rights for Department employees, this Agreement shall prevail,
notwithstanding any such provision of Chapter 141, 142 or 143, TLGC or any other state statute.

66
ARTICLE 26
SAVINGS CLAUSE

Should any provision of this Agreement be found to be inoperative, void or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, all other provisions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect for the duration of this Agreement, it being the intention of the Parties that no portion of
this Agreement or provision herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the invalidity of
any other portion or provision.

67
ARTICLE 27
DURATION AND TERMINATION

Section I. As of the effective date of this agreement, all pay increases, leave, or changes in
benefits, shall be implemented in accordance with the respective timelines outlined herein. This
Agreement shall remain in effect until the 30th day of September, 2016, or until such time as it is
superseded by a new agreement between the Parties, whichever occurs later provided however,
that in no event shall this Agreement continue in effect after September 30, 2017.

Section 2. The City presently intends to continue this Agreement each fiscal year through its
term, to pay all payments due, and to fully and promptly perform all of the obligations of the
City under this Agreement. All obligations of the City shall be paid only out of current revenues
or any other funds lawfully available therefore and appropriated for such purpose by the City
Council, in compliance with the Texas Constitution, Article XI, Sections 5 and 7. In the event
that the City cannot meet its funding obligations, as provided in the State Constitution, this entire
Agreement becomes null and void.

Section 3. Voter Disapproval of the Crime Control Prevention District.

A. In the event that the election to extend and continue the Crime Control Prevention
District does not result in its extension, the City shall have the authority to postpone the
implementation of any pay increase, step increase, or step pay change set forth in this Agreement
upon the effective date and thereafter, for a period of 12 months from the date of the canvass of
the election results; provided, however, that after postponement, such increase shall nevertheless
take place beginning the 12th month after the date initially provided for, and shall continue in
effect during any remaining evergreen period, as provided in Section 1.

B. In the event of action by the City Council under the prior paragraph, the Parties
shall convene for the purpose of negotiating contract changes in the context of lost funding, but
all obligations of the Agreement shall otherwise continue, subject to the postponement of any
increases or changes noted above, unless agreed amendments are approved by both Parties.

Any pay increases, step increases or step pay changes postponed herein shall be paid the first pay
period following the 12th month from the date of the canvass of the election results unless
modified by amendment of this Agreement by the Parties.

Cc. This Agreement does not impair the authority of the City Council to determine the
number of authorized positions in the Department, or to change the classification of positions.

68
ARTICLE 28
NOTICE

Except as otherwise provided herein, any notice, demand, request or other communication
hereunder given or made by either Party to the other shall be in writing and shall be deemed to
be delivered whether actually received or not, when deposited in the United States mail, postage
prepaid, certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the Parties hereto at the respective
addresses set out below, or at such other address as they may provide by written notice to the
other Party.

A. If to City:
City Manager
City of Fort Worth
1000 Throckmorton Street
Fort Worth, TX 76102

B. If to Association:
President
Fort Worth Police Officers’ Association
904 Collier Street
Fort Worth, Texas 76102

69
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, THE PARTIES HAVE CAUSED TO HAVE THIS AGREEME
TO BE SIG BY FHEIR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVES ON THIS.
DAY OF -20/

 
  
  
  
  
 

CITY OF FORT.

Thomas M. Higgins xi Pri
City Manager / LE

ORT <<

 

   

ol nf

eles ASSOCIATION

   

J. Kayes City
a

VOR TH

 
  

“Hall /President
Fort Worth Police Officers’ Association

 

/) 7 \
LWT IO
70 Gontract Auth

7

Date

  
 
APPENDIX A

VOLUNTARY PAYROLL DEDUCTION
CITY OF FORT WORTH

| authorize the City of Fort Warth to Bbeaie A discontinue change
the following Payroll Deductiontsk:

Employee ID 6:

Employne Name:
Seren rrr nner seme ere Tn

Employes Signature: ote:

      

 

Must have ah ollginal enipiay an signals te iakes, soanned docuvionis, otc,) i process Payran Oedactian Requesh
Deduction Name Pi tecny § amoune Deduction Code.
0)._Aatns Cash Accurmiation Fund - GUL Employee Consributloa 0 GUL

      

|O1_Astna cash Accurmmation Fund - GUL Spouse Coninbution

D_ Aenoctecacy Patnitly (AFLAC (Farnity Cancer Mary) a
a

(1 Association of Cty Employees (ACE)

L111 Btsck Fire Fighter's Assaciatiges

 

 

 

       

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

| C1_Blsek Poitee Oftcwe's Aswoctatton” (see nofe Bevo |
LL_CLEAT (Combined Law Entorcamont Assoc of Texas!” (s60.nate below) |
CU venta Post tae ne iso
_01_Fireman’s Group Ratiot FRGRRE
LOL fit ear ite re
G_Font worth Fine Fignter's Association sects sypmsnstcrner J FRASON
(CL fom Worth Marshals Association sEWMAR) mote) nn L ODP ad
Cl conera tnplayos Associsbon (GEC) cr
(01 Heaith Speciat Encatimont | HLTHSC. a
L1_Hispanie Leadership Organization | Heo |
(01_Latine Police Officers Association of Fart Worth” ispe note bstew) | of RATPOA
| Librarians Association | LIBASN

DU bona term cae ___ANGTRM |

 

 

 

 

 

 

L(1_Nortn Texas Assoc of Putttic Employees {USW-NTAPE) NTXPEE j
OL offic & Professions! Emplayes loternational Union (OPEL) OPIEU i
I Police Benevoten Fund POLBEN :
C1 Police officers Aswectation POA) a POLASN.

| C1_pre-Fals Logat Services FPOLGL
(O_o ta aatton i | | MeTLFE

| C1_Toxas Municipal Police Association” # jsee note below) a TMPACN,
(11_unted Negro Cottege Fund UNNGCL
C1_unites way UNDWAY
[mea

 
  

PRGLOTI PKGCC I
PKGCRG!
PRGSTX |

RATE:

 

CIRCLEONE: LOT GARAGE CONV. CNTR TAX:

chny Police Officer who vas rot a member of one oF more of these assuciations as of November 11, 2008, must be amertser of the
Police Otficers Association (POA) in order to select this deduction,

acity of Fert Worth Marshals may select this deduction wathout jeining the POA.
“WRarshals must contact Marstul’s Association before signing up for Fort Wacth Marshals Association,

To Be Completed “Date Received: Bate input: input By 1
by HR Recards: |

REVISED CEST

71
APPENDIX B

VACATION LEAVE ACCRUALS CHART
OFFICER

 

Limits at the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Employee Maximum Accrual Rate Maximum Beginning of Maximum
Group Accrual Per | Per Pay Period | Accumulation each Payroll Payment At
Year (Hours) (Hours) 4X Year Termination
(Hours) (Hours) (Hours) 2X
3X
Officer with 1
year of service 117 4.50 468 351 240
(14.6)
Officer with 5
years of 133 5.12 532 399 272
service
(16.6)
Officer with
10 years of 141 5.42 564 423 288
service
(17.6)
Officer with
15 years of 157 6.04 628 471 320
service
(19.6)
Officer with
20 years of 181 6.96 724 543 368
service
(22.6)

 

72

 
X03

X04

X07

X08

X09

Tithe

Police Officer

Police Corporal
4 Years

Police Sergeant
7 Years

Police Lieutenant
10 Years

Police Captain
13 Years

1. NOTES

APPENDIX C

STRUCTURED PAY PLAN TABLE

FY 2012/2013

FY 2012/2013!

Base Pay Ist Year 2nd Year 3rd Year 4th Year 6th Year

Sept 2 3 4 5
Base Pay Base+1 Base+2 Base+3  Base+4
25.09 2634 27.66 29.04 30.49

6
Base+S
31.25

4th Year 6th Year

 

6

Base Pay Base+1

33.66

Across the Board (ATB) Pay Raise Percentages:

FY 201210013
FY 201372014
Fy 2014/2015
FY 201812016
FY 2015/2016

0.00 % Effective first pay period of FY 2012/2013,
1.00 % Effective first pay period of FY 2013/2014
2.00 % Effective first pay period of FY 2014/2015
1.00 % Effective first pay period of FY 2015/2016

34.50

7th Year
6
Base Pay
38.04

8th Year

Base+6
32.03

8th Year

Base+2
35.36

8th Year
7
Base+1
38.99

10th Year
8
Base+7
32.83

10th Year
8
Base+3
36.24

10th Year
8
Base+2
39.96

10th Year
8
Base Pay
44.03

2.00 % Effective the pay period that includes the date of Aprit 1, 2016 for FY 2015/2016

12th Year
9
Base+8
33.65

12th Year
9
Baset4
3715

12th Year

Base+3
40.96

12th Year
9
Base+1
45.13

13th Year
9
Base Pay
49.78

14th Year
10
Base+9
35.33

14th Year
10
Base+5
39.01

I4th Year
10.
Base+4
43.01

14th Year
10
Base+2
47.39

14th Year
10
Base+I
52.27

16th Year
ul
Base+10
37.16

loth Year
ul
Base+6
41.02

16th Year
u
Base+5
45.20

loth Year
u
Base+3
49.83

loth Year
ul
Base+2
54.93
Key

X03

X04

X07

X08

X09

Title

Police Officer

Police Comporal
4 Years

Police Sergeant
7 Years

Police Lieutenant
10Y

 

 

Police Captain

 

1. NOTES,

FY 2013/2014

FY 2013/2014!

Base Pay Ist Year 2nd Year 3rd Year 4th Year 6th Year 8th Year

Step | 2 3 4 5

6

3

Base Pay Base+! Base+2 Base+3. Base+4 Base+S Base+6

25.34 26.60 27.94 29.33 30.79

4th Year 6th Year 8th Year

5

Base Pay Base+l

34.00

Aeros the Board (ATB) Pay Raise Percentages

FY 2013/2014

1.00 % Effective first pay period of FY 2013/2014

31.56

6

34.85

7th Year 8th Year

6

32.35

7
Base+2
35.71

7

Base Pay Base+

38.42

39.38

10th Year
8
Base+7
33.16

10th Year
8g
Base+3
36.60

10th Year
8

Bi
40.36

 

10th Year
8
Base Pay
44.47

12th Year
9
Base+8
33.99

12th Year
9
Base+4
37.52

12th Year
9
Base+3
4137

12th Year
9
Base+1
45.58

13th Year
9
Base Pay
50.28

14th Year
10
Base+9
35.68

i4th Year
10
Base+S
39.40

L4th Year
10
Baset4
43.44

 

14th Year
10
Base+2
47.86

14th Year
10
Base+!
52.79

16th Year
il
Base+10
37.53

16th Year
i
Base+6
4143

16th Year
it
Base+5
4s

 

16th Year
ul
Base+3
50.33

16th Year
HW
Base+2,
55.48
Key

X03

X04

X08

X09

Title

Police Officer

Police Corporal
4 Years

 

Police Lieutenant
10 Years

Police Captain
13 Years

1. NOTES:

FY 2014/2015

 

Base Pay Ist Year 2nd Year 3rd Year 4th Year 6th Year 8th Year 10th Year

 

FY 2014/2015
Step | 2 3 4 5
Base+1 sa
2585 27.14 29.92 3141

 

4th Year 6th Year 8th Year

5

Base Pay Base+l Baset2  Base+3

34.68

Across the Board (ATB) Pay Raise Percentages.

FY 2014/2015,

2.00 % Effective first pay period of FY 2014/2015,

75

6

Basc+3 Base+4 Base+5

32.19

6

35.54

7th Year 8th Year

6

7
Base+6
33.00

7

36.43

7

Base Pay Base+|

39.19

40.17

8
Base+7
33.82

10th Year
8

37.33

10th Year
8
Base+2
417

10th Year
8
Base Pay
45.36

12th Year
9
Base+8
67

 

12th Year
9
Base+4
38.27

12th Year
9
Base+3
42.20

12th Year
9
Base+l
46.49

13th Year
9

e Pay

51.28

 

14th Year
10
Base+9
36.40

14th Year
10
Base+S
40.19

14th Year
10
Base+4
4431

14th Year
10
Base+2
A882

14th Year
10
Base+!
53.85

16th Year
NH
Base+10
38.28

16th Year
i
Base+6
42.26

16th Year
i
Base+5
46.57

16th Year
it
Base+3
S133

16th Year
i
Base+2
56.59
FY 2015/2016

FY 2015/2016!
Key Title Base Pay Ist Year 2nd Year 3rd Year 4th Year 6th Year 8th Year 10th Year 12th Year 14th Year — 16th Year
Step | 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 IL
Base Pay Base+! Base+2 Base+3 Base+4 Baset+5 Base+6 — Base+7 Base+8 Base+9 Base+10
X03 Police Officer 26.11 2741 28.78 30.22 31.72 32.52 33.33 34.16 35.01 36.76 38.67

4th Year 6th Year 8th Year 10th Year 12th Year {4th Year |6th Year

5 6 7 8 9 10. it
Base Pay Base+! Base+2 — Base+3 Base+4 Base+5S Base+6,
X04 Police Corporal 35.02 35.90 36.79 37.71 38.65, 40.59 42.68
4 Yea

 

7th Year 8th Year [0th Year 12th Year 14th Year 16th Year
6 7 8 9 10 il
Base Pay Base+! — Base+2 Base+3 Base+4, Base+5,
X07 Police Si 39,58 40.57 4158 42.62 44,75 47.03

7 Years

 

10th Year 12th Year 14th Year 6th Year

8 9 10 Hl
Base Pay Base+! — Base+2——Base+3
X08 Police Lieutenant 4581 46.96 49.31 51.85
10 Years
13th Year 14th Year 16th Year
9 10 MW
Base Pay Base+! — Base+2
X09 Police Captain 51.80 $4.39 $7.15
13 Years
4. NOTES
Across the Board (ATB) Pay Raise Percentages:
FY2015/2018 1.00 % Effective first pay period of FY 2015/2016

76
Key

X03

Nod

X07

X08

X09

Tithe

Police Officer

Police Corporal
4 Years

Police Sergeant
7 Years

 

Police Lieutenant
10 Years

Police Captain
13 Years

4. NOTES

FY 2015/2016 Mid-Year

FY 2015/2016 Mid - Year!

Base Pay Ist Year 2nd Year 3rd Year 4th Year 6th Year Sth Year

Step! 2 3 4 5
Base Pay Base+] Baset2 Baset3 Base+4
26.63 27.95 29.36 082 32.36

4th Year 6th Year 8th Year

6
e+5,
33.17

 

6

Base Pay Baset

35.72

Across the Board (ATB) Pay Raise Percentages:
2.00 % Effective the pay period that includes the date of April 1, 2016 for FY 2015/2016

Fy 20152016

77

36.62

Tth Year 8th Year

6

7
Base+6
33.99

7
Base+2
37.53

Base Pay Base+l

40.37

41.38

10th Year
8
Base+7
34.84

10th Year
8
Base+3
3846

10th Year
8
Base+2
4241

10th Year
8
Base Pay
46.73

12th Year
9
Baset+8
35.71

12th Year
9
Base+4
3943

12th Year
9
Base+3
43.47

12th Year
9
Base+!
47.90

13th Year
9
Base Pay
52.83

14th Year
10
sero

37.50

 

14th Year
10
Base+5
41.40

 

14th Year
10

Base+2

30

 

14th Year
10
Base+]

55.47

i6th Year
ul
Base+10)
39.44

16th Year
I
Base+6,
43.54

16th Year
I
Base+5S
47.97

loth Year
"
Base+3

89)

 

16th Year
"
Base+2
58.30
APPENDIX D
Holiday Pay Examples

Productive time = time that is included in the total number of hours worked by an Officer in a
work week, for the purpose of calculating an Officer’s eligibility for overtime in a work week.
Includes: Regular (REG), Holiday (HOL), Accrued Holiday Used (HLA), Personal Holiday
Leave (PHL), Special Personal Holiday Leave (SPHL)

Non-Productive Time = Vacation (VAC), Sick (S), Holiday Accrued (HAE), Holiday Premium
Pay (HOT)

Bold Italics = “Productive” hours

() = Hours worked converted for | 2 times

RDO = Regular Day Off

Payroll Week = Saturday — Friday

Day Breaker = Shift that crosses two calendar days

Total including / time conversion = the total hours for which an officer will be paid after
being credited with 2 time premiums for overtime and holidays.

Holiday Premium Pay = Holiday Overtime on the pay stub

e
OD
~ ayeyn ols

Note: An Officer who chooses to accrue a holiday (Holiday Accrual Earn) when they work will
not receive “productive time” for those hours worked. They will receive productive time when
they use the accrued hours (Holiday Accrual Used) at a later date.

78
SECTION 1 - Officers Who Are NOT Scheduled to Work on a Holiday

Example 1: Schedule 0600 — 1400 hours Tuesday — Saturday (8-hour shift in one calendar
day)
Officer is not scheduled and does not work on the Holiday.

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hours Worl
Total
including %
conversion
Regular Earnings 8 8 |12| 8 4 40
Holiday Premium (1/2 ) 0
Paid Holiday 0
Overtime (1 2) 4 6
(6)
Sub-Total Paid | 8 0 0 8 | 12] 8 10 46
Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 8 8
Total Compensation (Paid and 8 0 8 8 | 12] 8 10 54
Accrued)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Example 2: Schedule 0600 — 1400 hours Tuesday — Saturday (8-hour shift in one calendar
day)

Officer is not scheduled to work but works a portion of a shift on the Holiday. In addition to Holiday
Premium that is paid at 1 % times, the Officer chooses to be paid for the portion of the holiday worked
and automatically accrues for the portion of the holiday not worked.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sa} Su M- T |W Th] F Total
Hours Worked
Total
including
conversion
Regular Earnings 8 8 | 8} 8 4 36
Holiday Premium (1 % ) 4 (6) 6
Paid | Holiday 4 4
Overtime (1 4) 4 6
(6)
Sub-Total Paid | 8 0 10 8 | 8} 8 | 10 52
Accrued | HolidayAccrual Earned 4 4
Total Compensation (Paid and 8 0 14 8 | 8] 8 | 10 56
Accrued)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

79
Example 3: Schedule 0600 — 1400 hours Tuesday — Saturday (8-hour shift in one calendar

day)

Officer is not scheduled to work but works a portion of a shift on the Holiday.
Premium Pay that is paid at | '4 times, the Officer chooses to accrue a whole holiday.

 

In addition to Holiday

 

  

 

     

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

M- T |W] Thi F Total
Holiday
Hours Worked 8 RDO RDO/4 8 8 8 8 44
Total
including
conversion
Regular Earnings 8 8 |8| 88 40
Holiday Premium (1 % ) 4 (6) 6
Paid | Holiday 0
Overtime (1 4) 0
Sub-Total Paid | 8 6 8} 8] 8 | 8 46
Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 8 8
Total Compensation (Paid and 8 14 8} 8} 848 54
Accrued)

 

 

 

Example 4: Schedule 0600 — 1600 hours Tuesday — Friday (10-hour shift in one calendar

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

day)
Officer is not scheduled and does not work on the Holiday.
Sa Su M- T |W Th] F Total
Hours Worked
Total
including
’
conversion
Regular Earnings 10 | 14| 10| 6 40
Paid Holiday Premium (1 % ) 0
Holiday 0
Overtime (1 %) 4 6
(6)
Sub-Total Paid | 0 0 0 10 | 14} 10 | 12 46
Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 8 8
Total Compensation (Paid and 0 0 8 10 | 14] 10 | 12 54
Accrued)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

80
Example 5: Schedule 0600 — 1600 hours Tuesday — Friday (10-hour shift in one calendar
day)

Officer is not scheduled to work but works a portion of a shift on the Holiday. In addition to Holiday
Premium Pay that is paid at 1 2 times, the Officer chooses to be paid for the portion of the holiday

 

 
    
 

  

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

worked.
Total
Holiday
| {Hours Worked RDO RDO RDO/4 10 10 10 10 44
Total
including
A
conversion
Regular Earnings 10 | 10| 10| 6 36
Holiday Premium (1% ) 4 (6) 6
Paid Holiday 4 4
Overtime (1%) 4 6
(6)
Sub-Total Paid | 0 0 10 10 | 10 | 10 | 12 52
Accrued | HolidayAccrual Earned 4 4
Total Compensation (Paid and 0 0 14 10} 10} 10 | 12 56
Accrued)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Example 6: Schedule 0600 — 1600 hours Tuesday — Friday (10-hour shift in one calendar
day)

Officer is not scheduled to work but works a portion of a shift on the Holiday. In addition to Holiday
Premium Pay that is paid at 1 4 times, the Officer chooses to accrue the whole holiday

 

 

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hours Worked RDO RDO __ RDO/4
Total
including
%
conversio
n
Regular Earnings 10_| 10 | 10 | 10 40
Holiday Premium (1% ) 4 (6) 6
Paid Holiday 0
Overtime (1 2) 0
Sub-Total Paid 6 10 | 10 | 10} 10 46
Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 8 8
Total Compensation (Paid and 14 10 | 10; 10] 10 54
Accrued)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

81
Example 7: Schedule 2000 — 0600 hours Tuesday — Friday (10-hour Day Breaker shift)
Officer is not scheduled and does not work on the Holiday.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hours Worked
Total
including
conversion
Regular Earnings 6 4 |10| 14) 6 40
Holiday Premium (1 2 ) 0
Paid | Holiday 0
Overtime (1 %) 4 6
(6)
Sub-Total Paid | 6 0 0 4 {10} 14| 12 46
Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 8 8
Total Compensation (Paid and 6 0 8 4 110} 14) 12 54
Accrued)

 

 

 

SECTION 2 - Officers Who ARE Scheduled to Work on a Holiday

Example 1: Schedule 0600 — 1400 hours Monday — Friday (8-hour shift in one calendar
day)

Officer is scheduled to work and does work on a holiday. The Officer’s total hours worked during the
week, including the hours worked on the holiday, is 44 hours. In addition to Holiday Premium Pay that is
paid at | % times, the officer chooses to be paid Holiday Pay rather than accruing a holiday.

 

M- T|W {Thi F Total
Holiday

Hours Worked

 

Total including 4

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

conversion

Regular Earnings 8|12| 8 | 4 32

Holiday Premium (1 % ) 8 (12) 12

Paid | Holiday 8 8

Overtime (1%) 4 6

(6)

Sub-Total Paid 20 8112] 8 | 10 58

Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 0 0

Total Compensation (Paid and 20 8} 12] 8 | 10 58
Accrued)

 
Example 2: Schedule 0600 — 1400 Monday — Friday (8-hour shift in one calendar day)
Officer is scheduled to work and does work a full shift on a holiday. In addition to Holiday Premium Pay
that is paid at | % times, the officer chooses to accrue the holiday rather than being paid for the holiday.

 

M- |T|Wj Th| F Total

Hours Worked

 

Total including ‘4 conversion

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Regular Earnings 8|12|8| 8 36
Holiday Premium (1 % ) 8 12
Paid (12)

Holiday 0 0
Overtime (1) 0
Sub-Total Paid | 12 8} 12]| 8] 8 48
Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 8 8
Total Compensation (Paid and 20 8/1218 8 56

Accrued)

 

Example 3: Schedule 0600 — 1400 Monday — Friday (8-hour shift in one calendar day)
Officer is scheduled to work and observes the holiday.

 

M- |T Wj Th} F Total

 

Hours Worked

Total including

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

conversion

Regular Earnings 8 12 |8| 4 32

Holiday Premium (1 % ) 0 0

Paid | Holiday 8 8

Overtime (1) 4(6) 6

Sub-Total Paid 8 8] 12 | 8] 10 46

Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 0 0

Total Compensation (Paid and 8 8} 12; 8] 10 46
Accrued)

 

83
Example 4: Schedule 0600 — 1400 Monday — Friday (8-hour shift in one calendar day)
Officer is scheduled to work and does work a portion of the holiday. In addition to Holiday Premium Pay

that is paid at | % times, the Officer chooses to be paid for the whole holiday.

 

M- T) Wj Th F
Holiday

 

Hours Worked

  

Total

Total including

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

conversion

Regular Earnings 8 12| 8 4 32

Holiday Premium (1%) 4 (6) 6

Paid | Holiday 8 8

Overtime (1 2) 4 (6) 6

Sub-Total Paid 14 8] 12] 8 10 52

Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 0 0

Total Compensation (Paid and 14 8] 12] 8 10 52
Accrued)

 

 

Example 5: Schedule 0600 — 1400 Monday — Friday (8-hour shift in one calendar day)
Officer is scheduled to work and does work a portion of the holiday. In addition to Holiday Premium Pay
that is paid at | 4 times, the Officer chooses to accrue time for the portion of the holiday worked and is

automatically paid for the portion of the holiday that the Officer does not work.

 

M- T| W | Thi F

Hours Worked

 

Total

Total including %

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

conversion

Regular Earnings 8 | 12 |8| 8 36

Holiday Premium (1 % ) 4 (6) 6

Paid Holiday 4 4

Overtime (1 4) 0

Sub-Total Paid 10 8 | 12 | 8] 8 46

Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 4 4

Total Compensation (Paid and 14 8} 12 | 8] 8 50
Accrued)

 

 

84
Example 6: Schedule 1000 — 2000 Monday — Thursday (10-hour shift in one calendar day)
Officer is scheduled to work and does work. In addition to Holiday Premium Pay that is paid at 1 2 times,
the Officer chooses to be paid for the holiday rather than accruing a holiday.

 

M- T |W] Th Total

Holida
Hours Worked 10 10 14 10 44

Total including

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

conversion
Regular Earnings 10 | 14 8 32
Holiday Premium (1%) 10 (15) 15
Paid Holiday 8 8
Overtime (14) 2(3) 3
Sub-Total Paid 23 10,14} 11 58
Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 0 0
Total Compensation (Paid and 23 10} 14] 11 58

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accrued)

 

Example 7: Schedule 1000 — 20000 Monday — Thursday (10-hour shift in one calendar day)
Officer is scheduled to work and chooses to observe the holiday. The Officer works additional hours later
in the week to offset Holiday. (If the Officer did not work extra hours that week, the Officer could make
up the hours on the Holiday by using accrued leave time considered as productive time.)

 

M- T |W) Th Total
Holiday

    

Total including 2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

conversion
Regular Earnings 10/14] 8 32
Holiday Premium (1%) 0
Paid | Holiday 8 8
Overtime (1 4) 2(3) 3
Sub-Total Paid 8 10} 14] 11 43
Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 0 0
Total Compensation (Paid and 8 10} 14} 11 43

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accrued)

 

85
Example 8: Schedule 2000-0600 Monday — Thursday (10-hour Day Breaker shift)

Officer is scheduled to start a work week at 2000 hours on a holiday and does work. In addition to
Holiday Premium Pay that is paid at | 4 times, the officer chooses to be paid Holiday Pay for the hours
worked on the holiday rather than accruing a holiday and automatically accrues for the unscheduled hours
on the holiday. (If the Officer did not work extra hours that week, the Officer could make up the hours on.
the Holiday by using accrued leave time that is considered productive time.)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sa Su M- T|W|Th] F Total
Hours Worked
Total
including
%
conversion
Regular Earnings 0 10| 14| 10 2 36
Holiday Premium (1 ) 4 (6) 6
Paid Holiday 4 4
Overtime (1 4) 4 (6) 6
Sub-Total Paid 0 10 10} 14} 10} 8 52
|| Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 4 4
Total Compensation (Paid and 0 14 10] 14} 10 8 56
Accrued)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Example 9: Schedule 2000 — 0600 Saturday — Wednesday (10-hour Day Breaker shift)
Officer is scheduled to start a work week at 2000 hours on Saturday. The Officer takes off the Sunday
night-Monday morning shift and Monday is a holiday. The Officer returns to work Monday at 2000
hours. The Officer chooses to accrue the hours worked on the holiday and observe a portion of the
holiday.

 

Hours Worked

 

Total including 2
conversion

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Regular Earnings 4\6 14 | 10 34

Holiday Premium (1% ) 4 (6) 6

Paid | Holiday 4 4

Overtime (1 4) 0

Sub-Total Paid | 4 | 6 10 14| 10 44

Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 4 4

Total Compensation (Paid and 416 14 14] 10 48
Accrued)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

86
SECTION 3 - Chief’s Prerogative Regarding Non-Essential Staff When the Contractual

Holiday for Police Officers is on a Different Day than the Observed Holiday for the City of
Fort Worth

Example 1: Schedule 0800 — 1700 Monday — Friday (uncompensated lunch)

Officer who has weekends off and is non-essential when City offices are closed. Note: The Officer will
have to use previously accrued holidays for Monday since the Sunday accrual will not be available until
the following pay period. If no holiday accrual has been accumulated, accrued compensatory or vacation
time will be used.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

S- M-City Observed | T |W} Th} F Total
Christmas Holiday
Day
Hours Worked
Total
including
”
conversion
Regular Earnings & |12| 8 4 32
Paid Holiday Premium (1% ) 0
Holiday 0
Overtime (1 4) 4 (6) 6
Holiday Accrual Used 8 8
Sub-Total Paid 0 8 8 | 12} 8 | 10 46
Accrued | Holiday Accrual Earned 8 8
Total Compensation (Paid and 8 8 8 |} 12} 8 | 10 54
Accrued)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

87
APPENDIX E

Education Reimbursement Policy
Statement of Purpose

The Education Reimbursement program addresses the City’s commitment to employee growth
and development. Reimbursed education must be directly related to an employee’s current job
or to a position with the City that requires the educational preparation. The Human Resources
Department determines whether the courses taken are related or required as part of the job. Law
and religious degrees are not covered and doctorate degrees are partially covered.

Funding for this program is subject to council approval and is limited to the fiscal year in which
funds are budgeted. A fixed budget amount is available for tuition reimbursement per fiscal
year. The individual cap available to an employee per fiscal year is applied on a first-come, first-
served basis until the yearly budget is reached. Remaining funds do not transfer into the
subsequent fiscal year.

Applicants must meet with a designated Human Resources Department representative before
admittance to the reimbursement program. Applications are reviewed for approval or
disapproval on a “first-come, first-served” basis. When the allocated fiscal year budget funds are
exhausted, no additional applications will be approved. The approval of a course or a degree plan
is not a guarantee of a promotion or obtaining a position that requires or uses the training.

General Eligibility Requirements

An employee can qualify to receive reimbursement for one degree at each level: high school
diploma or GED, associate, undergraduate (bachelors) and graduate (masters).

The requirements to apply for education reimbursement are:
¢ Must be a regular, full-time employees participating in the City’s retirement fund.
Temporary, seasonal or less-than-part-time employees are not eligible.

« Must have successfully completed their initial probation and any extended
probation.

¢ Cannot currently be on disciplinary probation or have received an overall
performance evaluation that requires a PIP during the most recent performance
evaluation.

Must have the approval of their supervisor and Human Resources before attending
the course.

 

In any graded undergraduate course, an employee must attain a course grade of “
or higher. In circumstances where the course is not graded, a “pass” grade must be
earned to be eligible for reimbursement.

88
In any graded graduate course, an employee must attain a grade of “B” or higher.
In circumstances where the course is not graded, a “pass” grade must be earned to
be eligible for reimbursement.

All course work must be taken on the employee’s own time. When there is an
unavoidable conflict between class and job responsibilities, a supervisor may make
a reasonable effort to accommodate the class schedule. Any accommodation of an
employee’s class schedule is at the supervisor's discretion.

Seminars and conferences that meet for the short duration of two weeks or less are
not eligible for education reimbursement. Seminars, training and review courses
that deal with professional certifications or licensing are not eligible for tuition
reimbursement. Individual departments may reimburse for short seminars, review
courses or certifications.

Reimbursement is not paid for audited courses or for non-credit, continuing
education courses for which there is no grade.

Credits obtained by the College Level Examination Program (CLEP) are not
eligible for Education Reimbursement.

Degree plans leading to a degree in Law are not covered.
Degree plans leading to religious or ministry degrees are not covered.

Doctorate level degrees (PhD) are covered only if in a scientific field (chemistry,
biology, forensics, etc.) and highly related to the employee’s current classification
with the approval of the City Manager or designee.

Fees and expenses other than tuition and mandatory, course-related fees are
excluded from reimbursement. Although not limited to the following, excluded
expenses are: books, supplies, parking fees, health insurance fees, room and board.

Incomplete forms or forms without all required documents attached will not be
processed. Forms and requests turned in more than ten working days beyond the
published deadline will not be approved, processed or paid.

College programs such as mini-terms/sessions, distance learning or quarters that are
not set on a semester basis are considered for reimbursement if they are job related
or part of a degree program and are taken for credit. The employee must meet the
established application deadline for the spring, fall or summer semester that
precedes the course.

Courses must be taken at an accredited school, junior college, college, university,
technical or trade school.

89
Not Eligible for Reimbursement

1. Temporary or part-time employees are not eligible for Education Reimbursement.

Seminars and conferences that meet for the short duration of two weeks or less, are not

eligible for education reimbursement. Seminars, training and review courses that deal

with professional certifications or licensing are not eligible for tuition reimbursement.

Individual departments may reimburse for short seminars, review courses or

certifications.

Reimbursement shall not be paid for audited courses or for non-credit, continuing

education courses for which there is no grade.

4. Credits obtained by the College Level Examination Program (CLEP) are not eligible for

Education Reimbursement.

Fees and expenses other than tuition and mandatory, course-related fees are excluded

from reimbursement. Although not limited to the following, excluded expenses are:

books, supplies, parking fees, health insurance fees, room & board.

6. Incomplete forms or forms without all required documents attached will not be
processed. Forms and requests turned in more than ten working days beyond the
published deadline will not be approved, processed or paid.

7. Degree programs leading to a religious ministry or occupation (based on the separation of
church and state principle). Degree programs at a religious institution that are relevant or
useful to an employee’s City job are acceptable.

tw

we

n

Administration, Payments & Maximum Reimbursement

Education Reimbursement is paid only once for each approved course. Payments are made as
soon as practicable after receipt of the required paperwork.

An employee who receives financial assistance for their education from another source must
disclose the source and amount on the Education Reimbursement Application. The City does not
pay for tuition and mandatory fees paid by other sources, such as scholarships, grants, Veterans
benefits or other subsidies. Any employee who receives reimbursements from the City which
were paid by other sources must pay back 100% of those funds before becoming eligible for any
future reimbursements from the City.

The City’s total education reimbursement cannot exceed the employee's education expenses.
Continuation of Employment & Reimbursement Payback Provisions

If an employee resigns or is terminated before completing a course, the City is not obligated to
pay reimbursement. An employee who terminates or retires from the City of Fort Worth after
receiving reimbursement must pay back 100% of reimbursement received during the 12 months

immediately preceding termination or retirement and 50% of reimbursement received during the
13-24 month period before termination or retirement.

90
An employee terminated because of a reduction in force, medical disability or as a result of
occupational injuries or illnesses is not required to pay back the money received for educational
reimbursement and is not subject to the payback provision.

Education Reimbursement Appeals

The City’s Personnel Committee shall hear appeals regarding education reimbursement matters.
The committee shall consider matters submitted by a Department Director, upon which the
requesting Department Director and the Human Resources Department have been unable to
reach consensus. The Personnel Committee shall render final decisions on the appeal in
accordance with the provisions of this policy.

For more information regarding Educational Reimbursement, please see Appendix 7.

(Revised 2-10-06)
Personnel Rules and Regulations

Appendix 7 — Education Reimbursement Overview

 

 

Type of What's Education Reimbursement Rate Procedure
Education Reimbursable
Reimbursement
Degree Program Tuition & Max allowable - Tuition and Turn in Application with
Mandatory course mandatory course related fees paid the following attachments:
related fees by the employee or $1500 per

Individual Growth Plan
including a statement of
career goals i.e., How
course benefits the City &
employee

semester or corresponding period for
tuition and mandatory course related
fees, whichever is less. In no case
will the yearly maximum
reimbursement exceed $4,500.
Degree Plan & goals must
only be filed at the
beginning of the degree.
Once a file is established,
application only is
required.

Estimate of semester cost

On completion of Course
turn in:

Official grade slip

Official itemized, paid
receipt

 

 

 

 

 

91

 
Type of
Education
Reimbursement

 

What's.
Reimbursable

 
 

   
 

Education Reimbursement Rate

   
 

  

Procedure

 

Job Related Course
(Including college
courses, continuing
education, trades or
technical)

 

Tuition and
Mandatory course
related fees

 

Max allowable—Tuition and

mandatory, course related fees paid

by the employee or $1,500 per

semester or corresponding period for
tuition and mandatory course related
fees, whichever is less. In no case

shall the yearly maximum
reimbursement exceed $4,500.

 

Application with the
following attachments:

Official Job Description
Official Course description

Individual Growth Plan
including a statement of
career goals i.e., How
course benefits the City &
employee

Estimate of cost
On Completion of Course:
Official grade slip

Official itemized, paid
receipt

 

GED or ESL

Test Fee

 

Actual test fee following successful

completion of test

On completion, submit:
Application

Official certificate showing
successful completion of
GED or ESL

Itemized, paid receipt

 

High School
Diploma

 

 

Tuition

Eligible schools must be
verified through Human
Resources

 

 

Steps to Apply for Education Reimbursement

1. Read and become fami

 

 

iar with the provisions of the Education Reimbursement

Policy. Know the Education Reimbursement procedures and all application and

grade/receipt deadlines.

2. Start and keep a file of all documents relating to Education Reimbursement.

3. Submit Education Reimbursement Application, together with required documents
by the deadline established by the Human Resources Department.

Following successful completion of the course, submit an official grade slip and official itemized
receipt/proof of payment that shows tuition, fees and other items listed separately. These
documents must be submitted by the deadline established by the Human Resources Department.
