ORDINANCE NO. 5637

AN ORDINANCE OF THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
SANTA BARBARA ADOPTING A MEMORANDUM OF
UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE CITY OF SANTA
BARBARA AND THE SANTA BARBARA POLICE
OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION FOR THE PERIOD OF JULY 1,
2013, THROUGH JUNE 30, 2016

THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SANTA BARBARA DOES ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:

SECTION 1. The Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Santa
Barbara and the Santa Barbara Police Officers Association entered into as of July 1,
2013 and attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference as Exhibit "A" is hereby
adopted.

SECTION 2. During the term of the agreement, the City Administrator is hereby
authorized to implement the terms of the Memorandum of Understanding between the
City of Santa Barbara and the Santa Barbara Police Officers Association without further
action by the City Council, unless such further action is explicitly required by state or
federal law. This authorization shall include, but not be limited to, the authority to
implement employee salary increases and publish changes to the salary schedule(s)
adopted with the annual operating budget.
a ope te Keck

Fees ert ane anna
Te 2. 2 ang = ee
tle by Tew ABerdy

te teat By Lara Ray

emt Taree Eg PIR Sr A LE oe BEE A, A

= Spot et ee eevee hb Gnttent a Fl wt
be ois ee eh cee oom gt) PY hoes
epee fgg oom, ms hs oS lanes "a SRG POCA | SO

oaks Mime
- were eg ed ed ae

7 = kes ro" are ae area? are

ee ee ee ge ied ae et ee —"27

Se ee ee ee ed ae

= mee re me ede ot ee Ee Le LF

ee a Se ee es pee eelee p= le
gel et ai TL "TT

e
EXHIBI
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BITA

BETWEEN
THE CITY OF SANTA BARBARA
AND THE
SANTA BARBARA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

THIS AGREEMENT, SIGNED ON Septic Spew LY Zad, IS ENTERED INTO AS OF
JULY 1, 2013, BETWEEN THE CITY OF SANTA BARBARA, HEREINAFTER REFERRED TO AS THE

"CITY," AND THE SANTA BARBARA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION, HEREINAFTER REFERRED
TO AS THE "ASSOCIATION."

Pursuant to Section 3.12 of the Municipal Code of the City of Santa Barbara and Section 3500 et. seq. of
the Government Code, the duly authorized representatives of the City and the Association, having met and
conferred in good faith concerning wages, hours, and terms and conditions of employment of Unit
employees, declare their agreement to the provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding.

FOR THE CITY: FOR THE ASSOCIATION:

an aaa

Kristine Schmidt Eric Beecher
Employee Relations Manager iati

rank Mannix

     

Crug) BuO.
Cryst&l Bedolla
Police Officer
Andrew Hill
Counsel Pov

   
   

Counsel
»

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS

(Online version- “Click” on any article to skip to that Article)

AR

PPFNOAnAeon a

25.

E #
"B" Step (Secondary Salary Step)

  
 
 
 
 
  

 

Benefits- Part-time Employees .
Bereavement Leave

Cafeteria Plan ..

Call Back

Educational Incentive Pay Plan .
Emergency Medical Dispatch Personnel

 

Health insurance for Unit Members’ Survivors ..

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 

Holidays .....
Implementation of MOU
Jury Duty and Court Appearance:
Layoff Procedure......
Life Insurance............
Loss Control Support ...
Maintenance of Benefits
Management Rights......
Medical, Dental, and Vision Insurance
Meeting and Conferring
Municipal Code Changes...
No Unfair Labor Practices

  
 
  
  

Payroll Deductions ....

 

Recruitment Incentives

Retirement.
Retroactivity
37.
38.
39.

41.

49,
51.
53.
APPENDIX A- CATASTROPHIC LEAVE POLICY

APPENDIX B- TRAINING AND RELATED TRAVEL TIME FOR REQUIRED CLASSES .
APPENDIX C- MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING REGARDING 3/12.5 SCHEDULE.

BSESRESS

Salary Adjustments ............0.....08
Salary Increases Upon Promotion ....
Scope of Representation ...

Service Credit for Sick Leave 'e Upon Retirement
Shift Differential for Non-Sworn Personnel......
Specialty Assignment Progra
Standby Pay.
Term of Agreement...............
Time Off for Association Officers

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Transportation Demand Management
Tuition Reimbursement...............
Unauthorized Leave/Suspension....
Uniform Allowance...........
Use of Computer Resources.

 

Workers' Compensation: Non-Sworn Personnel

 
 
  
 
"B" Step (Secondary Salary Step)

The parties agree that achieving the second salary step, or "B,” and subsequent salary steps
thereafter, shall require, in addition to satisfactory performance, a period of one year of actual
service.

It is further agreed that any salary adjustments in cases of employee reclassification shall not
necessarily move "step to step."

Benefite- Domestic Partners

Employees may be entitled to add their registered domestic Partners to City health and welfare
benefits, to take family medical leave to attend to a domestic partner, and to other domestic partner
benefits, as provided under City policy or under state law.

Benefits- During Authorized Leave Without Pay

No sick leave, vacation, or holidays shall accrue to any employee during authorized leave without
Pay for any full biweekly pay period. Employee shall be responsible for full payment of insurance
Premiums during authorized leave without pay, except as otherwise provided by law.

Benefits- Part-time Employees

A. Employees filling positions authorized by City Council in the official Position and Salary
Control Resolution at more than 20 hours per week on a less-than-full time basis shall
receive benefits as follows:

i, Cafeteria plan contribution, medical contribution, dental contribution, vision
contribution, holiday time, and other benefits under this agreement equal to the
percent of time regularly scheduled versus a regular work week rounded up to
the nearest ten percent (10%).

ii. Vacation and sick leave equal to the percent of time actually worked versus a
regular work week rounded up to the Nearest ten percent (10%).

B. Grandfathering: Employees filling positions authorized by City Council in the official Position
and Salary Control Resolution at more than 20 hours per week on a less-than-full-time basis
before March 1, 2005 will continue to receive full-time health benefits (cafeteria plan
contribution, medical contribution, dental contribution, vision contribution).

Bereavement Leave

In case of the death of an immediate family member, full-time employees shall be eligible for up to
forty (40) hours leave with pay.

Immediate family member is defined as: mother, father, brother, sister, spouse, registered domestic
partner, child, grandparents by blood or marriage, grandchildren by blood or marriage, mother-in-
law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-intaw, daughter-intaw, son-in-law, person ‘standing in loco
Parentis, and step family members. “in4aw” and “step” relationships shall include the immediate
family of a registered domestic partner on the same basis as that of a spouse.

Co-worker funeral attendance is acceptable upon the approval of the Chief of Police, consistent with
the operational needs of the Department.
6.

7.

Biweekly Pay Period

It is understood that all references to "hours or days per month" may be considered on the basis of
“hours per biweekly pay period” through conversion factors providing substantially equal employee
benefits.

Cafeteria Plan

A.

Each full-time employee shail be eligible to allocate a discretionary amount equal to $6,000 per
plan year under the "125 Cafeteria Plan.”

if medical, dental, and vision insurance plan selections exceed the cafeteria plan allocation, the
City will pay the difference of these insurance premiums up to the amounts in the Medical,
Dental and Vision Insurance Article of this MOU; said excess premiums are not discretionary.

Call Back

An employee officially called back to duty after being off from scheduled duty for ten (10) hours
or more shall be compensated for actual hours worked with a minimum of two (2) hours of pay
or compensatory time off at the overtime rate. Effective July 7, 2007, this shall be increased to
a minimum of three (3) hours.

An employee officially called back to duty after being off from scheduled duty for less than ten
(10) hours shall be compensated at the overtime rate for actual hours worked with a minimum
credit of four (4) hours at the overtime rate set forth in the Overtime Article of this agreement.
An employee called back to work in this capacity shall continue to be compensated at the
overtime rate for as many continuous hours worked from the reporting time of the call back
including regularly scheduled work hours.

- Multiple call backs within the minimum paid time periods outlined in Sections A and B of this

Article will not receive additional compensation.

A "call back" occurs when an employee has left work and is on a regular day off or otherwise off
duty and is requested to return to work. Call back does not begin until the employee arrives at
duty station and begins work. At no time does a “call back” entitle an employee to “portal” pay
or travel time.

An employee shall not be compelled to take vacation or CTO to avoid payment of overtime for a
call back.

Management shall make every effort to avoid scheduling consecutive work days (excluding
overtime) without a minimum of ten (10) hours of time off with the following exceptions:

4. Shift change;
2. By mutual consent of both management and the employee; or
3. During an emergency or natural disaster.

Telephone Consultations: An employee who receives a phone call authorized in advance by
the shift commander on off-duty hours for which he or she is not otherwise receiving
compensation (i.e. standby or callback pay) shall be paid for the time actually spent on the
phone call, or % hour, whichever is greater. This will apply to phone calls for professional
consultation purposes, not routine phone calls such as calling an employee back to work.
This section will apply independently to multiple phone calls, even regarding the same event,
except if those multiple phone calls occur within the same half hour.

2
10.

14.

12.

13,

Canine Pay

It is agreed that employees assigned to serve as canine handlers shall receive the following
overtime pay in addition to their regular base salary:

The time spent by a canine handler in the care, grooming and feeding of his/her assigned police
dog shall be hours worked payable at a time and one half overtime rate of $35.6475 per hour
(hourly rate of $23,765 at a time and one-half overtime premium) effective July 1, 2013. In order to
maintain equivalency, this hourly rate for dog care shall be increased by the same percentage as
the general salary increases for Police Officers.

It is agreed that canine handlers normally spend 6 hours per biweekly pay period performing such
work and written authorization from the Police Chief must be obtained to perform such work for
more than 6 hours.

Child Care

The City will maintain a pre-tax salary reduction plan for employee dependent care needs in
accordance with Section 129 of the Internal Revenue Code.

Educational! Incentive Pay Pian

A. Effective the beginning of the first full pay period after the City is notified officially by POST of an
Officer's qualification for an Intermediate or Advance POST certificate, said officer shall receive
the supplement to his or her base pay as described in Section B of this Article.

B. The monthly amount of Intermediate or Advance POST pay a full-time employee shall receive
is as follows:

Police Officer Sergeant
Effective Date Intermediate Advance Intermediate Advance
duly 1, 2013 $396 $603 $420 $656

Said supplemental pay shall be included in the employee's regular biweekly paycheck.
Emergency Medical Dispatch Personnel

Public Safety Dispatch personnel (Dispatchers |, II and II, and Supervisors) who are certified as
Emergency Medical Dispatchers and provide pre-arrival medical instructions to callers to the
Police/Fire Communications Center shall be eligible to receive a biweekly premium equal to 5% of
the employee's biweekly base salary.

Equal Employment Opportunity

A. The City and the Association agree that the provisions of this agreement shall be applied
equally to all employees covered herein without discrimination because of a person’s age
(over 40), ancestry, color, mental or physicat disability including HIV and AIDS, gender
identity and expression, marital status, medical condition (cancer or genetic characteristics),
national origin, race, religious belief, sex (including pregnancy/childbirth), sexual orientation,
political affiliation, or union membership.

B. The City and the Association agree to commit themselves to the goal of equal employment

opportunity in all City services. Further, the Association agrees to encourage their members
to assist in the implementation of City equal employment opportunity programs.

3
c.

Employees shall adhere to, and have the ability to file a complaint under, the Citywide “Non-
discrimination and Harassment Policy and Employee Complaint Procedure” as that policy
may be amended from time to time.

14. Grievance Procedure

15,

16.

A.

Any employee who has a grievance shall first try to get it settled through discussion with that
employee's immediate supervisor without undue delay. Every effort shall be made to find an
acceptable solution at the lowest possible level of supervision.

If after such discussion the employee does not believe the grievance has been satis
resolved, that employee may file a formal appeal in writing to the Police Chief within ten (10)
calendar days after receiving the informal decision of the immediate supervisor. The Police
Chief shall render a written decision and comment to the employee within ten (10) calendar
days after receiving the appeal.

._ If after receipt of the written decision of the department head the employee is still dissatisfied,

that employee may appeal the decision of the Police Chief to the City Administrator. Such
appeal shall be made by filing a written appeal to the City Administrator within five (5) days after
receipt of the written decision of the Police Chief. The City Administrator shall review the
decision of the Police Chief, and the City Administrator's decision, which shall be rendered
within twenty-five (25) days after the appeal is made, shall be final. The City Administrator may
request the advice of the Board of Civil Service Commissioners (Board) in any grievance
proceeding, but the City Administrator shall not be bound to follow any recommendation of the
Board.

. Grievances general in nature regarding interpretation of City-wide policy or which involve

matters beyond the authority of the Chief of Police, shall be filed with the Assistant City
Administrator who shall respond in accordance with the rules applicable to the Police Chief
outlined herein.

Health Insurance for Unit Members’ Survivors

The City shall maintain and pay for the existing level of insurance benefits for up to six (6) months
for the surviving family of a unit member who dies in the line of duty, or for such greater period of
time required by state or federal law.

Holidays

A.

Except as indicated below, full-time employees shall accrue four (4.333) hours of holiday leave
each biweekly pay period (24 pay periods). Said hours shall be credited to the employee's
Holiday bank.

The following days shall be designated as holidays by the City:

January 1st (New Year's Day)

3" Monday in January (Martin Luther King Jr.’s Birthday)
3rd Monday in February (President's Day)

Last Monday in May (Memorial Day)

July 4th (Independence Day)

1st Monday in September (Labor Day)

4th Thursday in November (Thanksgiving)

The Friday immediately following Thanksgiving Day
December 25th (Christmas Day)

Four additional days (32 hours) each fiscal year may be designated by the employee as
holidays.
17.

18.

19.

C. When a holiday falls on a Saturday or Sunday the preceding Friday or following Monday
respectively, shall be observed as a legal holiday.

D. If a holiday is requested by the employee and approved by the City or is a day listed in Section
B of this Article, and designated by the City and if the employee is called back to work on that
holiday, the employee shall receive compensation for the hours worked in accordance with the
overtime section of this Agreement and also shall be entitled to reschedule the holiday for the
hours lost. Requests for holiday time off shall not unreasonably be denied.

E. If an employee's holiday bank exceeds 120 hours, the City shall have the option to either
require the employee to take holiday time off or to pay the employee for the hours. The option
of time off or pay in-lieu of holiday hours shall be at the sole discretion of the City.

F. Employees may schedule up to 80 hours of their accrued holiday time during the regular annual
the vacation sign up period established by the Department, pursuant to the same rules and
procedures.

Implementation of MOU

City shall implement provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding by adopting appropriate
resolutions, ordinances, and administrative policies.

Jury Duty and Court Appearances

The parties agree that members of the bargaining unit performing jury duty or responding to a
Subpoena arising from line of duty civil court appearances shall be compensated as though they
were on duty. Any and all other remuneration received by the employee for such jury duty or court
appearances shall be paid to the City.

A swom employee who is required by subpoena to be at court outside of his/her regularly
scheduled work week regarding a matter arising from line of duty, and whose presence in the
courtroom is necessary both before and after a scheduled court lunch period, shall be deemed to
be on duty during the scheduled lunch period.

Notwithstanding the above, the Chief of Police has the right to adjust an employee's work schedule
in keeping with court appearances, jury duty schedules, and/or needs of the City.

Layoff Procedure

in cases of abolition of positions, which result in layoff of personnel, or teduction-in-force, the
following seniority policy shall apply to sworn members of the bargaining unit:

A. The individual with the least time in rank shall be first reduced. Where equal time in the rank is
the case, total time with the Police Department shall be used to determine seniority.

B. The individual affected shall have the right to "bump" downward to the next lower swom
Classification such that the last hired employee in the lowest swom rank shall be the first
employee laid off. Rehiring shall be accomplished pursuant to Section 3.16.350 of the
Municipal Code.

'n cases of abolition of positions, which result in layoff of personnel, or reduction-in-force, the
seniority and layoff policy found in Municipal Code Section 3.16.350 shall apply to non-swom
members of the bargaining unit.
20.

21.

Life Insurance

The City and the Association agree that employees shall be entitled to a term life insurance policy
covering the employee only, the premium for which shall be paid by the City. The limits of life
insurance coverage shall be seventy-five thousand ($75,000) of term insurance with one hundred
fifty thousand ($150,000) double indemnity in case of accidental death for sworn employees; and
fifty thousand ($50,000) of term insurance with one hundred thousand ($100,000) double indemnity
in case of accidental death for non-sworn employees. Said life insurance policy will be subject to
‘such reasonable restrictions and requirements as may be imposed by the insurance carrier.

Loss Control Support

A. The Association agrees to support, without qualification, the City’s Safety Program and will
encourage its members to attend safety courses if required by the City and made available on
City time.

8B. Both the City and the Association recognize the need and will strive to reduce the number of
industrial injuries among employees.

C. It is the duty of management to make every reasonable effort to provide and maintain a safe
place of employment. The Association will cooperate by encouraging all employees to perform
their work in a safe manner. It is the duty of all employees in the course of performing their
duties to be alert to unsafe practices, equipment and conditions, and report them to their
immediate supervisor. If such conditions cannot be satisfactorily remedied by the immediate
supervisor, an employee has the right to submit the matter either personally or through the
Association to the Chief of Police or designated representative. On any matter of safety that is
not resolved, consultation will take place between management and Association
representatives.

D. It is agreed that the City shall continue maintaining vehicles and equipment in a safe operating
condition and that no employee will be penalized for refusing to use vehicles or equipment
proven to be unsafe pursuant to State law.

Maintenance of Benefits

A. City and Association agree that all benefits other than direct wages as provided by ordinances,
resolutions and City Charter in existence at the commencement of this agreement shall not be
diminished, lessened, altered or reduced except as may be herein provided for the duration of
the agreement.

B. Wage adjustments as provided for from time to time by ordinance, resolution, or City Charter,
as such may be amended in accordance with this agreement, shall also continue for the
duration of this agreement.

C. City and Association shall meet and confer concerning any work schedule changes from
current 4/10 work schedule for sworn personnel.

Management Rights

The rights of the City include, but are not limited to, the exclusive right to determine the mission of
its constituent departments, commissions and boards; set standards of service; determine the
procedures and standards of selection for employment and promotion; direct its employees; take
disciplinary action; relieve its employees from duty because of economic reasons or for cause as
provided in Section 1007 of the City Charter; maintain the efficiency of governmental operations;
determine the methods, means and personnel by which government operations are to be

6
26.

conducted; determine the content of job classifications; take all necessary actions to carry out its
mission in emergencies; and exercise complete contro! and discretion over its organization and the
technology of performing its work.

Medical, Dental, and Vision Insurance

A. The parties agree that the City will pay 100% of the premium for medical insurance for the
employee only up to a monthly maximum of $1,374.64 per month.

Itis agreed that should the amount of subject premium be less than the limits herein described,
the difference between the employee only premiums and said dollar amount limits shall be
applied to employee dependent medical coverage, if any.

B. Effective January 1, 2016, the monthly maximum toward medical insurance for employees
enrolled in a PPO that is coordinated with a Health Reimbursement Account (HRA) will be
increased to $1,414.64

C. Effective January 1, 2015, for a swom employee enrolied in a PPO plan that is coordinated
with a Health Savings Account (HSA), the City will match the employee's contribution to the
HSA on a dollar-for-dollar basis, not to exceed a maximum City contribution of $50.00 per
month, provided however that the total combined employer and employee amount will not
exceed the annual indexed allowable HSA contribution limits. Effective January 1, 2016, this
amount will be increased to a match not to exceed $75.00 per month and will also be
available for non-sworn employees enrolled in the HSA coordinated PPO plan.

D. The City will pay for the premium for dental insurance up to a monthly maximum of $65.00.
Effective January 1, 2015, this amount will be increased to a monthly maximum of $105.00 for

sworn employees.

E. For the length of this agreement the City will pay for the premium for vision insurance up to a
monthly maximum of $7.50.

F. The City retains full and complete control over the selection, approval and administration of
insurance programs to include selection of carrier, insurance contract renewal and changes in
program specifications.

G. Should the City discontinue offering an HMO plan, or discontinue offering an HRA coordinated
PPO plan, or discontinue offering an HSA-coordinated PPO plan, the parties will reopen
negotiations for the sole purpose of developing an alternative City contribution structure that will
maintain the same total City contribution toward bargaining unit medical benefits as was in
place immediately before the change.

Meeting and Conferring

Except as provided in the “Municipal Code Changes” Article of this Agreement, or as otherwise
Provided in this Agreement, the parties agree that there shall be no meeting or conferring over any
issues of wages, hours, or other terms and conditions of employment covered by this agreement
during the term of this agreement unless both parties consent.

Municipal Code Changes
During the term of the Agreement the City and the Association shall meet and confer with regard to

any City proposed updates to Santa Barbara Municipal Code Title 3 affecting the terms and
conditions of employment of Association Members as required by law.
27.

No Unfair Labor Practices

The parties agree that during the term of this agreement the City will not lock out employees and
the Association will not engage in labor practices detrimental to providing services to the Citizens of
Santa Barbara, or detrimental to the interests of the City; nor will the Association sanction, support,
condone, approve, or engage in a strike, sit-in, slow down, work stoppage, or speed-up.

The City and the Association further agree that all matters of controversy concerning issues
covered by this agreement, will be settled by established grievance procedures.

The Association acknowledges that violations of the above shall be just cause for disciplinary action
including termination.

“Non-Sworn Personnel” Shift Assignments

Non-sworn personnel in the bargaining unit shall normally be allowed a minimum of ten (10) hours
off between shifts unless the employee consents otherwise. The above ten hour provision shall not
apply during the regular periods of shift rotation, in cases where the employee has worked overtime
Prior to reporting for his/her next regular shift assignment, or in cases of emergency.

Overtime

A. Except as provided in the Call Back Article overtime shall be defined as any hours worked
beyond eighty (80) hours in a fourteen-day work period. For the purpose of computing
overtime, all regular, scheduled work hours, including paid leave time shall be considered time
worked.

B. Overtime shall continue to be compensated at a time and one-half overtime cash or time and
one-half CTO rate.

C. Effective September 17, 2013, if an employee's scheduled overtime is cancelled within 8 hours
of the scheduled overtime start time, the employee will receive 3 hours of pay at straight time. ,

D. If an employee is called back to work or held over from his/her previous regularly scheduled
shift and works five (5) or more hours outside his/her normal shift, and any portion of the hours
worked on a call-back or hold-over basis falls within five (5) hours of the beginning of his/her
next scheduled shift, that employee will be receive at least five (5) hours of continuous rest
before resuming work without a loss in pay. If any portion of the rest period falls during the next
regularly scheduled shift, then that portion of the rest period will be paid by the City at the
employee's normal straight time pay rate. The employee shall have not restrictions on the
location of the rest area.

Hf such call-back or hold over is concluded less than 3 hours before the start of the employee's
next scheduled shift, then the employee may request to take the equivalent paid rest period at
the back-end of the shift instead. If the request is approved, the employee will be paid at the
employee's normal straight time rate during the regularly scheduled shift and the rest period.

E. An employee who has accrued CTO shall be permitted to use such time within a reasonable
period after making the request to do so if the use of compensatory time does not unduly
disrupt the operations of the City. For purposes of this provision, “unduly disrupt the operation
of the City’ shall include, but not be limited to, requested use of compensatory time during
Fiesta (Old Spanish Days), July 4th, and Christmas.

F. The City shall have the option to pay off all overtime subject to an employee retaining a CTO
bank that shall not exceed a maximum of 50 hours.
31.

. Overtime for declared disasters shall be paid time and one-half only if federal or State disaster

or emergency relief funds are made available to defray costs. Section F of this Article shall
apply to the duration of emergency incidents, not the duration of the formal declared
emergency.

|. Employees may use up to 40 emergency leave hours per calendar year from their overtime

bank for time off due to illness or injury of their spouse, registered domestic partner, or children.
Such emergency leave shall not be withheld by the City, and shall be in addition to paid sick
leave use for this purpose under State law. Emergency leave shall be deducted from the
employee's accumulated overtime. No emergency leave payment shall be made except after
satisfactory evidence of dependent iliness or injury has been accepted and approved by the
Chief of Police.

Payroll Deductions

A.

Any changes in Association dues deduction only shall be subject to indemnification of City by
the Association.

City shall maintain payroll program with equal biweekly deductions (24 checks plus 2 checks
without voluntary deductions).

Premium Pay for Use of Bilingual Skills

For all full-time Patrol Officers and employees in other Positions designated by the Chief of Police,
who establish to the satisfaction of the Chief and the Human Resources Manager proficiency in
conversing and reading skills in Spanish, as demonstrated by appropriate testing every other year,
the City will pay premium pay of $51.20 each biweekly pay period.

For all full-time employees in positions designated by the Chief of Police who meet the following
qualifications, the City paid premium will be $102.50 each biweekly pay period:

A

Establish to the satisfaction of the Chief and the Human Resources Manager a complex level of
verbal and/or written proficiency in Spanish as demonstrated by appropriate testing every other
year.

Provide written translation from Spanish-to-English and English-to-Spanish and/or act as a
translator for complicated interviews with Spanish speaking witnesses or suspects.

Recruitment Incentives

The City may, at its option, implement any of the following recruitment incentive programs at any
time during the term of this Agreement:

A.

Vacation Credit for Prior City Service: An employee who (1) received a performance evaluation
of “meets standards” or better on his or her last two performance evaluations, and (2) separates
from City service and then is rehired within 3 years of his or her termination date, may recoup
his or her past service credit toward the vacation accrual rate. Such employee may also be
eligible for credit for other government service under section B of this article.

Vacation and Sick Leave Credit for Prior Government Service: An employee appointed from
outside City of Santa Barbara government service within 6 months of leaving employment with
either a city, county, state agency, federal agency or special district and who, in the opinion of
the Police Chief, possesses government experience directly related to the position to which he
or she has been appointed, May receive credit for years of prior service with his or her
immediate previous government employer in the following ways:

9
i Vacation Accrual: Upon appointment, employee will receive credit for the
full prior years of service at his or her immediate previous goverment employer
toward the initial vacation accrual rate. Employee will not be eligible to progress to
a higher accrual rate until employee has the normal required minimum amount of
City of Santa Barbara service (including prior service under Section A of this
Article) for that accrual rate.

ii, Sick Leave: Employee will be credited with 96 hours of sick leave.
Thereafter, employee will accrue sick leave at the normal rate.

C. Uniform: New employees may be provided an initial uniform set at City cost.

D. Signing Bonus: New employees who have already completed a full basic academy at the time
of hire (¢.g., a lateral hire or a post-academy hire) may be provided a signing bonus in an
amount determined by the City.

E. Employee Referral Bonus: Existing employees who refer an applicant from outside City
employment who is hired and successfully completes the probationary period may be provided
a referral Bonus. City may establish the amount of such bonus and procedures for
documenting the referral at the time of application.

Retiree Medical Insurance Contribution

A. This provision is applicable to employees who retire from City service, and
1. Have 15 or more years of regular City service; or
2. Retire from the City with an industrial disability.

B. The City shall contribute $9.10 per month, per year of service up to a maximum of 35 years
(ie., $318.50/month). Employees will receive a prorated contribution for portions of a year of
service. Service will be calculated based on the nearest full one hundredth (.01) of a year. (For
example, an employee retiring on November 30th with 15.233 years of service will receive
15.23 x $8.70= $132.50 per month). The retiree medical contribution will increase as follows:

Accrued liability for past retiree medical increases was factored into past labor agreements and
will not be charged again toward costing in future negotiations.

C. The retiree is not limited to purchase of a City sponsored plan, provided however, that if the
retiree purchases another insurance plan, the retiree must supply the City with adequate proof
of insurance coverage prior to any contribution from the City. Proof of such coverage shall be
provided to the City on a periodic basis, as determined by the City.

The City will contribute only up to the maximum monthly premium of the City’s sponsored plan.

D. Except as specifically provided in Section F of this article, below, the City shall continue to
make its contribution until the retiree reaches age 65 or dies, whichever occurs first. If there is
a surviving spouse or registered domestic partner, he/she will be permitted to remain on the
medical insurance plan at his/her own cost, subject to the conditions set forth by the insurance
company.

E. The City will continue the normal retiree medical allowance past the age of 65 for the six (6)
employees named below who retire after December 23, 2006 and thereafter certify, on an
annual basis, that they are not eligible to apply for Medicare Part A (hospitalization) coverage
on the basis of their City service, other covered employment, through a spouse’s covered
employment, or through any other means.

10
lame
Robert E. Casey Police Officer 6/75

Jessie M. Ramey Parking Enforcement Officer 21/75
Kathryn H. Denlinger Parking Enforcement Officer 10/19/77

The City shall continue to make its contribution until the retiree dies. However, if at the time the
retiree dies there is a surviving spouse or registered domestic partner over 65 years of age who
is not eligible for Medicare Part A, one half of the allowance will continue until the death of the
‘spouse or registered domestic partner.

In the event Health Care legislation is passed which affects the nature of the benefit described
above, the parties will reopen negotiations and modify this benefit, if necessary, so as to
maintain their original intent (e.g., eligibility, scope, cost).

1.

2. Leonard J. Gomez Police Officer 9/25/78
3. David M. Gonzales Police Sergeant 3/7/77
4. George B. Hansen Police Officer TABIT9
5.

6.

34. Retirement

A.

c.

D.

The City contract with the Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS) shall provide the
3% at age 50 benefit formula for all Police Safety members.

The City's Employer Paid Member Contributions for Safety employees will be reduced as
follows:

1. For the period of June 29, 2013 through July 26, 2013, employees will continue to pay
2.266% of compensation toward the 9% member contribution, and the City will contribute
6.734%;

2. For the period of July 27, 2013 through July 11, 2014, employees will contribute 3% of
compensation toward the 9% member contribution, and the City will contribute 6%;

3. For the period of July 12, 2014 through July 10, 2015, employees will pay 6% of
compensation toward the 9% member contribution, and the City will contribute 3%; and

4. Effective July 11, 2015, employees will pay the full 9% member contribution.

The City contract with the Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS) shall provide the
2.7% at age 55 benefit formula for all Miscellaneous members.

Under the negotiated 2.7% at 55 cost/benefit sharing formula for Miscellaneous employees:

1. if the PERS miscellaneous plan employer rate is exactly equal to
20.164%, the employee shall pay 7.162% of the 8% required employee
contribution. The City will pay 0.838% of the 8% required employee contribution.

2. If the employer rate is less than 20.164%, the employee shall receive
Credit for 30.559% of the amount by which the employer rate is less than
20.164%. The credit shall be applied until the City again pays a full 7% of the 8%
required employee contribution.
[For example: if the employer rate is only 18.164% of PERS-able
compensation, the City will pay an additional 0.61% (2% times 30.559%)
of the 8% employee contribution, for a total of 1.448%];
3. If the employer rate exceeds 20.164%, the employee shall Pay 30.559%

of the amount by which the employer rate exceeds 20.164%. The employee
shall pay for this cost in the following manner:

11
i. First, through an increase in the employee-paid portion of the 8%
required employee contribution up to a maximum increase of 0.838%

[For example: if the employer rate is 22.164% of PERS-able
compensation, the employee will pay an additional 0.61% (2% times
30.559%) of the 8% employee contribution, for a total of 7.772%];

li. Second, through payroll deduction.

[For example: if the employer rate is 25.164% of PERS-able
compensation, the employee will pay an additional 1.528% (5% times
30.559%) of PERS-able compensation as follows: an additional 0.838%
(8%-7.162%) to cover the full 8% employee contribution, and a payroll
deduction equal to 0.69% (1.528%-0.838%) of PERS-able
compensation.]

E. The City shall report the value of Employer Paid Member Contributions (EPMC) to PERS as
compensation earnable for both Safety and Miscellaneous employees pursuant to Government
Code Section 20636(c)(4). Effective July 11, 2015, the City will discontinue this practice for
Safety employees through adoption of the appropriate resolutions.

F. The City will provide the PERS One-Year Highest Compensation benefit to Safety and
Miscellaneous employees.

G. The City will provide an amendment to the Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS)
contract to allow widows/widowers to continue receiving benefits upon remarriage.

H. The City will provide the PERS Increased Level of 1959 Survivor Benefits (Level Two) for
Safety employees, and the PERS Increased Level of 1959 Survivor Benefits (Level Four) for
Miscellaneous employees.

|. The PERS contract shall provide for Public Service Credit for Peace Corps or Americorps:
Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA) for Miscellaneous employees only.

J. Notwithstanding the provisions above, effective January 1, 2013, new members as defined by
California Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 (hereinafter “AB 340") will be
covered under the 2.7% at 57 Safety retirement formula or the 2% at 62 Miscellaneous
retirement formula, with a final compensation measurement period of the average of the
highest three (3) consecutive years, as well as all other statutory requirements of AB 340.
Effective July 1, 2013, new employees and/or members as defined by AB 340 shall contribute
half the normal cost for benefits, as defined by AB 340; the City will not pay any portion of
these employees’ required contributions.

Retroactivity
An employee will be eligible for retroactive increases to salaries and benefits provided under this
Agreement on the dates specified for each increase if the employee is an active City employee
and bargaining unit member on the date that the City Council ratifies this Agreement.

To the extent possible, in order to reduce the impact on employee pay, the City shall coordinate

any retroactive employee pension deductions necessary under this agreement with the payment
for the 2013 vacation cash out opportunity.

12
36. Salary Adjustments

37.

A. All sworn positions represented by the Association (police officers and police sergeants) shall
receive the following regular increases to base salary:

Date Increase
July 12, 2014 2.0%
July 11, 2015 3.0%

B. All non-sworn positions represented by the Association shall receive the following regular base
salary increases:

Date I
July 12, 2014 1.5%
duly 11, 2015 2.0%

C. Effective September 21, 2013, the base salary for the Police Records Supervisor classification
will be increased from range 293 to Range 325.

Salary Increases Upon Promotion

Employees shall receive at least a five percent (5%) salary increase upon promotion provided
however that the City shall not be required to pay a salary in excess of the authorized salary range
in the City Position and Salary Control Resolution.

For purposes of this article, the base for the (5%) salary increase shall be the employee's current
step on the appropriate salary range plus Specialty Assignment Pay if appropriate. All officers
Promoted to the classification of Sergeant shall be appointed to "C" Step.

38. Scope of Representation

A. The Association represents all employees (except hourly and confidential employees) in a
police bargaining unit composed of the following job classifications:

Police Sergeant

Police Officer

Police Officer - Entry Level
Identification Technician

Assistant Identification Technician
Public Safety Dispatcher (1,11,lI1)
Public Safety Dispatcher Supervisor
Police Property/Evidence Specialist
Police Property/Evidence Assistant
Police Range/Equipment Specialist
Police Crime Analyst

Parking Enforcement Officer

Police Records Specialist

Police Records Supervisor

Police Technician

Reclassification of these positions that does not entail changes in job duties or responsibilities
will not affect their inclusion in the bargaining unit except as is provided by applicable State law.

13
B. If the City creates a Community Services Officer classification to perform some or all functions
currently being performed by sworn officers, but not requiring the service of a sworn employee,
the classification will be included as a non-sworn classification in the bargaining unit. City
agrees that the creation of new Community Services Officer positions will not result in layoff of
any sworn officer.

Service Credit for Sick Leave Upon Retirement

At the time of retirement, the City shall purchase an annuity for a retiring employee that pays a
monthly benefit similar to the PERS amendment that provides service credit for sick leave under
Government Code Section 20965.

The following conditions apply to this benefit:

A. In order to qualify for service credit for sick leave upon retirement, the retiring employee
must have been hired by the City on or before September 17, 2013 and have at least 500
sick leave hours;

B. The conversion rate of 0.004 years of service credit for each day of sick leave is utilized.
(For purposes of this section, a “day” is the equivalent of eight (8) hours.);

Cc. The retiring employee may take the cash purchase value of the annuity in lieu of the
monthly annuity;

D. Prior to September 17, 2013, safety group members who obtain 90% of final compensation
upon retirement are not eligible for this benefit; however, employees who retire on or after
September 17, 2013 and who obtain 90% of final compensation upon retirement will be
eligible for this benefit; and

E. lf the City amends its PERS Miscellaneous or Police contract to include service credit for
sick leave upon retirement, non-safety or Police members, respectively will be included in
that PERS contract amendment and the annuity program will be discontinued for that
group.

Shift Differential for Non-Sworn Personnel
A. Full-time, non-sworn personnel regularly assigned to a shift of eight (8) or more hours shall
receive:
1. Swing shift differential pay when 50% or more of the hours of their regularly
assigned shift , excluding overtime, falls between 5:00 p.m. and midnight; or

2. Graveyard shift differential pay when 50% or more of the hours of their regularly
assigned shift, excluding overtime, falls between midnight and 7:00 a.m.

8. Employees who are regularly assigned to a shift that does not meet the definition of a swing
shift or graveyard shift shall not receive shift differential. This includes, but is not limited to,
circumstances wherein an employee may be called back to work or scheduled to work an
overtime shift that qualifies for shift differential pay when regularly assigned to the shift.

C. The biweekly amount of shift differential for a full-time employee shall be as follows:

‘Swing Shift Biweekly Graveyard Shift Biweekly
$64

Effective Date
duly 1, 2010 $128

14
41.

Sick Leave

A. Employees shall accrue sick leave at the rate of eight (8) hours per month of service rendered
up to a maximum of 2,080 hours of accumulated sick leave.

B. The City’s "non-replenishable" sick leave program (M.C. 3.08.150b) shall be retained for the
term of this agreement.

C. An employee may use up to 48 hours of available accrued sick leave (the equivalent of 6
months of accrual) per calendar year to attend to an illness of a child, parent, domestic partner,
or spouse of the employee, as provided under State law. Part-time employees may use the
equivalent of six (6) months of sick leave accrual at their prorated accrual rate for such
Purposes. All rules for use of sick leave will apply, including those regarding physician
statement requirements and use of sick leave for medical appointments

Specialty Assignment Program
The Specialty Assignment Program is as follows:

A. For each employee, management will identify number of specialties per Person, excluding
temporary assignments, and rate all persons at 2% per specialty with a maximum of 6%. Each
2% increment is retained after the assignment ends.

1. Credit for a specialty position held prior to June 30, 1992, shall be given regardless
of the duration of the assignment. Credit for the same specialty position held more
than once shall be given so long as the assignments were not continuous.

2. Credit for specialty positions held subsequent to June 30, 1992, shall require that
the position be held for a minimum of 75% of the maximum duration of that
assignment unless approved by the Division Commander. If the employee is ona
leave of absence of more than 30 consecutive calendar days during the
assignment, then the maximum duration of the assignment will be extended by the
period of the leave. Duration of assignments is determined by the Career
Development Program.

B. At the sole discretion of the Police Chief, certain specialty assignments may be designated as
“long-term specialty assignments" not having a maximum duration, and allowing increasing
specialty pay in the same assignment. For such positions, specialty pay shall be earned in the
following increments:

1. 2% upon assignment, retained upon reassignment if the employee holds
the position for four (4) years;

2. An additional 2% after four (4) years in the assignment, retained upon
reassignment if the employee holds the position for six (6) years; and

3. An additional 2% after six (6) years in the assignment, retained upon
reassignment if the employee holds the position for at least eight (8) years.
To receive credit for each 2% increment, the employee must hold the position for a minimum of
75% time required to retain that increment, unless approved by the Division Commander. The
combined maximum specialty pay for all specialty assignments, including long-term
assignments, shall be 6%.

C. Retention of specialty pay. In order to retain ‘specialty pay employees must:

15
1. Meet or exceed performance standards.

2 Work any assignment as ordered. Requirements for the assignment and
procedures for selection shall be set forth in the Career Development Program.

3. Continue to apply for and compete in good faith for upcoming specialty
assignments as described in the annual performance evaluation.

D. Failure to comply with the above requirements results in the loss of all specialty pay.

E. Ifan employee has lost specialty pay as a result of failing to meet the requirements of Section C
of this Article, the employee may have the specialty pay prospectively reinstated by again
complying with the above requirements of Section C. Complying again with the requirements of
Section C.3. above means competing for and selection to a specialty assignment.

Standby Pay

The City and the Association agree that when an employee is officially designated by management
to remain available to return to work, at any time during specific hours outside of normal working
hours, the employee shall receive two (2) hours of straight time pay or compensatory time off for
each eight (8) hours on standby or fraction thereof. Effective July 5, 2008, this will be increased to
three (3) hours of straight time pay or compensatory time off for each eight (8) hours on standby or
fraction thereof. To the extent feasible, the parties agree that standby shall be assigned on an
equitable basis to all eligible employees.

The City and Association agree that all employees will be on automatic standby duty during a state
of emergency or civil defense disaster as declared by the President of the United States, the
Governor of the State, the Mayor of the City, the City Council, or the City Administrator. Such
automatic emergency standby shall be without compensation unless the City is reimbursed by the
State or federal government for such an expenditure.

Term of Agreement

A. This Memorandum of Understanding shall become effective July 1, 2013 and shall remain
effective through June 30, 2016.

B. The agreement may be extended beyond its expiration date, if both parties concur.

Time Off for Association Officers

A. Reasonable time off with pay at straight time will be granted to Association officers and
negotiators for the purpose of meeting and conferring or consulting with the City subject to
approval by the Chief of Police as to specific times.

B. The Association will maintain a complete and current list of its officers and negotiators on file
with the Assistant City Administrator.

C. Upon reasonable advance notice, Association officers will be granted up to an aggregate of one

hundred sixty (160) hours pay annually for attendance at Association meetings and conventions
and for conducting normal and regular Association business during the term of this agreement.

16
46.

Training

The City and the Association agree that all direct costs for all training or instruction required by the
City shall be paid for by the City. However, the City shall retain the right to determine what training
is required for the employee to improve his performance on the job and to make such training a
condition of employment.

For the purposes of this agreement, this section shall include requests by Department Heads for
additional training of current employees, subject to the approval of the City Administrator.

Both parties recognize that training programs and the advancement of employees to positions of
higher skill are matters of great importance and interest to the City, the Association, and the
employees covered by this agreement.

Transportation Demand Management

A. Effective December 23, 2006, will provide up to 8 additional carpool! parking spaces, based
on need, with reasonable distance from the Police Department.

B. Bargaining unit members shall be eligible to participate in any established Citywide
Alternative Transportation Program.

Tuition Reimbursement

Employees shall be eligible for tuition reimbursement through the City of Santa Barbara's
Educational Reimbursement Program.

Unauthorized Leave/Suspension

No sick leave, vacation, or holiday time shall accrue or be paid during any period of unauthorized
leave or suspension. Suspension is defined as provided in Municipal Code Section 3.16.310 and
City Charter Section 1007. Retroactive accrual of sick leave, vacation, or holiday time shall be
provided for suspensions later found to be in error. This section shall not apply to any non-
disciplinary suspension. .

Uniform Allowance

A. Except as indicated below, the City shall provide an annualized uniform allowance to full-time
employees in the bargaining unit who are required to maintain a uniform as follows:

Swom police personnel not assigned motorcycle, SWAT or canine duty $1,038

Sworn police personnel assigned canine duty 1,088
Swom police personnel assigned motorcycle or SWAT duty 1,238
Non-sworn personne! 863

B. Payment of the uniform allowance will be paid to employees who are on the payroll during the
pay period ending two (2) weeks prior to the payday on which the uniform allowance is paid in
June or December of each year. Payment will be made in a separate check, in an amount
equal to half of the annualized allowance, per the following schedule:

December 13, 2013 and June 13, 2014

December 12, 2014 and June 12, 2015
December 11, 2015 and June 10, 2016

17
51.

Use of Computer Resources

Employees’ rights and obligations regarding use of the City's computers and computing
resources are governed generally by the City’s computer use policies. The Association and the
City agree that occasional and incidental employee use of City computing resources for
Association business Is allowable within the same parameters applied to other acceptable non-
commercial personal use under those policies.

The parties agree that such use shall not interfere with the performance of work duties or the
effective delivery of services, and shall not result in any significant cost to the City or compromise
the security of City systems. The parties further agree that City computer resources, including
the e-mail system, will not be used by the Association or City employees to support or oppose a
political campaign or ballot measure.

The Association acknowledges that employees have no expectation of privacy in the use of City
computer resources, including but not limited to e-mail and text messaging, even if they are
locked or password-protected.

Vacation

A. It is agreed that vacation time may be taken as accrued subject to City approval.

B. It is agreed that vacation accrual for sworn personnel shall be in accordance with the following
schedule:

Lenath of Service Vacation Entitlement
0 through 5 years 80 hours per year

6 through 10 years 120 hours per year
11 through 24 years 160 hours per year
After 24 years 200 hours per year

C. Itis agreed that vacation accrual for non-swom police personnel shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:

Lenath of Continuous Service Vacation Entitlement
0 through 2 years 80 hours per year
3 through 5 years 104 hours per year
6 through 10 years 144 hours per year
11 through 17 years 184 hours per year
18 through 23 years 200 hours per year
24 and over years 224 hours per year

D. Maximum vacation accrual will be 280 hours. Effective September 21, 2013, this maximum will
be increased to 320 hours. Said maximum vacation accrual shall not apply if scheduled
vacations are canceled by the City for emergencies or personal emergencies of employees.
Where requested in advance by the employee, management will make reasonable efforts to
work with the employee to try to avoid the loss of vacation time accruals under the accrual
maximum.

E. There will two final vacation “cash-in” opportunities during the term of this Agreement. The first
shall occur, concurrent with any retroactive employee pension contributions required under this

18
Agreement, before October 29, 2013. The second opportunity shall be offered for Payment on
the paycheck employees receive on December 12, 2014. A maximum of 40 hours of vacation
may be cashed in during each of these opportunities.

53. Work Schedule

A.

B.

c.

When regular days off (RDO) are changed, reasonable notice shall be given to the affected
employee(s). “Reasonable notice” is at least 48 hours unless by mutual consent.

All swom employees shall be placed on a 4/10 work schedule. Management retains the right to
change an employee's day off at any time with less than 48 hours notice without incurring
overtime liability in order to meet departmental needs related to court subpoenas and other
planned events. Other planned events shall include incidents such as drug sweeps in
Investigations and employee training. Overtime liability will continue to occur when an
employee works in excess of eighty (80) hours in a 14-day work period as required by the Fair
Labor Standards Act (FLSA).

Uniformed sworn officers on a 4/10 schedule who are subject to call for service during the lunch
period will work ten (10) hours and take a one half (1/2) hour paid lunch break. Other sworn
and non-sworn employees on a 4/10 schedule will work ten (10) hours and take a one-half (1/2)
hour or one-hour unpaid lunch break. A change made by management to this practice will be a
normal meet and confer issue.

Upon mutual agreement between management and an employee represented by the
Association, s/he may work a schedule different than that delineated in Section B of this Article.

54. Workers’ Compensation: Non-Sworn Personnel

A

Non-sworn employees who sustain illness or injury arising out of and in the course of their City
employment shall receive benefits equal to those mandated by the State of California plus the
difference between State mandated benefits and the equivalent of eighty-five percent (85%) of
the individual's gross (excluding 0.T.) salary, if any, paid by the City for a maximum of ninety
(90) working days.

This Article shall not be construed to grant employees the use of sick leave benefits in lieu of or
to supplement workers’ compensation benefits herein or by State law, except as follows:

An employee who returns from an accepted work-related injury or illness to regular duty r
modified duty may attend follow-up medical appointments during work hours when it is not
possible to arrange such appointments on non-work time. Reasonable advance notice must
be given to the supervisor, which in no event shall be less than 24 hours. Release time is
subject to supervisory approval based on operational needs. Under these conditions, to
account for the lost work time to attend physician, physical therapy, chiropractic, counseling
and other physical and mental care appointments, the employee may:

1. Use accrued paid leave time (sick leave, vacation time, compensatory time,
Or personal leave); or

2, Use ‘industrial leave without pay’ if employee has no accrued paid leave
time, or

3. If the employee has not reached a permanent and stationary status, the
employee may elect to use “industrial leave without pay” if employee does not
choose to use accrued paid leave (sick leave, vacation time, compensatory time,
or personal leave). However, employees who have reached permanent and

19
stationary status must exhaust available leave balances before being placed on
leave without pay.

An employee who has not reached a permanent and stationary status and uses
industrial leave without pay may be entitled to “wage loss” under workers’
compensation system depending on eligibility.

The City may make changes to its Personnel Policies including, but not limited to, the
Santa Barbara Municipal Code to reflect the substance of this Agreement.

Ae CA LEAVE PO!

PURPOSE: To establish a program whereby City employees can donate vacation, holiday and/or
compensatory time to the leave banks of permanent full-time and permanent part-time employees
who have exhausted all applicable accumulated leave balances for the following reasons:

A.

To the sick leave banks of employees who are incapacitated due to an off-duty catastrophic
illness or injury; or

To the vacation leave banks of employees who are caring for a spouse, registered
domestic partner, or child who has been diagnosed as terminally Ill.

DEFINITION: A catastrophic illness or injury is a severe illness or injury which is unusual,
unexpected, or immediate in nature; and which is expected to preclude an employee from returning
to work for an extended period of time, during which the employee will exhaust all of his/her
accumulated leave balances.

POLICY: City employees may donate vacation, holiday and/or compensatory time to a permanent
full-time or permanent part-time employee if:

A

An employee experiences a catastrophic illness or injury or must care for a spouse,
registered domestic partner, or child who is diagnosed as terminally ill which requires
him/her to be absent from work for an extended period of time;

The employee has nearly exhausted all applicable leave balances (sick, vacation, personal
leave, holiday, compensatory time in the case of the employee's off duty catastrophic
illness or injury; vacation, personal leave, holiday and compensatory time due to caring for
a spouse, registered domestic partner, or child diagnosed as terminally ill); and

The employee or if incapacitated, the legally recognized representative, has agreed to
accept the donation, if approved by the Department Head and the City Administrator.

The Department Head will take action to help ensure that each employee's decision to
donate or not donate to a Personal Catastrophic Leave Account is kept confidential and
that the donor and recipient employees are not pressured to participate.

State and Federal income tax on the value of vacation, holiday, and/or compensatory time

donated shall be deducted from the recipient employee's pay at the time the hours are
used.

20
PROCEDURES:

A.

A request is made by the recipient employee or if incapacitated, the legally recognized
representative, to the Department Head for the establishment of a Personal Catastrophic
Leave Account. This request may be made prior to that employee exhausting all of his/her
applicable paid leave balances so that time donated to the time bank may be utilized
immediately upon exhaustion of the employee's applicable leave balances, but not before.

Upon approval of the Department Head and the City Administrator, and upon agreement of
the recipient employee, a Personal Catastrophic Leave Account will be established. The
employee or if incapacitated, the legally recognized representative, will sign the "Request to

LEA\ a IN

Receive Donation(s)" form allowing publication and distribution of information regarding
his/her situation.

The employee or if incapacitated, the legally recognized representative, will be required to
provide verification of the illness or injury from an attending physician before and while
using time donated under this program. All information provided by the attending physician
will remain confidential.

The request for donations shall occur in three month intervals and may be extended if the
employee's catastrophic leave time is continued, up to a maximum of twelve (12)
Continuous months for any one catastrophic illness/injury or the need to care for a spouse,
registered domestic partner, or child diagnosed as terminally ill, based upon approval of the
Department Head and City Administrator.

Donated vacation, holiday, and/or compensatory time shall be converted and credited to
the recipient in equivalent hours of sick leave due to employee illness or vacation leave due
to a terminally ill spouse, registered domestic partner, or child at the recipient's base hourly
rate. (e.g. employee A makes $20/hour and donates 1 hour of vacation time to employee B
who earns $10/hour. B's sick or vacation bank is increased by 2 hours for each hour
donated by A.)

Employees will use the "Donation of Vacation/Holiday/Compensatory Time" form to submit
donations of vacation, holiday and/or compensatory time directly to Human Resources. All
donations will be reviewed for compliance with this Policy. After review, the form will be
forwarded to Payroll for action and adjustment to the donor and recipients’ paid leave
balances.

All donations of vacation, holiday, and/or compensatory time shall be limited to a ten (10)
hour maximum donation per request interval per injurediill employee or spouse, registered
domestic partner, or child diagnosed as terminally ill.

The donation of vacation, holiday, and/or compensatory time is irreversible. Should the
tecipient employee not use all the donated time for the catastrophic illness or injury for
which it was requested within one year following the initial request for catastrophic leave,
any balance will revert automatically to a City-wide "Catastrophic Leave Bank" for future
use by employees with need for that donated time pursuant to the provisions of this
Catastrophic Leave Policy. A recipient may also voluntarily release donations made
in his or her name to the City-wide "Catastrophic Leave Bank” in writing at any time.

21
If prior to the expiration of one year following the initial request for catastrophic leave, a
recipient has not released the balance of donations received to the City-wide "Catastrophic
Leave Bank” and provides the City a medical certification demonstrating to the satisfaction
of the Human Resources Manager that the same catastrophic illness or injury is still active
and may cause incapacity within the next year, the donations will be maintained for the
exclusive use of the recipient for up to an additional year. This same certification may be
provided annually thereafter. The City shall have no obligation to remind the recipient of
the availability of the options provided under this paragraph.

Once donations have been released by the recipient in writing, or have reverted
automatically to the City-wide "Catastrophic Leave Bank’, a recipient shall not have greater
access to such balances than other any qualified employee.

1 A report on the usage of Personal Catastrophic Leave Accounts and status of the City-wide
"Catastrophic Leave Bank" will be available to recognized labor organizations and others
with a need to know. The report will include the identity of the recipient(s), hours donated,
hours used and the remaining balance(s).

APPENDIX B- TRAINING AND RELATED TRAVEL TIME FOR REQUIRED CLASSES

The purpose of this Appendix is to provide a guide to utilize when determining when an employee is entitled
to payment for attending training.

Non-Exempt Employees

The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) indicates that time spent by non-exempt employees in training is
compensable unless all of the following conditions are met:

1.
2.

4.

Attendance is outside of the employee's regular working hours.

Attendance is in fact voluntary. FLSA indicates that attendance is not considered voluntary if the
employee believes that present working conditions or the continuance of employment will be
adversely affected by non-attendance.

The course, lecture, or meeting is not directly related to the employee's job. The regulations state
that training is directly related to the employee's job if it is designed to make the employee handle
his or her job more effectively, as distinguished from training for another job.

The employee does not perform any productive work during such attendance.

if all four of the above conditions are not met, then all hours spent in training (including those outside of
normal working hours) are considered to be compensable under FLSA.

If the training is considered compensable and travel time is associated with the employee's attendance, then
the next question is whether the time spent traveling should be paid for. , The following must be considered.

1.

Travel During Regular Working Hours. if the travel time related to attending required training
‘occurs during normal working hours, then the time is considered to be compensable.

Special One-Day, Out-of-Town Travel. Travel time associated with special one-day, out-of-town
training is required to be paid for irrespective of the mode of transportation utilized or whether the
employee drives or is a passenger. Time that can be excluded from payment is normal home-to-
work travel time and time spent eating while traveling.

22
3. Overnight Travel. If an employee travels overnight on business (for more than one day), the
employee must be paid for time spent in traveling (except for meal periods) during their normal
working hours on their non-working days, such as Saturday, as well as, on their regular working
days. Travel time as a passenger on an airplane, train, boat, bus, or automobile outside of regular
working hours is not considered worktime unless the employee performs any actual work or the
employee drives a car without being offered public conveyance. Therefore, nighttime travel policies
when associated with training for more than one day may prove to be more advantageous. The
cost for hotel accommodations and meals for the employee versus the overtime payment should be
considered when trying to determine which is more advantageous.

‘Special Requirements for 207K Exempt Employees

The only special requirement related to 207(k) exempt employees under FLSA relates to time spent in
fequired training when an employee is confined to a campus or to barracks 24 hours a day. Only the time
spent in actual training is considered compensable hours of work as long as the other hours are spent in
studying or other personal pursuits. Other than this, the same requirements that apply to non-exempt
employees apply to 207(k) exempt employees.

AN! LA’ FO! ON’

Exempt Employees

In the case of an exempt employee, the MOU is the guiding document in whether training or related travel
time is compensable. Generally, exempt employees will only be paid for time spent in required training and
travel during normal work hours. Travel outside of regular work hours is excluded,

Employees who have questions regarding the compensabllity of training and related travel time, may
contact either the Chief of Police or one of the Personnel Analysts at Ext. 5316.

Cc. IM. DI 12. HE!

This memorandum of understanding was entered into as of September 25, 1999, and amended on July 3,
2001, between the City of Santa Barbara, hereinafter referred to as “City,” and the Santa Barbara Police
Officers Association, hereinafter referred to as “Association.”

This agreement is intended to allow the City to implement, on a trial basis, a "3/12.5" work schedule for
some of those Officers and Sergeants assigned to patrol functions who worked a "4110" work schedule
immediately prior to implementation of the MOU.

The work period shall be defined as a 28-day work period as permitted by the Fair Labor Standards Act
(FLSA) for law enforcement personnel for all sworn Personnel irrespective of their shift assignment in
order to accommodate the new "3/12.5" schedule. FLSA mandated overtime for all sworn personnel shall
be defined as any hours worked beyond one hundred seventy one (171) hours in a designated twenty-
eight (28) day cycle. Overtime under a "4/10" or "3/12.5" work schedule is defined as hours worked
beyond the regularly scheduled shift, whether it be a 12.5-, 10-, 9- or 8-hour day. Overtime liability shall
also occur if a member works in excess of his/her regularly scheduled 75, 80 or 85 hours in a pay period.
The City shall continue for purposes of computing overtime to count all regular, scheduled work hours,
including paid leave time, as time worked. Overtime shall continue to be compensated at a time and one-
half overtime cash or time and one-half CTO rate but not to exceed the 50 hours CTO maximum bank.
Once overtime is earned in connection with any approved method of accrual (daily, biweekly, FLSA) said
amounts shall be deducted from overtime owed under any other approved method of accrual. There shall
be no double or triple payment of overtime for the same hours involved.

23
The basic work schedule for those assigned to a "3/12.5" shall be to work 12 shifts of 12.5 hours and one
shift of 10 hours during each 28-day work period. This is the equivalent of working 160 hours in a four-
week period; the same as employees assigned to a "4/10", work schedule. The current meal break policy
shall apply to all sworn patrol personnel assigned to a "3/12.5" work schedule.

For those assigned to a "3/12.5" schedule, the 10-hour shift must be worked within the designated 28-day
work period and is considered an integral part of the City’s staffing needs. Therefore, the 10-hour shift is
not intended to be "routinely" utilized for leave time. In situations where an employee who, for whatever
reason, does not either actually work or report leave time approved by the Department for the required
10-hour shift within the 28-day work period shall have paid leave utilized for any hours necessary to
account for the required 160 hours in the following order: CTO, Holiday, Vacation unless an agreement
between management and the employee to utilize in a different order. If no leave balances are available,
then the hours shall be reported as leave without pay.

The one 10-hour shift shall not be limited to any particular purpose; however, it is generally intended to be
utilized to facilitate training, patrol responsibilities or special assignments. Complete flexibility for
scheduling this day shall be maintained by management to allow for changing priorities, training
availability, and the special needs of the organization.

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING REGARDING 3/12.5 SCHEDULE- CONTINUED

Under the "3/12.5" work schedule employees shall regularly work 75 hours during one biweekly pay
period and 85 hours during the other biweekly pay period within the 28-day work cycle. As a matter of
convenience for employees assigned to the "3/12.5" work schedule, the City shall ensure that the
payments received by the employees at the end of each biweekly pay period are equal, or 80 hours per
biweekly pay period, exclusive of any overtime. An exception will be in the case of an employee who
does not work the required hours and does not have sufficient leave balances to cover the hours.

Management shall make every reasonable effort to have changes in patrol shift assignments coincide
with the end of a 28-day work period. However, if the needs of the department as determined in the sole
discretion of the Police Chief warrant a change from the "3/12.5" schedule to another such as, but not
limited to, a "4/10" other than at the end of a 28-day work period, the Association acknowledges that an
adjustment to balance the hours worked and paid will be required. This adjustment may necessitate a
deduction from an employee's CTO, holiday, vacation time and/or gross pay. A similar adjustment may
be necessary in situations such as, but not limited to, the resignation of an Officer.

The Association agrees that management retains the absolute right to discontinue the use of the "3/12.5"
work schedule at any time without having to engage in the meet and confer process. Management also
retains the right to assign an officer to either the "3/12.5” or the "4/10" work schedule without having to
engage in the meet and confer process. If the "3/12.5 work schedule is discontinued by management,
employees assigned to a "3/12.5" work schedule shall return to a "4/10" work schedule.

24
ORDINANCE NO. 5637

STATE OF CALIFORNIA )
)
COUNTY OF SANTA BARBARA ) ss.
)
CITY OF SANTA BARBARA )

| HEREBY CERTIFY that the foregoing ordinance was introduced on September
19, 2013, and was adopted by the Council of the City of Santa Barbara at a meeting
held on October 15, 2013, by the following roll call vote:

AYES: Councilmembers Dale Francisco, Frank Hotchkiss, Grant House,
Cathy Murillo, Randy Rowse, Bendy White, Mayor Helene
Schneider

NOES: None

ABSENT: None

ABSTENTIONS: None

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereto set my hand and affixed the official seal
of the City of Santa Barbara on October 16, 2013.

  

ee

fe
fo: t 1-57 Gwen Peirce, CMC
4% =" =: “ws + = City Clerk Services Manager
vo
| HEREBY seprovt eto atinnc ber 16, 2013.

  

‘uy! (ltr 1

25
