612 PDC

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
FOR JOINT SUBMISSION
REGARDING THE
SUPERVISORY PEACE OFFICERS

THIS MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING, made and entered into this 29" day of

September, 2015,

BY AND BETWEEN Authorized Management Representatives
(hereinafter referred to as "Management) of
the County of Los Angeles (hereinafter
referred to as “County”),

AND Professional Peace Officers Association
(hereinafter referred to as “PPOA").
ARTICLE 1
ARTICLE 2
ARTICLE 3
ARTICLE 4
ARTICLE 5
ARTICLE 6
ARTICLE 7
ARTICLE 8
ARTICLE 9
ARTICLE 10
ARTICLE 11
ARTICLE 12
ARTICLE 13
ARTICLE 14
ARTICLE 15
ARTICLE 16
ARTICLE 17
ARTICLE 18
ARTICLE 19

ARTICLE 20
ARTICLE 21
ARTICLE 22
ARTICLE 23
ARTICLE 24
ARTICLE 25
ARTICLE 26
ARTICLE 27

612 PDC

TABLE OF CONTENTS

JASLE ee eer eee

PURPOSE
RECOGNITION
NON-DISCRIMINATION
IMPLEMENTATION

  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

 

RENEGOTIATION . 9
SALARIES ... 12
OVERTIME .. 21
UNIFORMS.. 29
PEACE OFFICER RELIEF FUND.. “3
ACTING CAPACITY ... 33
EIGHT-HOUR DAY... 35
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 36
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS 37
ASSOCIATION RIGHTS...... 38

PERSONNEL INVESTIGATIONS...
ADVISORY COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP

 

 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 

PAYCHECK ERRORS -46
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS IN THE EVENT OF TRANSFER O

FUNCTIONS.........0--002 =e - 48
GENERAL CONDITIONS 50

OBLIGATION TO SUPPORT..
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS...

FULL UNDERSTANDING, MODIFICATIONS, WAIVER .
AUTHORIZED AGENTS..
PROVISIONS OF LAW...
LIMITED TERM ASSIGNMENT PROGRA|
RANDOM DRUG TESTING PROGRAM .

 

APPENDIX A. . 87
ATTACHMENT A.. . 88
ATTACHMENT B1 - 90
ATTACHMENT B2 91
ATTACHMENT B3 92
ATTACHMENT B4 -- 93
ATTACHMENT C.. -94

SIGNATURE PAGE.
612 PDC

ARTICLE 14 PURPOSE

It is the purpose of this Memorandum of Understanding to promote and provide for
harmonious relations, cooperation, and understanding between Management and the
employees covered herein; to provide an orderly and equitable means of resolving any
misunderstandings or differences which may arise under this Memorandum of
Understanding; and to set forth the full and entire understanding of the parties reached
as a result of good faith negotiations regarding the wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of employment of the employees covered hereby, which understanding the
parties intend jointly to submit and recommend for approval and implementation to

County's Board of Supervisors.
612 PDC

 

ARTICLE 2 RECOGNITION

Pursuant to the provisions of the Employee Relations Ordinance of the County of
Los Angeles and applicable State law, Professional Peace Officers Association was
certified on January 29, 1970, by County's Employee Relations Commission (Employee
Relations Commission File No. R-22-69) as the majority representative of County
employees in the Supervisory Peace Officers Employee Representation Unit
(hereinafter the "Unit") previously found to be appropriate by said Employee Relations
Commission. Management hereby recognizes PPOA as the certified majority
representative of the employees in said Unit. The term "employee" or “employees” as
used herein shall refer only to employees employed by County in said Unit in the
employee classifications comprising said Unit as listed in Appendix "A" attached hereto
and incorporated herein, as well as such classes as may be added hereafter by the

Employee Relations Commission.
612 PDC

NOK-DISOENeaee—

ARTICLE 3 NON-DISCRIMINATION

The parties mutually recognize and agree fully to protect the rights of all employees
covered hereby to join and participate in the activities of PPOA and all other rights in the
Employee Relations Ordinance and Government Code, Sections 3500 through 3511.
No employee shall be interfered with, intimidated, restrained, coerced or discriminated

against because of the exercise of these rights.

The provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding shall be applied equally to all
employees covered hereby without favor or discrimination because of race, color, sex,

age, national origin, political or religious opinions or affiliations.
612 PDC

ARTICLE 4 IMPLEMENTATION

 

This Memorandum of Understanding constitutes a mutual recommendation to be jointly
submitted to County's Board of Supervisors. It is agreed that this Memorandum of
Understanding shall not be binding upon the parties unless and until said Board of

Supervisors:

A. Acts, by majority vote, formally to approve said Memorandum of Understanding;

B. Enacts necessary amendments to all County ordinances, including the
Los Angeles County Code, required to implement the full provisions of Articles;

and

Cc. Acts to appropriate the necessary funds required to implement the provisions of

this Memorandum of Understanding which require funding.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the Board of Supervisors fails to take all
actions necessary to timely implement this Memorandum of Understanding, it is
understood that the parties may mutually agree to implement appropriate provisions of

this Memorandum which do not require specific approval by the Board of Supervisors.
612 PDC

If the parties do not mutually agree to implement appropriate provisions of this
Memorandum not requiring approval by the Board of Supervisors, then negotiations

shall resume upon the request of either party.

Notwithstanding the above, the provisions of Article 22, Management Rights, which
differ from Section 5 of the Employee Relations Ordinance, shall be implemented only

by mutual agreement of the parties.
612 PDC

ARTICLE 5 TERM

The term of this Memorandum of Understanding shall commence on the date when the
terms and conditions for its effectiveness, as set forth in Article 4, Implementation, are
fully met, but in no event shall said Memorandum of Understanding become effective

prior to 12:01 a.m., on February 1, 2015. This Memorandum of Understanding shall

expire and otherwise be fully terminated at 12:00 midnight on January 31, 2018.
612 PDC

ARTICLE 6 RENEGOTIATION

 

In the event either party hereto desires to negotiate the provisions of a successor
Memorandum of Understanding, such party shall serve upon the other, its request to
commence negotiations, as well as its initial written proposals for such successor

Memorandum of Understanding no later than September 15, 2017.

Negotiations shall begin no later than October 15, 2017. If full and entire agreement on
the terms of a successor Memorandum of Understanding is not reached by November
30, 2014, an impasse shall be automatically declared on those issues which remain in

dispute unless the parties mutually agree to continue negotiations.

COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENTS (COLA). GENERAL SALARY MOVEMENT (GSM).
ACROSS-THE-BOARD ADJUSTMENTS {ATB)

During the term of this Memorandum of Understanding, should any recognized County
safety bargaining unit reach a signed agreement that results in a higher across-the
board (ATB) percent increase for any given year, than provided to members of Unit 612
by this Agreement, the County agrees to adjust the salary of Unit 612 members by an
equivalent percent increase, effective the same year of the contract and the same time
as the increase in the other safety bargaining unit.

(By way of example, in the event that Unit 612 members received an increase in salary

each year under a three year contract (3% - 3% - 2% - 2%) but another County
612 PDC

bargaining unit received a 4% increase in salary for the first year of its contract, Unit 612
members would immediately receive an additional 1% increase for a total of 4%

increase in salary in that same year.)

ECONOMIC ENHANCEMENTS

During the term this Memorandum of Understanding, should any recognized County
safety bargaining unit reach a signed agreement that results in an economic
enhancement, greater than provided to members of Unit 612 by this Agreement for any

year of its contract, the County agrees to pay Unit 612 members the same economic

ment for the same year. For the purposes of this provision, “economic

 

enhancement” includes, but is not limited to, providing or increasing uniform allowance,
post pay, standby pay, night shift differential, step increase, vacation time accrual or
cash out, holiday pay or cash out, longevity pay, bonus, stipend, incentive pay or lump
sum payment.

COMPACTION PAY STUDY

The County acknowledges bargaining unit member concerns that a problem with
compaction may exist (at a minimum to include Deputy to Sergeant, Sergeant to
Lieutenant, D.A. Investigator to D.A. Sergeant, D.A. Sergeant to D.A. Lieutenant) which
could adversely impact promotions. As such, within 90 days following Board of
Supervisor approval of a successor MOU, the County agrees to form a committee to

pre-meet and establish guidelines for a compaction study. The Committee will be

10
612 PDC

comprised of an equal number of County and PPOA members, not to exceed 5
members each. The County CEO Representative and PPOA President will be standing
members of the committee. The target for completion of the study will be 180 days after

the committee establishes guidelines for the compaction study.

The compaction study will be conducted by the County as per current compensation
procedures/processes. The parties also agree to reconvene the committee within thirty
(30) days of the conclusion of the study to discuss the study’s findings and, if the
committee agrees there is compaction that should be addressed, make joint

recommendations to the Board of Supervisors to remedy the situation.

a
ARTICLE 7 SALARIES

 

Sectiont. Recommended Salary Adjustment

 

612 PDC

The parties agree jointly to recommend to County's Board of Supervisors that said

Board adopt and implement the following salaries applicable to employees in the Unit

on the effective dates indicated:

ITEM ITEM EFFECTIVE
NO CLASSIFICATION DATE

2719 LIEUTENANT CURRENT
7/01/2015
07/01/2016
7/01/2817
61/01/2018

2894 LIEUTENANT ,DA CURRENT
07/81/2015
07/01/2016
7/01/2617
1/01/2018

2717 SERGEANT CURRENT
07/91/2015
7/81/2016
67/01/2017
1/61/2018

2891 SERGEANT ,DA CURRENT
07/01/2015
87/01/2016
97/01/2017
91/01/2018

Section 2. Step Advances

MINIMUM
NOTE SCH RATE
108D 7892.64
109E 8129.36
110F 8373.18
a1ic 8539.55
111L 8769.73
108D 7892.64
1@9E 8129.36
110F 8373.18
111C 8539.55
1b 8709.73
1e@1L 6648.82
183A 6840.80
1048 7045.55
104K 7185.91
185G 7329.55
163L 7018.91
165A 7221.08
1068 7438.55
166K 7586.91
107G 7738.55

ZEe2E EEZEE 22222 FEEZZ

MAXIMUM
RATE

 

10351.18
10662.45
10982.45
11200.64
11423.18

10351.18
10662.45
10982.45
11200.64
11423.18

8709.73
8971.00
9241.00
9425.20
9612.82

9195.55
9471.00
9755.36
9956.27
10149.00

A. Full-time permanent employees in this Unit who are below the top step of the

salary range and who are eligible for an annual step advance will be granted a

12
612 PDC

step advance only when a competent or better Performance Evaluation has been

filed by the employee's department head.

The Performance Evaluation shall be filed at least one month prior to the
employee's step advance anniversary date, and within a period which does not

exceed one year prior to that date.

If no performance review is filed as defined in A. above, or if an employee
receives an Improvement Needed Performance Evaluation, the employee's step

advance will not be granted on the date due.

Where no Performance Evaluation is issued in accordance with Paragraph A.
above, the employee may request his/her department in writing to issue a
Performance Evaluation. The department head shall issue a Performance
Evaluation within five (5) days of the employee's request. If said Performance
Evaluation is competent or better, the employee shall be granted a step advance

effective to his/her step advance anniversary date.

Grievances arising out of this Section shall be processed as follows:

1 Where no Performance Evaluation has been issued in accordance with

Paragraph B. above, the employee may file a grievance with the Department

13
612 PDC

of Human Resources.
If the Department of Human Resources fails to obtain issuance of such
Performance Evaluation within ten (10) days after the grievance is filed with

the Department of Human

14
612 PDC

Resources, the employee shall be deemed competent and the step
advance shall be processed within thirty (30) days effective to his/her step

anniversary date.

2. Where the department head issues a Performance Evaluation upon
request of the Department of Human Resources, and said Performance
Evaluation is competent or better, the employee shall be provided a step
advance within thirty (30) days effective to his/her step advance

anniversary date.

3. Grievances based on an Improvement Needed Performance Evaluation
shall be filed within ten (10) days of issuance with the department head or
his/her designated representative who shall respond to the grievance
within ten (10) days. Appeals from a department head shall be processed

in accordance with Civil Service Rules.

During the term of this agreement, should any changes be made in the existing
categories of Performance Evaluations which adversely impacts the application
of this Section, the parties agree to meet and renegotiate this Section. In the

event an agreement cannot be reached through negotiations, it is agreed that

15
612 PDC

PPOA may submit the dispute to arbitration. The arbitrator shall issue an award
on the step advances as affected by the changes in existing categories of

Performance Evaluations.

Section 3. Explosive Detail Bonus

Personnel in this Unit assigned on a permanent, full-time basis to explosive detail duty
in the Sheriffs Department shall be entitled to compensation at a rate four (4) schedules
higher than that established for their class when they have successfully completed

special training.

Section 4. Additional Compensation - POST Certificate Bonus

In no event shall an employee be compensated under this Section for any period of time
such employee held a POST Certificate prior to January 1, 1986. The bonuses shall be
considered as wages, and, upon promotions, employees shall be placed on a step in
the new salary schedule which provides an increase in salary consistent with the
provisions of Section 6.08.090 the Los Angeles County Code. Employees who do not
qualify for the Basic POST bonus as set forth above, shall remain eligible for the twenty-
six (26) standard salary "level" bonus by certifying to the Sheriff every six (6) months
following July 1, 1979, that steps are being taken (training or education, not experience)

to achieve the Basic POST Certificate.

16
612 PDC

Employees in this bargaining unit who are appointed to the rank of Sergeant (#2717) or
Lieutenant (#2719) on or after January 4, 1999 shall not receive compensation for the
Basic POST Certificate. This provision shall also apply to employees in the Office of the
District Attorney who are promoted to the class of Lieutenant, DA (Item No. 2894) and

Sergeant, DA (Item No. 2891) on or after January 1, 2001.

Section 5. Sergeant Supervisory/Skill Bonus

A Sergeant who is regularly assigned to supervise or work with a Bonus II Deputy shall
receive a supervisory/skill bonus of one standard salary schedule (2-3/4 percent),
unless the difference in the skill pay between the Sergeant and the relevant Deputy,

Bonus Ii, exceeds that amount.

Specifically, the supervisory/skill bonus shail be applied to all Sergeants assigned to the

following units:

Detective Division

 

Narcotics Bureau, Major Violators;
Commercial Crimes Bureau, Forgery - Fraud Detail;
Commercial Crimes Bureau, Arson - Explosives Detail;

Homicide Bureau.

17
612 PDC

Technical Services Division

Scientific Services Bureau, Crime Lab - Firearms Identification;

Scientific Services Bureau, Crime Lab - Questioned Documents.

Region Ill

Special Enforcement Bureau, Emergency Services Detail.

Section 6. Shooting Bonus

The parties agree that the Shooting Bonus shall be as follows:

a) Marksman $2.00 per pay period
b) Sharpshooter $4.00 per pay period
c) Expert $8.00 per pay period
d) Distinguished Expert $16.00 per pay period

Section 7.
The parties agree that the recommended salaries set forth herein were negotiated in
good faith, and were jointly determined independently of race, gender, age or national

origin.

Section 8. Motorcycle Skill Pay
Effective August 1, 1992, Sergeants covered by this MOU and assigned full-time duty to

the motorcycle patrol unit shall be compensated by a skill pay equivalent to 22 standard

18
612 PDC

salary levels higher (approximately 5 ¥%%) than the monthly salary for the classification

of Sergeant.

Section 9. Longevity Pay
Upon approval of the Board of Supervisors and implementation this MOU, members of
this bargaining unit shall receive Longevity Pay in accordance with the following

implementation schedule:

07/01/05 3% 20 years of service
01/01/06 4% 25 years of service

07/01/06 4% 30 years of service

Longevity Pay is cumulative and shall constitute a base rate. Longevity Pay shall be
paid for aggregate service as a Deputy Sheriff or District Attorney Investigator in the
County of Los Angeles. Agency hire date as a safety employee for mergers and
consolidations shall be recognized for purposes of longevity (no lateral law enforcement
experience, military buy-back, or general County experiences counts towards qualifying

for years of service for longevity pay).

Section 10. Custody Dual Track Career Path

Effective January 1, 2013 the Sheriffs Department shall implement The Dueal Track

Career Path (Dual Track) Program to enhance continuity, stability and accountability in

19
612 PDC

the county jail system. The Dual Track shall offer Sergeants (Item 2717) and
Lieutenants (Item 2719) the ability to promote and remain in Custody Division without

the requirement to be patrol-certified.

Non-patro! certified Sergeants and Lieutenants who choose to remain and promote
within the Custody Division under the Dual Track Program shall receive step advances
in accordance with Section 2 of the Article, but shall not receive a step advance or

otherwise advance to the top step of the salary range unless patrol-certified.
PPOA acknowledges consultation with the Department on the changes to the

classifications and promotional examination process of Sergeants and Lieutenants

necessary to implement the Dual Track Program.

20
ARTICLE 8

Section 1.

612 PDC

OVERTIME

Compensation for Overtime Worked

A. Overtime for employees in this Unit in excess of the workweek, as defined by

Section 7(a\(2)(c) , shall be compensated by compensatory time on an hour-for-

hour basis except as follows:

An employee shall accumulate overtime at a straight time rate to fulfill and
maintain a corridor of 40 hours. All overtime accumulated over 40 hours,
up to and including 460 hours, shall be paid at time and one-half unless
the employee elects that such time be accumulated at a straight time rate

and so indicates in the manner specified by Management.

Any employee who has credit for an accumulation of 160 hours of unused
compensatory time off shall receive paid overtime at the rate of time and
one-half his/her base rate for any overtime worked. An accumulated
compensatory time off for which an employee has credit as of the effective
date of this Article (July 1, 1997 per County Code Section 6.15.090,
subsection 6) shall be counted in the 160 hours of compensatory time off
specified above. In the event such accumulated overtime credit exceeds

the 160 hours, such excess shall remain to the employee's credit.

21
612 PDC

3. Paid leave time does not count toward establishing overtime eligibility
except when an employee uses holiday time, compensatory time off
(accumulated overtime) or in the event an employee who uses accrued
benefit time during a work week is ordered to work overtime, then the

benefit time used shall count as hours worked.

An employee who uses accrued benefit time during a work week and
volunteers to work additional hours may at his/her option accumulate said
additional hours on a hour-for-hour basis to be used as compensatory

time off.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, employees required to
attend unit meetings during otherwise off-duty time shall receive as
compensation therefor credit for compensatory time not to exceed four
hours per quarter. Any additional overtime as a result of such meetings

during any quarter shall be compensated as provided in Subsection A.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, the Department Head may
order payment of overtime in lieu of permitting accumulation of compensatory
time off if the Chief Executive Officer or the Board of Supervisors agrees there is

a need for such payment.

22
612 PDC

Section 2. Usage of Compensatory Time Off
A. Accumulated compensatory time may be taken off by an employee with prior

approval of Departmental management.

Accumulated compensatory time off for over 40 hours shall be taken off by an
employee when directed by Departmental Management, provided, however, that
Management will give an employee at least seven (7) business days' notice prior
to the date the directed compensatory time off is to be taken ("business day"
means calendar days exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays);
however, no employee shall be directed by Departmental Management to take
off all or any part of the first 40 hour corridor which may be accumulated in

accordance with Section 1.A.1 of this Article.

Compensatory time off shall be first deducted from any available time earned on
or before June 30, 1977, and remaining to the employee's credit as of such date.
In the event the latter is not applicable, requests for compensatory time off will be

deducted from any time earned effective July 1, 1977, and thereafter.

In approving and directing compensatory time off, Management will
accommodate employee convenience to the degree possible in light of

operational requirements.

23
612 PDC

Section3. Ordered Overtime

 

It is agreed that overtime will be ordered and worked only when required to meet the

County's public service obligations.

Section4. Time of Payment

It is the intent of the parties that overtime worked in one month will be paid in the

following month.

Section5. Saving Clause

The parties agree that due to the delay of the application of the Fair Labor Standards
Act to public employees of state and local government until April 15, 1986, the overtime
provisions of the 1983-85 MOU shall be applied to employees covered by this
agreement instead of the overtime provisions contained in this Article for the period of
the delay to April 14, 1986. Provisions of this Article shall be applied on and after

April 15, 1986, to employees covered by this agreement and the provisions of the

4983-85 MOU shall cease to apply. If during the term of this agreement the Fair Labor

through law, regulation, or court decision, the overtime provisions of the 1983-85 MOU
shall be reincorporated into this MOU and applied to employees covered by this
agreement and any contrary language shall be deleted subsequent to the effective date

of such law, regulation, or court decision.

24
612 PDC

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, in the event that any employee or
employees covered by this agreement are determined by statute or any court of
competent jurisdiction to be covered by the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act
(i.e., not “exempt"), such employee or employees may be declared by the County to fall
within the provision of Section 7(k) of the Fair Labor Standards Act (42 U.S.C.A. Section
207 (k)), provided that such employees are paid overtime compensation at time and
one-half his/her regular hourly rate in accordance with the provisions of the Fair Labor

Standards Act with the following exceptions:

I Paid leave time does not count toward establishing overtime eligibility except
when an employee uses holiday time or in the event an employee who uses
accrued benefit time during a work week is ordered to work overtime, then the

benefit time used shall count as hours worked.

2. Hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours up to forty-three (43) hours in a work
week (exclusive of daily fifteen (15) minute briefing period) may be accumulated
to be used as compensatory time off on an hour-for-hour basis, or shall be
paid at time and one-half his/her regular hourly rate, at the option of the

employee.

3. An employee who uses accrued benefit time during a work week and volunteers
to work additional hours may at his/her option accumulate said additional hours

on an hour-for-hour basis to be used as compensatory time off; and provided that

25
612 PDC

the work period for such employee or employees shall be seven (7) days under

Section 7(k) of the Fair Labor Standards Act.

Section 6.

Pay for Unusual Occurrence

Lieutenants shall be paid at time and one-half for all overtime worked when the Sheriffs

Department or the County is reimbursed at time and one-half for such overtime.

Section 7.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding:

A. Between October 1, 1993 and June 30, 1994 only, all overtime shall be

compensated with compensatory time off (CTO) as_ provided for in

subparagraphs (1) - (4), below.

(1)

(2)

To the extent such time would have qualified for time and one-half pay
under other provisions of this MOU (including time and one-half pay at the
employee's option), such time shall be compensated with time and one-
half CTO, subject only to the maximum accumulation of 480 hours

(resulting from 320 hours of work) for employees covered by this MOU.
To the extent such time would have qualified for straight time pay under
other provisions of this MOU, such time shall be compensated with

straight time CTO.

26
(3)

(4)

(5)

612 PDC

Such CTO either (a) may be taken off at the request of an employee

subject to management approval or (b) shall be maintained “on the

books”.

Nothing in this paragraph is intended to alter the definition of “overtime” as
set forth elsewhere in this MOU or the circumstances under which

overtime compensation must be paid.

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section A paragraph (1) above, overtime
compensation for all special event overtime (as defined in County Code
Section 6.15.120 and including but not limited to the Tournament of Roses
Parade/Rose Bowl, High School Athletic Events and motion picture
security) shall be paid at the rate of time and one half (17) in accordance

with the provisions of this MOU in effect prior to this amendment.

Effective July 1, 1994, compensation for all "overtime" as defined in this

Memorandum of Understanding shall, at the employee's option, be compensated

with pay at the rate of one and one-half times the pay then in effect for the

employee, or accrued as CTO at the rate of one and one-half hours for each hour

of overtime worked. Accumulation of CTO shall be subject only to the maximum

accumulation of 480 hours (resulting from 320 hours of work).

27
612 PDC

On or after August 1, 1995, at the employee's option, time “on the books” may
continue to be taken as time off, subject to management approval, or may be
converted to pay. An employee electing payment for any portion of his or her
CTO accrual balance may submit a request and, within forty-five (45) days of that

request, shall be paid at the rate of pay then in effect for the employee.

CTO accrued between October 1, 4993 and June 30, 1994, shall be taken off
only at the request of the employee. For any CTO accrued during other periods,
nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit management's authority to
direct any employee to take accumulated CTO as provided elsewhere in this

MOU.

From July 1, 1994 through June 30, 1995, the Board of Supervisors may pay for
CTO accrued between October 1, 1993 and June 30, 1994 at the rate of pay

then in effect for the employee.

28
612 PDC

ARTICLE 9 UNIFORMS

 

Nothing herein shall be construed to modify in any manner whatsoever the uniform
standards in the Sheriffs Department, and nor shall anything herein be construed as a
waiver of Management's right to establish, change and modify uniform standards and

dress codes.

Section 1. Uniform Replacement and Maintenance Allowance

Employees covered by this agreement and employed on November 1, 2015, shall be
entitled to a lump sum payment of one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1250) in lieu
of the uniform items previously issued and replaced under the 1979-1 981 Memorandum
of Understanding. Such payment shall be made between December 1, 2015 and

December 15, 2015, by separate payroll warrant.

Employees covered by this agreement and employed on November 1, 2016, shall be
entitled to a lump sum payment of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1500) in lieu of
the uniform items previously issued and replaced under the 1979-1981 Memorandum of
Understanding. Such payment shall be made between December 1, 2016 and

December 15, 2016, by separate payroll warrant.
Employees covered by this agreement and employed on November 1, 2017, shall be
entitled to a lump sum payment of one thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($1750) in

lieu of the uniform items previously issued and replaced under the 1979-1981

29
612 PDC

Memorandum of Understanding. Such payment shall be made between December 1,

2017 and December 15, 2017, by separate payroll warrant.

Employees covered by this agreement shall receive by separate payroll warrant a one-
time only, lump sum uniform supplement payment of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2500) effective March 1, 2005.

This allowance shall not constitute a base rate.

Section 2. Uniform Replacement and Maintenance

 

Employees shall be responsible for the replacement of each uniform item previously
issued and considered substandard under Sheriffs Department guidelines and shall be

responsible for the laundry, care, and maintenance of their uniforms.

Section 3. Motorcycle Jacket

Upon assignment to full-time duty in a motorcycle patrol unit, the Department agrees to
provide, on a one (1) time only basis, a credit voucher up to one hundred and fifty
($150.00) dollars for the purchase of 2 Departmentally-approved motorcycle patrol

jacket.

30
612PDC

ARTICLE 10 PEACE OFFICER RELIEF FUND

Section 1.

Beginning January 1, 1990, and for the term of this agreement, the County agrees to
contribute to the Peace Officer Relief Fund (PORF) the sum of thirty ($30.00) dollars per

month, per employee employed in any of the following item numbers:

Item No.

2717 Sergeant
2719 Lieutenant
2891 Sergeant, DA
2894 Lieutenant, DA
Section 2.

Payment shall be made on the first working day of the month for all employees working

at least eight (8) hours the preceding month in any item classification set forth in Section

1 herein above.

Section 3.
Payment shall be to:

Peace Officer Relief Fund Trust
2 Cupania Circle
Monterey Park CA 91755

31
612 PDC

Section 4.

The County agrees that the benefits provided through the PORF shall be as determined

by the Peace Officer Relief Fund Board of Trustees.

Section 5.

It is the intent of the parties that the benefits provided through PORF will not provide
monthly benefits to an eligible employee in excess of their regular monthly base

compensation.

Additionally, the parties agree that PORF benefits shall be coordinated with County
benefits so that the combination of County monthly leave benefits and the PORF

benefits will not exceed the eligible employee's regular monthly base compensation.

32
612 PDC

ARTICLE 11 ACTING CAPACITY

 

Section 1. Definition

Acting capacity is the official assignment to fill a vacant, fully funded and budgeted
higher level position by departmental order in the Sheriff's Department or by order of the
Chief of the Bureau of Investigation in the District Attorney's Department. Such
assignment shall be entered on the departmental personnel records to provide

documentation of experience in the higher classification.

For purposes of this Article, if a promotional list is enjoined or appointments stayed for
any reason whatsoever, assignment of employees represented by this Unit to an acting

capacity by departmental order from such lists shall constitute an official acting capacity

assignment.

Such appointment(s) shall in no way change or otherwise modify Civil Service Rules

regarding promotions.

Section 2. Bonus

Beginning with the thirty-first (31st) consecutive day of such acting assignment and for
each subsequent month until the employee is promoted or returned to an assignment in
his/her class, he/she shall receive a bonus, equivalent to one (1) salary schedule,
eleven (11) levels, above his/her existing salary schedule. For those employees, who

had completed thirty (30) consecutive days on such acting assignment prior to

33
612 PDC

August 1, 1983, the bonus shall be payable effective August 1, 1983.

This bonus shail not constitute a base rate.

Section 3.
In the event an "Intent-to-Promote" employee is assigned to an official acting capacity
and returned to an assignment within his/her own classification without appointment to

the rank of Sergeant (#2717) or Lieutenant (#2719), the provisions of Section 2 of this

Article shall apply.

This provision shall apply to employees in the Office of the District Attorney who are
assigned to an official acting capacity and are returned to an assignment within his/her
own classification without appointment to the rank of Lieutenant, DA (Item No. 2894)

and Sergeant, DA (Item No. 2891) on or after January 1, 2001.

34
612 PDC

ARTICLE 12 EIGHT-HOUR DAY

 

The basic workday for each “shift employee” ("shift employee" as defined in Section
6.04.110 of the Los Angeles County Code assigned to an eight (8) hour workday shall
be eight (8) hours of work plus a 45-minute briefing period at the beginning of each
workday. For other eight (8) hour workday employees, the basic workday shall be eight
(8) hours of work plus at least a one-half hour meal break, and Management shall make

every reasonable effort to insure that such meal break is uninterrupted by recall to work.

35
612 PDC

ARTICLE 13 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

 

It is agreed that the individual departmental grievance procedures in effect in the
Sheriffs Department (attached hereto as Appendix "B") and the District Attorney's Office
(attached hereto as Appendix "C") will be fully effective as the grievance procedure
applicable to the employees in the Unit of each respective department covered herein

during the term of this Memorandum of Understanding.

36
612 PDC

ARTICLE 14 STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS

SInIKES ANS ===“

During the life of this agreement no work stoppages, strikes, slowdowns or picketing

shall be caused or sanctioned by PPOA, and no lockouts shall be made by the County.

In the event any employees covered by this agreement, individually or collectively,
violate the provisions of this Article and PPOA fails to exercise good faith in halting the
work interruption, PPOA and the employees involved shall be deemed in violation of this

Article and the County shall be entitled to seek all remedies available to it under

applicable law.

37
612 PDC

 

ARTICLE 15 ASSOCIATION RIGHTS
Section 1. PPOA Rights

Itis understood and agreed that PPOA has the right to:
A. Represent its members before Management representatives regarding wages,

hours, and other terms and conditions of employment.

B. Receive timely written notice of any ordinance, rule, resolution, or regulation

directly relating to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment.

Cc. Inspect an employee's personnel file at a reasonable time, upon request, during
normal business hours, with the exception of all material obtained from other
employers and agencies at the time the employee was hired, provided an

authorized PPOA representative has the employee's written consent.

D. Use County facilities for membership meetings, (excluding meetings for the
advancement of activities which have a negative impact on County operations)
and conferences upon reasonable advance notice to the appropriate County

official, subject to availability of such facilities.

Section 2. Work Access for Representation Purposes

The parties agree that authorized PPOA representatives will be given access to work

locations during working hours to conduct business relating solely to the provisions of

38
612 PDC

this Memorandum of Understanding. Access shall be guided by the following

limitations:

PPOA shall furnish a list of representatives to the department head or his/her
designated representative. PPOA will immediately notify the department of any

changes in its representatives.

=~

A representative desiring access to a work location must state the purpose and
request approval from the department head or his/her representative within a

reasonable amount of time prior to an intended visit.

2. PPOA agrees that its representatives will not interfere with the operation of the

department or any of its facilities.

3. Access will be granted to an authorized PPOA representative if, in the opinion of
the department head or his/her representative; such access will not interfere with

operations or adversely affect security.

4. If a requested visit is denied, an alternate time will be mutually agreed upon.

5. An employee designated as an authorized PPOA representative must obtain
permission from his/her immediate supervisor to engage, during duty hours, in

business relating to this Memorandum of Understanding.

39
612 PDC

Permission to leave will be granted promptly unless such absence would
interfere with efficient operations. If permission is denied, an alternate time will

be designated.

Section 3. PPOA/Management Meetings

Management agrees to consult with PPOA in conformity with Section 5 and Section 6

(a) of the Employee Relations Ordinance.

Section 4. Employee Lists

Management will provide PPOA with a list of all employees in the unit within ninety (90)
days from the date of this Memorandum of Understanding. Additional lists may be
provided at no less than six (6) month intervals when requested by PPOA at a

reasonable cost determined by the office of the County Auditor-Controller.

Section 5. Intra-County Communications

It is agreed that during the term of this agreement PPOA may maintain a mailbox at
Sheriffs Headquarters and that PPOA may send materials via the County mail system.
All materials which PPOA desires to teletype shall first be reviewed by the Sheriffs

authorized representative.

40
612 PDC

Bureun pees

Section 6. Bulletin Boards
Management agrees to provide at least one arch-file clipboard for the exclusive use of
PPOA in each area or facility employing more than ten (10) employees. PPOA shall

have the right to use such arch-file clip-board to post information or materials

concerning the following subjects:

PPOA recreational, social and related news bulletins;

Scheduled PPOA meetings;

Information concerning PPOA elections or the results thereof; and

So f@ P

Reports of official business of PPOA, including reports of subcommittees or the

Board of Directors.

Prior to posting any of the above materials on such arch-file clip-boards, such materials
shall be initialed by an authorized representative of PPOA and the Sheriff or District
Attorney if reasonably available. All other materials which PPOA desires to post shall

first be approved by the Sheriff's authorized representative.

Section 7. Payroll Deductions and Dues

 

It is agreed that PPOA dues and such other deductions as may be properly requested
and lawfully permitted shall be deducted, in accordance with the provisions of applicable
State law, monthly by Management from the salary of each employee covered hereby

who first files with County Management a written authorization requesting that such

41
612 PDC

deductions be made. It is further understood and agreed that Management shall not be
required to deduct said dues or other deductions or to remit same to PPOA when any
employee covered hereunder requests in writing that the County cancel all or any
portion of any deductions previously authorized. Remittance of the aggregate amount
of all dues and other proper deductions made from the salaries of employees covered
hereunder shall be made to PPOA by Management within thirty (30) working days after

the conclusion of the month in which said dues and deductions were deducted.

PPOA agrees to indemnify and hold the County of Los Angeles harmless from any
liabilities of any nature which may arise as a result of the application of the provisions of

this Article.

Section 8. Waiver of Rights
Nothing contained in this Memorandum of Understanding shall be construed as a
waiver by PPOA of its rights under Section 6 of the Employee Relations Ordinance,

except for those matters specifically set forth in this Memorandum of Understanding.

42
612 PDC

ARTICLE 16 PERSONNEL INVESTIGATIONS
A. The President of PPOA or a designated representative mutually agreed upon by

the parties, are the only persons entitled to inquire whether an employee is the
subject of a formal departmental investigation for misconduct. Disclosure shall

be subject to the following conditions:

1. Such disclosure will not be made if in the judgment of the department
head it would tend in any manner to jeopardize either the investigation
itself or the employee subject to such investigation or would interfere with

the operations of the department.

a Requests for such information must be directed to the department head or

his/her designated representative as follows:

Sheriffs Department

Commander, Area 1, Professional Standards and Training Division

District Attorney's Office

Chief, Bureau of Investigation

3, PPOA and the department agree that any information provided on a

personnel investigation is confidential and may be revealed only to the

concerned employee.

43
612 PDC

4. Inquiry shall be limited to those cases where PPOA has a recognizable

interest.

An employee who is the subject of a personnel investigation shall receive
consideration for overtime assignments on the same basis as other employees
who are not being investigated. Overtime assignments with duties not
substantially related to the matters being investigated may be granted.
Employees who have been suspended are precluded from working peace officer

assignments.
612 PDC

DVISORY COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP

ARTICLE 17 Al

The Sheriff agrees to appoint from the Unit 612 membership of the Professional Peace
Officers Association two qualified persons to serve as representatives on the Uniform

and Equipment Advisory Committee in accordance with the following conditions:

1 The Professional Peace Officers Association will submit to the Sheriff or his/her

designated representative a list of six named employees of the Department.

2. The Sheriff will consider the appointment of one employee for each Committee
from this list.
3. The appointed representative for each Committee will act as a voting member of

that Committee for the duration of his/her appointment.

4. The Sheriff reserves the right to monitor and direct the programs and activities of
the Advisory Committee and determine the length of tenure of Committee

members.

5. Replacement of a Committee member will be in accordance with the above

procedures.

45
612 PDC

ARTICLE 18 PAYCHECK ERRORS

 

A. Underpayments
1. If an underpayment of 10% of base monthly pay (5% of base monthly pay

if paid twice a month) or $100, whichever is least, occurs in an employee's
paycheck, a paycheck correction may be requested. Such request must
be made to the appointing authority within two business days after receipt
of the warrant. Otherwise, the correction shall be made in the next

regularly issued warrant.

2. The Auditor-Controller wili issue a corrected or supplemental warrant
within three working days after receiving the request from the appointing

authority.

3. Changes in salary resulting from step advances or changes in status are
excluded from amounts which constitute paycheck errors for purposes of

this Articie.

B. Overpayments

1. Recovery of more than 15% of net pay will be subject to a repayment
schedule established by the appointing authority under guidelines issued

by the Auditor-Controller. Such recovery shall not exceed 15% per month

46
612 PDC

of disposable earnings (as defined by State law), except, however, that a

mutually agreed-upon acceleration provision may permit faster recovery.

47
612 PDC

ARTICLE 19 EMPLOYEE RIGHTS IN THE EVENT OF TRANSFER OF
FUNCTIONS

In the event the County enters into any agreement with another public employer or
private entity which involves the transfer of functions now being performed by
employees in this representation Unit or the law provides for the transfer of functions
now being performed by employees in this Unit to another public or private agency, the
County will advise such public or private entity of the existence and terms of this
Memorandum of Understanding and will immediately advise PPOA of such agreement
or law. In addition, the County will consult with the employer absorbing a County
function to encourage utilization of affected employees by the new employer. When a
Department's Request for Proposal is approved by the Chief Executive Officer, the
Labor Relations Office will arrange to meet with representatives of PPOA to advise

them of this action within five (5) business days.

When advance knowledge of the impact of pending changes in function, organization,
or operations is available which will result in the abolishment of positions or when there
is any major reassignment of functions from one department to another or to another
agency, Management will make an intensive effort to either reassign or transfer affected
employees to other positions for which they qualify, or train affected employees for new
positions in order to retain their services. Itis understood and agreed that Management
shall have no obligation to negotiate the decision of any reorganization by the County

during the life of this agreement. Management acknowledges an obligation to negotiate

48
612 PDC

the impact on wages, hours and working conditions of the employees in this bargaining

unit insofar as such subjects are not set forth in Memoranda of Understanding or Civil

Service Rules.

49
612 PDC

ARTICLE 20 GENERAL CONDITIONS

 

Employees covered by this Memorandum of Understanding who are being investigated
by the Department on any criminal charges shall have the right to counsel and the right

to have all interrogations and interviews recorded.

50
612 PDC

ARTICLE 21 OBLIGATION TO SUPPORT

The parties agree that subsequent to the execution of the Memorandum of
Understanding and during the period of time said Memorandum is pending before the
Board of Supervisors for action, neither PPOA, nor Management, nor their authorized
representatives will appear before the Board of Supervisors or meet with members of
the Board of Supervisors individually to advocate any amendment, addition or deletion
to the terms and conditions of this Memorandum of Understanding. It is further
understood that this Article shall not preclude the parties from appearing before the
Board of Supervisors nor meeting with individual members of the Board Supervisors to

advocate or urge the adoption and approval of this Memorandum of Understanding in its

entirety.

51
612 PDC

ARTICLE 22 MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

MANAGEMENT RAYS

 

It is the exclusive right of the County to determine the mission of each of its constituent
departments, boards, and commissions, set standards of service to be offered to the
public, and exercise control and discretion over its organization and operations. It is also
the exclusive right of the County to direct its employees, take disciplinary action for
proper cause, relieve its employees from duty, effect work furloughs or any other
alternatives because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons, and determine the
methods, means and personnel by which the County's operations are to be conducted;
provided, however, that the exercise of such rights does not preclude employees or
their representatives from conferring or raising grievances about the practical
consequences that decisions on these matters may have on wages, hours and other

terms and conditions of employment.

52
612 PDC

ARTICLE 23 FULL UNDERSTANDING. MODIFICATIONS, WAIVER

A. This Memorandum of Understanding sets forth the full and entire understanding
of the parties regarding the matters set forth herein, and any other prior or
existing understanding or agreements by the parties, whether formal or informal,

regarding any such matters are hereby superseded or terminated in their entirety.

B. Except as specifically provided herein, it is agreed and understood that each
party hereto voluntarily and unqualifiedly waives its right and agrees that the
other shall not be required to negotiate with respect to any other matters within

the scope of negotiations during the term of this Memorandum of Understanding.

C. No agreement, alteration, understanding, variation, waiver or modification of any
of the terms or provisions contained herein shall in any manner be binding upon
the parties hereto unless made and executed in writing by all parties hereto and,

if required, approved and implemented by County's Board of Supervisors.
D. The waiver of any breach, term or condition of this Memorandum of

Understanding by either party shall not constitute a precedent in the future

enforcement of all its terms and provisions.

53
612 PDC

AVIBUNICER SSS

ARTICLE 24 AUTHORIZED AGENTS

For purposes of administering the terms and provisions of this Memorandum of

Understanding:

A. Management's principal authorized agent shall be County's Chief Executive
Officer or his duly authorized representative (Address: 222 North Grand Avenue,
Los Angeles, California 90012; Telephone: 974-2404), except where a particular
Management representative is specifically designated in connection with the

performance of a specific function or obligation set forth herein.

B. PPOA's principal authorized agent shall be its President or its Executive Director

(Address: 188 E. Arrow Hwy, San Dimas, CA 91755; Telephone (323) 261-3010).

54
612 PDC

PROVISO

ARTICLE 25 PROVISIONS OF LAW

It is understood and agreed that this Memorandum of Understanding is subject to all
current and future applicable Federal and State laws and regulations, the Charter of the
County of Los Angeles, all ordinances and regulations of the County of Los Angeles,
and any lawful rules and regulations enacted by County's Civil Service Commission,
Employee Relations Commission or similar independent commissions of the County. If
any part or provision of this Memorandum of Understanding is in conflict or inconsistent
with such applicable provisions of Federal, State or local law or regulations, or is
otherwise held to be invalid or unenforceable by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction,
such part or provision shall be suspended and superseded by such applicable law or

regulations, and the remainder of this Memorandum of Understanding shall not be

affected thereby.

55
612 PDC

IMITED TERM ASSIGNMENT PROGRAM

ARTICLE 26 u

A. Definitions
J. "Tour of Duty" is the period an employee is assigned to a unit of
assignment from the effective date that he/she transfers into said unit of
assignment until the effective date that he/she transfers out of said unit of

assignment.

2 A “Limited Term Assignment” is a position where there is a maximum
period of time beyond which an employee's Tour of Duty in said position

cannot exceed.

3. A "Covered Unit" is a unit of assignment, as defined in Section B herein,

where all assigned positions are Limited Term Assignments.

4, An “Incumbent Employee" is an employee of any rank assigned to a

Covered Unit on the date on which the program becomes effective.

5. A "Future Employee" is an employee of any rank who is assigned to a

Covered Unit after the date on which the program becomes effective.

56
Cc.

612 PDC

Covered Units and Limited Terms of Assignment

The agreed upon Covered Units and the respective Limited Terms of Assignment

per Tour of Duty are as follows:

Covered Unit Term of Assignment
1. Narcotics Bureau Six (6) years
2. Special Investigations Bureau Seven (7) years

3. Vice Bureau Five (5) years

Incumbent Employees

He When this program requiring an Incumbent Employee to transfer from a

Covered Unit to another unit of assignment goes into effect:

a. The beginning of the Limited Term Assignment shall commence on

the date this program becomes effective.

b. He/she shall, within ten (10) days from the date this program
becomes effective, be notified in writing that his/her Tour of Duty

shall not exceed that specified in Section B. herein.

c He/she shall receive not less than twelve (12) months, nor more
than fifteen (15) months advance written notice as to the date on

which his/her Tour of Duty shall expire.

57
o

612 PDC

All Incumbent Employees shall, upon their transfer from a Covered Unit,
continue to receive bonus pay as well as all future negotiated raises and
applicable step raises as if they remained in that position in the Covered
Unit. The intent of this provision is to ensure that the Incumbent Employee
shall not suffer any form of economic loss as a result of the
implementation of this program. Example: A Sergeant supervising Bonus
ll Deputies would transfer and continue to receive the supervisory pay

differential plus step and negotiated increases.

Once an Incumbent Employee is transferred from a Covered Unit, he/she
may not reapply in-grade to return to any Covered Unit for five (5) years

after the effective date of his/her transfer from said Covered Unit.

No Incumbent Employee shail be prohibited from transferring prior to the

completion of his/her Tour of Duty from a Covered Unit.

 

All Future Employees shall be notified in writing within ten (10) days after
they transfer to a Covered Unit that the Tour of Duty shall not exceed that

specified in Section B herein.

58
612 PDC

All Future Employees shall receive no less than twelve (12) months, or
more than fifteen (15) months, advance written notice as to the date on

which their Tour of Duty shall expire.

When Future Employees transfer from a Covered Unit, they shall continue
to receive bonus pay as well as all future negotiated raises and applicable
step raises, as if they remained on that position, provided the transfer is
within the last year of completion of the Limited Term Assignment. Bonus
pay protection will only last until such time that employee is appointed to
another bonus position. If, at the employee's option the transfer occurs
prior to the last year of completion of the Limited Term Assignment, it will

be considered as a voluntary relinquishment of the position.

Once a Future Employee transfers from a Covered Unit, he/she may not
re-apply in-grade to return to any Covered Unit for five (5) years after the

effective date of his/her transfer from said Covered Unit.

A Future Employee may submit an application for transfer from a Govered
Unit prior to the completion of the Limited Term Assignment. Such
transfer request must be approved by the employee's Division Chief within
six (6) months from the date of submission. However, transfer requests
submitted during the final year of the Limited Term Assignment shall be

expedited upon request.

59
612 PDC

Application of Policy

The intent of the parties is that this program will apply only to employees
represented by Unit 612. The application of the provisions specified herein
requiring the mandatory transfer from a Covered Unit shall be enforced without
exception. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of race, color, sex,
national origin, political or religious belief, affiliation, status of a then current
investigation, value to Unit and/or Division and/or Department, or personal

relationship.

One-Time One-Case Exception

1. The only exception to the provisions requiring an Incumbent Employee or
Future Employee to transfer from a Covered Unit by the end of the term
specified in Paragraph B herein shall be his/her involvement in a then

ongoing maior (single case) investigation.

Z. If the employee's Division Chief certifies that his/her continued

 

participation in an on-g investigation is critical to secure a prosecution,

 

then a one-time one-case only exception may be authorized.

60
612 PDC

3. The reason for said extension must be articulated in writing, citing the one-

case by name and number.

4. Thereafter, the employee must transfer within six (6) months of the

completion of the trial or decision not to file the case.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, effective February 1, 1996, this
Article shall no longer be applicable to employees covered by this Memorandum
of Understanding; except, however, those employees who transferred from a
Covered Unit prior to February 1, 4996, who were covered by the provisions of

this Article, shall retain any such compensation to which they were entitled.
It is the expressed intent of the parties that, for any employee who left a Covered

Unit prior to February 1, 1996, such employee shall continue to receive any rights

to which he/she was entitled prior to the deletion of this Article.

61
612 PDC

ARTICLE 27 RANDOM DRUG TESTING PROGRAM

 

Section |. INTRODUCTION

A.

Statement of Policy

Law enforcement officers are called upon to make a number of decisions. Among
them is sometimes deciding whether or not to use deadly force in the discharge
of their duties. They are required to function in environments that are often
hostile, hazardous and sometimes corrupt. Few persons are given such sensitive

public trust.

Any illegal use of drugs by law enforcement officers would pose a serious threat
to public safety. It would negatively affect morale and safety in the workplace,
endanger credible testimony, and significantly increase the risk of incurring civil

liability.

In the interests of the County of Los Angeles, its citizens, and the members of the
Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department (hereinafter LASD) and the District
Attorney's Bureau of investigation (hereinafter Bureau), it shail be the policy of

the LASD and Bureau to implement a random drug testing program.

All aspects of this drug testing program shall be on County time and paid

consistent with the provisions of this MOU.

62
612 PDC

Frequency of Testing
iP LASD

Sworn members shall be separated into three categories for the purpose

of determining the frequency of random drug testing.

The first category shall include all Deputy Sheriff Trainees and
probationary Deputy Sheriffs. Members in this category may be tested up

to, but not more than, six times in a twelve month period.

The second category shall include all sworn members assigned to
Department units having, as a primary responsibility, the operation of
aircraft or buses, the interdiction of drugs, the development of information
pertinent to the interdiction of drugs, or having substantial contact with
drug abuse or drug trafficking subjects. This category includes Narcotics
Bureau, Special Investigations Bureau, Headquarters Detective Division,
Aero Bureau, Transportation Bureau, Special Enforcement Bureau, and
Gang Enforcement Team (GET). Members in this category may be tested

up to, but not more than, four times in a twelve month period.

The third category shall include all other sworn members. These
members may be tested up to, but not more than, three times in a twelve

month period.

63
612 PDC

Note: A twelve month period shall be September 1, 1990 through
August 31, 1991 and each September 1 through August 31 of
succeeding years. Employees changing categories shall be
subject to the new category limit. Drug tests occurring since
September 1 and prior to the change in category shall count

toward the new limit.

2 Bureau
Sworn members of the Bureau may be tested up to, but not more than,

three times in a twelve month period.

Note: A twelve month period shall be February 1 through January 31 of

each year.

Confidentiality of Testing

Personnel subjected to drug testing shall be assigned a confidential test
identification number. The actual collection process shall be as discreet as

possible and shall respect the dignity of the test subject.

The Drugs

The random drug testing program may test for any of the drugs or classes of

drugs listed below:

64
612 PDC

Amphetamines/Methampheta mine
Cocaine

Cannabinoids (Marijuana, THC)
Opiates (Heroin, Morphine, Codeine)
Phencyclidine (PCP)

Be iP os

The Sheriff and District Attorney reserve the right to delete drugs and classes of

drugs from this list.

Test Methodology

The testing methodology will be based on a laboratory examination of a urine
specimen. Specimen collection and laboratory examination are described in

Section IV, Specimen Collection and Section V, Laboratory Analysis.

Laboratory analysis of urine specimens shall be restricted to those tests
authorized by this policy to detect drug abuse. They shall not be used for other
purposes, such as the analyses of physiological states or diseases (e.g.,

pregnancy, AIDS or cancer therapy).

65
612 PDC

Fi Implementation
The drug testing program shall be implemented on September 1, 1990 for LASD;
and February 1, 2005 for the Bureau, or as soon thereafter as this agreement is
adopted by the County Board of Supervisors.

Section Il. PROGRAM ORGANIZATION

A. Assignment
Responsibility for the day-to-day coordination of the Random Drug Testing
Program shall be assigned to Operations Lieutenant in the LASD’s Risk
Management Bureau and Executive Division in the Bureau. This responsibility
will include the creation of computer-generated random selection test schedules,
on-site specimen collection, delivery of specimens to the laboratory and the
maintenance of such Executive and statistical records as may be needed.
Statistics maintained on the number of tests administered and the number of
positive tests shall be provided to the union within five (5) business days of the
receipt of a written request by the union.

B. Drug Abuse Program Director

1 LASD
The Captain of the Risk Management Bureau, or the Senior Manager
designated to temporarily act in his/her behalf is designated as the

Department's Drug Abuse Program Director. The Captain shall have

66
612 PDC

overall responsibility for all pre-employment and employee drug testing
activities. It shall be the Captain's responsibility to direct the course and
scope of such employee substance abuse awareness programs as may
be in operation. The Captain is also designated as the Department
manager who shail be the contact point with the Medical Review Officer

regarding his/her evaluation of any positive test results.

Bureau

The Assistant Chief, Bureau of Investigation, or the senior manager
designated to temporarily act in his/her behalf, is designated as the
Bureau’s Drug Abuse Program Director. The Assistant Chief shall have
overall responsibility for all pre-employment and drug testing activities. It
shail be the Assistant Chief's responsibility to direct the course and scope
of such employee substance abuse awareness programs as may be in
operation. The Assistant Chief is also designated as Bureau manager
who shall be the contact point with the Medical Review Officer (MRO)

regarding his/her evaluation of any positive test results.

67
612 PDC

Medical Review Officer

 

The Medical Review Officer (MRO) shall be a licensed physician who has
knowledge of substance abuse disorders and has appropriate medical training to
interpret and evaluate an individual's positive test result together with his or her

medical history and any other relevant biomedical information.

The responsibility for the assignment of the appropriately qualified physician and

for ensuring his/her availability is that of the Director of Medical Services.

Collection Site Supervisors

Collection Site Supervisors in the LASD are those persons assigned to Risk
Management Bureau whose principle duties involve overseeing the on-site
collection of test specimens. Collection Site Supervisors in the Bureau are those
persons assigned to the Bureau whose duties involve overseeing the on-site
collection of test specimens. They shall supervise a male or a female assistant

assigned to each team. Collection Site Supervisors operate with the direct

authority of the Sheriff or District Attorney. They are empowered to command
any employee of any rank to furnish a urine specimen as a random test selection

schedule may dictate.

68
612 PDC

 

Section Ill. POSITIVE TEST RESULTS
A. Preliminary Determination

The Laboratory shall notify both the Medical Review Officer and the Drug Abuse
Program Director whenever it confirms a positive test result. The Scientific
Services Bureau (Laboratory) shall immediately send one copy of the subjects

Laboratory Report and the sealed Pre-test Declaration form to the MRO.

The MRO will give a system number to the Program Director (not the test result).
The Program Director will arrange an interview for the Medical Review Officer
with the employee (employee's option). The Program Director will try to contact
the employee utilizing the daytime telephone number designated by the

employee on the pretest declaration form.

The MRO is authorized to terminate the process if he/she determines that the
test result was caused by appropriate use of medication. He/she will then
prepare a written report to the Program Director limited to his/her statement of

conclusion. No further action will be taken.

lf the MRO cannot close the case, he/she will contact the Program Director
regarding the need for additional information in order to verify the employee's
statements. The Program Director will immediately send an investigator to verify

the facts presented by the employee without initiating a formal internal

69
612 PDC

investigation. The information obtained by the investigator will be provided to the
Medical Review Officer. The Medical Review Officer will prepare a written report
to the Program Director limited to a statement of conclusion if the additional
information allows him/her to determine that the test results were caused by

appropriate use of prescribed medication.

The Drug Abuse Program Director shall consult with the MRO on all other
matters of positive test results. The decision to proceed with further Executive
action is solely that of the Director. The Director in consultation with the MRO is
empowered to resolve the matter upon his/her finding that a positive test has
resulted from legitimate use or accidental exposure to drugs and no substantial

impairment exists.

If the Director determines that further Executive action is warranted, he/she shall:

(1) immediately advise the appropriate executive at the level of Division Chief
or higher, LASD, Bureau Chief or higher, District Attorney; and, (2) on
behalf of that executive, direct Internal Affairs to conduct an Executive
investigation; and (3) employee will be relieved of standard duty with pay.
The employee will be provided with a copy of documentation pertaining to

test results as provided in Section V.F herein.

70
612 PDC

Discipline

LASD and Bureau policy forbids any of its members to use any controlled
substances, narcotics, or hallucinogens except when prescribed by a physician
for an illness or injury. Moreover, LASD and Bureau policy forbids all members
from willfully violating any Federal statute, State law or local ordinance.
Members who violate any rules, regulations or policies of the LASD or the

Bureau or the County shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including

discharge.

Refusal to Provide Urine Specimen

Members who refuse to be tested when so required will be subject to disciplinary
action up to and including discharge. Attempts by a member to alter or substitute
any specimen will be deemed grounds for disciplinary action. In such instances,

Internal Affairs will be requested to conduct an Executive investigation, including

another drug test.

Note: Failure to provide a specimen within a reasonable period of time
(usually not more than three (3) hours) may constitute a refusal to

take a drug test.

71
612 PDC

Section IV. SPECIMEN COLLECTION

A.

Notification of Selection

Urine specimen collection will be done at an employee's unit of assignment or, if
not appropriate, another LASD or Bureau facility, only. Collection personne! shall
contact the appropriate Watch Commander or Senior Officer or appropriate
Bureau Section Lieutenant or Sergeant present and explain their presence.

Then they shall determine the subject's availability.

The Watch Commander/Senior Officer or the Bureau Section
Lieutenant/Sergeant shall assist by arranging for test subject(s) to present
him/her for testing. The Watch Commander/Senior Officer or the Bureau Section
Lieutenant/Sergeant shall also assist by locating and securing restroom facilities

that best meet the requirements of the collection procedure.

If the test subject is not working (RDO, vacation, off sick, etc.), or is unavailable
(Court, in the midst of a critical situation, etc.), the Collection Site Supervisor will
test the subject upon retum to the work site. Oniy the Watch Commander or
Senior Officer, the Bureau Section Lieutenant or Sergeant originally contacted
may be made aware of the identities of any untested personnel. He/she shall
assist in determining the point in time when the test subject will return to the work

site.

72
612 PDC

Collection Site Privacy and Security

The actual collection process takes only a few minutes. However, because there
must be rigorous controls for privacy, security and chain-of-evidence purposes,

choosing the most appropriate restroom is crucial.

The restroom selected as a collection site shall be equipped with a sink to allow
test subjects to wash their hands, a toilet, and be equipped with a stall for

privacy.

During the specimen collection process, no unauthorized personne! shall be
permitted in the restroom. The only authorized personnel are the test subject
and the Collection Site Supervisor of the same sex. Another Collection Site
Supervisor shall remain outside the restroom and shall bar entry for the time it

takes to collect and package a specimen.

Subject Identification, Advisory Statement and Pre-Test Declaration Form

When the Collection Site Supervisor contacts a test subject, the subject shall be
asked to present his/her Sheriffs Department or District Attomey’s photo

identification card.

If the subject is unable to present proper identification, he/she must be identified

by the Watch Commander/Senior Officer or Bureau Section Lieutenant/Sergeant

73
612 PDC

present. The subject will also be asked to complete a Pre-test Declaration form
(Attachment "A"). The form elicits information about recent use of prescription
and non-prescription medications, and accidental exposure to controlled
substances. The form shall contain the subject's right thumbprint and
confidential test number. It is to be placed in a sealed envelope by the subject
and given to the Collection Site Supervisor. The form will be destroyed without

being reviewed if the test results are negative.

Chain of Custody

Test specimens shall be stored and transported using the same documented
chain of custody and standard of care and safety applied to evidence throughout
the Department and Bureau. Sealed specimen bottles shall be placed in a
locked portable container and kept under the direct control of the Collection Site
Supervisor until it leaves his or her custody. The Collection Site Supervisor may
store the container in the most appropriate, authorized facility evidence locker.
All such containers shall be picked up the next business day and transported to
the Laboratory. Oniy Collection Site Supervisors and Laboratory personne! shall

possess keys to the portable specimen container.
When a specimen is stored in a facility's evidence locker, all LASD or Bureau
evidence handling procedure shall apply, including tagging the container and

entering it into the LASD’s Facility Master Property Ledger or the Bureau's

74
612 PDC

Property Register. All such entries shall be listed as "Lab Container
No " showing the appropriate container number. No other written
remarks about container contents or test subject identities shall be made. The
Collection Log Sheet and Pre-test Declaration forms shall be locked inside the
specimen container and, upon delivery to the Laboratory, both the transporting
employee and the Laboratory employee authorized to receive the specimens
shall open the container. They shall obtain the Collection Log Sheet and note
their identities in the appropriate place on the form. At this point, the Laboratory
assumes custody of the specimens, Collection Log Sheets and sealed envelopes

containing the Pre-test Declaration forms.

A copy of the test subject Collection Log Sheet shall be retained by the Collection

Site Supervisor.

Collection, Integrity and Identification of Specimen

After a test subject has been properly identified, briefed about the reason for the
test and has completed the Pre-test Declaration form, the mechanics of the
collection process shall be explained. The Collection Site Supervisor shall
require the test subject to remove any unnecessary outer garment (e.g., coats,
jackets, etc.) and shall visually check for signs of concealed items that might be

used to adulterate or substitute a sample. Personal belongings such as

75
612 PDC

briefcases, purses, and weapons/holsters, etc., must remain with the subject's

other outer garments. The subject shall retain control of his/her wallet.

The test subject shall wash and dry his/her hands prior to providing a urine
specimen. There shall be no further access to water, soap, any chemical agent,
or other materials which would be used to adulterate the specimen until after it

has been provided.

The Collection Site Supervisor shall place a toilet bluing agent in the toilet bowl
and, if the toilet is so equipped, in the reservoir tank. The purpose of this

procedure is to deter the dilution of the specimen.

The test subject shall be required to provide a specimen in a large, wide
mouthed, easily carried, plastic non-reusable cup, unobserved and in the privacy
of a stall or otherwise partitioned area. Unusual behavior shall be noted by the
Collection Site Supervisor on the Collection Log Sheet. The test subject will be
provided two LASD or Bureau approved specimen bottles {samples A and B).
The containers will have affixed to them specially prepared labels showing the
test subject's confidential identification number. The subject's right thumbprint
will be rolled onto the labels by the Collection Site Supervisor. The subject shall

then be ordered to provide a urine specimen and to divide it equally between the

two bottles in the presence of the Collection Site Supervisor.

76
612 PDC

A minimum of 50 milliliters (1.7 fluid ounces) must be provided or the specimen
will be considered incomplete. If the Collection Site Supervisor determines that
there is an insufficient amount of urine (less than 50 milliliters total) in the
specimen bottles, additional urine shall be collected. In this instance, the test
subject shall remain under the supervision of the Collection Site Supervisor. The
subject shall be asked to drink fluids to aid in urination and shall be allowed a
reasonable amount of time to furnish additional urine. When additional
specimens are provided, third and fourth bottles shall be labeled, be affixed with
another thumbprint label and be fastened to the original specimen bottles with

clear tape.

immediately after a specimen collection, the Collection Site Supervisor shall
ensure the temperature is between 90 and 100 degrees Fahrenheit. The
Collection Site Supervises shail also inspect the specimen for signs of
adulteration (€.g., contaminants, color, etc.). Unusual findings should be noted in

the remarks section of the Collection Log Sheet.

In the presence of the Collection Site Supervisor the test subject, shall secure
lids on the specimen bottles. The Collection Site Supervisor shall then seal the
lids with evidence tape. If at the time of collection, there is reason to believe that
the specimens have been diluted, adulterated, substituted, or in any way

tampered with, the Collection Site Supervisor shall report the matter on the

77
612 PDC

Collection Log Sheet. The Collection Site Supervisor may report those
observations in writing to the lab, which may analyze the suspect specimens.
The results of those analyses shall be reported in the written laboratory report to

the MRO for further action, if any is needed.

Section V. LABORATORY ANALYSIS
A. Laboratory Management

The laboratory shall perform urine drug testing for the LASD and the Bureau and
shall meet all analytical, quality assurance and quality control standards which
are professionally accepted by laboratories which perform forensic urine drug

testing.

Laboratory Receipt of Specimens, Chain of Evidence and Rejection Criteria

Samples received by the laboratory shall be signed in and processed by the
Evidence Control Section. The samples will then be transferred to the
Toxicology Section. Toxicology Section personnel will sign the chain of evidence
log. Each sample shaii be inspected for evidence of possible tampering. The
employee confidential identification numbers will be compared with the numbers
on the Collection Log Sheet serving as the chain of custody document
(Attachment B). Any evidence of any tampering, or discrepancies in the
identification numbers on the samples and Collection Log Sheet, or in the event

that the seal is broken on either sample, that there is no identification number, or

78
612 PDC

the ID number is illegible, or that a thumb print is missing or illegible on either
sample, such shall be reported to the Drug Abuse Program Director and shall be
noted on the Collection Log Sheet. Such specimens shall not be tested.
(However, such specimen may be recollected.) All other samples will then be

stored at the Laboratory.

Specimen Processing

Laboratory personnel will normally process urine specimens (sample A) by
grouping them into batches. When conducting the screening test, every batch
shall contain an appropriate number of standards for calibrating the

instrumentation and a minimum of 10 percent controls.

Initial Screening Test
Current NIDA/SAMHSA standards in affect at the time of collection, and, for

those drugs without a NIDA/SAMHSA standard, Attachment "C" shall be used for
the immunoassay screening test which will be used to eliminate “negative” urine
samples from further consideration. Detailed screening and quality assurance

procedures are discussed in the Laboratory Procedural Manual.
Written documentation shall be maintained by the laboratory showing details of

all the EMIT screening tests done under this program. These data may be

reviewed by consultants to the Union. All samples that initially screen positive

79
612 PDC

shall be stored in the locked employee Drug Testing freezer in the Toxicology

Section until conformation studies by GC/MS are complete.

Confirmatory Test

Specimens which were initially screened and found to be positive shall be
confirmed using gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) quantitative
techniques. Detailed confirmation and quality assurance procedures are
discussed in the Laboratory's Procedural Manual.

Specimens shall be considered as positively confirmed if they fall above the

cutoff levels listed below.

dls Amphetamines:
¢ amphetamine 250 ng/ml
e methamphetamine 250 ng/mi*
2. Cocaine metabolite(1) 100 ng/ml
mi Marijuana metabolite(2) 15 ng/ml
4. Opiates:
e Morphine 2000 ng/ml
e Codeine 2000 ng/ml
e 6-acetylmorphine** 10 ng/ml
5. Phencyclidine 25 ng/ml

* Specimen must also contain amphetamine at the concentrations of > 200 ng/ml

*« Conduct this test if specimen contains morphine at a concentration > 2000 ng/ml

80
612 PDC

Preparation of Laboratory Report - Negative Test Specimens

The laboratory shall prepare a report, by confidential test identification number, of
all specimens screened as negative. Concurrently, the laboratory shall return all
sealed Pre-test Declarations accompanying negative test specimens for
destruction by Risk Management Bureau. They will be destroyed within three
days of receipt of negative test results. The Laboratory report listing negative

test specimens may be transmitted by electronic means.

Preparation of Laboratory Report - Positive Test Specimens

In the event that a specimen is found to be positive by the GC/MS process, the
Laboratory shall prepare a written report. The original report shall be retained by
the Laboratory. One copy, along with the sealed pre-test Declaration Form, shall

be sent to the Medical Review Officer.

The laboratory report shall contain the following information:
1. Employee confidential test identification number.
ee The drug identified.

3. The initial screening method.
4. The date screened.

S: The screening analyst's name.

81
612 PDC

6. The printed output from the immunoassay screening instrument
pertaining to the batch of samples which includes the positive
sample. That output will include the data from the relevant

standards, blanks, quality control samples, and positive sample.

te The confirmation method.
8. The date confirmed.
9. The confirming analyst's name and signature.

40. The graphs and reports pertaining to the gas chromatograph mass
spectrometer analysis of the relevant batch of samples and
associated controls and quantitative standards.

41. The name and signature of the reviewing laboratory supervisor.

12. Collection Log Sheet.

Following confirmation, all positive urine samples are to be frozen and retained

for a minimum of two (2) years by the Laboratory.

82
612 PDC

EPORTING AND REVIEW OF RESULTS

Secton VI. Ri

A.

Cc.

Report of Laboratory Results

The Laboratory shall report the results of all positive drug tests within five (5)

business days from collection of sample.

Medical Review

The Medical Review Officer shall conduct an in-depth review of all tests reported
as positive by the Laboratory. The laboratory report will include all materials
specified in part V, F, above. He/she shall review the test subject's Pretest
Declaration and shall take such action as may be necessary to examine any
alternate medical explanation for a positive test result. Such action may include
a voluntary medical interview with the subject and a review of all medical records

made available by the subject.

Employee Notification

If the MRO does not find appropriate medical justification for the positive
laboratory findings, he/she shall prepare a written report to the Program Director.
Upon notification to the employee of a positive finding, the employee shall be
provided with the laboratory report (as described in part V, F. above) and the

MRO's written report. The Employee also shall be provided with a written notice

83
612 PDC

of his or her right to have the second sample (Sample B) independently tested

and reviewed by an independent MRO.

Retesting

When the Laboratory has confirmed a positive test result, the Employee or
his/her representative may request that a GC/MS test of Specimen B be

conducted at an independent lab (refer to Appendix A for a list of laboratories).

If the test results are positive, an independent Medical Review Officer selected
by the employee or his/her representative will review the findings and interview
the employee (at his/her option). The MRO will prepare an advisory report to be
given to the Drug Abuse Program Director with a copy to the employee. Internal
Affairs and the employee will be notified by the Program Director. A pre-

disciplinary hearing (Skelly) may take place as a result of the investigation.

If the results of the first independent lab are negative, The Drug Abuse Program
Director may request that GC/MS test of Specimens A and B be performed at a

second independent lab (refer to Appendix A for the list of the laboratories).
If the test results from the second independent lab are negative, or if the Program
Director elects not to have a second independent chemical test, no further action

will be taken.

84
612 PDC

If the test results from the second independent lab are positive, an independent
Medical Review Officer will review the findings and interview the employee (at
his/her option). The MRO will prepare an advisory report to be given to the Drug
Abuse Program Director with a copy to the employee. Internal Affairs and the
employee will be notified by the Program Director. A pre-disciplinary hearing
(Skelly) may take place as a result of the investigation. The results of the third

analysis (samples A and B) shall be deemed conclusive.

The LASD or the Bureau shall pay for all such retesting. However, results of
drug tests not obtained within the specifications of the Drug Testing Program and
not processed by a laboratory mutually agreed to by the union and management

shall not be considered.

Referrals by the Medical Review Officer Not a Bar to Disciplinary Action

The Medical Review Officer may counsel the subject regarding follow-up care by
competent medical authority and, if requested, furnish referrals. Such actions by
the Medica! Review Officer shall not prohibit, or be considered as a replacement
for, any disciplinary action by the LASD or the Bureau. Members having a
positive drug test result shall remain subject to discipline up to and including

discharge, irrespective of any counseling or treatment.

85
612 PDC

oe Audit Trail
Drug Testing results are inadmissible without audit trail showing compliance with
each aspect of procedure. Burden of showing compliance is on the LASD or the

Bureau.

Section VI. FURTHER PROVISIONS

 

A. Hoid Harmless and Indemnification Clause
The County agrees to indemnify and defend the employee organization from any
liabilities which may arise as a result of the employee organization entering into
this agreement. It is expressly understood that the County of Los Angeles shall
choose the counsel, and have control of all phases and aspects of the litigation
and the organization's defense including settlement, and that the employee
organization shall cooperate in that defense. It is further understood that this
indemnity and defense provision oniy appiies to those claims where the legality
or constitutionality of the Drug Testing Program or any part of that program is at
issue. It does not extend to claims against the employee organization in which
the legality or constitutionality of that program is not at issue. The County will not
indemnify or defend the employee organization against any claim that the
organization or anyone acting on its behalf improperly or negligently advised,
represented, or performed services for an employee with respect to any event
subsequent to the effective data of this agreement with respect to the Drug
Testing Program, disciplinary proceedings arising from the program, or any other

right or liability of the employee related to the program.

86
APPENDIX A

CONTRACT TOXICOLOGY LAB SERVICES

Quest Diagnostics Incorporated
Van Nuys, California
(818) 989-2520

Healthtech
Long Beach, California
(562) 933-0777

87

612 PDC
612 PDC

ATTACHMENT A

 

DRUG TESTING DECLARATION
LOS ANGELES COUNTY SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT

THIS FORM SHALL BE SEALED AND SHALL NOT BE OPENED UNLESS THE RESULTS
OF THIS URINE TEST ARE CONFIRMED AS POSITIVE. ALL OTHER SEALED
DECLARATIONS SHALL BE DESTROYED WITHOUT BEING OPENED.

CONFIDENTIAL TEST NO. TEST LOCATION

 

LIST ANY PRESCRIPTION OR OVER-THE-COUNTER NON-PRESCRIPTION
MEDICATIONS YOU ARE NOW TAKING OR HAVE TAKEN DURING THE LAST THIRTY
(30) DAYS. SPECIFY THE REASON FOR THE MEDICATION(S), THE AMOUNT LAST
TAKEN AND THE DATE. ALSO, INDICATE THE NAME OF THE HEALTH CARE
PROVIDER PRESCRIBING ANY MEDICATION(S).

PRESCRIBING
SUBSTANCE REASONFOR DATELAST HEALTH CARE OFFICE
TAKING TAKEN AMOUNT PROVIDER LOCATION

 

 

 

HAVE YOU INGESTED, INHALED OR ABSORBED ANY CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE
WITHIN THE LAST TEN (10) DAYS IN CONNECTION WITH YOUR DUTIES AS A PEACE
OFFICER?

FICE!

( )NO
( )YES DATE NAME OF SUPERVISOR ADVISED OF
INCIDENT

 

 

FILE NO.

 

| CERTIFY THAT THE ABOVE INFORMATION IS, TO THE BEST OF MY KNOWLEDGE,
TRUE AND CORRECT.

 

RIGHT

THUMB DATE OF COLLECTION:

PRINT
IF FOLLOW-UP IS NECESSARY, MY PREFERRED DAYTIME TELEPHONE NUMBER
FOR CONTACT OR MESSAGE IS: AREA CODE ( ) NO.
NOTES: ONE COPY TO EMPLOYEE AT TIME OF SPECIMEN COLLECTION

ONE COPY TO BE PLACED IN SEALED ENVELOPE

88
612 PDC

ATTACHMENT A (continued

DRUG TESTING DECLARATION
LOS ANGELES COUNTY DISTRICT ATTORNEY

THIS FORM SHALL BE SEALED AND SHALL NOT BE OPENED UNLESS THE RESULTS
OF THIS URINE TEST ARE CONFIRMED AS POSITIVE. ALL OTHER SEALED
DECLARATIONS SHALL BE DESTROYED WITHOUT BEING OPENED.

 

CONFIDENTIAL TEST NO. TEST LOCATION

LIST ANY PRESCRIPTION OR OVER-THE-COUNTER NON-PRESCRIPTION
MEDICATIONS YOU ARE NOW TAKING OR HAVE TAKEN DURING THE LAST THIRTY
(30) DAYS. SPECIFY THE REASON FOR THE MEDICATION(S), THE AMOUNT LAST
TAKEN AND THE DATE. ALSO, INDICATE THE NAME OF THE HEALTH CARE
PROVIDER PRESCRIBING ANY MEDICATION(S).

PRESCRIBING
SUBSTANCE REASONFOR DATE LAST HEALTH CARE OFFICE
TAKING TAKEN AMOUNT PROVIDER LOCATION

 

 

 

HAVE YOU INGESTED, INHALED OR ABSORBED ANY CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE
WITHIN THE LAST TEN (10) DAYS IN CONNECTION WITH YOUR DUTIES AS A PEACE

OFFICER?

( )NO
( )YES DATE NAME OF SUPERVISOR ADVISED OF

INCIDENT

 

FILE NO.

| CERTIFY THAT THE ABOVE INFORMATION IS, TO THE BEST OF MY KNOWLEDGE,
TRUE AND CORRECT.

 

 

 

 

RIGHT

THUMB DATE OF COLLECTION:

PRINT
IF FOLLOW-UP IS NECESSARY, MY PREFERRED DAYTIME TELEPHONE NUMBER
FOR CONTACT OR MESSAGE IS: AREA CODE ( ) NO.
NOTES: ONE COPY TO EMPLOYEE AT TIME OF SPECIMEN COLLECTION

ONE COPY TO BE PLACED IN SEALED ENVELOPE

89
06

 

 

“SMYVWSY

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SYNLWNOIS daLO3TIOO
€Y39057 JONAGIAS SMOLOSTION AWILRSLWG | LSuOaS
9071 AYOLVYORV1 907 WLLUNSNVYL 907 NOILOSTIOD
LSSHS 9071 NOILOATIOS
LANAWLYVdad S.dldaHS
bd INAWHOVLLY

90d Z19
612 PDC

ATTACHMENT B2

 

SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT
SCIENTIFIC SERVICES BUREAU
RANDOM DRUG TESTING CONTROL RECORD

LABORATORY RECEIPT NO.
RECEIVED BY:
DATE: TIME:
# COLLECTION SHEET(S):
# URINE SPECIMENS

 

 

 

 

# SEALED PRE-TEST DECLARATIONS:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SCREENING TEST (EMIT):

ASSIGNED TO: BY:

DATE: TIME:
COMPLETED BY:

DATE: TIME:
RETURNED TO: BY:

DATE: TIME:
# NEGATIVE SPECIMEN(S)
DISPOSED ON: BY:

 

# POSITIVE SPECIMEN(S)
SPECIMEN NUMBER(S)

 

 

FROZEN ON: BY:
91
612 PDC

ATTACHMENT B3

 

SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT
SCIENTIFIC SERVICES BUREAU
RANDOM DRUG TESTING CONTROL RECORD
CONFIRMATION TEST (GC/MS)

LABORATORY RECEIPT NO.

 

SPECIMEN NUMBER:

 

ASSIGNED TO: BY:

DATE: TIME:
COMPLETED BY:

DATE: TIME: a
FROZEN ON: BY:

92
612 PDC

ATTACHMENT B4

AE en

SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SCIENTIFIC SERVICES BUREAU
RANDOM DRUG TESTING CONTROL RECORD
SPLIT RELEASE
LABORATORY RECEIPT NO.
SPECIMEN NUMBER:
REMOVED FROM FREEZER BY:
DATE: TIME:
SPLIT RELEASED BY:
DATE: TIME:
SPLIT RELEASED TO:
(PRINT NAME)
(SIGNATURE)
(COMPANY)

DATE: TIME:

93
ATTACHMENT C

 

EMIT SCREENING LEVELS

AMPHETAMINES:
COCAINE:
PCP:

OPIATES:

MARIJUANA METABOLITE:

94

500 ng/ml
150 ng/ml
25 ng/ml

2000 ng/ml

50 ng/ml!

612 PDC
612 PDC

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused their duly authorized

representatives to execute this Memorandum of Understanding the day, month, and

year first above written.

PROFESSIONAL PEACE OFFICERS COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES

ASSOCIATION AUTHORIZED MANAGEMENT
REPRESENTATIVES

   

  
  

.
S By. cle. li. Berra
= ~PPOA Iterim Chief Executive Officer
A G LG By
Sheriff, County of Los Angeles

Executive Director, PPOA

By.
District Attorney
County of Los Angeles

 

TO BE JOINTLY SUBMITTED TO COUNTY'S BOARD OF SUPERVISORS.

95
612 PDC

APPENDIX A

SUPERVISORY PEACE OFFICERS, UNIT 612

 

tem No. Title

2717 Sergeant

2719 Lieutenant
2894 Lieutenant, DA
2891 Sergeant, DA

96
612 PDC

APPENDIX B

 

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE (SHERIFF'S. DEPARTMENT)

Section’. Purpose

The purpose of the Grievance Procedure is to provide a just and equitable method for

the resolution of grievances.

Section2. Definitions
A grievance is any complaint concerning the interpretation or application of this
Memorandum or rules or regulations governing personnel practices or working

conditions that the departmental management has the ability to remedy.

“Business Days” means calendar days exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal

holidays.

Section 3. General Provisions

 

1; Employee grievance procedures are not applicable in areas outside the authority
of this department such as interpretation of the Los Angeles County Code or in
areas where appeal procedures already exist, such as unsatisfactory

performance evaluations and certain specified disciplinary actions (discharge or

97
612 PDC

reduction). The employee shall be advised as to whether or not the department

will handle the grievance at the time he/she submits his/her formal appeal.

2. If an employee fails to initiate a grievance or to appeal from one level to
the next level within the time limits established in this grievance
procedure, the grievance shall be considered settled and not subject to

further appeal.

By mutual agreement of both parties, the various steps and time limits set
forth in this grievance procedure may be waived or the grievance may

revert to a prior level for reconsideration.

3. An employee may present his/her grievance on County time, but the use
of County time for this purpose shall not be excessive nor shall this
privilege be abused in any manner. The department shall determine what

constitutes abuse.

4. If the aggrieved employee wishes, he/she may be assisted at the first step
of the formal grievance procedure or any subsequent step by an
authorized representative of a recognized employee organization. The

representative of the employee organization must have his/her name on

98
612 PDC

file and be accepted in accordance with the Employee Relations
Ordinance of the County of Los Angeles or other such applicable

employee relations law.

It is also the employee's option to choose a fellow employee as his/her
representative. The choice of a fellow employee as a representative must

be acceptable to the Sheriff or his/her alternate.

If the grievance does not involve a suspension but the aggrieved
employee definitely believes that his/her grievance cannot be resolved at
any supervisory level except the Review Board, he/she may, with the

concurrence of the concemed supervisors, waive formal step one.

To waive the first grievance step, the aggrieved employee must obtain the
signatures of his/her first and third level supervisors in the signature
spaces on the Form SH-AD-456. The aggrieved employee shall also write
the word "waived" and sign his/her name in the decision section for step

one and forward the form to the Review Board.

Form SH-AD-465 (Grievance Procedure) shall be prepared by the
employee for the formal grievance process. The original shall be
presented by the employee at the various grievance steps and returned to
the employee with the written response. A copy of the original Form

99
612 PDC

(SH-AD-465), in its entirety, shall be made by the various supervisory
levels and sent to Sheriff's Employee Relations, at the completion of each
formal step. A second copy of the original should be retained as the unit
commander's record of the grievance discussions. This record will not be

included in the employee's personnel file.

8. Management shail notify PPOA of any grievance involving the terms and

conditions of this Memorandum of Understanding.

9. A PPOA representative has the right to be present at any formal grievance
meeting concerning a grievance that directly involves the interpretation or
application of the specific terms and provisions of the Memorandum of

Understanding.

10. PPOA agrees to encourage an employee who files a formal written
grievance, to state clearly and concisely the specific action(s) being

grieved, the article(s) vioiated, and the specific remedy requested.

Section 4. Informal Procedures

 

Most problems or complaints can be settled if the employee will promptly, informally and

amicably discuss them with his/her immediate supervisor. This desired initial

100
612 PDC

discussion, a part of the day-to-day supervision, should ideally precede any use of the

formal grievance procedure.

Within ten (10) business days from the occurrence of the matter on which a complaint is
based, or within ten (10) business days from his/her knowledge of such occurrence, an
employee shall either discuss the complaint with his/her immediate supervisor or file a

formal grievance.

NOTE: In those situations where the nature of the problem involves the immediate
supervisor, the employee may discuss the problem informally with the next
level supervisor although he/she should generally advise the immediate

supervisor of his/her intention.

If the immediate supervisor either fails to reply within three (3) business days or gives
an answer which the employee feels is unsatisfactory, within five (5) business days, the
employee may informally discuss the grievance with his/her second level supervisor or

proceed with the formal grievance procedure.

If the second level supervisor either fails to reply to the employee within three (3)
business days or gives an answer which the employee feels is unsatisfactory, the
employee may then initiate the formal grievance procedure at the first level of

supervision.

101
612 PDC

Section5. Formal Procedure

 

FirstStep (Third Level _Supervisor___or Designated Middle _ Management
Representative)
If the problem has not been resolved within eleven (11) business days of the date of the
initial discussion with the first level supervisor (or ten (10) business days from the
occurrence or knowledge of the occurrence of a grievable matter if no informal
discussion has occurred), the employee may file a formal written grievance with his/her
third level supervisor or middle management representative. The Department
Grievance Form (SH-AD-465) shall be completed by the employee describing the

problem and the remedy he/she believes is merited.

The third level supervisor or middle management representative shall promptly notify
Sheriffs Employee Relations. The third level supervisor shall consider available
pertinent information and give his/her decision in writing (original SH-AD-465) to the
employee within five (5) business days. The supervisor shall include the reasons for
his/her decision and forward a complete copy of SH-AD-465 to Sheriffs Employee

Reiations.

If, upon receipt of the decision, the employee takes no further action within ten (10)

business days, the grievance will be assumed to have been settled.

102
612 PDC

If the supervisor has not answered the employee's complaint within five (5) business
days, or if the answer is unsatisfactory in the employee's opinion, the employee may

appeal to the next grievance level.

Note: The two-step process for a Sergeant's grievance shall be (1)
Captain and (2) Review Board. The two-step process for a

Lieutenant's grievance shall be, (1) Captain and (2) Review Board.

Second Step (Review Board - Division Chief, Commander and a Maximum of two

members selected by the employee)

If the problem has not been resolved, the employee may submit his/her written
grievance (Form SH-AD-465) to his/her Division Chief within ten (10) business days of

the response, or lack of response, of the third level supervisor.

Upon presentation of the grievance at this level, the employee may exercise his/her
option to designate a maximum of two sworn members (of equal or superior rank to the
grievant) of the Sheriffs Department who are not parties to the grievance to participate
as equal voting members of the Review Board. The employee may waive such
selection if he/she so desires by writing "waived" in the space provided for employee-

selected members of SH-AD-465 and affixing his/her signature.

103
612 PDC

The Review Board shall consist of the employee's Division Chief (who shall act as
Chairman), the Commander in the employee's chain of command and a maximum of
two additional sworn members of the Sheriffs Department, if so selected by the

employee.

The employee's Division Chief will establish the date, time and place for the Review
Board meeting and promptly notify the employee. The Review Board shall meet with
the employee at the earliest possible date, evaluate the grievance and afterward
determine a course of action by permitting such Board member to have an equal voice.
A majority opinion shall constitute a recommended decision. If a deadlock occurs, the
opposing sides shall submit their written opinions to the Sheriff or his designated

representative for final disposition.

Supervisors of all levels who have previously dealt with the grievance may be called by
the Review Board to appear at the grievance meeting. The grievant may call witnesses

who may serve on County time.

The Review Board shall submit its recommended decision or opposing opinions to
Sheriffs Employee Relations within ten (10) business days of the Review Board

meeting, unless a longer period of time has been agreed to by the employee.

104
612 PDC

Sheriffs Employee Relations shall coordinate the actions of the Review Board,

processing the required documents to the Sheriff or his/her designated alternate.

The recommended decision by the Review Board, approved by the Sheriff or his/her
alternate (the Undersheriff or Assistant Sheriff of the concerned division), shall be final,
except as provided under Section 6, Arbitration, or appeal procedures provided in the

Civil Service Rules.

Written notice of the Sheriffs decision shall be sent to the employee within ten (10)

business days of the receipt of the Review Board’s recommendation.

Section 6. Arbitration

a Within ten (10) business days from the receipt of the written decision of the
department head or his/her designated representative, an employee, only if
he/she is represented by PPOA, may request that the grievance be submitted to

arbitration as provided for hereinafter.

2. Only those grievances which directly concern or involve the interpretation or
application of the specific terms and provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding and which are brought by an employee who was represented by
PPOA in any steps of the grievance procedure may be submitted to arbitration

hereunder. Inno event shall such arbitration extend to:

105
612 PDC

The interpretation, application, merits or legality of any State or local law
or ordinance, including specifically all ordinances adopted by County's
Board of Supervisors unless the arbitrator, in his/her discretion, finds it
necessary to interpret or apply such State or local law in order to resolve

the grievance which has been submitted to the arbitrator;

The interpretation, application, merits or legality of any or all of the County
of Los Angeles Civil Service Rules, nor matters under the jurisdiction of
the Civil Service Commission for which said Commission has established
procedures or processes by which employees or employee organizations
may appeal to, or request review by, said Civil Service Commission,

including but not limited to discharges, reductions and discrimination; nor

The interpretation, application, merits or legality of the rules or regulations
of the department head, the Chief Executive Office or any other County
department, agency or commission unless the arbitrator in his/her
discretion, finds it necessary to interpret or apply such rules or regulations
in order to resolve the grievance which has been submitted to the

arbitrator;

Any subject matter reiating to County-sponsored employee group

insurance plans that could impose on the carrier, the provider or the

106
612 PDC

County an obligation which would be in conflict with the applicable law
and/or contracts or service agreements between the County and the

carrier or provider;

ee Grievances on competent or better performance evaluations which do not
meet the guidelines set forth at the Employee Relations Commission

meeting of December 19. 1986.

In the event PPOA desires to request a grievance which meets the requirements
of Paragraph 2 hereof be submitted to arbitration, PPOA shall within the time
requirements set forth above send a written request for arbitration to County's

Employee Relations Commission which request shall:

A. Set forth the specific issue or issues still unresolved through the grievance

procedure and which are to be submitted to arbitration;

B. The parties shall select an arbitrator by mutual agreement and
recommend to the Employee Relations Commission that the individual be
appointed for the purpose of conducting the arbitration proceeding. In the
event the parties cannot agree on a choice within thirty (30) working days

from date of receipt of the request of arbitration, the parties shall request

107
612 PDC

that the Employee Relations Commission provide them with a panel of five
arbitrators. Upon receipt of the Employee Relations Commission panel,
the parties shall alternately strike one name each from the panel and the
last name left will be appointed as the arbitrator in the case by the

Employee Relations Commission;

Cc. Arbitration procedures conducted under the authority of this Section shall
be held at an appropriate location in the County Hall of Administration,
except when another location is mutually agreed upon by the parties to the

case.

Arbitration of grievances hereunder will be limited to the formal grievance as
originally filed by the employee to the extent that said grievance has not been
satisfactorily resolved. Arbitration hereunder shall be conducted in accordance
with applicable rules and procedures adopted or specified by County's Employee
Relations Commission unless the parties hereto mutually agree to other rules or
procedures for the conduct of such arbitration. The
arbitrator shall be shared equally by the parties involved, it being understood and
agreed that all other expenses including but not limited to fees for witnesses,
transcripts and similar costs incurred by the parties during such arbitration will be

the responsibility of the individual party involved.

108
612 PDC

Prior to a hearing by an arbitrator, a representative of the County and PPOA shall
meet and prepare a submission statement setting forth the issue(s) to be
determined which shall be submitted to the arbitrator. In the event the County
and PPOA cannot jointly agree on a submission statement, then, at the hearing,
each party shall present to the arbitrator its own submission statement in which

case the arbitrator shall determine the issue(s) to be resolved.

The decision of an arbitrator resulting from any arbitration of grievances
hereunder shall not add to, subtract from or otherwise modify the terms and

conditions of this Memorandum of Understanding.

The decision of the arbitrator shall be binding upon PPOA. To the extent the
decision and award of the arbitrator does not require legislative action by the
Board of Supervisors, such decision and award shall be binding upon the
County. If within sixty (60) days of receiving notice of a decision and award
requiring legislative action by the Board of Supervisors such legislative action is
not taken, the arbitrator's decision and award shall have no force or effect
whatsoever. PPOA may then resort to a court of competent jurisdiction to pursue
whatever other legal remedies are available to it under the provisions of this

Memorandum of Understanding.

109
612 PDC

8. A written decision of an arbitrator resulting from the arbitration of a grievance
under the following Articles shall be entirely advisory in nature and shall not be

binding upon any of the parties:

Recognition

Purpose

Implementation

Term

Renegotiation
Non-Discrimination

Payroll Deductions and Dues
Authorized Agents

Provisions of Law

110
612 PDC

APPENDIX C

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE (DISTRICT ATTORNEY)

 

Section 1. Purpose

 

The purpose of the Grievance Procedure is to provide a just and equitable method for

the resolution of grievances.

Section 2. Definitions

 

 

A. "Grievance means a formal complaint by an employee concerning the
interpretation or application of the provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding or rules and regulations governing personnel practices or working
conditions, which complaint has not been resolved satisfactorily in an informal

manner between an employee and his/her immediate supervisor.

B. "Business Days" means calendar days exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and

legal holidays.

c. "Chief means the Chief of the District Attorney's Bureau of Investigation in the
District Attorney's Department, or the Assistant Chief of the Bureau of

Investigation when acting in the absence of the Chief.

111
612 PDC

"Middle Management" means a Lieutenant, Captain, Commander or the

Assistant Chief in the District Attorney's Department.

“Immediate Supervisor" means Lieutenant or Captain in the District Attorney's

Department.

"Grievant" means a Sergeant or Lieutenant in the District Attorney's Department.

Section 3. Responsibilities

A.

An employee is encouraged to discuss his/her complaint with his/her immediate
supervisor as part of an ongoing process of training and communication between
the employee and his/her immediate supervisor. The immediate supervisor will,
upon request of an employee, discuss the employee's complaint with hinv/her at a
mutually satisfactory time. No employee shall suffer any penalty for presenting

or filing a grievance.

Departmental management has the responsibility to:
Ay, Inform an employee of any limitation of the department's authority to fully

resolve the grievance; and

112
612 PDC

2 Supply the employee with the necessary information to process his/her

grievance to the proper agency or authority.

Waivers and Time Limits

Section 4.

 

Failure by management to reply to the employee's grievance within the time limits
specified automatically grants to the employee the right to process the grievance

to the next level.

Any level of review, or any time limits established in this procedure, may be

waived or extended by mutual agreement confirmed in writing.

If an employee fails to appeal from one level to the next level within the time
limits established in the grievance procedure, the grievance shall be considered
settled on the basis of the last decision and the grievance shall not be subject to

further appeal or reconsideration.

By mutual agreement, the grievance may revert to a prior level for

reconsideration.

113
612 PDC

Section 5. Employee Rights and Restrictions

A.

An employee may present his/her grievance on County time, but the use of
County time for this purpose shall not be excessive nor shail this privilege be

abused in any manner. The department shall determine what constitutes abuse.

Employees who are requested by either the grievant or by management to
appear as witnesses at any hearing and at any step shall be allowed to do so on

County time.

The employee has the right to the assistance of a representative of his/her
choice in the preparation of the written grievance and to represent him/her in
formal grievance meetings. The representative selected by the employee must
be an authorized representative of a recognized employee organization or a
fellow employee of the District Attorney's Bureau of Investigation who is not a
party to the same grievance. Only a person selected by the employee and made

known to management prior to a scheduled formal grievance meeting shall have

3

the right to represent or advocate as an employee's representative.

If the grievance involves disciplinary action resulting in suspension, the employee
may waive the first step in the formal grievance procedure and submit the
grievance directly at the second step within ten (10) days from the notice of intent

to discipline.

414
612 PDC

E PPOA, agrees to encourage an employee who files a formal written grievance, to
state clearly and concisely the specific action(s) being grieved, the article(s)

violated, and the specific remedy requested.

Section 6. Informal Procedure

 

Most problems or complaints can be settled if the employee will promptly, informally and
amicably discuss them with his/her supervisor. This desired initial discussion should
ideally precede any use of the formal grievance procedure.

Section7. Formal Procedure

Step 1. (immediate Supervisor)

If the problem has not been resolved within ten (10) business days of the date of the
initial discussion with the immediate supervisor (or ten [10] business days from the
occurrence or knowledge of the occurrence of a grievable matter if no informal
discussion has occurred), the employee may file a formal written grievance with his/her
immediate supervisor. The Grievance Form shall be prepared in triplicate by the
employee stating the specific nature of the grievance and the remedy requested. The
employee shall submit the original and one copy of the Grievance Form to his/her
immediate supervisor and retain a copy. The Grievance Form may be secured from the
departmental Personnel Section. Upon receipt of the formal grievance, the immediate

supervisor shall contact the grievant or the grievant's representative (if specified) and

115
612 PDC

arrange a hearing date and location. Within five (5) business days from the completion
of the hearing, the Grievance Response Form shall be completed by the immediate
supervisor. The original of both the Grievance and Grievance Response forms shall be
returned to the grievant and a copy of the Grievance Response Form shall be retained

by the immediate supervisor.

if the grievance is within the scope of the immediate supervisor's authority and
responsibility and it is sustained, it shall be the immediate supervisor's responsibility to

make the necessary arrangements to implement the decision.

Step 2. (Middle Management Representative or Review Board)

In the event the grievant is not satisfied with the Step 1 response and elects to seek
review at the Step 2 level, the grievant shall, within five (5) business days from the
receipt of the Step 1 response, forward the originals and one copy each of the
Grievance and Grievance Response forms to the Chief of the Bureau of Investigation.
At the grievant's option the Chief shall either designate a middle management
representative to review the grievance or shali initiate the formation of a Review Board
to review the grievance. If a Review Board is formed it shall be comprised of two middle
management representatives designated by the Chief and a maximum of two peace
officers in the District Attorney's Department designated by the grievant. The grievant's

representatives on the Review Board must be of equal or superior rank to the grievant

and must not be parties to the grievance.

116
612 PDC

Upon receipt of the Step 2 request for review from the Chief, the middle management
representative or a member of the Review Board shall contact the grievant or the
grievant's representative (if specified), and arrange a hearing date and location. Within
five (5) business days from the completion of the hearing, the Grievance Response
Form shall be completed by the ranking middle management representative in the Step
2 process. A majority opinion shall constitute a final decision. A grievance shall not be
sustained on a tie vote or deadlock, but if such is the case, then the opposing sides
shall attach their written opinions to the Grievance Response Form. The originals of the
Grievance and Grievance Response forms shall be returned to the grievant and a copy
of each shall be forwarded to the Chief. If the grievance is sustained by the Step 2
process, it shall be management's responsibility to make the necessary arrangements

to implement the decision.

Step 3. (The Chief of the Bureau of Investigation)

If the grievance is denied or results in a deadlock at the Step 2 level, and the grievant
elects to seek review at the Step 3 level, he/she shall, within five (5) business days from
the receipt of the Step 2 response, send a written request to the Chief requesting a
review of the grievance. The originals of the Grievance and Grievance Response forms

shall accompany the written request.

Upon receipt of the Step 3 request for review, the Chief shall contact the grievant or the

grievant's representative (if specified) and arranges a hearing date and location. Within

117
612 PDC

ten (10) business days from the completion of the hearing the Chief shall complete the
Grievance Response Form. If the grievance is sustained, the Chief shall make the

necessary arrangements to implement the decision.

If the grievance is denied, the reason(s) will be set forth in the Grievance Response

Form.

The originals of the Grievance and Grievance Response forms shall be forwarded to the
departmental Personnel Officer who shall be responsible for establishing and
maintaining a separate, permanent file for grievances processed through all step levels.
A copy of each form shall be returned to the grievant and a copy of each shall be

retained by the Chief.

Grievances processed through all step levels shall be retained for a period of three (3)
years while an employee is in active County service, and shall be retained for a period

of one year following termination of an employee's County service.

Section8. Special Handling of Sensitive Complaints

If a grievant feels that because of the sensitive nature of his/her complaint that it should
be reviewed initially by the Chief, he/she may direct his/her grievance to the Chief with a

written memorandum specifying the need for departure from the conventional

118
612 PDC

processing. The Chief shall determine whether the grievance should be handled
personally or processed by the immediate supervisor. f it is determined that the
grievance should be referred to the immediate supervisor, the Grievance Form shall be

returned to the grievant with a written memorandum so specifying.

Section 9. Arbitration

 

 

Ay Within ten (10) business days from the receipt of the written decision of the
department head or his/her designated representative, an employee, only if
he/she is represented by PPOA, may request that the grievance be submitted to

arbitration as provided hereinafter.

2. Only those grievances which directly concern or involve the interpretation or
application of the specific terms and provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding and which are brought by an employee who was represented by
PPOA in all steps of the grievance procedure may be submitted to arbitration

hereunder. In no event shall such arbitration extend to:

A The interpretation, application, merits or legality of any State or local law
or ordinance, including specifically all ordinances adopted by County's
Board of Supervisors unless the arbitrator, in his/her discretion, finds it
necessary to interpret or apply such State or local law in order to resolve

the grievance which has been submitted to the arbitrator,

119
612 PDC

The interpretation, application, merits or legality of any or all of the County
of Los Angeles Civil Service Rules, nor matters under the jurisdiction of
the Civil Service Commission for which said Commission has established
procedures or processes by which employees or employee organizations
may appeal to or request review by said Civil Service Commission,

including but not limited to discharges reductions and discrimination; nor

The interpretation, application, merits or legality of the rules or regulations
of the department head, the Chief Executive Office or any other County
department, agency or commission unless the arbitrator, in his/her
discretion, finds it necessary to interpret or apply such rules or regulations
in order to resolve the grievance which has been submitted to the

arbitrator;

Any subject matter relating to County-sponsored employee group
insurance plans that could impose on the carrier, the provider or the
County an obligation which would be in conflict with the applicable law
and/or the contracts or service agreements between the County and the

carrier or provider;

120
612 PDC

E. Grievances on competent or better performance evaluations which do not
meet the guidelines set forth at the Employee Relations Commission

meeting of December 419, 1986.

In the event PPOA desires to request a grievance which meets the requirements
of Paragraph 2 hereof be submitted to arbitration, PPOA shall within the time
requirements set forth above send a written request to County's Employee

Relations Commission which request shall:

A. Set forth the specific issue or issues still unresolved through the grievance

procedure and which are to be submitted to arbitration;

B. The parties shall select an arbitrator by mutual agreement and
recommend to the Employee Relations Commission that the individual be
appointed for the purpose of conducting the arbitration proceeding. In the
event the parties cannot agree on a choice within thirty (30) working days
from date of receipt of the request of arbitration, the parties shall request
that the Employee Relations Commission provide them with a panel of five
arbitrators. Upon receipt of the Employee Relations Commission panel,
the parties shall alternately strike one name each from the panel and the
last name left will be appointed as the arbitrator in the case by the

Employee Relations Commission;

121
612 PDC

Cc. Arbitration procedures conducted under the authority of this Section shall
be held at an appropriate location in the County Hall of Administration
except when another location is mutually agreed upon by the parties to the

case.

Arbitration of grievances hereunder will be limited to the formal grievance as
originally filed by the employee to the extent that said grievance has not been
satisfactorily resolved. Arbitration hereunder shall be conducted in accordance
with applicable rules and procedures adopted or specified by County's Employee
Relations Commission unless the parties hereto mutually agree to other rules or
procedures for the conduct of such arbitration. The fees and expenses of the
arbitrator shall be shared equally by the parties involved, it being understood and
agreed that all other expenses including but not limited to fees for witnesses,
transcripts and similar costs incurred by the parties during such arbitration will be

the responsibility of the individual party involved.

Prior to a hearing by an arbitrator, a representative of the County and PPOA shall
meet and prepare a submission statement setting forth the issue(s) to be
determined which shall be submitted to the arbitrator. In the event the County
and PPOA cannot jointly agree on a submission statement, then, at the hearing,
each party shall present to the arbitrator its own submission statement in which

case the arbitrator shall determine the issue(s) to be resolved.

122
612 PDC

The decision of an arbitrator resulting from any arbitration of grievances
hereunder shall not add to, subtract from or otherwise modify the terms and

conditions of this Memorandum of Understanding.

The decision of the arbitrator shall be binding upon PPOA. To the extent the
decision and award of the arbitrator does not require legislative action by the
Board of Supervisors, such decision and award shall be binding upon the
County. If within sixty (60) days of receiving notice of a decision and award
requiring legislative action by the Board of Supervisors, such legislative action is
not taken, the arbitrator's decision and award shall have no force or effect
whatsoever. PPOA may then resort to a court of competent jurisdiction to pursue
whatever other legal remedies are available to it under the provisions of this

Memorandum of Understanding.

123
612 PDC

8. A written decision of an arbitrator resulting from the arbitration of a grievance
under the following Articles shall be entirely advisory in nature and shall not be
binding upon any of the parties:

Purpose

Recognition
Non-Discrimination
implementation

Term

Renegotiation

Payroll Deductions and Dues
Authorized Agents

Provisions of Law

124
612 PDC

APPENDIX D

 

EXPEDITED ARBITRATION
This is an alternative to the procedure set forth in Sections 6 and 9, Arbitration, of
Appendices B and C, Grievance Procedure, respectively and will only be utilized

upon mutual written agreement of the parties.

A joint submission statement setting forth the issue(s) to be determined will be
prepared prior to the hearing by the parties. If the parties cannot agree to a

submission statement the expedited arbitration procedure will not be utilized.

Only those grievances which directly concern or involve the interpretation or
application of the specific terms and provisions of this Memorandum of
Understanding may be submitted to arbitration hereunder. In no event shall such

arbitration extend to:

A. The interpretation, application, merits or legality of any State or local law
or ordinance, including specifically all ordinances adopted by County's
Board of Supervisors; unless the arbitrator, in his/her discretion, finds it
necessary to interpret or apply such State or local law in order to resolve

the grievance which has been submitted to the arbitrator.

125
612 PDC

The interpretation, application, merits, or legality of any or all of the County
of Los Angeles Civil Service Rules, nor matters under the jurisdiction of
the Civil Service Commission for which said Commission has established
procedures or processes by which employees or employee organizations
may appeal to, or request review by, said Civil Service Commission,

including but not limited to, discharges, reductions, and discrimination; nor

The interpretation, application, merits or legality of the rules or regulations
of the department head, the Chief Executive Office, or any other County
department, agency, or commission unless the arbitrator, in his/her
discretion, finds it necessary to interpret or apply such rules or regulations

in order to resolve the grievance which has been submitted to the

arbitrator.

The parties shall select an arbitrator from the panel of arbitrators previously

agreed to by the parties and established for the purpose of conducting expedited

arbitration proceedings:

The arbitrator will be compensated at the contracted for flat daily rate.

The cost of the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the parties. In addition,

126
612 PDC

each party shall pay for all fees and expenses incurred by that party on its

behalf, including but not limited to witness fees.

B. The parties agree that 1) No stenographic record of the hearing will be
made, 2) there will be no representation by outside counsel and 3) there

will be no post hearing briefs.

The arbitrator selected shall hear the grievance(s) within ten (10) working days of
his/her selection, and may hear multiple cases during the course of the day.

However, six (6) hours of hearings will constitute one day.

Arbitration of a grievance hereunder shall be limited to the formal grievance as
originally filed by the employee to the extent that said grievance has not been

satisfactorily resolved.

The arbitrator shall issue a "bench" decision at the conclusion of the parties’
testimony. Only by mutual agreement of the parties and the arbitrator will a

written decision be issued.

The decision of an arbitrator resulting from any arbitration of grievances
hereunder shall not add to, subtract from, or otherwise modify the terms and

conditions of this Memorandum of Understanding.

127
10.

41.

612 PDC

The decision of the arbitrator shall be binding upon PPOA. To the extent the
decision and award of the arbitrator does not require legislative action by the
Board of Supervisors, such decision and award shall be binding upon the
County. If within sixty (60) days of receiving notice of a decision and award
requiring legislative action by the Board of Supervisors, such legislative action is
not taken, the arbitrator's decision and award shall have no force or effect

whatsoever.

Election of this binding forum shall constitute a waiver by all parties to this
process of all other Executive processes for the resolution of this dispute in
whole or in part and the award shall not be appealed. The decision from this

arbitration shall not be precedent setting.

The decision of an arbitrator resulting from the arbitration of a grievance under
the following Articles shall be entirely advisory in nature and shall not be binding
upon any of the parties:

Recognition

Non-Discrimination

Implementation

Term

Renegotiation

Payroll Deductions and Dues

Authorized Agents
Provisions of Law

128
612 PDC

APPENDIX E

COURT TIME FOR EMPLOYEES IN PPOA UNIT 612

Section 1. On-Call Subpoena

Pursuant to the procedures established in cooperation with applicable courts, the parties to the
PPOA Memorandum of Understanding agree that employees covered by such Memorandum of
Understanding, with the exception of the classes of Lieutenant, Lieutenant, DA, who receive an
on-call subpoena and remain on-call during off-duty hours for court appearances, shall receive
one-half their hourly rate, as defined by the Los Angeles County Code for their classification, for
each hour that they are on-call including travel to court as a result of having received a call to
appear. However, in no event shall an employee (except the classes of Lieutenant and
Lieutenant, DA) who receives an on-call subpoena, which is not canceled prior to the date of the
subpoena, be compensated for less than two (2) hours of on-call including travel to court. The
on-call status will commence at the time for appearance specified in the subpoena, and will end
when the employee is relieved from on-call status by the court or the Liaison Deputy, or upon
arrival at the court in response to a call. It is further agreed that employees assigned to an
evening or early morning shift, or those on their day off, shall, upon receipt of an on-call
subpoena, notify the court liaison officer designated by their unit of their on-call status.
Employees in an on-call status shall contact their court liaison officer, by noon of the day set for

appearance to confirm their status if they have not been contacted earlier. If the employee is on

129
612 PDC

an on-call status at the end of the court day, the court liaison officer shall notify the employee at
the end of the court day whether he/she is to remain on-call the following day. Employees
receiving an on-call subpoena shall report to court only when called to appear. Employees who
are called to appear in court on an overtime basis shall receive overtime compensation at the

rate established for their classification.

Section 2. Must Appear Subpoena

Employees who are required to appear in court during off duty hours as a result of a must
appear subpoena shall receive three (3) hours minimum plus actual time in court over two (2)

hours (includes travel time and evidence pick-up).

Section 3. DMV Telephonic Hearing
Employees who are subpoenaed for a DMV Telephonic Hearing which is scheduled during the

 

employee's working hours shall utilize a Department telephone to call the DMV at the scheduled

time and receive no additional compensation.

Empioyees who are subpoenaed for a DMV Telephonic Hearing that is scheduled at a time
when the employee is off duty shall receive one hour of overtime or actual time spent beyond
one hour (whichever is more) for a complete call based on their hourly rate as defined by the

Los Angeles County Code for their classification.

130
612 PDC

Section 4. Increments of Time

increments oe

 

Time earned, credited and paid pursuant to Sections 1, 2, and 3 above shall be in increments of

15 minutes.

The above provisions will remain in effect for the term of this contract unless superseded by

order of the Board of Supervisors.

131
612 PDC

APPENDIX F

 

SICK LEAVE ACCRUAL EXCHANGE
The parties agree to recommend jointly to the County's Board of Supervisors that
employees shall earn and accrue full-pay sick leave and be paid for unused full-pay sick
leave as provided in Article 12 of the Memorandum of Understanding regarding fringe
benefits between the County and the Coalition of County Unions, AFL-CIO, except as

follows:

is Employees in this Unit shall be credited with full-pay sick leave to a maximum of

10 days in 1988 and a maximum of 8 days in 1989.

2 It is understood between the parties that in exchange for the reduction in credited
full-pay sick leave as provided in one (1), herein above, the provisions in Article
7, Section 1, Recommended Salary Adjustment, on July 1, 1988, included an

additional 8 level base rate increase.
3. Effective January 1999, employees in this Unit in the classification of Sergeant

(#2717) or Lieutenant (#2719) shall be credited with full-pay sick leave to a

maximum of 12 days.

132
612 PDC

Effective January 1, 2001, Lieutenant, DA (Item No. 2894) and Sergeant, DA
(Item No. 2891) shall be credited with 4 additional days of full-pay sick leave to a
maximum of 12 days in calendar year 2001 and a maximum of 12 days per
calendar year thereafter. In exchange for the increase in credited full-pay sick
leave days, amendments were made to Sections 1 and 4 of Article 7. Further,
Lieutenant, DA and Sergeant, DA were added to Article 27, Random Drug
Testing. 5. In addition to the days of unused full-pay sick leave for which an
employee may be paid pursuant to Section 2 of said Article 12, of the Coalition
Fringe Benefits Memorandum of Understanding, an employee may, at his/her
option, regardless of whether sick leave was used during the preceding 12
months, receive payment for up to 2 additional sick leave days on July 1, 2013
and 2014, in lieu of carrying such days, provided at least 20 days of full-pay sick

leave remain to the employee's credit after such payment.

Employees in this Unit shall be credited with full-pay sick leave to a maximum of

42 days as indicated above during the term of this contract.

133
 

 

 

 

 

 
