WORKING AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CITY OF
PITTSBURGH
AND
THE FRATERNAL ORDER OF
POLICE
FORT PITT LODGE NO. 1

JANUARY 1, 2010 - DECEMBER 31, 2014

 
7

SE nee Meee lea) eet

Te mmmaiere ae

SECTION

WORKING AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE CITY OF PITTSBURGH
AND
THE FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
FORT PITT LODGE NO. 1

January 1, 2010 — December 31, 2014

SUBJECT PAGE

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  

SECTION | - RECOGNITION
SECTION 2 - DUES CHECK-OFF
SECTION 3 - SENIORITY...
SECTION 4 - MANAGEMENT
SECTION 5 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
SECTION 6 - SALARIES
SECTION 7 - LONGEVITY PAY.
SECTION 8 - HOURS OF WORK
SECTION 9 - OVERTIME .
SECTION 10 - HOLIDAYS.
SECTION 11 - VACATIONS.
SECTION 12 - UNIFORMS...
SECTION 13 - LEAVES OF ABSENCE .
SECTION 14 - INSURANCE............
SECTION 15 - LEGAL REPRESENTATION
SECTION 16 - PENSIONS AND COMPENSATION
SECTION 17 - SCOPE OF AGREEMENT
SECTION 18 - OTHER BENEFITS.....
SECTION 19 - POLICE DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES
SECTION 20 - PERSONNEL FILES ......ssssssessseeesseees
SECTION 21 - INTERNAL INVESTIGATION PROCEDURES
SECTION 22 - DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY
SECTION 23 — PROVISIONS ON APPEAL .....
SECTION 24 - SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT. .
SECTION 25 - TERM.....sscsssssssssssessssessecessccsseessscesarecsnecsseeneeeneesnecsusssnseaneenessnessneeaneessneesnes

APPENDIX A Compensatory Time Bank

APPENDIX B Catastrophic Leave Bank
INDEX TO AGREEMENT

ABSENCE, Leaves of

AGENCY Shop Fee

AGENCY Shop Fee Payer Objection Policy
AGREEMENT, scope of

BARGAINING representative, City and Union
BULLETIN Boards

CALL Outs

COMPENSATION - Pensions

COUNSEL, Legal

COUNSEL, Legal, City's contribution toward
COURT Attendance

COURT, definition of

COURT Pay

DENTAL Insurance

DEVIATION of schedule
DIFFERENTIAL, Shift

DUES and Agency Shop Fee Check Off

EMPLOYEE, definition
EXCHANGE of pass days

FAMILY and Medical Leave
FUNERAL Leave

GENERAL Orders, Notification to Union of issuance
GRIEVANCE procedure

HEALTH Insurance

HEART and Lung Procedures
HOLIDAYS

HOURS of Work

INSURANCE, Dental

INSURANCE, Health

INSURANCE, Life

INTERNAL Investigation Procedures
INVESTIGATION, Internal, Procedures for

JURY Duty

Draft 4/25/11
LABOR Management Committee
LEAVES of Absence

LEGAL Representation

LIFE Insurance

LONGEVITY Pay

MANAGEMENT
MEAL Period
MILITARY Leave

NOTICE of Transfer to employee
OVERTIME

PENSION - Compensations
PERSONAL Leave Days
PERSONNEL Files

QUARTERMASTER System
QUIT defined for vacation purposes

RECOGNITION, City and Union
RESPONSIBILITIES of the Parties, City and Union

RETIREMENT
RULES and Regulations, Notice to Union of issuance

SALARIES

SENIORITY

SHIFT description

SHIFT, deviation of schedule

SHIFT Differential

SICK Leave

SICK Leave for employees hired after 1980 but before 1988

SICK Leave for employees hired before 1980 and
employees who elect

TRANSFERS, Notice to employees of

UNIFORMS
UNIFORM Allowance
UNION Activity on City Time

VACATIONS
VACATION Eligibility
VACATION Selection
VISION Care Benefits

WORKWEEK, Normal

Draft 4/25/11

40

87

124
Draft 4/25/11

WORKWEEK, Overtime 40
WORKDAY 40
Draft 4/25/11

RECOGNITION

SECTION | - RECOGNITION

The City recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive collective bargaining representative
concerning the terms and conditions of employment, including compensation, hours, working conditions,

retirement, pensions and other benefits for all employees as provided in Act 111 of 1968.

The Union recognizes the Mayor as the sole and exclusive bargaining representative for the City
of Pittsburgh. The Union, its agents and representatives, agrees to bargain collectively pursuant to Act

111 of 1968 with only the Mayor or his designated representative.

The term "employee" as used in this Agreement refers to all individuals occupying positions set
forth in Section 6; provided, however, that no individual shall be considered an employee until he or she
has successfully completed the training program mandated by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or has
been employed by the City for ninety (90) days whichever is longer. In addition, in recognition of the
fact that persons newly hired to Police Officer positions, normally, will require at least four (4) months of
full time training, an official "probationary employee" status shall be deemed to exist for the six (6)

months period commencing upon successful completion of such training by each new employee.

Upon completion of the second month of his or her probationary status, each new employee shall
be accorded the right to appeal, as not being for proper cause, any employment termination action to the
Civil Service Commission, provided such appeal is filed within ten (10) work days of the City's notice of

that termination.
Draft 4/25/11

DUES CHECK-OFF

SECTION 2 - DUES CHECK-OFF

A. L. The City will check off uniform and regular monthly dues and agency shop fees as
designated by the Union in writing to the City on the basis of individually signed
voluntary check-off authorization cards. This shall include deductions from
compensation paid pursuant to the Heart and Lung Act 53 P.S. 637 if the City has
received a voluntary check-off authorization card signed by the employee specifically
permitting the City to deduct dues from compensation paid pursuant to the Heart and
Lung Act. A copy of such authorization card for "the check-off of Union dues shall be

_ furnished to the City. These authorizations shall not be sent more frequently than once
each month. Deductions on the basis of authorization cards submitted to the City shall
commence for the month in which the City receives such card or in which such card
becomes effective, whichever is later. In case of earnings insufficient to cover
deductions, a deduction shall be made from the next pay in which there is sufficient
earnings or a double deduction may be made from the pay of the following month,

provided, however that any accumulation of dues shall be limited to two (2) months.

2. If the Union shall increase the amount of its monthly and/or annual dues subsequent to
the execution of then current dues check-off authorization cards by members of the
bargaining unit, the then current dues check-off authorization cards shall be considered
sufficient authorization to the City to increase the amount of Union dues deducted by it
from the earnings of the respective members of the bargaining unit.

2
Draft 4/25/11

Written notification from an appropriate officer of the Union to the City that the Union
has increased its periodic dues shall be considered by the City as constituting adequate
notice and authority for it to increase the amount of any dues deduction that it deducts

from the earnings of members of the bargaining unit.

Employees covered by this Agreement who are not dues paying members of the Union
shall be required as a condition of employment to pay, in lieu of dues, an agency shop fee
for their proportionate share of the cost of the collective bargaining process, contract
administration and the pursuance of matters affecting wages, hours and conditions of
employment, but not to exceed the amount of dues uniformly required of members. Such
employees shall have the full protection of and full access to the rebate procedure

contained in Subsection D of this Agreement which is agreed to by the parties.

An employee shall be charged with not meeting the agency shop fee as a condition of
employment only if the Union's Financial Secretary has given notice to the employee and
the City that the employee has failed to pay the agency shop fee and has not instituted the
rebate procedure within the time limits set forth in Sub-Section D. The City shall
institute proceedings to discharge the employee within ten (10) calendar days of receipt

of the notice unless notified to the contrary by the Union.

The City shall, at the direction of the Union, make extra dues deductions from an
employee who is in delinquent status. If an employee is absent from work for reasons
other than those already provided for in this Agreement, the Union may, when said

employee returns to work, submit written notification to the City stating the amount of

3
Draft 4/25/11

dues delinquency and the number of months an extra dues deduction shall be taken from

an employee’s pay.

The City shall remit to the Union all monies deducted and a list of all employees for whom a

deduction has been made on or before the 15th day of the month after such deductions are made.

The Union shall indemnify and save the City harmless against any and all claims, demands, suits,
or other forms of liability that shall arise out of or by reason of any action or inaction taken by the
City for the purpose of complying with any of the provisions of this Section, or in reliance on any

list, notice, or assignment furnished under any such provisions.

Agency Shop Fee Payer Objection Policy
The Fraternal Order of Police, Fort Pitt Lodge No. | has approved the following Policy governing
objections by F.O.P. represented police agency shop fee payers, both the expenditure of their

agency shop fees for purposes not related to the costs of exclusive representation.

1. The agency shop fee paid to F.O.P. by non-FOP. members shall be equal to the

membership dues for F.O.P. members in the bargaining unit.

2. The amount of the agency shop fee, and a copy of this Policy, shall be distributed by the
F.O.P. upon implementation of this Policy and each January 15th hereafter to all agency

shop fee payers in the bargaining unit.
Draft 4/25/11

At the end of each fiscal year, the F.O.P.'s expenditures shall be reviewed in order to
establish on a pro rata basis what portion of the agency shop fees charged to each agency
shop fee payer in the unit to which the policy applies were expended on matters not
related to the costs of exclusive representation. The F.O.P. will then prepare, by the Ist
day of April following the close of the fiscal year, a report setting forth the results of this
review with respect to that previous year. Such report will thereafter be available to any
agency shop fee payer who requests a copy. Such requests should be made in writing, by
certified mail, return receipt requests, addressed to the F.O.P. at 1428 Banksville Road,

Pittsburgh, PA 15216.

Upon issuance of the report, the F.O.P. will pay to each person who has timely filed an
objection under this policy his/her pro rata share of the amount of agency shop fees
which have been expended on matters not related to the costs of exclusive representation

(such pro-rata share shall hereafter be referred to as the "amount"), plus accrued interest.

Any non-member shop fee payer shall have the right to object to the expenditure of
his/her agency shop fees for purposes not attributable to the costs of exclusive
representation by filing such objection in writing addressed to the F.O.P. at 1428
Banksville Road, Pittsburgh, PA 15216, and sending a copy to the City Office of Labor

Relations at 313 City-County Building, Grant Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15219.

Upon the filing of such objection, the F.O.P. will immediately deposit an amount
equivalent to the agency shop fees of the objector(s) for the months following filing of

the objection that remain in the F.O.P.'s fiscal year, in a separate interest-bearing account

5
Draft 4/25/11

carried by the F.O.P., and will not expend such amount thereafter for any purpose except

as set forth herein.

Any agency shop fee payer who has timely filed such an objection pursuant to this Policy
and who claims that the amount is not in accord with the standard set forth in Paragraph 3
of this Policy, may appeal the F.O.P.'s determination of the amount. Such an appeal shall
be commenced by filing such an appeal in writing with the F.O.P. and sending a copy to
the City Office of Labor Relations at the addresses above. Any such appeal must be filed
no later than 30 days following the issuance of the report required by Paragraph 3 of this
Policy. The appeal shall state the basis for the claim that the F.O.P.'s determination of

the amount is not in accord with the standard set forth in Paragraph 3 of this Policy.

An appeal filed under Paragraph 7 of this Policy shall first be considered by the
Executive Board of the F.O.P. or its designee, which shall have the discretion to
consolidate all appeals and to require a hearing in determining the appeals or to determine
appeals in such other manner as it deems appropriate. In all cases, the F.O.P. Executive
Board or its designee shall issue its determination as to the appeal within 30 days of the
filing to the appeal, or in the case of consolidated appeals, within 30 days of the filing of

the last appeal so consolidated.

An appellant dissatisfied with the determination of the F.O.P. Executive Board may
further appeal that determination. Such an appeal must be filed, in writing, no later than
15 days after the issuance of the decision of the F.O.P. Executive Board or its designee

under Paragraph 8 of this Policy, or else such decision shall be final and binding. Any

6
10.

Draft 4/25/11

such appeal must be addressed to the F.O.P. and a copy sent to the City Office of Labor

Relations at the addresses above.

All appeals filed pursuant to Paragraph 9 of this Policy will be referred to an impartial
decision-maker, Until further notice, all such appeals shall be referred by the F.O.P. to
the American Arbitration Association (A.A.A.), pursuant to its ‘Rules for Impartial
Determination of Union Fees.' The F.O.P. will have the authority to have any and all such
appeals consolidated. The impartial decision-maker's jurisdiction shall be limited to
determining whether the amount determined by the F.O.P. with respect to the appellants
is in accord with the standard set forth in Paragraph 3 of this Policy. The decision of the
impartial decision-maker shall be final and binding. The F.O.P. and the appellant shall

bear the cost of all charges made by the A.A.A. and the impartial decision maker equally.

All agency shop fee amounts of objectors not paid to them pursuant to Paragraph 4 of this
Policy will remain in the account referred to in Paragraph 6 of this Policy until the close
of the period for filing an appeal to the Executive Board of the F.O.P. set by Paragraph 7
of this Policy. If an objector timely files such an appeal, the amounts in the account of
this Policy with respect to such objector will remain in the account until final resolution
of the appeal to the impartial decision-maker, as the case may be, and then will be
distributed to the F.O.P. and the objector in accordance with the final decision of the
appeal, with accrued interest. If no such appeal is filed by an objector with the F.O.P.
Executive Board within the time period established by Paragraph 7 of this Policy, then all
remaining monies in the account with respect to the objector will be distributed to the

F.O.P,
12.

13.

Draft 4/25/11

For the purposes of this Policy, ‘file’, ‘filing’ and/or ‘filed' means receipt by the recipient

designated herein, after mailing by first-class certified mail, return receipt requested.

It is the intent of the parties to follow the standards set forth for such procedures by the
United States Supreme Court in Chicago Teachers Union, et al v. Hudson, 106 S.Ct. 1066
(1986). Should any section of this procedure be found to be constitutionally deficient,

such will not serve to invalidate the remainder of the procedure.
Draft 4/25/11

SENIORITY

SECTION 3 - SENIORITY

A seniority system based upon continuous service and applicable ability considerations shall be

followed for employment security and work assignment determinations, to include annual "Job Pick"

selections and awards of and to police service employees, during the term of this Agreement. In

connection therewith, the following definitions and rules are to be applied by the City.

A. Continuous Service - The "continuous service" status of each bargaining unit employee shall

mean all "unbroken" service, from the date of his or her initial employment as a Police Officer in

the Police Bureau. A break in such service will result, however, upon the occurrence of any of

the following:

1.

2.

voluntary quit;

termination for cause; or

absence in excess of five (5) days without any justifiable reason and/or without any
“report off" from work within that period of absence.

Any continuous absence due to a non-work related disability for a total of twelve (12)
continuous months or for a total of twelve (12) cumulative months in a twenty-four (24)
month period shall result in a break in continuous service and termination of
employment, The period of absence runs prospectively from April 1, 2001. Any
employee who is terminated under this provision for a non-work related disability will be
able, within five (5) years following termination, to present evidence to the City
physician establishing that the non-work related disability has been overcome, and that

9
Draft 4/25/11

the former officer is able to return to full duty. In such case, the officer will be reinstated,

and his continuous service shall be bridged for all purposes.

Job or "Rank" Seniority - Each employee will be accorded job or "rank" seniority, from the date
of his or her initial promotion to any rank, with his or her "continuous service" status therefore
running from that date. Seniority for any lower ranks held by any employee will continue while
he or she holds any higher rank, of any Police Officer job. In the event an employee is reinstated
after having terminated employment, he or she shall be accorded full credit for all time served as

a Police Officer in the Police Bureau.

Bureau-Wide Seniority - Each employee will be accorded a “bureau-wide" continuous service or
"seniority" status from the date of his or her initial employment on any job in the Police Bureau
of the City. This seniority shall be applied in cases of any decrease in force and/or recall action

affecting employees in his/her job or rank, by the City.

Annual Bidding (Job Pick) Procedures - By September 15 of each calendar year, the Chief of
Police shall forward to the F.O.P. his projected manning level notice for the Bureau of Police for
the following year. The F.O.P. shall have the right to grieve in an expedited manner any issues
concerning the proposed picks. The parties shall select a neutral arbitrator prior to September 15

to decide any expedited grievances so as not to delay the October 1 posting date.

1. Uniform Division Employees

a. By October 1, and continuing until October 31, of each calendar year, the Chief

of Police shall cause a posting of Projected Manning Level notices indicating

10
Draft 4/25/11

regular assignments and shifts to be filled by Uniformed Officers, and listing the
names, ranks and service dates of such officers assigned, at and for all Police
Stations maintained by the City. These notices shall include a "sign up" page or
"Pick Sheet" for each position (by shift) to be posted and filled, at and for each
such Police Station. The Chief of Police shall have the discretion to create and
post units within which qualified Uniformed Police Officers may bid, and place
qualified Uniformed Police Officers within them. The City will send to the
F.O.P. a written statement as to the qualifications it considers in placing
employees in the units. The Union shall have the right to grieve in an expedited
fashion if it perceives the posting as an attempt to circumvent seniority or other
“contractual” rights of Uniformed Police Officers. Effective for job picks for
2006, the twenty five percent (25%) most senior police officers (excluding
sergeants and lieutenants) assigned to work in the uniform division each year
shall be permitted to elect the zone in which they will work that year, in order of
seniority. *(Final sentence of this paragraph is subject to appeal filed by the

City on 1/28/05.)

During the above said "posting" period, all Uniform Police Officers at each
Station shall be given an opportunity to sign the Pick Sheet notice reflecting the
regular "position" (and shift) of his or her choice. Any employee who fails to
sign up for any regular position and shift assignment posted, or whose choice of
position and shift is awarded to a senior employee, shall be assigned to one,

without regard to his or her seniority status, by the Commander at the Station.

11
Draft 4/25/11

All regular position and shift assignment selections under Paragraph B hereof
shall be made and awarded on a "seniority" basis, from among all qualified
Uniform Division employees at each Police Station. Any employee who fails to
obtain his indicated choice of such assignments will be given a right to make a
new choice within the posting period of Paragraph (b) above, and will be

considered therefore, on the same basis.

Effective for the calendar year beginning January 1, 1999, all employees
assigned to Zones shall be permitted to bid on car, wagon, utility or COP
assignments on the basis of seniority. Regular COP assignments shall be posted

and shall indicate the two (2) consecutive pass days and the shift.

By November 15 of each calendar year, the Chief will post Officer Assignment
notices, indicating all regular positions assigned, by name, rank and applicable
service date of each employee so assigned, at and for each Police Station, for the
next following calendar year. A copy of this notice will be provided to the Local

F.O.P. President.

As provided in Paragraph (a) above, all Station assignments of Uniform Division

(and other) employees will be made by the Chief of Police.

If, after the assignments within a Police Station for a calendar year take effect, an
opening in an assignment occurs due to a resignation, retirement, including

disability retirement, death, or promotion which the City determines to fill, then

12
Draft 4/25/11

the vacancy shall be posted for bid within the Police Station or unit before
transferring a Uniformed Police Officer from another Police Station or unit. The
City may fill such openings at any time by posting for bid, but if the City gives
the assignment to Uniformed Police Officers for thirty (30) calendar days then it
will be deemed to have determined to post the opening for bid. The assignment
and shift shall be posted for bid for ten (10) calendar days but otherwise the
procedure for bidding shall be the same as under subparagraphs b and c above.
Only the initial opening caused by one of the events described above shall be
filled by this procedure. Nothing in this subsection shall force the City to make

promotions.

If, on a particular shift, the City must fill a vehicle assignment open on that shift,
then the City shall fill it first from among Uniformed Police Officers who have
successfully bid upon vehicle assignments but who have no vehicle available on
that shift. If there are more open vehicle assignments on that shift than there are
available Uniformed Police Officers who have successfully bid upon vehicle
assignments, then the open vehicle assignments will be given to Uniformed
Police Officers who successfully bid upon utility assignments, first by request,
then by inverse order of seniority. The City may bypass any Uniformed Police
Officer for an open vehicle assignment on a particular shift if the City, in good
faith, believes that because of compatibility, the Uniformed Police Officer will

not be effective in that assignment on that shift.

Picks shall be made in the following order

13
Draft 4/25/11

Captains shall pick first.

Lieutenants shall pick second.

Sergeants shall pick third.

Gold Badge shall pick fourth.

Graded Det. shall pick fifth.

Master Police Officers shall pick sixth.

4th Year Patrol Officers shall pick seventh.

3rd Year Patrol Officers shall pick eighth.

2nd Year Patrol Officers shall pick ninth.

Ist Year Patrol Officers shall pick tenth.
For seniority purposes in the Detective Bureau only, all persons assigned to the
Detective Bureau prior to February 17, 1998 shall have their seniority based upon
total service as a Police Officer. Any person permanently appointed to the
Detective Bureau after February 17, 1998 shall have their seniority based upon

time in grade as a detective.

Other Employees

A procedure similar to that described in Paragraph (a) above will be followed for regular
position and shift assignments to employees "outside" of the Uniform Division. A
separate such procedure may be established and applied to any reasonable "groupings" of

such employees, as determined by the Chief of Police.

Effective January 1, 2001, the parties agree to eliminate the position and practice of

utilizing desk sergeants. The parties will create the new assignment of desk officer.

14
E.

Draft 4/25/11

Beginning with the bids for calendar year 2002, the desk officer position shall be posted
and bid in each zone location in the annual bidding procedure set forth in Section 3.D.
The City agrees to fill, by March 1, 2001, those vacancies in the position of sergeant

which exist as of the effective date of this award.

Transfers and Reassignments

1.

Permanent

Permanent transfers of employees from their regular position or shift assignments, at any
Station, will be made only with the consent of each affected employee, so long as the
regular position and shift assignment selected by him continues to be manned at his

Station, during that calendar year, by the City.

Temporary

Station, position and/or shift transfers or reassignments of any employee(s) for a period
of seven (7) days or less (five work days and two pass days) — though, not to exceed ten
(10) such periods for any given officer in any calendar year — shall be deemed
“temporary.” Normally such transfers shall first be done through seeking volunteers and
if an insufficient number of volunteers are available, then the transfers shall normally be
made in inverse order of seniority. Such "temporary" transfers or reassignments are to be
based upon Police service requirements, as determined by the Chief of Police. The Chief
shall have an unfettered right to determine such requirements, and to make such
temporary transfers or reassignments, during the period of this Agreement. However, no
transfer under this paragraph may be made for disciplinary reasons. In the event of an

emergency, the transfers may be made without first seeking volunteers or without

15
Draft 4/25/11

reverting to the use of inverse order of seniority. If special skills or abilities are needed
or if the transfer would result in overtime the transfer may be made without first seeking

volunteers.

Personal Transfers

 

Any employee may request a transfer from one shift to another or one station to another
within the Operations Division. All such requests shall be in writing with a copy to the
Union. Requests for transfer may be granted only for compelling personal reasons or
inability to adequately perform assigned duties. Requests for transfer shall be granted
provided there is a vacant position as determined by the City, available or another
employee will consent to trade shift or station assignment with the employee requesting
the transfer and the employee is capable of performing the assigned duties of the new
shift or station. In the event that more requests are received than may be accommodated,
preference in granting such transfers shall be based on length of continuous service.

Final discretion as to whether or not a transfer is to be granted shall rest with the Chief.

Bureau Transfers

Employees may be transferred by the Chief, or their Commander, either temporarily or
permanently, to another shift or station for the good of the Bureau. Bureau transfers, for
the purpose of affording necessary police service, shall as far as practicable be in the
reverse order of length of continuous service. Nothing in paragraphs (1) or (2) of this
subsection prohibits the City from transferring employees from their picked job
assignments at one Police Station or unit to another police station or unit in accordance
with this paragraph.

16
Draft 4/25/11

5. Employees are to have two (2) weeks notice of permanent, involuntary transfers from any
Police Station to another, except in the case of emergencies or as the needs of public

safety require.

Seniority Roster Postings - Two (2) separate Seniority Rosters will be posted at each Police
Station, one (1) listing the names, ranks, service dates, station and shift assignments of all
bargaining unit employees and the other listing the names, ranks, service dates and shift
assignments of employees at that particular Police Station. The City shall supply to the Fraternal
Order of Police, a seniority list in inverse order of seniority with dates of promotion to last rank
and category within the Pittsburgh Police. Said seniority list shall be provided to the Fraternal

Order of Police no later than June 1st of each calendar year.

17
Draft 4/25/11

RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PARTIES

The City, its representatives at all levels, is bound to observe the provisions of this Agreement.

The Union, its officers, Board members, and representatives at all levels, is bound to observe the

provisions of this Agreement.

In addition to the responsibilities that may be provided elsewhere in this Agreement, the

following shall be observed:

1.

There shall be no interference with the right of any employee to become or to continue as

a member of the Union.

There shall be no discrimination, restraint, or coercion against any employee because of

membership of the Union.

There shall be no Union activity on City time except as provided in Section 5-E-2.

There shall be no intimidation or coercion of employees into joining the Union or

continuing membership therein.

The provisions of this Agreement shall be applied to all employees without regard to
race, color, religious creed, national origin or sex. The representatives of the City and the
Union, shall comply with this provision in all steps of the grievance procedure and in all

dealings between the parties.

18
Draft 4/25/11

MANAGEMENT

SECTION 4 - MANAGEMENT

A. The City and the Director of the Department of Public Safety, through the Chief of Police shall
have the exclusive right to manage, administer, and supervise the employees including the right to
schedule and assign work, transfer, and the sole and exclusive right to determine the size and
organization of the Police Bureau including the discretion to determine vacancies and to fill
vacancies in accordance with the needs of the Bureau and the public safety as determined by the

Chief of Police, Director of the Department of Public Safety, and the Mayor.

B. The parties recognize that the procedure for appointments, promotions, and reduction of force,
suspensions and discharges is as provided by the Police Civil Service Act for Cities of the Second
Class as amended as of January |, 1976 (53 Purdon's Statutes, 23531 et seq.), and the City shall

obey the safeguards outlined in Section 21 in conducting internal investigations.

If the Legislature should, amend or enact statutes that mandate a process for the removal,
discharge, suspension, reduction in rank or reduction in pay of employees in the competitive class

then the collective bargaining agreement will be amended to reflect said changes.

Cc, Except in an emergency situation, the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief, Assistant Chiefs and
Commanders will notify and provide a copy to the Union, at least 15 days prior to
implementation of any change in the Rules and Regulations of the Bureau, and any new General
Order. This notice is to provide the Union with a chance to review and, if desired, to discuss the
order or regulation in question with Police Administration.

19
Draft 4/25/11

F.O.P. Bulletin Boards shall be provided at all stations and divisions subject to normal City rules

and regulations against inappropriate usage.

The Union shall be notified in writing by the City of any disciplinary action or actions taken by it

against any member of the bargaining unit within seven (7) calendar days of such action.

The Mayor of the City shall provide the President of the Union with a copy of his proposed
budget for the next fiscal year at approximately the same time that the Mayor submits such

proposed budget to City Council.

The Union shall be notified in writing by the City of all new hires, promotions or terminations
which occur within the bargaining unit, as well as any changes which materially affect the job
status of members of the bargaining unit within fifteen (15) calendar days subsequent to such

event,

The City may, at its sole discretion, subcontract any work presently performed by the bargaining

unit. The City will engage in meet and discuss with the Union prior to taking any such action.

20
Draft 4/25/11

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

SECTION 5 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

A. The parties shall observe and be bound by Public Law 1183 of 1947 relating to strikes by public
employees. (43 P.S. 215.1 et seq.). During the term of this Agreement there shall be no lockouts.
There shall be no strikes, work stoppages, interruption, or impeding of work, or concerted
absences from work. No officer, board member or representative of the Union shall authorize,
instigate, aid or condone any such activities. The applicable procedures of this Agreement shall

be followed for the settlement of all grievances.

B. DEFINITIONS

Grievance - A "grievance" is hereby defined as:

1. A complaint by an employee regarding the interpretation or application of, or compliance

with this Agreement.

2. A complaint by the Union regarding interpretation or application

of, or compliance with this agreement.

3. Any disciplinary action resulting in discharge, suspension, written reprimand or
demotion. The employee may elect to grieve any such disciplinary action to arbitration
before a single arbitrator or to a tripartite arbitration panel selected in accordance with the

Police discipline appeals procedures of the contract.

4. The days for the filing and processing of grievances shall be exclusive of Saturdays,
21
Draft 4/25/11

Sundays and holidays.

5. The failure to process or answer a grievance within an established time limit presumes
that it has been satisfactorily resolved.

6. The parties may extend the specified time limits by a signed agreement.

7. If the City fails to file a timely answer to a grievance, or the F.O.P. fails to file a timely
appeal to the next step, it will create a rebuttable presumption that the grievance is being
settled by the party who fails to take timely action.

8. The parties, by mutual agreement, can expedite a grievance from Step 1 to Step 3.

9. Disciplinary termination grievances shall take precedence over contract
grievances.

PROCEDURE

1. Step One
a. Any employee who believes that he (or she) has a grievance and is unable to

resolve the matter personally, can submit a written grievance to the Chief of
Police, on forms provided by the City, which shall (among other items) include
the signatures of the Grievance or Assistant Grievance Committeeman and the

employee.

b. To be considered, the written and signed grievance shall be submitted to the
22
Draft 4/25/11

Chief of Police (or his/her designated representative) within ten (10) days after
the occurrence of the event giving rise to the grievance or within ten (10) days
after the employee knew or reasonably should have known of the event giving

rise to the grievance.

c. The Union’s representative and the Chief of Police (or his/her designated
representative) shall meet and discuss such grievances following receipt of the
written grievance, at a meeting to be scheduled for such purpose at a time and
place mutually agreeable to the parties. Such grievances will be discussed and
answered by the Chief within ten (10) days, after they are received. The Chief

shall have authority to settle any grievance.

d. The answer of the Chief (or his /her designated representative) and the date
thereof shall be recorded on the Grievance Form, with a copy given to the
aggrieved employee and to his/her Union representative. If the Chief does not
respond within ten (10) days, the grievance shall be considered granted, without

necessity for further appeal.

e. Ifa grievance is not satisfactorily resolved at Step One, it may be appealed to the

Step Two level by the Union filing an appeal in writing within ten (10) days of

the Chiefs Step One answer.
2. Step Two
a. In Step Two, the Union’s representative and the Mayor (or his/her designated

representative) shall discuss such grievances, following receipt of the written

23
Draft 4/25/11

appeal to the latter, at a meeting to be scheduled for such purpose at a time and
place mutually agreeable to the parties. Grievances discussed in such meeting
shall be answered by the Mayor (or his/her designated representative) in writing,
within ten (10) days after the date of such meeting, unless a different date for

such disposition is agreed upon by the parties.

If the Mayor’s answer in Step Two is not appealed in writing within ten (10) days
after the written answer by the Mayor (or his/her designated representative) the
particular grievance shall be considered settled on the basis of such decision, and
shall not be eligible for further appeal. If the Mayor (or his/her designated
representative) does not answer within ten (10) days, the grievance shall be

considered granted, without necessity for further appeal.

3. Step Three

a.

Any grievance which has been processed in accordance with the provisions of
this Section, but which has not been satisfactorily resolved may, upon proper
appeal, be submitted to arbitration before an impartial Arbitrator to be selected
from the list of impartial arbitrators established by the parties as set forth below.

i. The City and the Union shall each submit the names of twelve (12)

arbitrators who are members of the National Academy of Arbitrators.

ii, The first nine (9) names that appear on both lists shall comprise a

permanent panel of arbitrators.

24
Draft 4/25/11

iii. If less than nine (9) names appear on both lists, all names that appear on
both lists shall be on the permanent panel and the remaining names shall

be combined into one list.

iv. From the combined list of names, each party will alternately strike one
name (the Police shall strike first) until a total of nine (9) arbitrators have

been selected overall.

v. The nine (9) selected arbitrators, in alphabetical order, shall comprise the

panel of Arbitrators for the term of this Agreement.

The Arbitrator shall be requested to submit his decision, in writing, within thirty
(30) days after the conclusion of the hearing or hearings (and/or receipt of any
transcript and/or briefs thereof) and the decision of the Arbitrator, so rendered
shall be final and binding upon the employee involved and upon the Parties to
this Agreement. Where a dispute relates to the scale of wages or benefits in any
way, any decision rendered shall not be made retroactive for more than thirty
(30) days beyond the date on which the dispute first was presented, in writing, as
a grievance. The fees and expenses of arbitration shall be borne in equal shares
by the City and the Union. The Arbitrator shall not have the right to add to,
subtract from, modify, or disregard any of the terms or provisions of the

Agreement.

25
Draft 4/25/11

MULTIPLE GRIEVANCES AND UNION GRIEVANCES

In order to avoid the necessity of filing numerous grievances on the same subject or event, or
concerning the same alleged contract violation occurring on different occasions, a single
grievance may be processed and the facts of alleged additional violations including the dates
thereof may be presented in writing directly in Step 2. Such additional claims shall be filed
promptly and each additional claimant shall be clearly identified. When the original grievance is
resolved in the grievance or arbitration procedure, the parties resolving such grievance shall
review each pending claim in the light of the decision in an effort to dispose of them. If any such
claim is not settled, it shall thereafter be considered as a separate grievance and processed in

accordance with the applicable procedure and the applicable time limitations.

GRIEVANCE REPRESENTATIVES

1. The Union shall designate to the City in writing the names of the Union officers and shall
certify in writing the names of eighteen (18) authorized grievance representatives. Any
changes in Union representation shall be recognized by the City only after the changes

are certified to the City in writing by the Union.

2. Authorized grievance representatives will be allowed time off without pay to attend
meetings and hearings and to visit other work sites for the purpose of transacting
grievance business after notice to the supervisor. Such permission for time off shall not
be requested when the Union activity could reasonably be performed during non-working
hours, and, such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld by the supervisors

involved.

26
Draft 4/25/11

SALARIES

SECTION 6 - SALARIES

A. In each calendar year of this Agreement, the basic hourly and annual salary rates for bargaining

unit job classifications shall be established as follows:

Effective January 1, 1998 there shall only be one grade of detective which shall be paid at the rate
of four and one half (4.5%) percent above the fourth year police officer rate. All existing first

grade detectives shall maintain a rate of one and one half (1.5%) percent above the detective rate.

B. In determining the hourly rate to be applied for overtime and any other purpose under this
Collective Bargaining Agreement, the hourly rate shall be determined by dividing the annual base

rate by 2,080.

Cc. If an employee is transferred into the Detective Bureau and assigned to perform the duties of the
detective job description, the employee shall be paid at the rate for a Detective effective after
having been assigned to the Detective Bureau to perform the duties of the detective job
description for ninety (90) days in any one hundred twenty (120) day period. A police officer so
assigned shall be paid the rate of a Detective based on his or her assignment to work in the
Detective Bureau as a detective for ninety (90) days in any one hundred twenty (120) day period
whether or not the police officer is appointed as a graded detective pursuant to the Civil Service
procedures applicable to the City of Pittsburgh Police Department. If a person is assigned to an
Investigative position and is not made a graded detective, he/she shall have the right to be
addressed as “detective” for the duration of their assignment. An officer assigned to a detective

27
Draft 4/25/11

position shall be required to complete only one ninety (90) day probationary period in order to be
eligible to receive detective pay. If an officer is transferred from a detective position, after
completion of the probationary period, any subsequent reassignment to a detective position shall

result in the officer being immediately eligible for detective pay.

If an employee is assigned to a higher graded position by a Lieutenant, Acting Lieutenant, or
higher ranking officer, the employee shall be compensated for all hours so worked at the standard
hourly wage rate of the position to which assigned. Assignment of an employee to the grade of

Acting Lieutenant must be approved by a Commander, Assistant Chief or the Chief.

All existing rank and grade pay differentials shall remain as is with the exception that the rank
differential for Sergeants shall be 14 % above the pay rate for Police Officer Fourth Year, and the
tank differential for Lieutenants shall be 14% above the pay rate for Sergeants, effective January

1, 2004.

1. The base wage rate for each position in the bargaining unit will remain frozen at December
2009 rates throughout calendar year 2010. A one thousand dollar ($1,000) signing bonus will be
issued to each member of the bargaining unit, to be paid in the month of March. Employees

whose wage rates were in step increments will proceed to the next step.

2. In calendar year 2011, the base wage rate for the position of Police Officer 4th Year shall be

increased by 2.0% and all other grade and rank differentials will remain the same. Those in

positions of step increases will progress to the next step, regardless of seniority.

28
Draft 4/25/11

3. In calendar year 2012, the base wage rate for the position of Police Officer 4th Year shall be
increased by 2.0% and all other grade and rank differentials will remain the same. Those in

positions of step increases will progress to the next step, regardless of seniority.

4. In calendar year 2013, the base wage rate for the position of Police Officer 4th Year shall be
increased by 2.0% and all other grade and rank differentials will remain the same. Those in

positions of step increases will progress to the next step, regardless of seniority.

5. In calendar year 2014, the base wage rate for the position of Police Officer 4th Year shall be
increased by 2.0% and all other grade and rank differentials will remain the same. Those in

positions of step increases will progress to the next step, regardless of seniority.

6. The City and the Union anticipate additional savings from the use of compensatory time
banks, which savings should allow the cost increases in this Agreement to meet the requirements
of the City's Act 47 Plan. To ensure this savings, the City and the Union will each appoint three
(3) persons to a Contract Review Committee, which shall meet in December in each year of the
term of the contract to determine the amount of savings from compensatory time used verses
overtime earned. If, at the end of any calendar year, the cost of wage and benefit increases
covered by this Agreement exceeds the ceiling allowed under the Act 47 Plan by an aggregate
amount in excess of $250,000, then the wage increase for the next calendar year will be adjusted
to eliminate such excess. If, at the end of calendar year 2013, there is an aggregate savings over
the ceiling allowed under the Act 47 Plan, then 50% of that savings shall be divided among those
who are active officers and members of the bargaining unit as of December 31, 2013 in an

amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) per officer. In the event that the Contract

29
Draft 4/25/11

Review Committee comes to impasse over such wage adjustments, then the current Act 111

neutral arbitrator shall rule based on this Agreement and the Act 47 Plan.

7. To determine appropriate police officer pay grades, continuous service status is as defined in

Section 3 - Seniority (A)(1)(2)(3) and (4).

30
LONGEVITY PAY

SECTION 7 - LONGEVITY PAY

A..

Oraft 4/25/11

Each eligible bargaining unit employee will be granted longevity pay each year based upon years

of service with the City in the bargaining unit, as follows:

Completed Years of Service

Four years through seven years

Eight years through eleven years

Twelve years through fifteen years

Sixteen years through nineteen years

Twenty years through twenty-three years
Twenty-four years through twenty-seven years
Twenty-eight years through thirty-one years
Thirty-two years through thirty-five years
Thirty-six years through thirty-nine years

Forty years or more

Annual Payment

$ 1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000

10,000

The annual dollar amount of longevity received by any officer under the above plan shall not be

less than the dollar amount of longevity received by that officer in 2009. An officer will continue

to receive the same, frozen amount of longevity pay under the 2009 plan until such time as his

annual payment under the above plan exceeds the former plan. Thereafter, the officer will

receive annual payments pursuant to the above plan.

31
Draft 4/25/11

If City Council has approved supplemental pay for officers involuntarily called to military duty,
said officers will receive longevity pay without satisfying the One Day Work Rule. This

provision will be effective retroactive to January 1, 2002.

The longevity payment shall be paid in the first pay period following the employee's anniversary
date, provided, however, that any employee who has achieved twenty (20) years of service shall

be paid in February.

Except as provided in paragraph B and paragraph C, no officer shall be entitled to receive

longevity pay unless the officer works a minimum of one (1) day in that calendar year.

32
Draft 4/25/11

HOURS OF WORK

SECTION 8 - HOURS OF WORK

A. This Section defines the normal hours of work, but shall not be construed, either, as a
guarantee of hours of work and pay or as a basis for calculating overtime hours of work

and pay, except as provided for, otherwise, in this Agreement.

1, The normal workday shall be eight (8) consecutive hours of work. An employee
shall be entitled to a meal period of one-half (1/2) hour while on duty during the
eight (8) hour work period. It is understood that the employee is on duty and on

call at any time during the meal period.

2. The normal workweek shall be five (5) workdays beginning on the first day of
any seven (7) consecutive day period which may begin on any day of the
calendar week. Workdays shall be consecutive except for days off. The normal

two (2) days off shall be consecutive days off.

3. The normal workweek shall apply except in emergency cases for the suppression
of riots or tumults or the preservation of the public peace in times of riot,

conflagration, or public celebrations.

B. Time spent by employees in attendance in Court and Magistrate sessions, including lunch
breaks, as required by subpoena by the District Attorney's Office or as required by the
33
Draft 4/25/11

Chief of Police, is time worked and shall be compensated as such. Such time worked
shall be compensated at the regular rate or at the overtime rate, depending upon whether
it qualified as straight-time or overtime, provided, however, that employees required to
attend pretrial or Federal, State, County, or City Court and Magistrate sessions shall be
guaranteed at least three (3) hours pay at the applicable rate. This paragraph shall also
apply to Law Department and Human Relations Hearings, Merit Board, OMI interviews,
and in Trial Boards and Boards of inquiry for sitting members or witnesses for the

prosecution.

An officer who appears in court as a defendant in a civil or criminal case arising out of
the performance of police duties may elect to have his shift changed to coincide with
scheduled court appearances. An officer electing such change would waive any claim to
overtime within a twenty-four (24) hour period in relation to his regularly scheduled shift.
Subject to the approval of the County and the courts, an officer required to attend City
Court must select either morning or afternoon schedule for court hearings. No election
will be honored, however, if it would create a claim for overtime compensation that

would not otherwise exist.

An employee whose court appearance continues into the employee's shift shall be entitled

to pay for time worked only. The three hour court appearance guarantee shall be

inapplicable.

34
Draft 4/25/11

An employee whose court appearance starts one and one-half hours or less prior to the
employee's shift may be required to report for duty immediately after the court

appearance and the three hour court appearance guarantee shall be inapplicable.

If an employee's court appearance starts more than one and one-half hours prior to the
employee's shift and ends prior to the employee's shift, the three hour court appearance
guarantee shall ‘be applicable whether or not the employee is asked to report to work

immediately after the court appearance.

If a court appearance occurs more than one and one-half (1 4) hours after the end of an
employee's shift, the employee shall be entitled to the three (3) hour court appearance

guarantee whether or not the employee is held over until the appearance begins.

If a court appearance occurs one and one-half (1 %) hours or less after the end of an
employee shift, the employee may be held over for the court appearance. In this event,
the employee shall be paid for hours worked only and the three (3) hour court appearance

guarantee shall be inapplicable.

An employee required to make two court appearances in a day may be held over on duty
from the first to the second court appearance. In this event the three hour court
appearance guarantee is applicable only to the first court appearance.

Overtime hours accrued as a result of court time can, at the discretion of the officer, be
paid as overtime or be banked as compensatory time subject to the rules and procedure

set forth in Appendix A

35
Draft 4/25/11

Call Outs - Except for Court or Magistrate sessions covered by Paragraph B above, an
employee called out to work for any period other than the period of his or her previously
scheduled hours of work shall be guaranteed at least four (4) hours of work or pay and
shall be compensated at applicable overtime pay rates for such ‘call out' time. Previously
scheduled hours of work of any affected employee shall not be rearranged or reduced

because of call out work under these provisions.

Except in "emergency" situations, or where requested and agreed to by the affected
employees, any change in previously scheduled hours of work shall be made and posted
no later than Thursday of the week preceding the calendar week in which the change is to
take effect, or by the end of the last shift worked by the affected employee during that

preceding week, whichever occurs first.

When any change is made in the schedule of, any employee in any manner contrary to the
provisions of Paragraph E above, he/she shall be deemed to have reported for work on his
regular shift and shall be paid on that basis, with all other hours worked on that day

compensated for, at the appropriate “overtime” pay rate.

Shift Differential - For hours worked on the afternoon shift there shall be paid a premium
rate of 2.00% of the hourly rate; and for hours worked on the night shift there shall be
paid a premium rate of 3.00% of the hourly rate; and for hours worked between 4:00

P.M. and 11:00 P.M. there shall be paid a premium rate of 4.00% of the hourly rate.

36
Draft 4/25/11

For purposes of applying the aforesaid shift differentials, all hours worked by an

employee during the workday shall be considered as worked on the shift on

which he or she is regularly scheduled to start work, except,

a)

b)

An employee regularly scheduled for the day or afternoon shift who
completes his or her regular eight-hour turn and continues to work into
the following shift shall be paid the applicable shift differential for all

hours worked on the following shift.

An employee who completes his or her regular eight-hour turn and after
going off duty is called out for another shift within the same workday
shall be paid the applicable shift differential if any, for the hours worked

on the other shift.

Shifts shall be identified in accordance with the following:

a)

b)

c)

Day Shift includes all turns regularly scheduled to commence between
6:00 am. and 8:00 a.m. inclusive.
Afternoon Shift includes all turns regularly scheduled to commence

between 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. inclusive.

Night Shift includes all tums regularly scheduled to commence between.

10:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. inclusive.

37
Draft 4/25/11

Shift differential shall be included in the calculation of overtime compensation,
except when such overtime results from an appearance in court but shall not be

part of the base wage for any other purpose.

Any hours worked by an employee on a regularly scheduled shift which
commences at a time not specified in Paragraph 2 above shall be paid as follows:
a) For hours worked which would fall in the prevailing day turn of the

Bureau no shift differential shall be paid.

b) For hours worked which would fall in the prevailing afternoon turn of the

Bureau the afternoon shift differential shall be paid.

c) For hours worked which would fall in the prevailing night turn of the

Bureau the night shift differential shall be paid.

d) For all hours worked by an employee during any shift which begins after
4:00 p.m. and before 11:00 p.m., the employee shall be paid a shift

differential of 4.00% of the hourly rate.

H. EXCHANGE OF PASS DAYS

1,

Employees assigned to the same station, division and of equal rank may
exchange complete pass days and tours of duty, subject to the approval of the

Assistant Chief and/or his Designated Representative.

38
Draft 4/25/11

2. No overtime liability due to such exchanges shall accrue to the City nor shall the
City assume responsibility for enforcement or repayment of time between the

officers involved.

3. In no event are exchanges of duty tours to be granted in order for any employee

to make profit or for the purpose of assuming outside employment of any length

or duration.

I. Nothing in the Award of December 30, 2004 shall be construed to change the present

practice regarding minimum pay for court appearances.

39
Draft 4/25/11

OVERTIME

SECTION 9 - OVERTIME

A. DEFINITIONS

1. The workweek shall consist of seven (7) consecutive days beginning 12:01 a.m. on
Monday.

2. The workday is the twenty-four (24) hour period beginning with the time the employee
begins work.

3. The regular rate of pay as used in this Agreement shall mean the standard hourly wage
rate which the employee would have received for the work assigned had it been
performed during the 40 hour work week.

4. For purposes of overtime payments, based on Wheeler v. Hampton, 399 F.3 238
(C.A.3(Pa.) 2005), the annual base pay will include longevity pay, and shift differential at
the median rate, proposed by the City of three (3%) percent.

B. Overtime rates of one and one-half (1') times the regular rate will be paid for:

1.

During any workweek wherein an officer actually works more than forty hours, the hours
in excess of forty hours will be paid at a premium rate ‘of one and one half times the
officer's regular rate. Overtime hours accrued as a result of this provision can, at the
discretion of the officer, be paid as overtime or be banked as compensatory time subject

to the rules and procedure set forth in Appendix A.

If officers are forced to work on pass days, then the order of selection shall be by inverse
seniority.

40
Draft 4/25/11

Payment of overtime rates shall not be duplicated for the same hours worked. Hours
compensated for at overtime rates shall not be counted further for any purpose in determining

overtime liability under the same or any other provisions of this Agreement.

Improper Absenteeism Exclusion

Any employee who absents himself (herself) from work without permission or justification, or
whose pattern of absences otherwise demonstrates an abuse (it is to be noted that patterns of
attendance abuse do properly subject an employee to discipline), and who does not challenge the
determination that such absence(s) were made without permission or justification, under this
Agreement, may be required to make up the time not worked, in four (4) hour periods, at any time

and in any assignment directed therefore, by the Chief of Police.

All "make-up" work under this provision will be compensable on a "regular time" pay basis;
provided that any affected employee be accorded an option to elect and accept a suspension
penalty for periods not to exceed three (3) days and a fine in an amount not to exceed three (3)
days’ pay, in addition--in lieu of such make-up work--for each improper absence. Any
unchallenged improper failure by the employee to "make up" any time lost, as directed by the
Chief, shall be deemed an election and acceptance of a suspension penalty and fine under this

Section.

Any election and acceptance of such suspension penalty and fine under this provision shall be

deemed to constitute a waiver of any right to protest that suspension penalty and fine, under any

City or State Law or Agreement provision in effect at the time.

41
Draft 4/25/11

All shift changes shall occur on the first of each month. The first eight (8) hours worked on the

first day of a new schedule shall be compensated at straight time.

OVERTIME PAY AND ACTING PAY OPPORTUNITIES

Ll.

Whenever the need arises to hire on over time a lieutenant or sergeant (and on-duty
manpower is not available), hire the person of the rank to be filled if the cost is the same
as hiring a lower rank to act in a higher capacity. (Thus, the practice will continue of
making a lower rank act in a higher capacity, as long as it is not on overtime and the cost

is only acting pay.)

As long as the lieutenant or sergeant who is offered the overtime is not on pass, this will
prevail. A lieutenant or sergeant who is on pass is free to volunteer to work at time and a
half, provided he/she agrees not to demand the overtime rate applicable for pass day
work. This in no way creates a mandatory manning level, and the Bureau will continue to

have a lower rank act if on-duty manpower is available.

Offers will first be made to the lieutenant and sergeant on the shift and at the duty
location that has the manpower shortage. This will be done by seniority. Ifno one on the
shift is available then the other shifts will be contacted. This will also be done by

seniority. If no one is available then any supervisor from the prior shift will stay.

If this procedure is violated by anyone under the rank of Commander, there will not be
any grievances accepted by the FOP, and the City will not be required to pay any amount

to the lieutenant/sergeant who was not offered the _ overtime.

42
Draft 4/25/11

HOLIDAYS

SECTION 10 - HOLIDAYS

Each employee shall be entitled to the following holidays:

qd) New Year's Day January 1,

(2) Martin Luther King Day (date of official observance under Federal Law)
(3) Presidents’ Day (date of official observance under Federal Law)

(4) Police Memorial Day (May 15)

(5) Memorial Day,

(6) Independence Day July 4,

(7) Labor Day,

(8) Veteran's Day November 11,

(9) Thanksgiving Day,

(10) Christmas Day December 25

A. DUPLICATION

1,

A holiday which occurs during the vacation period of an employee shall be charged to the

vacation period of the employee and the Holiday shall be deferred.

A holiday which occurs while an employee is on authorized sick leave shall not be charged

against the sick leave of the employee.

An employee who is receiving compensation benefits when a holiday occurs is not
entitled to have the holiday at a later date upon return to work or to receive additional pay

for that day.
43
Draft 4/25/11

B. HOLIDAYS WORKED

1,

Any employee who works on any of the listed holidays shall have the choice of double
time and one-half pay for all hours worked on the holiday, or pay at time and one-half for
the holiday worked and eight hours compensatory time off with pay at straight time at a

later date.

An employee shall be paid double time and one-half on holidays unless he or she elects,
in writing, to choose equal compensatory time off before the end of the regular shift on

the holiday so worked.

If an employee shall be held over to work on the actual calendar day holiday as listed in
this section, he or she shall be paid the holiday rate for the hours that he or she is held
over to work on the holiday. If an employee is held over to work following their normal

holiday shift, he or she shall be paid at the regular overtime rate.

Cc. UNWORKED HOLIDAYS

When a holiday falls on a pass day, an employee shall receive the choice of pay at straight time

for the holiday or equal compensatory time off with pay. An employee shall be paid straight time

on the holiday unless he or she elects in writing to choose equal compensatory time off before the

end of the last shift scheduled and worked prior to the pass day on which the holiday occurs.

D. Equal compensatory time shall be scheduled at the discretion of the Chief of Police. Equal

compensatory time off may be accumulated no longer than three hundred and sixty-four (364)

44
Draft 4/25/11

days after the holiday. Equal compensatory time off in advance may be authorized by the Chief

of Police only when required to meet the manpower requirements of the Bureau of Police.

No officer shall be entitled to receive holiday pay unless the officer works a minimum of one (1)

day in that calendar year.

Unused deferred holidays shall be paid to an employee upon termination and/or retirement.

45
Draft 4/25/11

VACATIONS

SECTION 11 - VACATIONS

Each eligible employee shall be entitled to vacation after one (1) year of service from the

beginning date of employment and during each subsequent calendar year.

A. To be eligible for a vacation in any calendar year during the term of this Agreement an employee
must have continuous service from the date of first employment with the City as set forth below.
If continuous service is broken for any of the reasons listed below, an employee who is reinstated
must work for one (1) year prior to using vacation. Continuous service will be bridged in

accordance with Section 3B of this agreement to determine vacation entitlement.

B. For vacation entitlement purposes only continuous service shall be broken by:

1. A quit. Absence for twenty (20) consecutive workdays without notice to the City shall

constitute a quit.

2. Discharge for cause.

3. Absence due to a physical disability for more than one year, provided that an absence due
to compensable disability which extends beyond one year shall not break continuous
service if the employee reports himself or herself available for work within thirty (30)

days after final payment of statutory compensation for such disability.

46
Draft 4/25/11

4, A lay off is not a discharge for cause and does not constitute a break in service for

vacation purposes.

Cc. Any otherwise eligible employee, who has attained the years of continuous service indicated in
the following table in any calendar year during this Agreement, shall receive a vacation during such

calendar year corresponding to such completed years of continuous service as follows:

Years of Continuous Completed Service Calendar Weeks of Vacation
One (1) through four (4) two (2)
Five (5) through nine (9) three (3)
Ten through fourteen (14) four (4)
Fifteen (15) or more five (5)

In no event shall a vacation or vacation pay to which an employee may be entitled be carried over or

accumulated from one calendar year to the next, except as provided for in Section K of this Section.

D. VACATION SELECTION

1. Between December | and December 15, each employee shall specify in writing

his or her vacation preference for the following year.

47
Draft 4/25/11

2. Employees with longer continuous service will be given preference in vacation
selection by rank as of January 1 of the calendar year in which the employee becomes

eligible.

3. No later than January 1 of each year notice of the vacation periods scheduled shall be

posted.

4, The City shall establish guidelines for each branch, station and section for
allotting the number of employees to be allowed off on vacation at any one time. Such

guidelines shall be posted prior to December 1 each year.

5. The City has the final discretion to allot vacation periods throughout the calendar

year and to change such allotments in order to meet the needs of public safety.

6. The City shall not be required to establish vacation allotment quotas which
permit more than twelve percent (12%) of its total work force assigned at any work
station to be on vacation at any given time. Vacation period preferences will be given

priority over any discretionary leaves of absence granted by the City.

7. If an employee is involuntarily transferred to another duty station, his earlier

approved selection of a vacation period or periods shall not be changed without the

consent of such employee.

48
Draft 4/25/11

8. An employee who will be on disability leave between December 1 and December
15 of any calendar year shall be notified by the City in writing prior to December | that
he may select his vacation period or periods for the subsequent calendar year during the

December | to December 15 period of the then current year.

Each employee granted vacation will be paid forty (40) hours pay for each week of eligible
vacation at the standard hourly wage rate for the permanent position held when the vacation is

taken.

Individual vacation days may be granted at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

Employees required to "work" as defined in Section 8B on a vacation day shall be given the
option of receiving time and one-half for the vacation day worked (in addition to regular vacation
pay) or of taking eight (8) hours compensatory time off with pay at straight time rates, at a later

date.

An employee shall have the option of starting a vacation week or weeks immediately after his

pass days or the Sunday prior to his pass days.

Prime time for the selection of vacation purposes shall be defined as the period of time

commencing on the workweek including June 15 and ending at the conclusion of the workweek

including September 15.

49
Draft 4/25/11

Employees shall be permitted to use up to three weeks of vacation time as single vacation days
each year. Absent written approval from management, all single vacation days must be used prior

to December 15th each year.

All members of the bargaining unit shall be permitted to carry five (5) vacation days into the
following year which must be used or lost by no later than March 15 of the following year.
Vacation days used in accordance with this provision shall be paid at the daily rate in effect at the

time of usage.

No officer shall be entitled to receive vacation pay unless the officer works a minimum of one (1)

day in that calendar year.

50
Draft 4/25/11

UNIFORMS

SECTION 12 - UNIFORMS

A. 1. The City shall replace each uniformed employee's required uniform insignia and personal
equipment, as they wear out due to normal usage (see subsection A2) or where they are
irreparably damaged in the line of duty through no negligence or carelessness of the
employee. An employee shall be responsible for replacing at his or her own cost any

item lost or damaged through carelessness.

2. Under this Section, each uniformed employee may have replaced, where replacement is
necessary due to normal wear, no more than four (4) pairs of trousers and/or skirts, six (6)
long or short sleeve shirts including insignia, and one (1) each of any other required

uniform item, insignia or personal equipment in a calendar year.

3. Each new employee shall be issued six (6) pairs of trousers and/or skirts, ten (10) long
and/or short sleeve shirts including insignia and one (1) each of all other required uniform

items, insignia and personal equipment.

B. Each employee in the bargaining unit shall be paid, in the month of February or in the first month
in which the employee actually works in the calendar year, whichever is later, a sum six hundred
twenty-five dollars ($625.00) as a uniform and clothing maintenance allowance to include
purchases of shoes and any work clothes not issued through the Quartermaster System. For

purposes of this Section, an individual is not otherwise eligible for a uniform allowance until after

51
Draft 4/25/11

he or she has attained employee status in accordance with Section 1 (Recognition) of this
agreement.
Officers retiring prior to the end of February shall not receive a uniform allowance for that

calendar year.

52
Draft 4/25/11

LEAVES OF ABSENCE

SECTION 13 - LEAVES OF ABSENCE

A.

Bereavement and Funeral Leave: If the spouse or a child of an employee should die, that
employee shall be granted not more than five (5) scheduled workdays off without loss of pay
from the date of death through eight (8) workdays from the day of the funeral, including the time
required to return from the funeral if it takes place outside the City of Pittsburgh. Whenever a
death occurs in an employee's immediate family other than that of a spouse or child, the employee
will be granted not more than three (3) scheduled workdays off without loss of pay from the date
of death through five (5) workdays from the day of the funeral, including the time required to
return from the funeral if it takes place outside the City of Pittsburgh. Immediate family is
defined to mean parent, parents of spouse, brother or sister. An employee shall be granted one (1)
day of funeral leave with pay in order to actually attend the funeral of a deceased grandmother,

grandfather, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, or grandchild.

Effective with this Agreement, the City will discontinue providing short term disability benefits

and long term disability benefits for the members of the bargaining unit. Officers who are unable
to work due to illness or injury must utilize all available paid time off, including vacation, before
going on unpaid status. An officer who is on unpaid status due to a disability may qualify for the

Catastrophic Leave Bank as set forth in Appendix B.

53
Draft 4/25/11

Each qualified officer will receive ten (10) personal days each calendar year.

Personal days may be accrued and carried over from year to year up to a maximum of 150 days,
but the City will not pay for any such accrued days, and unused days will be forfeited, except that
upon retirement, the City will pay in a lump sum for up to twenty (20) accrued personal days.
The lump sum payment for personal days will be equal to the number of accumulated personal
days (up to twenty) times eight (8) hours, times the standard hourly wage rate for the permanent

position held by the employee on the date of his retirement.

Effective January 1, 2005, the sick leave plan including accrued sick days will be discontinued.
Any officer who has accrued sick days as of December 31, 2004, may freeze the number of sick
days in a bank. These sick days may be used during the waiting period before disability benefits.
Upon retirement, the City will buy back 100% of the number of accrued whole sick days. The
lump sum payment for accumulated sick days upon retirement shall be equal to the number of
accumulated whole sick days times eight (8) times the standard hourly wage rate for the
permanent position held by the officer on the date of retirement. *(Part of this paragraph is

subject to appeal filed by the City on 1/28/05.)

1. The employee who banked sick days prior to January 1, 2005 must have the required
length of service for retirement or be eligible for disability retirement at the time of
terminating employment with the City in order to be eligible for payment on retirement

for accumulated sick leave.*

54
Draft 4/25/11

2. An employee who banked sick days prior to January 1, 2005, who, while eligible for
retirement, dies while still employed will be paid for any unused sick leave time he or she

has accumulated as of the date of his or her death.

3. The beneficiary or estate of an employee who dies in the line of duty will receive a lump

sum payment equal to the number of accumulated sick leave days up to one hundred and

fifty (150) days.

4. The lump sum payment shall be equal to the number of accumulated sick leave days
times eight (8) times the standard hourly wage rate for the permanent position held by the

employee on the date of retirement.

The City may require medical certification that an employee was physically unable to perform his
or her duties because of illness or other physical disability if the employee is off for more than

three (3) consecutive days.

It is understood and agreed that, the City may establish, and require compliance with, such
regulations as shall be reasonable and necessary to prevent any abuse of sick leave, by an

employee.

It is understood and agreed, further, that the City may require medical certification of illness

before any sick leave payments are made to any employee whose prior pattern of sick leave usage

makes it apparent that the benefit is being abused, at the time.

55
Draft 4/25/11

Personal leave time off must be requested in writing at least seventy-two (72) hours in advance of
time requested unless due to sudden illness or emergency. Such requests for personal leave time
off shall be responded to by the City within forty-eight (48) hours of the request. Final discretion
to schedule personal leave time off shall rest with the City, but such requests shall not be
arbitrarily or capriciously denied. In the event that more requests are received than can be
allowed for the same day, then the time off shall be awarded on the basis of seniority. The
officer’s shift lieutenant will have the discretion to deviate from the 72 hour notice referenced in
COP #03-549 under appropriate circumstances, provided the lieutenant documents the time the
personal leave request was received and the reason it was granted (ie., sufficient scheduled

manpower on duty).

MILITARY LEAVE
Any employee who is required to attend an encampment of the Reserve of the Armed Forces or
the National Guard shall be eligible for Military Leave with no loss of pay for such period not in

excess of fifteen (15) calendar days in any calendar year.

JURY DUTY LEAVE

Any employee ordered to report for jury duty shall be granted a leave of absence from his or her
regular duties during the actual period of such jury duty and shall receive the difference between
any jury duty compensation received and his or her regular daily wage for each day of jury

service.

56
Draft 4/25/11

REHABILITATION PROGRAM

Officers requiring rehabilitation for drug or alcohol related problems shall be granted up to
twenty-eight (28) days of leave which may, at the officer's option, be deducted from any
accumulated leaves such as vacation, sick leave (etc.). If within six (6) months after successful
completion of the program and return to duty that officer uses not more than seven (7) days of
sick leave, all paid leave utilized shall be restored to the officer. Officers may avail themselves of

this program only once.

FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE
The provisions of the Family and Medical Leave Act are incorporated by reference herein. Any
employee who has successfully completed his or her probation period may take up to twelve

weeks of time, with insurance benefits, in the following circumstances:

a. Medical disability of the employee.
b. Medical disability of the employee's spouse, parent or child.
c. To care for a new or newly adopted child or foster placement.

The twelve (12) week period shall include any appropriate paid leave the employee is entitled to
use plus unpaid leave to total no more than twelve (12) weeks in a twelve (12) month period. The
twelve (12) month period shall begin to run from the first date that FMLA leave is used and shall
be calculated as a continuous twelve (12) month period. The leave may be taken in accordance
with the procedures established for all City employees. Notwithstanding this provision, time
spent on Accident and Sickness shall count against the 12 weeks allotted time.

Requests for unpaid leave must be made in writing and shall indicate the purpose of the leave
request and the approximate length of leave.

Employees shall not have an interruption of their continuous service while on unpaid leave.

57
Draft 4/25/11

N. One Day Work Rule Modification

A. An officer may be permitted to use vacation, personal days, DH days, VD days and AP

days accrued in the New Year without satisfying the One Day Work Rule provided:

qa)

Q)

@)

the officer makes a written request to his Commander in advance of the vacation

period specifying

(a) the last date he will work in the expiring year before commencing
vacation and

(b) the date of his return to work in the New Year;

the request must be approved in writing by the Commander in advance of the

officer commencing the vacation; and

the officer must physically work his/her entire shifts on the last date before
vacation and the date of return as stated in the written request submitted to the

Commander.

Where the Commander has granted the request, but an officer subsequently fails to work

the specific shifts identified in writing at the time of request, the officer will be marked

"X" for days absent in the New Year as required by the One Day Work Rule.

B. Further, when the Bureau determines that an officer is properly marked "Holiday" on

January 1, the One Day Work Rule is waived for vacation, personal days, DH days, VD

58
Draft 4/25/11

days and AP days commencing January 2, provided the Officer complies with the

procedure and attendance requirements stated in the paragraph above.

Example: (1) Officer submits memo to Commander on Dec. 13, 2002 requesting vacation
from Friday Dec. 27, 2002 through Friday January 3, 2003; (2) The memo must specify
the last date the officer will physically work in the expiring year and the date of return to
work in the New Year; (3) Failure to physically work on the date of return stated in the
request will result in application of the One Day Work Rule, i.e., the officer will be
marked "X" (absent without pay) or “Y” (AWOL), as appropriate, for days absent in the

New Year.

Any officer who is on leave of absence for which he or she does not receive wages from the City
shall be responsible to pay the employee contribution portion of his benefits. The only acceptable
form of payment will be a personal check or money order made payable to the Treasurer, City of

Pittsburgh.

59
Draft 4/25/11

INSURANCE
SECTION 14 - INSURANCE
A. LIFE INSURANCE
1. Each active employee shall be insured by the City during the term of this Agreement for

an amount equal to the employee's annual base salary rounded off to the next highest
hundred dollars of Group Life Insurance with double indemnity during the employee's
employment with the City of Pittsburgh during the term of this Agreement. The City
shall pay the full cost of such insurance including any rate increases which occur during

the term of this Agreement.

2. Each employee who retires during the term of this Agreement shall, upon such
retirement, be provided seven thousand five hundred ($7,500) dollars of life insurance
coverage, to include such coverage as provided under any disability retirement benefits

granted under the Pension Plan in effect on January 1, 1976.

B. HEALTH INSURANCE
L Active Police Officer Health Insurance
1 Effective January 1, 2005 active police officers will be offered the "Next
Generation Health Plan" as set forth in the document presented at arbitration and
attached as Appendix A. The Act 47 Plan adopted by the City of Pittsburgh
designed a new healthcare plan calling for employee contributions. It recognizes

the uncertainty of future costs and the need for flexibility to amend the benefit
60
Draft 4/25/11

design and/or the amount of the employee contribution on an ongoing annual
basis in order to enact savings and contain future cost increases. * (Part of this

paragraph is subject to appeal filed by the City on 1/28/05.)

The Act 47 Plan calls for a minimum 15% employee contribution. The City of
Pittsburgh is self-insured therefore the proper method to calculate the 15%
contribution is the annual cost for active police officers for the prior year. The
evidence presented showed projected costs for medical and prescription coverage
for active officers in 2004 at $4.026,825. Effective January 1, 2005, officers shall
make the following monthly contributions toward healthcare:

1) Individual - $30.00

2.) Husband/Wife - $75.00

3.) Family - $90.00

It is recognized that the City will make annual adjustments to the contribution
rates. The Union may utilize the grievance procedure to challenge the amount of
any annual adjustment.

The City has the right to purchase fully insured health care plans or to self-insure
for purposes of health care coverage.

The parties agree that there will be a contract re-opener for negotiations of health
care benefits for active employees for 2011 and beyond. During these
negotiations, the parties will also discuss alternatives for 2004 retirees.

Future pre-Medicare retirees, provided they were hired prior to January 1, 2005,
will be offered the same plan choices as active employees.

Existing pre-Medicare retirees will be offered the active employee choices as an
option.

61
Draft 4/25/11

Employees may make an election of health care plan, as provided under Section 14-B-1,

at least once each year, at a time determined by the City.

a. If an employee covered under this agreement, is married to another employee of
the City, only one employee shall receive health insurance coverage through the
City. The employee that receives health insurance through the City shall provide
health insurance coverage for both City employees and eligible dependents. The
employees involved may decide which employee will receive such insurance. If
the employee covered under this agreement does not receive health insurance
coverage through the City, he or she may enroll in the waiver program explained

in Section 14 (B) (5) (c).

b. If an employee, covered under this agreement, is married to an individual who
has health insurance coverage through an employer other than the City, the City
employee may waive health insurance coverage through the City. If the
employee covered under this agreement does not receive health insurance
coverage through the City, he or she may enroll in the waiver program explained

in Section 14 (B) (5) (c).

c. The City will only accept a waiver of health insurance coverage if the employee
provides proof that he or she is enrolled in another health insurance plan.
Acceptable proof will be an enrollment card with the subscriber's name,

identification number (Social Security Number) and group number. The City

62
Draft 4/25/11

reserves the right to verify that the employee is enrolled in another health

insurance plan.

An employee will be able to waive his/her health insurance coverage during the
annual open enrollment period or within 31 days after incurring a change in life

or family status. Changes in life and family status are those listed below:

Change in life and family status Effect on Waiver

Marriage/Divorce City employee may enroll in waiver program or de-

enroll from waiver program and select a
health insurance plan.

Death of Spouse/Dependent City employee may enroll in waiver program or de-

enroll from waiver program and select a
health insurance plan.

Birth/Adoption/Legal Guardianship City employee may enroll in waiver program or de-

enroll from waiver program and select a
health insurance plan.

Spouse Begins Employment

Spouse Loses/Reduces/Ends
Employment

City employee may enroll in the waiver program.

City employee may de-enroll in waiver program and

select a health insurance plan.
Within 31 days of a life and family status change, the employee must provide the
City's Employee Compensation Office written notice of such change. An
employee will only be permitted to re-enroll in the City's health insurance
program if such a change causes the employee waiving health insurance coverage
to lose his or her other health insurance coverage. Re-enrollment into the City's
health insurance program will be effective so as to prevent a lapse in coverage.

The City will require proof that the life and family status change has occurred.
63
Draft 4/25/11

6. In the event an officer is "killed in service," health care coverage identical to that

offered to active police officers shall be granted, without contribution, to the officer's

surviving spouse and surviving dependents."

7. Common law spouses and domestic partners shall be included within the

definition of family and shall be eligible for health insurance, dental insurance

and vision care in accordance with the following terms and conditions:

a)

b)

For purposes of this plan a common law marriage shall be defined by the
applicable Pennsylvania law and shall demonstrate at minimum the
criteria set forth below. It should be noted, however, that the
requirements set forth below do not alter the requirements set by
applicable Pennsylvania law for the dissolution of a common law
marriage. Employees shall show appropriate documentation
demonstrating the dissolution of a common law marriage before seeking
benefits under this section for a new common law spouse. A domestic
partnership shall be a same-sex partnership meeting

the criteria set forth below.

Both partners shall be a minimum of (18) years of age and mentally

competent at the time of registration;

64
°)

q)

Draft 4/25/11

Neither partner shall be married or the domestic partner/common law

spouse of another person;

The partners are not related by blood to a degree that would bar marriage

in Pennsylvania;

The partners acknowledge that they have entered into the relationship
voluntarily, willfully and without reservation intending the relationship
to be the functional equivalent of marriage, including living together as a
couple, mutual financial support, mutual caring and commitment, mutual

fidelity and mutual responsibility for each other’s welfare; and

The couple has been together for a minimum of twelve (12) months prior
to registration and has not terminated another registration with the City
of Pittsburgh less than twelve (12) months prior to the instant

registration.

The parties further agree that employees who:

1.

Complete an affidavit confirming the above and continue to adhere to the
principles stated; and

Provide three (3) documents demonstrating mutual responsibility, i.e. joint
utility bills, joint bank accounts, joint leases, etc.

will be eligible for benefits under the domestic partner/common law spouse benefits program.

65
Draft 4/25/11

I. Retiree Health Insurance

6.

a.

Any employee who retires after January 1, 1979, who at the age of 65 is
not covered by Medicare or is not covered by some other kind of medical
insurance coverage shall receive up to a maximum of $50 towards the

cost of providing such coverage.

Any employee who retires after January 1, 1980, who at the age of 60, is
not covered by Medicare or is not covered by another such medical
insurance plan shall receive monthly payments up to a maximum of fifty

dollars ($50.00) toward the cost of providing such coverage.

Any employee who retires after January 1, 1982 and,

I is not at the time of retirement or in the future, employed or self
employed, or
IL. does not have private medical insurance coverage or Medicare

through his or her spouse, or the opportunity to purchase such
coverage through his or her spouse, shall, on the date of
retirement only, be allowed to continue Blue Cross/Blue
Shield/Major Medical Insurance coverage through the City of
Pittsburgh. The City shall contribute towards the cost of this
coverage, for each employee so electing, an amount equal to the
amount charged by Blue Cross/Blue Shield for individual

coverage under this plan and the provisions of Appendix D of

66
Il.

Draft 4/25/11

the 1992 Working Agreement, as added by the award of

Edward E. McDaniel, on December 22, 1979 shall not apply.

This group of retirees will be provided with the option to enroll
themselves, and their spouses at the time of retirement, in one of
the manage care health insurance plans described in Section 14
(B) (1) during a specified open enrollment period. Any retiree
who terminates his/her Husband and Wife BC/BS/MM
Indemnity plan for a managed care plan will be permitted to re-
enroll in the BC/BS/MM Indemnity Plan only once. During a
future open enrollment period, any subsequent termination of the
BC/BS/MM Indemnity plan for a managed care plan will be
irrevocable. Such an election into a managed care health

insurance plan will be voluntary.

If the retiree selects a managed care plan, his/her monthly
pension deduction will be the difference between the Individual
rate paid by the City at the time of retirement and the applicable

premium for the selected managed care plan.

Any employee who retires after January 1, 1984 will be allowed to continue his
or her medical insurance coverage for himself/herself and spouse only, through
the City. The City shall contribute towards the cost of this husband and wife

coverage, for each employee so electing, an amount equal to the amount charged

67
Draft 4/25/11

for such insurance by the carrier providing such coverage on the date of his/her
retirement. Spouse, as defined in this retiree health insurance section, is defined

to mean the spouse at the time of retirement.

For any employee who retires on or after January 1, 1984 the City will be the
health insurer of last resort. As the health insurer of last resort, the City will
provide health insurance benefits, for a Police Officer and his/her spouse, who
retires after January 1, 1984, where such Police Officer and his/her spouse does
not have access to enroll in any other group health insurance plan. The City's
obligation to provide continuation of health insurance coverage is terminated if
the employee is or becomes employed or self-employed or has access to private
medical insurance coverage or Medicare through his/her spouse or if his/her
spouse has private medical insurance or Medicare or any opportunity to obtain

such coverage.

a. Any employee who retires after January 1, 1984 who at the time of
retirement has group medical coverage or Medicare or access to such
coverage because of other employment or through his/her spouse will not
continue to be covered by the City of Pittsburgh, provided however, that
should such coverage terminate or cease to be available, the employee
will be reinstated to his/her medical insurance benefits by the City of

Pittsburgh.

68
Draft 4/25/11

Should the City discover that the retiree and/or spouse has other
coverage or access to other coverage which the retiree and/or spouse has
failed to report to the City, City provided health insurance will be

permanently terminated.

The plan described in 14 (B) (7) (c) and 14 (B) (7) (d) is the Blue Cross
of Western Pennsylvania/ Pennsylvania Blue Shield/Major Medical

(BC/BS/MM) Indemnity plan.

This group of retirees will be provided with the option to enroll in one of
the managed care health insurance plans described in Section 14 (B) (1)
during a specified open enrollment period. Any retiree who terminates
his/her Husband and Wife BC/BS/MM Indemnity plan for a managed
care plan will be permitted to enroll in the BC/BS/MM Indemnity plan
only once. During a future open enrollment period, any subsequent
termination of the BC/BS/MM Indemnity plan for a managed care plan
will be irrevocable. Such an election into a managed care health

insurance plan will be voluntary.

The City shall continue to provide at its expense medical insurance for
each Police Officer who reaches age 65 in those instances where the
Police Officer is not eligible for Medicare directly, or through the Police

Officer's spouse. Each retired Police Officer, upon reaching age 65, must

70
Draft 4/25/11

Any employee who retires after January 1, 1984, who after retirement
has group medical coverage or Medicare or access to such coverage from
another source either through his/her employment or through his/her
spouse will not continue to receive health insurance benefits from the
City of Pittsburgh, provided however, that should such coverage
terminate or cease to be available the employee will be reinstated to

his/her medical insurance benefits by the City of Pittsburgh.

The parties agree that a termination of coverage which will entitle the
retiree/spouse to a reinstatement of City health insurance benefits does
not include a voluntary termination of coverage so that the retiree/spouse
may elect the City's health insurance coverage. The retiree must provide
the City with a written notification of any termination of his/her health
insurance benefits within thirty (30) days of the termination in order to

ensure no lapse in coverage.

The City will upon an employee's retirement require acceptable proof
that the retiring employee (and his/her spouse) is not covered or eligible
for medical insurance coverage by another source. The City shall require
annual verification of continued eligibility for coverage. Acceptable
proof, as determined by the City, may be a notarized affidavit or a copy
of the employee's Federal Income Tax Return. Employees shall be able
to redact their Federal Tax Return to exclude financial information not

related to verification of employment.

69
Draft 4/25/11

provide the City with proof acceptable to the City that the Police Officer
is not eligible for Medicare benefits, either directly or through his/her
spouse. If sufficient proof is not provided, the City's obligation will be to
fund the Medicare supplement benefit provided by Blue Cross of

Western Pennsylvania and Pennsylvania Blue Shield (BC/BS).

The City and union will provide as an option a Medicare Risk HMO
agreement to replace the benefits in Section 14 (B) (7) (h). The City will
pay the full cost of this program and participation will be voluntary. Any
retiree who terminates his/her Medicare Supplement coverage described
in Section 14 (B) (7) (h) will be permitted to re-enroll in the BC/BS
Medicare Supplement plan only once. During a future open enrollment
period, any subsequent termination of the BC/BS Medicare Supplement

for a Medicare Risk HMO plan will be irrevocable.

The City shall reimburse the retired Police Officer, and his/her eligible
spouse, for their respective Medicare Part B premium(s). The City will
pay the assessed Medicare Part B premium, and subsequent increases,
providing the retiree, and his/her spouse, apply for Medicare Part A & B
benefits prior to first becoming eligible for Medicare Part A & B
coverage. The City will not pay any penalties to the Medicare Part B
premium if the retiree, or his/her spouse, make a late application for

Medicare Part A & B benefits.

71
Draft 4/25/11

Any employee who retires after January 1, 1996 will be allowed to continue his
or her medical insurance coverage for himself/herself and spouse only, through
the City. The City shall contribute towards the cost of this husband and wife
coverage, for each employee so electing, an amount equal to the amount charged
for such insurance by the carrier providing such coverage on the date of his/her
retirement. The plans that the City will provide are the managed care plans
described in Appendix “A”, p. 2, specifically Highmark/Community Blue,
HealthAmerica, UPMC Health Plan and Aetna/USHC. In addition, these retirees

may elect the active employee choices as an option.

For any employee who retires on or after January 1, 1996 the City will be the
health insurer of last resort. As the health insurer of last resort, the City will
provide health insurance benefits for a Police Officer and his/her spouse who
retires after January 1, 1996, where such Police Officer and his/her spouse does
not have access to enroll in any other group health insurance plan. The City's
obligation to provide continuation of health insurance coverage is terminated if
the employee is or becomes employed or self-employed or has access to private
medical insurance coverage or Medicare through his/her spouse or if his/her
spouse has private medical insurance or Medicare or any opportunity to obtain

such coverage.

If at the time of retirement the Police Officer has eligible dependent children, for
purposes of benefit coverage, the retired Police Officer may continue coverage

for the eligible dependent children by paying the individual tier rate for each

72
Draft 4/25/11

child for a maximum of 18 months, according to COBRA legislation. Coverage
past 18 months will only be provided if a qualifying event occurs under COBRA.
If a Police Officer was enrolled in the Bonus Waiver program prior to retirement,
dependent children, for purposes of benefit coverage, will be eligible for

coverage as stated in this paragraph.

a. Any employee who retires after January 1, 1996 who at the time of
retirement has group medical coverage or Medicare or access to such
coverage because of other employment or through his/her spouse will not
continue to be covered by the City of Pittsburgh, provided however, that
should such coverage terminate or cease to be available, the employee
will be reinstated to his/her medical insurance benefits by the City of

Pittsburgh.

b. Any employee who retires after January 1, 1996, who after retirement
has group medical coverage or Medicare or access to such coverage from
another source either through his/her employment or through his/her
spouse will not continue to receive health insurance benefits from the
City of Pittsburgh, provided however, that should such coverage
terminate or cease to be available the employee will be reinstated to

his/her medical insurance benefits by the City of Pittsburgh.

c. The parties agree that a termination of coverage which will entitle the

retiree/spouse to a reinstatement of City health insurance benefits does

73
Draft 4/25/11

not include a voluntary termination of coverage so that the retiree/spouse
may elect the City's health insurance coverage. The retiree must provide
the City with a written notification of any termination of his/her health
insurance benefits within thirty (30) days of the termination in order to

ensure no lapse in coverage.

The City will upon an employee's retirement require acceptable proof
that the retiring employee (and his/her spouse) is not covered or eligible
for medical insurance coverage by another source. the City shall require
annual verification of continued eligibility for coverage. Acceptable
proof, as determined by the City, may be a notarized affidavit or a copy
of the employee's Federal Income Tax Return. Employees shall be able
to redact their Federal Tax Return to exclude financial information not

related to verification of employment.

Should the City discover that the retiree and/or spouse has other
coverage or access to other coverage which the retiree and/or spouse has
failed to report to the City, City provided health insurance will be

permanently terminated.

Any employee retiring on or after January 1, 1996 will be provided with

Husband and Wife coverage in the health plan he/she was enrolled in on

his/her last day of work. Any retiree who resides in a local area where

74
Draft 4/25/11

he/she can reasonably access the resources of the provider networks of

the above plans will be covered by one of these plans.

If as a result of a change in residence, a retired Police Officer no longer
has the ability to reasonably access the resources of any of the provider
networks, the City will provide the retiree with the BC/BS/MM
Indemnity plan. If a retiree relocates to an area that provides a managed
care plan and he/she wishes to enroll in the managed care plan, the City
will reimburse the retiree for the Husband and Wife cost of the said
managed care plan up to the cost of the Husband and Wife BC/BS/MM
Indemnity program. To receive this reimbursement the retiree will have
to provide the City with acceptable proof that he/she is purchasing a

managed care plan.

The City shall continue to provide, at the City's expense, medical
insurance for each Police Officer who reaches age 65 and is eligible for
Medicare directly, or through the Police Officer's spouse. Each retired
Police Officer, upon reaching age 65, must provide the City with proof
acceptable to the City that the Police Officer is eligible for Medicare
benefits, either directly or through his/her spouse. If sufficient proof is
not provided, the City's only obligation will be to fund the Medicare Risk
HMO plan provided by Blue Cross of Western Pennsylvania and

Pennsylvania Blue Shield (BC/BS) only.

75
Draft 4/25/11

For those retired Police Officers and spouses who are eligible for and
enrolled in Medicare Part A & B, the City will provide a BC/BS or

HealthAmerica or US HealthCare Medicare Risk HMO Plan.

The City shall also reimburse the retired police officer, and his/her
eligible spouse, for their respective Medicare Part B premium(s). The
City will pay the assessed Medicare Part B premium, and subsequent
increases, providing the retiree, and his/her spouse, apply for Medicare
Part A & B benefits prior to first becoming eligible for Medicare Part A
& B coverage. The City will not pay any penalties to the Medicare Part
B premium if the retiree, or his/her spouse, make a late application for
Medicare Part A & B benefits.

The City shall continue to provide, at the City's expense, medical
insurance for each Police Officer who reaches age 65 where the Police
Officer is not eligible for Medicare directly, or through the Police
Officer's spouse. Officers not eligible for Medicare Part A & B will be

eligible for the plan described in section 14 (B) (1).

Any employee who retires after January 1, 2001, provided he or she was hired

before January 1, 2005, will be allowed to continue his or her medical insurance

coverage for himself/herself and spouse only, through the City. The City shall

contribute towards the cost of this husband and wife coverage, for each employee

so electing, an amount equal to the amount charged for such insurance by the

carrier providing such coverage on the date of his/her retirement. The plan(s)

76
Draft 4/25/11

that the City will provide are the same plan choices provided to active employees

described in Section 14 (B) (1).

For any employee who retires on or after January 1, 2001 the City will be the
health insurer of last resort. As the health insurer of last resort, the City will
provide health insurance benefits for a Police Officer and his/her spouse who
retires after January 1, 2001, where such Police Officer and his/her spouse does
not have access to enroll in any other group health insurance plan. The City's
obligation to provide continuation of health insurance coverage is terminated if
the employee is or becomes employed or self-employed or has access to private
medical insurance coverage or Medicare through his/her spouse or if his/her
spouse has private medical insurance or Medicare or any opportunity to obtain

such coverage.

If at the time of retirement the Police Officer has eligible dependent children, for
purposes of benefit coverage, the retired Police Officer may continue coverage
for the eligible dependent children by paying the individual tier rate for each
child for a maximum of 18 months, according to COBRA legislation. Coverage
past 18 months will only be provided if a qualifying event occurs under COBRA.
If a Police Officer was enrolled in the Bonus Waiver program prior to retirement,
dependent children, for purposes of benefit coverage, will be eligible for

coverage as stated in this paragraph.

77
Draft 4/25/11

Any employee who retires after January 1, 2001 who at the time of
retirement has group medical coverage or Medicare or access to such
coverage because of other employment or through his/her spouse will not
continue to be covered by the City of Pittsburgh, provided however, that
should such coverage terminate or cease to be available, the employee
will be reinstated to his/her medical insurance benefits by the City of

Pittsburgh.

Any employee who retires after January 1, 2001, who after retirement
has group medical coverage or Medicare or access to such coverage from
another source either through his/her employment or through his/her
spouse will not continue to receive health insurance benefits from the
City of Pittsburgh, provided however, that should such coverage
terminate or cease to be available the employee will be reinstated to

his/her medical insurance benefits by the City of Pittsburgh.

The parties agree that a termination of coverage which will entitle the
retiree/spouse to a reinstatement of City health insurance benefits does
not include a voluntary termination of coverage so that the retiree/spouse
may elect the City's health insurance coverage. The retiree must provide
the City with a written notification of any termination of his/her health
insurance benefits within thirty (30) days of the termination in order to

ensure no lapse in coverage.

78
Draft 4/25/11

The City will upon an employee's retirement require acceptable proof
that the retiring employee (and his/her spouse) is not covered or eligible
for medical insurance coverage by another source. The City shall require
annual verification of continued eligibility for coverage. Acceptable
proof, as determined by the City, may be a notarized affidavit or a copy
of the employee's Federal Income Tax Return. Employees shall be able
to redact their Federal Tax Return to exclude financial information not

related to verification of employment.

Should the City discover that the retiree and/or spouse has other
coverage or access to other coverage which the retiree and/or spouse has
failed to report to the City, City provided health insurance will be

permanently terminated.

Any employee retiring on or after January 1, 2001 will be offered
Husband and Wife coverage in the same plan choices as active
employees.

If as a result of a change in residence, a retired Police Officer no longer
has the ability to reasonably access the resources of any plan(s) utilized
by active employees, the City will provide the retiree with the
BC/BS/MM Indemnity plan. If a retiree relocates to an area that
provides a managed care plan and he/she wishes to enroll in the managed
care plan, the City will reimburse the retiree for the Husband and Wife

cost of the said managed care plan up to the cost of the Husband and

79
Draft 4/25/11

Wife BC/BS/MM Indemnity program. To receive this reimbursement
the retiree will have to provide the City with acceptable proof that he/she

is purchasing a managed care plan.

The City shall continue to provide, at the City's expense, medical
insurance for each Police Officer who reaches age 65 and is eligible for
Medicare directly, or through the Police Officer's spouse. Each retired
Police Officer, upon reaching age 65, must provide the City with proof
acceptable to the City that the Police Officer is eligible for Medicare
benefits, either directly or through his/her spouse. If sufficient proof is
not provided, the City's only obligation will be to fund the Medicare Risk
HMO plan provided by Blue Cross of Western Pennsylvania and

Pennsylvania Blue Shield (BC/BS) only.

For those retired Police Officers and spouses who are eligible for and
enrolled in Medicare Part A & B, the City will provide a BC/BS or

HealthAmerica or US HealthCare Medicare Risk HMO Plan.

The City shall also reimburse the retired police officer, and his/her
eligible spouse, for their respective Medicare Part B premium(s). The
City will pay the assessed Medicare Part B premium, and subsequent
increases, providing the retiree, and his/her spouse, apply for Medicare
Part A & B benefits prior to first becoming eligible for Medicare Part A

& B coverage. The City will not pay any penalties to the Medicare Part

80
Draft 4/25/11

B premium if the retiree, or his/her spouse, make a late application for

Medicare Part A & B benefits.

i. The City shall continue to provide, at the City's expense, medical
insurance for each Police Officer who reaches age 65 where the Police
Officer is not eligible for Medicare directly, or through the Police
Officer's spouse. Officers not eligible for Medicare Part A & B will be

eligible for the plan described in section 14 (B) (1).

10. Any employee who retires under the term of this agreement, who is married to
another City employee at the time of retirement, will not be provided with health
insurance coverage so that his/her spouse may participate in the waiver program
described in Section 14 (B) (4). The active employee will provide coverage for

the retired spouse and any eligible dependents, as explained in Section 14 (B) (8).

ll. Any officer hired after January 1, 2005 will not be entitled to any retiree health

care benefits provided by the City after his/her retirement.

ACCIDENTAL DEATH AND DISMEMBERMENT INSURANCE/ SUPPLEMENT LIFE
INSURANCE

Each active employee shall be insured at his or her option during the term of this Agreement by
the City for Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance for an amount up to One Hundred

Thousand Dollars ($100,000). The full cost of this insurance is to be paid by the employee. In

81
Draft 4/25/11

the event the City's insurance allows a higher maximum amount during the term of this

Agreement, the City may offer the higher amount to the employee.

Each active employee shall be insured at his or her option during the term of this Agreement by
the City for Supplemental Life Insurance for an amount up to one times the employee's annual
budgeted salary, not to exceed Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000). The full cost of this insurance
is to be paid by the employee. Medical evidence of insurability may be required. In the event the
City's insurance provider allows a higher maximum amount during the term of this Agreement,

the City may offer the higher amount to the employee.

DENTAL INSURANCE

 

1. Each employee and his/her eligible dependents shall be covered as set forth in the “Next

General Health Plan,” effective January 1, 2005, attached as Appendix A.

2. If an employee, covered under this agreement, is married to another employee of the
City, only one employee shall receive dental insurance coverage through the City. The
employee that receives dental insurance through the City shall provide dental insurance
coverage for both City employees and any eligible dependents. The employees involved
may decide which employee will receive such insurance. The employee covered under
this agreement must waive dental insurance coverage if the other employee refuses to do

so.

82
Draft 4/25/11

E. VISION INSURANCE
1. Each employee and his/her eligible dependents shall be covered as set forth in the “Next

General Health Plan,” effective January 1, 2005, attached as Appendix A.

2. If an employee, covered under this agreement, is married to another employee of the
City, only one employee shall receive vision insurance coverage through the City. The
employee that receives vision insurance through the City shall provide vision insurance
coverage for both City employees and any eligible dependents. The employees involved
may decide which employee will receive such insurance. The employee covered under
this agreement must waive vision insurance coverage if the other employee refuses to do

so.

F. COORDINATION OF BENEFITS
During the term of this Agreement, the City will have the right to require that any claim for
medical, dental and/or vision benefits for a spouse, child or other eligible dependent covered
under a separate employment related health insurance policy package which provides such
benefits be filed under that separate policy. Only those benefits not provided under any separate
such policy, and/or the difference in any costs therefore, shall be required to be provided to any
such spouse, child or other dependent of the employee, under the policy of that employee, by the
City. Primary coverage shall be apportioned in accordance with the Birth date Rule adopted by

the National Association of Insurance Commissioners.

83
Draft 4/25/11

GUARANTEE OF MEDICAL INSURANCE BENEFITS - During the term of this Agreement,

 

the City will have a right to change the Carrier(s) and/or Provider(s) of medical insurance benefits
in effect thereunder, so long as it extends and directly pays for such benefits presently provided
which may not be provided under any insurance policy with any new such Carrier(s) and/or

Provider(s) for any bargaining unit employees and/or their covered dependents.

At least thirty (30) days prior to any such change in Carrier(s) and/or Provider(s) therefore,
however, the City will provide each employee and F.O.P. Officer a complete and accurate
breakdown (copies of any Benefits Booklets of the present Carrier(s) and/or Provider(s) may
suffice here) of all medical benefits (and limitations) presently in effect, along with similar such
breakdown of all medical benefits (and limitations) to be effective under the Plan of the proposed
new Carrier(s) and/or Provider(s). There shall be no reduction in present benefits under this

provision.

INCENTIVE MEDICAL BILL REVIEW PROGRAM - Employees who find overcharges in their

 

medical bills due to calculation errors, billings for service not provided, or an erroneous rate for
services provided, will receive from the City one-half (1/2) of the amount the City saves, up to a
maximum payment to the employee of $500.00. In order to receive the payment, the employee
must discover the overcharge and report the overcharge to the Benefits Coordinator before the
City discovers the overcharge. Disputes over this provision shall be settled solely by the Benefits

Coordinator.

84
Draft 4/25/11

LEGAL REPRESENTATION

SECTION 15 - LEGAL REPRESENTATION

The City will provide for an employee's legal representation as follows:

A.

The City shall provide legal counsel to any employee in connection with any civil action brought

against him or her arising out of the performance of his or her duties.

Effective January 1, 2001, the City quarterly shall pay thirteen dollars ($13.00) per employee on
the active payroll per month to the F,O.P. Legal Defense Fund. Effective January 1, 2002, this
amount shall be changed to eleven dollars ($11.00) per employee on the active payroll per month.
There shall be a quarterly accounting by the Fund to the City as to the uses of such funds,
provided that these funds be used to pay reasonable legal fees an employee incurs as a result of
civil or criminal actions brought against him as a result of performance of his police duties and
not otherwise provided for by the City, and provided further that these funds shall not be used for

cases against the City nor for suits brought against the F.O.P.

The term "active" in the foregoing paragraph shall be defined as any employee on the payroll
other than someone declared by internal declaration or workman's compensation to be totally and

permanently disabled.

The parties agree to no more than $600.00 in Legal Defense Fund money maybe expended, per
incident, for legal representation during the preliminary inquiry immediately following:

85
Draft 4/25/11

(a) On duty shooting involving injury or death;

(b) In-custody death; and

(c) On duty accident/related deaths.

In addition, $1,200.00 in Legal Defense Fund money may be expended, per incident, for legal

representation at any coroner's inquest arising out of the above-referenced incidents.

The amount payable to the FOP Legal Defense Fund will be $11,500 per month for the term of this
agreement, unless otherwise adjusted by the parties. There shall be a quarterly accounting by the
Fund to the City as to the use of such funds. In addition to the information presently provided, the
accounting shall state the amount of time and the amount billed for each item. Authorized uses of
the Fund shall be limited to pay reasonable legal fees an employee incurs as a result of any civil
action brought against him or her based on performance of his or her police duties and not
otherwise provided by the City, provided such duties are lawful. The Fund shall not be used for

cases against the City, nor for suits brought against the FOP.

86
Draft 4/25/11

PENSIONS AND COMPENSATION

SECTION 16 - PENSIONS AND COMPENSATION

A.

During the term of this Agreement each employee shall be provided compensation for any work
related disability as provided in the Pennsylvania Workmen's Compensation Act of June 2, 1915,
P.L. 736 as amended as of the date of this Agreement (77 P.S. 1-1603 inclusive) and Heart and

Lung Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 477 as amended (53 P.S. 637) as of the date of this Agreement.

Each employee in the Bureau of Police hired prior to January 1, 1992 shall be provided pension
benefits as provided in the Policemen's Relief and Pension Fund of April 5, 1917, P.L. 39 as
amended as of January 1, 1976 (53 P.S. 23641 - et seq. and 53 P.S. 730.1 - 730.5 inclusive).
Each employee hired into the Bureau of Police on or after January 1, 1992 but before Jan. 1,
2005 shall be provided with pension benefits implemented by the City pursuant to Act 205. See
City Code §192.40 et seq. For employees hired on or after January 1, 1992, but before Jan. 1,
2005 the pension benefit will be determined on the basis of the last three (3) years of pay. *(Part

of this paragraph is subject to appeal filed by the City on 1/28/05.)

Employee retirement benefits will be based upon the highest twelve (12) months of service with
the City, at rates provided for in the Police Pension Act. *(This paragraph is subject to appeal

filed by the City on 1/28/05.)

87
Draft 4/25/11

The pension service increment for all employees who retire between January 1, 1983 and
December 31, 1983, inclusive, shall be $15.00 per month for each year of service beyond twenty

years of service.

SUPPLEMENTAL SERVICE INCREMENTS - Supplemental pension payment increments of
twenty ($20.00) dollars per month for each year of service beyond twenty (20) years, and twenty-
five ($25.00) dollars per month for each year of service beyond twenty five (25) years of service,
shall be granted to each employee who retires from his employment, hereunder, on or after

January |, 1984._*(This paragraph is subject to appeal filed by the City on 1/28/05.)

Any member of the bargaining unit who returns from a resignation must reimburse the pension
fund for all of the employee's contributions for prior service that the employee received upon

resignation before the employee can be reinstated as a Police Officer.

In the event a member retires after 20 years of service but at less than 50 years of age, a member

shall have the option of:

1. suspending payments to the pension fund and receiving at age 50 a pension based upon
the highest twelve (12) months service achieved by the time of the cessation of

employment; or

continuing to pay into the pension fund a monthly sum equal to the monthly contribution paid by

the present rank he or she held prior to retirement, until reaching the age of 50. *(This paragraph

88

 
Draft 4/25/11

is subject to appeal filed by the City on 1/28/05.)

Any person electing the second option shall receive a pension commensurate with the pension

rate which would be applicable had the person continued to work in that rank until age 50.

Pensions
lL. Effective January 1, 1998 the police pension plan shall be modified to include longevity
pay within the definition of final salary upon which a pension will be calculated. *(This

paragraph is subject to appeal filed by the City on 1/28/05.)

2. In the event a Statewide Pension System is legislated that would allow the City of
Pittsburgh to be included, a committee shall be formed with an equal number of members
from the Fraternal Order of Police and the City of Pittsburgh to meet and discuss whether

it is feasible for the City of Pittsburgh to be included within the State system.

Effective January 1, 2005, each employee hired after January 1, 2005 in the Bureau of Police
shall be provided pension benefits as provided in the "Policemen's Relief and Pension Fund" of
April 5, 1917, P.L. 39 as amended as of January 1, 1976 (53 P.S. Section 23641 et seq.). *(This

paragraph is subject to appeal filed by the City on 1/28/05.)

89
Draft 4/25/11

SCOPE OF AGREEMENT

SECTION 17 - SCOPE OF AGREEMENT

A. Any benefits specifically provided the employees on the date of this Agreement under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or provided during the term of this Agreement by laws of
Commonwealth-wide applicability shall be continued in full force and effect for the term of this

Agreement.

B. This Agreement sets forth all covenants, stipulations, and provisions agreed upon by the parties
hereto, and no agent or representative of either party has the authority to make and none of the
parties shall be bound or be liable for any statement, presentation, promise, inducement or

agreement not set forth herein.

Cc. This Agreement spells out the total contract in its entirety between the parties, including wages,
salaries, pensions and all fringe benefits, and there shall be no addition or changes during the term
of this Agreement to the wages, salaries, pensions and all other fringe benefits set forth herein

unless mandated by Federal Law.

D. It is not the intent of either party to violate any laws or any rulings or regulations of any
governmental authority or agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this Agreement.
The parties hereto agree that in the event any provision of this Agreement is held to be unlawful
or void by any tribunal having the right to so hold, the remainder of this Agreement shall remain
in full force and effect, unless the parts so found to be void are wholly inseparable from the

remaining portions of this Agreement.

90
Draft 4/25/11

EXISTING TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT

All terms and conditions of employment encompassed by the prior Agreement that are not altered
by the Agreement executed on February 17, 2010 or by subsequent Act 111 Arbitration Awards
shall remain in full force and effect. All demands made by the Parties that are not contained

within the February 2010 Agreement or an Award are rejected.

91
Draft 4/25/11

OTHER BENEFITS

SECTION 18 - OTHER BENEFITS

A. Physical Examination

Any bargaining unit employee who is directed to take a physical examination for any reason
relating to a duty connected injury, illness or incident, and who is not scheduled to be on duty at
the time of such physical examination or who is not on paid leave or disability leave at such time,
shall be paid at his applicable straight time rate for the period of time consumed by such

examination including waiting time in the office of a physician.

B. Printing of Working Agreement

Within a reasonable time following the execution of the Act 111 Interest Arbitration Award by
the Board of Arbitrators, the City shall both incorporate the terms of the Award into the parties
existing Working Agreement and shall have such revised Working Agreement printed in

sufficient quantity to be distributed by the Union to all members of the bargaining unit.

Cc. National Fraternal Order of Police President

 

Any member of the bargaining unit who shall be elected to the office of National President of the
Fraternal Order of Police shall be granted upon request a maximum of ten (10) days paid leave in

order to attend to the duties of his office.

92
Draft 4/25/11
Promotional Examination
Employees who take promotional examinations shall have 1/2 point added to their actual
examination scores for each complete year served by them in the Bureau of Police to a maximum
of five (5) additional points at 10 or more complete years of service. Promotional candidates

must have completed a minimum of six (6) years of service at the time of such examination in

order to receive a length of service credit.

There shall be at least a twenty-four (24) hour separation between tests for Sergeant and

Lieutenant.

Fraternal Order of Police President

 

The President of the Fraternal Order of Police, Fort Pitt Lodge No. 1 shall be entitled to seventy
five (75) days (600 hours) paid leave per year to attend to Union business.. The President may
take the leave in increments of one (1) hour or more as business may require. The President must
give notice of taking leave to his or her supervisor at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of
the use of leave, unless the use of leave is caused by some unexpected event. The City shall not
arbitrarily or capriciously deny the leave. The President of the Fraternal Order of Police, Fort Pitt
Lodge No. 1 may assign to his designee paid leave hours to attend to Union business in
accordance with this provision. The President must identify said designee in writing to the Chief
of Police with twenty-four (24) hours notice. This provision may not be used if it results in

overtime.

93,
Draft 4/25/11

An employee whose driver's license is suspended for a period not in excess of one (1) year shall
be placed on a leave of absence, the year to run from the first date of suspension. The leave shall
be

without pay or benefits, but the employee may retain benefits by paying the City the full cost of

the benefits.

Use of Civilian Dispatchers to Perform Bargaining Unit Work

The City may use only civilians as dispatchers and is not required to use any police officers for
dispatching or any other related employment activity referred to in the decision before the
Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board at PF-C-86-103-W which was being performed by civilians.
This means that any police officers currently performing dispatching duties may be reassigned
and replaced by civilians. Any police officer so assigned shall maintain his or her vacation pick if

already selected for 1992.

Use of Technology and Non-Union Personnel

The City of Pittsburgh shall not be required to use any police officers, either on straight time or
overtime, for security at the Public Safety Training Academy referred to in PLRB Case No. PF-
C-90-94-W and may contract out or use technology and/or non unit employees to provide such

security.

Civilianization
The City shall be permitted to transfer any duties which do not require police officer
certification and training to civilian employees outside the bargaining unit, even if currently

performed by police officers.

94
Draft 4/25/11

Master Police Officer

Effective January 1, 2001, the position of Master Police Officer shall be created. An employee
qualifies to be a Master Police Officer if he is a P.O. 4 with fifteen (15) years of service.
However, an employee may be removed or be denied the designation of Master Police Officer for
just cause in writing, which the employee may grieve to binding arbitration under the existing
grievance/arbitration process. Persons promoted to the position of Master Police Officer shall

receive the same salary as a person in the classification of Detective.

Tuition Reimbursement

The City shall create a tuition reimbursement plan for police officers so that a police officer who
has at least one (1) year of employment will be entitled to receive tuition reimbursement for
undergraduate, college level courses which are related to, or are a part of a course of study related
to, police work. The qualified officer must be actively employed at the time of application and
will be entitled to receive reimbursement for fifty (50%) percent of the cost of tuition and
laboratory fees for up to six (6) college credits in a calendar year, if a grade of “C” or better is

received in a credit course.

Outside Agreements

No future agreement with any outside agency, including the federal government, regarding a
substantial change in the terms and conditions of employment of police officers, shall be agreed
to by the City without its either seeking the approval of the Union, or providing the Union the

opportunity to seek intervenor status in any such matter.

95
Draft 4/25/11

M. Pregnancy Leave
The City shall have the right to assign officers who are not physically able to perform their

regular duties due to pregnancy or pregnancy-related disability to alternative duty.

N. Promotions
When a vacancy occurs in the rank of Sergeant or Lieutenant, the City shall promote to fill the

position within 90 days. The only exception is if the position in question is to be eliminated.

oO. Supplemental/Payroll Deduction Benefits

The parties shall mutually engage a contractor to provide for voluntary supplemental benefits to

be paid through payroll deductions made by the City of Pittsburgh.

P. Heart and Lung Procedures

The procedures agreed upon by the parties for adjudicating Heart & Lung Act claims shall be
applicable to all pending or future Heart & Lung Act claims. The Arbitrators shall be selected
using the American Arbitration Association selection method, a copy of which is set forth below.
The cost of the Arbitrator used by the parties to adjudicate these claims shall be split equally by
the City and the F.O.P.

Rules and Regulations for Proceedings Before
the City of Pittsburgh Police Heart and Lung Panel

Subchapter A. General Provisions

100.1 Scope.

96
Draft 4/25/11

This agreement applies to all proceedings before arbitrators selected by the parties to hear claims

filed pursuant to the Heart and Lung Act, 53 P.S. 637.

100.2 Definitions.

(a)

The following words and terms, when used in this agreement, shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

Act -- The Heart and Lung Act (53 P.S. 637).

Arbitrator -- An arbitrator who is a member of the panel and who has been selected to
preside over and rule on any matters relating to a claim.

Board -- Workers' Compensation Board or Workers! Compensation referee.

City Administrator -- The office or entity designated by the City as the office
responsible for administering claims filed under the Act.

City -- City of Pittsburgh.

Claim -- An initial claim, a petition filed by either party relating to eligibility for
benefits, modification of benefits, suspension of benefits, reinstatement of benefits,
termination of benefits, review of benefits, a petition to set aside final receipt, or any
matter relating to medical examinations or discovery of evidence.

Claimant -- A police officer who files a petition for, or otherwise receives benefits under
the Act.

Date of Circulation -- The date affixed by the City Administrator and shown on all
assignments of petitions and arbitrators’ decisions.

Department -- The Department of Public Safety, City of Pittsburgh.

First Petition -- The first petition filed in any claim by any party.

Party -- Includes claimant and the City.

97
Draft 4/25/11

Pretrial Conference -- Conference deemed to be a hearing by an arbitrator assigned by
the chairman in a manner as to effectuate a timely resolution of the petition.
Service -- Delivery in person or by mail. If service is by mail, it shall be deemed served

on the date postmarked and mailed by ordinary United States mail.

100.3. Initial Claims.

(a)

(b)

()

@

()

An initial claim shall be filed with the City Administrator within one hundred twenty
(120) days of the date in which the claimant knew or should have known of the work

related injury.

Initial claims must be submitted by contacting the City's third part administrator by
telephone.
The City Administrator will make a determination approving or denying any claim within

twenty-one (21) days of receipt of the initial claim.

In the event the City Administrator denies a claim, a "Notice of Denial" will be served on
the claimant. Such Notice will advise the claimant of their right to file a claim petition
and the time period for such filing. a copy of the Notice of Denial will also be sent to the
Fraternal Order of Police, Fort Pitt Lodge No. 1.

Employees shall treat with the City’s selected medical providers for the duration of their

disability, to the extent allowed by state law.

Subchapter B. Pleadings and Hearings

100.4. Identifying number.

98
100.5.

100.6.

100.7.

100.8.

Draft 4/25/11

(a) All pleadings, documents, and other submittals filed in a proceeding shall be identified by

the claim number assigned by the City Administrator.

Form of pleadings.

(a) Petitions and answers shall be upon forms prescribed by the City Administrator.

Verification of pleadings.
(a) Petitions and answers shall not require verification or affidavit as to the facts alleged
therein. A signature of a party or on behalf of a party by an attorney shall be deemed

sufficient and shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in 18 Pa. C.S. 4904.
Filing, service, and number of copies.
(a) An original and two copies of all first petitions shall be filed with the City Administrator.

The City Administrator shall serve a copy of the petition on the opposing party.

(b) An original and two copies of an answer to a first petition shall be filed with the City

Administrator.
(c) Other submittals. In the case of any other petitions, answers, pleading, motions,
documents, briefs, or other submittals, a party shall file an original with the arbitrator,

and shall serve a copy thereof on the other party.

Petitions.

99
Draft 4/25/11

(a) All filings relating to claims for benefits, modification of benefits, suspension of benefits,
reinstatement of benefits, review of benefits, request to set aside final receipt or any
matter relating to medical examination or discovery of evidence shall be commenced by

petition.

(b) A claim petition must be filed within thirty (30) days of receipt of "Notice of Denial" of

benefits prepared by the City Administrator and served on the claimant.

100.9. Answers,

(a) The non-petitioning party shall file an answer within fifteen (15) days following service

of a petition.

(b) An answer must be filed to all petitions.

100.10. Amendments to pleadings.

(a) A party shall have the right to amend at any time in a proceeding before an arbitrator

unless any other party to the proceeding establishes prejudice.

100.11. Continuances.

(a) General rule. Continuances may be granted for cause shown at the discretion of the

arbitrator to whom the case has been assigned.

(b) Procedure. The procedure shall comply with the following:

100

 
(c)

Q)

Q)

G)

Draft 4/25/11

Except as hereafter provided, requests for continuances shall be made to the
arbitrator promptly upon receipt of the notice of hearing, but not later than five
business days prior to the hearing date. Any requests for continuance made
within five (5) business days prior to the hearing date shall not be considered
unless the arbitrator is satisfied that circumstances relating to the requested

continuances occurred within five (5) business days of the hearing date.

Prior to the request, the party requesting the continuance shall ascertain the
position of all other parties in the case relating to the continuance and shall

advise the arbitrator of the foregoing at the time of the request.

If a continuance is granted, the arbitrator may impose any conditions and direct
any action by any party which the arbitrator deems reasonable under the

circumstances.

Circumstances to be considered. In ruling on requests for continuance, the arbitrator may

consider any of the following:

qa)
2)
@)
(4)
(5)

(6)

The position of the parties relating to the request for continuance.

The number of prior continuances and at whose request granted.

Whether the requested continuance will work an undue hardship on any party.
The unavailability of the parties, witnesses, or counsel.

The illness or death of the parties or counsel or members of their immediate
families.

The desirability of any unrepresented parties obtaining counsel.

101
7)

(8)
(9)

Draft 4/25/11

The necessity to replace the services of an expert witness who becomes
unavailable.
Bona fide and unavoidable scheduling conflicts of the parties or their counsel.

Any other reason deemed meritorious by the arbitrator.

100.12. Oral depositions generally.

(a)
(b)

The oral deposition of any witness may be taken only for use as evidence at hearing.

Any party may, but is not required to make the oral deposition of any medical expert in

order to establish that the claimant is or is not disabled and that such disability does or

does not prevent them from performing their duties as a police officer. Unless the

arbitrator decides otherwise, such evidence may be established through the introduction

of written reports.

100.13 Oral Depositions.

a)
(b)

(©)

An oral deposition may be taken at any time subsequent to the hearing.

The notice of an oral deposition shall be served at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date

scheduled for the taking of the deposition.

The notice of an oral deposition shall contain the following:

q)
2)
@)
(4)

The name or identity, address, and occupation of the witness.
The date, time, and place of the taking of the oral deposition.
A statement of a relevant reason for the oral deposition.

The following legend:

"Notice to Claimant or Witness:

102
@

Draft 4/25/11

You may object to the oral deposition by mailing or delivering a letter listing
your objections to (name and address of party scheduling deposition) at least
seven (7) days before (date of deposition)."
Service of this notice. The notice of an oral deposition shall be served upon each witness,
all counsel of record, and any party not represented by counsel of record. The notice

need not be filed with the arbitrator at the time it is initially served.

100.14. Objections to taking of oral deposition.

(a)

(b)

Procedures. Any party or witness may object to the oral deposition by serving a written
notice upon the party who has scheduled the deposition at least seven (7) days prior to the
scheduled date of the deposition. The objection shall stay the deposition until such time
as it is ordered by arbitrator to be held. Upon receipt of an objection, the party

scheduling the deposition shall notify all other parties.

Request for ruling. Any party or witness may request a ruling on any objection by filing
a written request with the arbitrator, which shall be accompanied by a copy of the notice
of an oral deposition, any subpoena, and the objection duly lodged as required by
subsection (a). The requesting party shall serve a copy of the request for ruling upon all

parties and objecting witnesses.

Ruling by arbitrator. Upon receipt of the request, the arbitrator will, after giving all

parties and objecting witnesses due notice and opportunity to be heard, rule on the

objection within five working days after the parties and objecting witnesses are heard.

103
Draft 4/25/11

(d) The arbitrator is not required to hold a hearing on an objection but instead may require

the parties to submit their responses in writing.

100.15 Admissibility of oral depositions.
(a) Oral depositions taken in accordance with 100.12(b) or by agreement of all parties shall
be admissible at the time of hearing in the same manner as if the deponent appeared
before the arbitrator and testified. All objections must be made and the reasons therefore

stated at the time of the taking of deposition.

100.16. Expense of taking depositions.
(a) If a deposition is to be taken more than 100 miles from the place where the hearing is or
would be scheduled, the arbitrator may make an order requiring payment of reasonable

expenses of attorneys, not including counsel fees, to attend the deposition.

(b) If a claimant chooses to take the oral deposition of a medical expert, all cost of such
deposition will be borne by the party noticing the deposition regardless of the outcome of
the claim. If oral depositions of medical experts are requested by the arbitrator then the
claimant may submit the cost associated with taking that deposition to his bill of cost.

Such cost may be refunded to the claimant if he prevails in his claim.

100.17. Authorizations.

104
(a)

Draft 4/25/11

The claimant must submit to the city authorization necessary for the City to obtain
medical reports, medical records, medical bills, employment records or any other records,

documents or information that may be relevant to the claim.

100.18. Documents.

(a)

If at least twenty (20) days written notice of the intention to offer the following

documents in evidence was given to the other party accompanied by a copy of the

document, a party may offer in evidence, without further proof,

(1) bills, records and reports of hospital, doctors, dentists, registered nurses, licensed
practical nurses and physical therapists, or other licensed health care providers,

(2) bills for drugs, medical appliances and prostheses,

(G3) bills for or written estimates of value, damage to, costs of repair of or loss of
property, and

(4) a report of rate or earnings and time lost from work or lost compensation
prepared by an employer.

Any other party may subpoena the person whose testimony is waived by this rule to

appear at the hearing and any adverse party may cross-examine him as to the document

as if he were a witness for the party offering the document.

100.19. Subpoena.

(a)

General rule. A party in interest in any pending proceeding may request the arbitrator to
issue a subpoena to compel the attendance of a witness or require the production of any

books, documents, records, or things relevant to the proceeding at a scheduled hearing or

105
(b)

Draft 4/25/11

deposition within the scope of and scheduled in accordance with this chapter. Upon
request, the arbitrator shall supply official subpoena forms, but only to a party, counsel or
record for a party, or duly authorized agent of such counsel.

Objections. The arbitrator may, upon filing of written objections by any person served
with a subpoena or any party in interest, and upon due notice of all parties in interest and

hearing thereon, quash or limit the scope of any subpoena issued or served.

100.20. Stipulations of fact.

(a)

(b)

Stipulations of fact may be filed with the arbitrator to whom the case has been assigned.

The arbitrator may issue a decision based on stipulations of fact, provided the arbitrator

shall be satisfied by any means he deems appropriate that:

qd) the stipulations of fact are fair and equitable to all parties involved and under the
circumstances; and

(2) the claimant understands the stipulations of fact and the effect of the stipulations

of fact on future payments of compensation and medical expenses.

100.21. Hearing.

(a)

(b)

It is the intent of both parties to provide a hearing within ninety (90) days of the filing of

any petition. Further, that all evidence be presented at such hearing.

All witnesses shall testify under oath administered by the arbitrator.

106
(©)

100.22. Briefs.

(a)

(b)

Draft 4/25/11

The rules of evidence shall be applied and except as provided in 100.15 relating to
medical experts, and 100.18 relating to the introduction of certain documents. Otherwise,

hearsay will not be accepted.

The arbitrator may require or the parties may submit proposed findings of fact,
conclusions of law, and legal briefs or memoranda to the arbitrator for his review and

consideration.

All submissions referred to in subsection (a) must be made within the time set by the
arbitrator but except in extraordinary cases, not later than twenty (20) days, following the

completion of the evidentiary portion of the case.

100.23. Oral argument.

(a)

The arbitrator may require, or any party may request, a closing oral argument. Such
argument shall be held immediately following the completion of the evidentiary portion

of the case.

100.24. Decisions of arbitrator.

@

Following the conclusion of the case, the arbitrator shall issue a written decision within
five (5) days of the close of the record. If requested, the arbitrator shall issue a
supporting opinion which may contain brief findings of fact, conclusions of law, and an
appropriate order based upon such record as may be proper under the circumstances.

Such opinion shall be issued within thirty (30) days of the close of the record.

107
(b)

©)
@)

©)

Draft 4/25/11

The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding.

A copy of the decision will be mailed to the claimant, by regular mail, by the arbitrator.
If the decision is to suspend or terminate benefits, the claimant will be given four (4) days
from the date of the decision to return to work with no loss of pay.

Saturday and Sunday will not count as "days" since the City doctor is not available for
physicals on those days. In addition, those are generally pass days for those on

compensation or modified duty.

100.25. Reconsideration.

@)

Either party may submit a written request for reconsideration or correction of the
arbitrators decision within ten (10) days of receipt of such decision. The non-requesting
party may file a written response to the request for reconsideration within ten (10) days of
receipt of the copy of the opposing party's written request for reconsideration or

correction.

Subchapter C. Arbitration

100.26. Rules For Selecting For Arbitrators and the Arbitration Panel.

(a)

Claims filed for benefits provided under the Heart and Lung Act shall be heard and
decided by an arbitrator who is a member of a panel of arbitrators assigned cases in the

manner indicated below.

108
(b)

()

Draft 4/25/11

Selection of the panel.

qa)

Q)

G)

(4)

G)

The City and the Union shall each submit the names of ten (10) arbitrators who
are members of the National Academy of Arbitrators.

The first five (5) names that appear on both lists shall be on the panel and the
remaining names shall be combined into one list.

If less than five (5) names appear on both lists, all names that appear on both lists
shall be on the panel and the remaining names shall be combined into one list
From the combined list of names, each party will alternatively strike one name,
with the union striking first, until a total of five (5) arbitrators have been selected
overall.

The five (5) selected arbitrators shall comprise the arbitration panel for

determination of all matters relating to heart and lung benefits.

Term of the arbitration panel.

(1)

The arbitration panel selected shall be permanent. However, in the event either
party wishes to remove an arbitrator or arbitrator(s) from the panel, they must do
so by written notice to the other side by July 1 of such year. Unless mutually
agreed to by the parties, neither party may request the removal of more than two

(2) members of the panel at any one time.

In the event that either or both parties request that the names of one (1) or more
arbitrators be removed from the panel, the parties shall submit a request for a list
of arbitrators from the American Arbitration Association. The number of

arbitrators requested shall be four (4) times the number of positions which need

109
@)

(©)

Draft 4/25/11

to be filled. The parties will take turns striking arbitrators from the list until only
the number of positions needed to be filled remain. The new arbitrators are to be
selected by the parties prior to November 30 of the year in which the request is
made. The arbitrator or arbitrator(s) being removed from the panel shall not be

removed until December 31 of the year in which the request is made.

Authority of the arbitrators.

qa)

Q)

@)

(4)

G)

The arbitrator shall have the authority to decide whether or not the claimant is
entitled to benefits as provided for under the Heart and Lung Act.

The arbitrator is not bound by, but should be guided by, judicial opinions
interpreting comparable legislation specifically provisions of the workers!
compensation law.

Arbitrators are not bound by, but should also be guided by, prior decisions of the
arbitration panel.

Decisions by workers' compensation referees or the Workers' Compensation
Board interpreting provisions of the Heart and Lung Act may be considered by
an arbitrator.

The arbitrator shall have the authority to grant, deny, or modify a claim, to
compel the production of documents, to compel the submission to medical
examination, or to order any other action deemed necessary to expedite a fair and

final resolution of any claim or petition.

Arbitration Fees.

qa)

The fees charged by an arbitrator shall be split equally between the City and the

FOP.

110
@

(g)

Draft 4/25/11

Workers' Compensation Claims.

If a claimant files a claim with the Workers’ Compensation Board, he will be bound by
any decision, findings of fact or conclusions of law reached by the Board in any claim
filed herein relating to the same injury, disability or event. If a claimant files a claim
with the Workers’ Compensation Board to or at any time while a claim filed under this
proceeding is pending and not yet final, the filing of such claim with the Workers’
Compensation Board will act as an automatic stay to these proceedings pending the
outcome of the claim filed with the Workers’ Compensation Board. In the event the
claimant is denied by the Board, that finding will be final and binding on any claim filed
herein. In the event the claim is granted by the Board, the City may either accept those
findings and award or have the claim for Heart and Lung benefits decided through the

procedures established herein.

qd) At the time the City files a petition to suspend, modify or terminate Heart and
Lung Act (HLA) benefits, a copy of the petition shall be filed simultaneously with the
affected employee/claimant and the Union. Any medical evidence on which the
employer relies shall be provided to the employee at that time. Medical evidence will not

be provided to the Union with due regard for confidentiality of medical records.

The panel recognizes the right of the employee/claimant to organize and obtain
any medical evidence to support his/her position. In recognition of this fact, a hearing on
the suspension, modification or termination of benefits shall not be scheduled sooner than

60 days from the date of the petition is filed and served upon the employee/claimant and

111
Draft 4/25/11

the Union. Date of mailing shall constitute the date of service.

At the 60-day hearing, the arbitrator shall have the authority, which shall be
discretionary, to impose a supersedeas of HLA benefits based upon the evidence
presented by the parties. The arbitrator is not required to grant or deny supersedeas at
this hearing but can reserve ruling in order to allow the employee/claimant additional
time to acquire medical or other evidence relevant to the case. Where supersedeas is
granted, the arbitrator may hold the record open for the employee/claimant to obtain any

additional medical evidence on the issues involving the petition.

In the case of a termination petition on grounds of permanency, HLA benefits

shall be converted to workers’ compensation benefits where supersedeas is granted.

In the case of a claim petition or reinstatement petition filed by the
employee/claimant, a hearing shall be held no later than 60 days after filing of the
petition by the employee/claimant, or on the next open arbitration date after the 60 days.
The employee/claimant shall provide the employer with any medical evidence upon
which he/she relies at the time the petition is filed. Any medical evidence related to the
claim that is subsequently obtained shall also be turned over to the employer. Any
independent medical examination to be sought by the employer shall be scheduled,
absent good cause for delay, within 60 days of filing of the petition or the date on which
the employee/claimant supplies the employer with medical evidence supporting the

petition, whichever is later.

112
Draft 4/25/11

Labor Management Committee

1.

Purpose. To investigate, study, discuss, and to make recommendations to the City of
Pittsburgh about ways to resolve work site problems of mutual concern to labor and

management.

Representation. By March 15, 1999, the President of the FOP shall appoint three (3)

persons as set forth in Paragraph 10 to represent labor. Three (3) senior supervisors of

the Pittsburgh Bureau of Police shall be appointed to represent management by the Chief

of Police. The parties recognize that continuity of membership on the committee is

important.

¢ One member shall receive initial appointment for a two (2) year term, with
subsequent terms being for one year. The other two members shall be appointed for
one-year terms. This will assure staggered terms of service to maintain some degree
of continuity.

¢ The President of the FOP and the Chief of Police reserve the right to remove or

reappoint members at any time.

Date and Time of Meetings. The first meeting of the LMC shall occur no later than April

9, 1999.

© Meetings shall be held monthly at a time mutually agreeable to the members of the
committee. The Committee has agreed to meet the first Wednesday of every month
at 1000 hours.

e A meeting shall not be conducted unless a quorum of four (4) Committee Members

are in attendance.

113
Draft 4/25/11

e The quorum of four must consist of at least two (2) representatives from Labor and

two (2) representatives from Management.

Location of Meetings. Meetings shall be held at a location to be determined by the chair
of the committee on a monthly basis. The Committee has agreed to alternate locations

monthly between the FOP Office and Police Headquarters.

Chair. Chair of the meetings shall alternate between representatives of labor and

representatives of management, with the FOP assuming the chair initially.

e The chair of the meetings shall alternate quarterly between the FOP and the Bureau
of Police, with the FOP chairing the 2"! and 4* quarters of each calendar year, and

the Bureau of Police chairing the 1° and 3" quarters of each calendar year.

Agenda. The agenda shall be established by agreement of the President of the FOP and

the Chief of Police.

¢ Members of the LMC shall submit requests to place topics on the agenda to the
President of the FOP or the Chief of Police.

* Topics for the agenda shall be provided to the chair of the LMC at least 48 hours
before each meeting.

e The agenda will then be distributed to members of the LMC for discussion.

Minutes. The recorder of minutes from each meeting shall alternate between

representatives of labor and representatives of management.

114
Draft 4/25/11

The recorder of minutes shall be represented by labor when the City chairs the LMC,
and by the City when the FOP chairs the committee.

In no event shall the chair of the meeting record the minutes.

Minutes shall not be finally recorded until approved by consensus of the LMC.

A copy of the minutes will be maintained by the President of the FOP and by the

Chief of Police.

Copies of the minutes may only be distributed to members of the Executive Board of the

FOP and the Command Staff of the Bureau of Police.

General Guidelines.

a.

It is recognized that recommendations growing out of LMC meetings are not
binding.

No active grievances shall be discussed and no bargaining shall take place.
Topics that could lead to grievances may be discussed.

The chair shall recognize each person wishing to speak before speaking.

The chair shall recognize a motion by either labor or management to table a topic
for further study.

The LMC may, as they deem necessary, consult expert resources to assist in their
discussions.

Each topic shall be discussed and action reached before proceeding to another
topic. Topics requiring further study may be tabled.

The Committee shall act by consensus only. If the Committee cannot reach

consensus on any topic, the topic shall be tabled.

115
Draft 4/25/11

i. When consensus is reached by the LMC, the topic will then be brought before the
President of the FOP and the Chief of Police for final approval and consensus
before dissemination and implementation may occur.

j No matters discussed in the LMC will be disseminated publicly.

10. The Act 47 Plan requires that the parties work to establish an effective labor management
committee and to implement functional operating guidelines and procedures to enable the
labor-management committee to function as a n effective forum for discussion and
resolution of workplace issues. Such a committee currently exists, it should be amended
to provide that the three (3) persons appointed by the F.O.P. do not have to be from the
F.O.P. Executive Board and, if a meeting is scheduled at a time when an F.O.P. member

is scheduled to work, said member can attend with no loss of pay.

In the Act 111 Award dated December 30, 2004, the Panel of arbitrators directs the labor
management committee to study the question of secondary employment, and to establish
reasonable rules and regulations concerning it. At any time after six (6) months from the date of
this award, if the parties have not reached agreement, either party may invoke this Panel to take

additional testimony and possibly issue an supplemental award.

Recognizing that the Act 47 Plan requires the City to establish validated fitness standards, the
arbitrators direct the labor management committee to meet and discuss concerning such
standards. Once standards have been determined, the parties may negotiate the effects of any such
policy, including frequency and methods of testing fitness, as well as any disciplinary action

relative to a failure to meet such standards. If the parties are unable to agree regarding these

116
Draft 4/25/11

effects, either party may invoke the Panel to take additional testimony and, if necessary, issue a

supplemental award,

If, during the term of this agreement, the Act 47 Plan is terminated or amended, or if the
Pennsylvania State Legislature enacts legislation relating to deferred retirement accounts
(DROP/IROP pension benefits) or the issue of residency requirements for police officers in cities
of the second class, the parties may reopen the contract to negotiate and/or arbitrate under these
limited conditions. The Panel shall retain jurisdiction to address such issues if agreement cannot
be reached by the parties. *(Part of this paragraph is subject to appeal filed by the City on

1/28/05.)

117
Draft 4/25/11

POLICE DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE

SECTION 19 - POLICE DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES

I. 1. All disciplinary action will be initiated through the preparation and filing of a
Disciplinary Action Report, copies of which shall be given to the Police Officer, and to

the F.O.P.

2. Within ten working days after the Disciplinary Action Report goes through the chain of
command and is signed by the Chief, there will be a meeting (referred to as the initial
meeting) between the Police Officer and the F.O.P. with the Director of Public Safety or
his designate and the Chief or an Assistant Chief. At this meeting, the City will describe
the basis for the proposed discipline and describe in summary fashion the evidence upon
which it is based. The Police Officer will be given an opportunity at this meeting to

respond to the charges against him or her.

3. Within three working days after the initial meeting, the Director of Public Safety will
decide whether or not to implement the proposed discipline, and notify the Police Officer
and the F.O.P. of his decision. If the discipline is to be implemented, suspensions with
intent to discharge will be effective immediately. Discharges following such suspensions
and all other disciplinary actions will be effective after the decision following the internal
hearing described below, if one is requested. If an internal hearing is not requested

within the specified time limits, the Director may implement the discipline immediately.

118
Draft 4/25/14

Within three working days after the Director decides to implement discipline the Police
Officer or the F.O.P. may request a hearing (referred to as the internal hearing) before the
Director of Public Safety or his designate. The internal hearing will be held within ten
working days after the request for a hearing. At the internal hearing the Police Officer
and the F.O.P. will have the opportunity to present any evidence and/or arguments in
support of their position. Prior to the internal hearing the F.O.P. will be given access to
any records or information that it may require in order to prepare and present its position

at the hearing.

Within five working days after the internal hearing, the Director of Public Safety shall
give the Police Officer and the F.O.P. written notice of his final decision concerning the

disciplinary action.

Within ten working days after receipt of the Director's final decision the Police Officer or
the F.O.P. may file a grievance in writing protesting the disciplinary action. The
grievance will include a request for arbitration and indicate whether the officer requests a
single arbitrator or a tripartite panel. If the officer requests a tripartite panel, the

grievance will name the arbitrator appointed by the F.O.P.
Within five working days of receipt of the written grievance the Employer will provide

the Union with the name of the arbitrator appointed by the City in the event a tripartite

panel is chosen.

119
12.

Draft 4/25/11

When a panel of arbitrators is requested, an arbitrator will be selected from the permanent
list of arbitrators established by the City and the F.O.P. in accordance with Section 5-E.
The arbitrator will be notified of the days within a forty five day period on which the
Parties will be available for an arbitration hearing. In addition, the panel arbitrators shall
be notified that the Arbitration Board's decision must be issued in writing within five
working days of the hearing, and a supporting opinion, if one is requested, may be issued

within thirty days of the hearing.

If, after an arbitration hearing is scheduled, it is continued at the request of the City to a
date beyond forty-five days after the request for a panel, the City will reinstate that
Grievant's contractual health insurance for the period from the end of the forty five day

period to the issuance of the arbitration award.

If the Employer does not comply with any of the time limits specified above, the

disciplinary action will be rescinded.

If there is no request for an internal hearing within the specified time limit, or if no

grievance is filed within the specified time limit, the decision to take disciplinary action

will be final and will not be subject to further appeal.

All time limits in the above procedure may be extended by mutual agreement in writing.

The costs of arbitration shall be shared by the City and the Union equally.

120
Draft 4/25/11

A sustained Disciplinary Action Report (“DAR”) disciplinary action shall be
considered against an officer in any formal hearing for promotion or in any
disciplinary hearing consistent with the following “reckoning periods”:
1 Disciplinary action in the form of an oral written reprimand may
be considered in determining the penalty for any subsequent
offense by an officer or may be used against an officer for
purposes of promotion for a period of one year.
2. Disciplinary action in the form of a written reprimand may be
considered in determining the penalty for any subsequent offense
by an officer or may be used against an officer for purposes of
promotion for a period of two years.
3. Disciplinary action in the form of a suspension may be
considered in determining the penalty for any subsequent offense
by an officer or may be used against an officer for purposes of

promotion for a period of five years.

1. The City will remove DAR's from an officer's PAR's system and file at the

conclusion of the appropriate reckoning period.

2. The City may archive in the City Law Department DAR information for
purposes of civil litigation. In addition, said information can be maintained by

OMI for the purpose of complying with the Consent Decree provisions that are
121
Draft 4/25/11

still in effect.

Cc. As regards matters of discipline, each reckoning period shall commence on the

date of issuance of the DAR.

D. As regards matters of promotion, each reckoning period shall commence on the
date of issuance of the DAR or, in the event of appeal, on the date of final

disposition of the grievance.

E. Any record of counseling kept by the City and/or the Bureau of Police shall be limited to
the following:
(i) date of counseling;
(ii) the employee's name
(iii) the supervisor's name;

(iv) __ the topic of the counseling session.

F. Absent unusual circumstances, disciplinary action must ordinarily be taken against an officer
within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days of an infraction, or within one hundred twenty
(120) calendar days after the City should reasonably have known about the infraction. *(This

paragraph is subject to appeal filed by the City on 1/28/05.)

G. If an officer is charged with a criminal offense requiring suspension under the Confidence in Law
Enforcement Act, that officer will be re-assigned to a non-law enforcement position in the
bargaining unit provided such a vacancy exists. If there is no such vacancy, then the officer will

be suspended without pay. Any such suspension may be challenged through the
122
Draft 4/25/11

grievance/arbitration process.

123
Draft 4/25/11

PERSONNEL FILES

SECTION 20 - PERSONNEL FILES

A. Employees’ home addresses, phone numbers, and pictures shall be kept confidential and shall not
be released to any person except for official City purposes or pursuant to a subpoena, statute or

lawful investigation by an outside governmental agency.

B. An employee shall have the right to inspect his or her official personnel record wherever kept,

twice a year or more often for good cause shown.

Cc. Inspection shall be during regular business hours of the repository, after notice to the Assistant
Chief of the employee's division, or the Chief of Police, or, in their absence, their designees.
Inspection shall be conducted under the supervision of the Department. The City shall make
duplicate copies of parts of the record at the employee's request and at the employee's expense.

The employee's entire personnel record shall be open for inspection.

D. No employee shall be charged with the offense of "Repeated Violations." When an employee is
charged before a Trial Board, the charged employee's record of prior disciplinary action shall be
considered only for relevant purposes, such as for proof of notice, impeachment or rebuttal or for

determination of a penalty after a finding of guilt.

E. Employees shall be given the opportunity to read and note receipt of any disciplinary action

before it is placed in their personnel files.

124
Draft 4/25/11

F. All information contained in the PARS system or the OMS system is to be considered part of an

officer’s confidential personnel file for all purposes of this Agreement.

125
Draft 4/25/11

INTERNAL INVESTIGATION PROCEDURES

SECTION 21 - INTERNAL INVESTIGATION PROCEDURES

A. 1. When an anonymous complaint is made against a police officer and no corroborative

evidence is obtained, the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.

2. When any citizen complaint is filed greater than ninety (90) calendar days after the date
of the alleged event complained of, which if true, could not lead to a criminal charge,
such complaint shall be classified as unfounded and the accused employee shall not be
required to submit a written report, but he shall be notified orally or in writing of such

claim.

B. 1. The City agrees that in order to afford an Officer a fair and impartial internal
investigation, no public statements will be made about the facts under investigation until

it has been completed.

2. The investigation of an officer will be limited to alleged violations of Bureau tules. The
City may investigate additional possible violations of Bureau rules and regulations that

arise during the course of an investigation.

3. The interrogation of any Officer being investigated for a disciplinary violation must be

undertaken at a reasonable hour and if possible during the officer's tour of duty. The

officer will be given twenty-four (24) hours notice of an interview at OMI.

126
10.

Draft 4/25/11

The Officer shall be informed of the nature of the investigation before any interrogation

begins.

If it is known, that an Officer being interrogated is a witness only, he must be so

informed.

A police officer, whether a subject or witness, must be informed of the nature of the

interrogation at the outset of the interrogation.

An officer being interrogated shall be given one fifteen (15) minute intermission each

hour.

A copy of the complaint will be given to the accused officer at the same time that a copy
of his/her statement to OMI is made available to the officer. Provided, however, if the
accused officer provided OMI with the names of additional witnesses at the time of
his/her statement, OMI will interview such witnesses prior to providing a copy of the

complaint and statement to the officer.

If a transcript is being taken by the City, an officer being questioned or investigated can

request a copy of same.

If the interrogated police officer writes a written statement, a transcript is taken, or

mechanical record made, a copy of same must be given to the interrogated police officer,

without cost, upon request.

127
13.

14.

15.

16.

Draft 4/25/11

Upon completion of the investigation, OMI findings and conclusions will be given to the

Chief who shall process the findings in compliance with this agreement.

When a police officer is accused of misconduct on either a Bureau charge or on a citizen
complaint and the charge or complaint is unfounded, then all records of the investigation
are to be destroyed one year after the investigation is completed and the officer shall be

notified.

If any police officer under interrogation is under arrest, or is likely to be placed under
arrest as a result of the interrogation, he shall be completely informed of all his rights

prior to the commencement of the interrogation.

Upon completion of the investigation, OMI findings and conclusions shall be given to the

Chief of Police, who shall process the findings in compliance with the agreement.

At the request of any police officer under interrogation, he shall have the right to be
represented by counsel of his choice and/or the F.O.P. representative who shall be present
at all times during the interrogation. The interrogation shall be suspended for a

reasonable time until representation can be obtained.

There shall be no public statements made about an investigation until the investigation is

completed.

128
Draft 4/25/11
17. Unless agreed to by the officer, the City shall not divulge the reasons for any disciplinary

action that is not appealed beyond arbitration.
18. Effective January 1, 1998, the internal investigations procedures shall be amended to

allow an officer to grieve to arbitration written reprimands.

No police officer shall be compelled by the City to be interviewed by and/or to testify before the
Citizen Police Review Board. Any statements compelled by the City under the Garrity Rule
during internal investigations are confidential and not subject to discovery or release to the

Citizens Police Review Board.

DHR Unit Procedures

In the interests of protecting both the rights of the accused and the rights of the complainant in

cases investigated by the Discrimination/Harassment/Retaliation Unit (“DHR Unit”), the parties

agree to comply with the following Procedures, which are modified from the Internal

Investigation Procedures in Section 21 of the Working Agreement:

1. The purpose of the DHR Unit is to investigate complaints by City employees of
violations of Order No. 20-1, the “No Discrimination/No Harassment/No Retaliation
Policy and Reporting Procedure,” and to issue findings and/or recommendations based on

such investigation.

2. The City agrees that in order to afford an officer a fair and impartial DHR investigation,

no public statements will be made about the matter under investigation until it has been

completed.

129
Draft 4/25/11
Investigations will be limited to alleged violations of Bureau Rules and Regulation,

policies and procedures. DHR may investigate additional possible violations of Bureau

rules and regulations that arise during the course of an investigation.

The DBR Unit interview of any accused officer must be undertaken at a reasonable hour
and if possible during the officer’s tour of duty. The officer will be given twenty-four

(24) hours notice of an interview at the DHR Unit.

The accused officer shall be informed of the nature of the investigation prior to any

questioning.

In advance of the interview, the accused will be permitted to read a summary of the

Complainant’s allegations as they relate to the accused.

During the interview, the accused officer shall have the right to an FOP representative.

Said FOP representative can be FOP legal counsel.

Witnesses other than the accused shall have the right to halt a DHR interview in the event
the interview becomes accusatory. The interview shall be suspended for a reasonable
period of time at the witness’s request, for him/her to obtain FOP representation or legal

counsel.

A copy of the accused officer’s statement, along with a copy of the summary of the

Complainant’s allegations, shall be provided, upon request, to the accused officer as soon

130
10.

11.

Draft 4/25/11
as they are available. However, if the accused officer provides new information or the

names of additional witnesses during the course of the interview, the copies will be

withheld until the additional investigation is complete.

Upon the completion of the investigation, DHR findings and conclusions will be given to

the Chief who shall process the findings in compliance with the Working Agreement.

If the DHR investigation is the basis for disciplinary action against an accused officer, the
accused shall be permitted to grieve the discipline to binding arbitration. Investigatory
matter, including the statements and identities of any co-worker complainant(s) or
witness (es), will be provided, upon request, to the FOP legal counsel in preparation for

arbitration.

131
Draft 4/25/11
DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY

SECTION 22 - DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY

A. POLICY:
The Pittsburgh Bureau of Police has a legal responsibility and management obligation to ensure a
safe work environment, as well as a paramount interest in protecting the public by ensuring that

its officers have the physical stamina and emotional stability to perform their assigned duties.

The abuse of drugs and/or alcohol is destructive to the good order and reputation of the Bureau of
Police and will not be tolerated. Officers must have physical coordination and unimpaired

judgment to react prudently and effectively to the demands of police service.

B. PURPOSE:
This order states Police Bureau Policy relative to the use of narcotics, illegal drugs and the abuse
of alcohol and legally prescribed drugs by any member of the Pittsburgh Bureau of Police and

sets forth conditions in which drug tests will be required.

Cc. DEFINITIONS:
1. The term Drug includes cannabis, narcotics, or controlled substances as defined under the

Pennsylvania Crime Code Controlled Substance, Drugs, Device, and Cosmetics Act.

2. The term Drug Abuse includes the use of cannabis, narcotics, or any controlled substance

which has not been legally prescribed and/or dispensed, or the abuse of a legally

prescribed drug.

132
Draft 4/25/11
The term Alcohol includes beverages and medication or other substances containing

ethyl, methyl, isopropyl or other low molecular weight alcohol.

Reasonable Suspicion Standard -- An apparent state of facts and/or circumstances found
to exist by a supervisor which would cause a reasonably intelligent person to believe the
employee to be under the influence or a user of drugs or narcotics. The standard of

reasonable suspicion is less than probable cause.

Drug And/Or Alcohol Testing - The use of intoxilyzer, urinalysis, hair testing or any

other clinically accepted method of detecting drugs and/or alcohol in the human body.

Dz. GENERAL RULES:

1.

The use of illegal drugs, cannabis, or non-prescribed controlled substances or the abuse
of legally prescribed drugs or controlled substances by a member of the Pittsburgh
Bureau of Police is strictly prohibited. In addition, members are prohibited from being

under the influence of alcohol while on duty.

Violation of this policy will result in disciplinary action.

Refusal by a Police Officer to take the required drug and/or alcohol testing shall be
considered insubordination and will result in the immediate relief from his/her police
duties pending disposition of any administrative action. Pursuant to Civil Service Rule

II], the Officer will be ordered to take a Civil Service Medical Exam.

133
=

Draft 4/25/11
3. The Department, upon notification of the refusal of a Police Officer to take the medical

examination, shall mark the Officer as absent without permission.

MANDATORY DRUG TESTING:
For mandatory drug testing the City may use intoxilyzer, urinalysis, hair testing or any other

clinically accepted method of detecting drugs and/or alcohol in the human body.

Mandatory drug and/or alcohol testing will be conducted only upon the approval of a
Commander, Assistant or Deputy Chief, Chief of Police, or pursuant to Civil Service regulations

under the following circumstances:

1, Based on REASONABLE SUSPICION citing specific instances when a member was
incapable of performing his or her required duties or exhibited unusual work performance

measures and/or behavioral traits.

2. At any time during the probationary period as defined by the working agreement between

the City of Pittsburgh and the Fraternal Order of Police, Fort Pitt Lodge No. 1.

3. For counseling assistance programs or as a condition of the Track III EAP due to prior

drug and/or alcohol abuse.

4, Prior to assignment to special units, i.e., Drug Suppression, Special Weapons and Tactics

(SWAT), the Bomb Disposal Unit, the Evidence Room, K-9 drug-dog handlers and drug-

dog trainers.

134
Draft 4/25/11
5. Random testing twice each year for personnel assigned to special units as listed above.

6. When an Officer is scheduled for a physical examination to return to duty after an
absence of 15 days or more which normally requires a physical examination and the

Officer has a record of excessive absenteeism.

7. Within a reasonable period of time following an officer’s involvement in an on-duty
vehicular accident which is reportable under the Motor Vehicle Code. An officer will be
drug and/or alcohol tested for involvement in an on-duty vehicular accident which is
reportable under the Motor Vehicle Code only if the officer was actually operating the
vehicle at the time of the accident. Testing must be conducted in a dignified manner,
which shall afford an officer privacy. An officer taken for immediate, necessary medical
treatment, as a result of a vehicle accident or a shooting, shall not have said medical
treatment postponed until testing can be performed. Any violation of an officer’s rights

under this section shall entitle the Union to one day of additional President’s time.

8. Any time an officer discharges a firearm, with the exception of routine firearm training

and/or the destruction of a wounded animal.

F. PROCEDURES FOR THE ORDERING OF DRUG AND/OR ALCOHOL TESTING IN CASES

OF REASONABLE SUSPICION:

 

1. A ranking officer (Commander or above) will be notified by the initiating supervisor of

the circumstances leading to the request for testing.

135
Draft 4/25/11
If the request is approved, the supervisor requesting the testing will direct a memo to the

Commander or other ranking officer indicating the circumstances of reasonable suspicion
which formed the basis of the request. If the basis for the request includes an infraction
of the rules and regulations, a Disciplinary Action Report (DAR) will accompany the

request.

The Bureau will strive, absent exigent circumstances, to provide the written explanation
at the time an officer is ordered to produce a specimen for reasonable suspicion testing.
The memo will then be presented to the accused Officer who will sign his or her name to
the bottom of the report indicating that they have read it. This signature will in no way
be considered an admission of guilt, but only an acknowledgment of the fact that the

report was read. A copy of this report will be given to the accused Officer.

An accused Officer who refuses to submit to properly required drug and/or alcohol
testing shall be deemed insubordinate; and, charges shall be preferred by the requesting
supervisor or other commanding officer, and the accused Officer will be transported

home.

If the accused Officer agrees to drug and/or alcohol testing, the Officer shall complete
and sign the consent form. If the accused Officer is unable to read the consent form, the
supervisor shall read it to the Officer. The yellow copy of the consent form will be given

to the accused Officer. The supervisor will retain the white copy of the consent form.

A supervisor will transport the accused Officer to the approved testing facility and will

stand by until the test has been administered and will then transport the Officer home. At

136
Draft 4/25/11
the testing facility, the supervisor shall complete and sign the laboratory request form for

the drug test indicating the name of the accused Officer to be tested and the telephone
number of the Chief of Police or his designee who is the person to be contacted when the
results of the drug tests are available.

7. Breath alcohol testing will be carried out in accordance with DOT standards.

8. Upon completion of the drug test, a copy of all police reports will be forwarded through

the chain of command to the Chief of Police.

ALLEGATIONS OF MISCELLANEOUS DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITY ON OR OFF DUTY:
Allegations of miscellaneous drug-related activity which would be considered reasonable
suspicion requiring a drug test include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Illegal sale, delivery, manufacture, purchase, or possession of drugs and narcotics.

2. Whenever the results of a preliminary criminal investigation indicate a reasonable
suspicion to believe that the accused Officer is involved in illegal drug-related activity; or
upon completion of the initial stages of an administrative investigation which indicates a
reasonable suspicion to believe that the accused Officer is personally using illegal drugs

or is personally misusing or abusing legally prescribed or dispensed medications.

3. A reasonable suspicion exists when a person has a reasonable belief that an individual is

under the influence of a drug which affects behavior, supportable by direct observation,

articulable reasons and common sense.

137
Draft 4/25/11

PROVISIONS ON APPEAL

SECTION 23 - PROVISIONS ON APPEAL

A. On Appeal from the February 14, 2003 Award:

Ll. The City shall continue to offer the current healthcare providers.

2. Effective January 1, 2003, the City may change the healthcare providers for present and future
retirees as long as the coverage provided remains the same. For those retiring after January 1, 2004, the
City shall contribute toward the cost of husband and wife coverage (Section 14. B.II.9), for each
employee so electing, an amount equal to the amount charged for such insurance by the carrier
providing such coverage on the date of his/her retirement.

B. On Appeal from the December 30, 2004 Award:

1. Paragraph 2(b) of the Award, which expands the Seniority rights of officers by requiring that
the 25 percent most senior uniformed officers be permitted to choose their duty location.

2. Paragraph 11(d) of the Award, which requires the City to buy back 100% of the number of
accrued whole sick days upon an employee’s retirement.

3. Paragraph 12(a) of the Award, which sets insufficient employee contribution toward the cost
of Health Insurance.

4. Paragraph 15 of the Award, which preserves pension enhancements for employees hired prior
to January 1, 2005.

5. Paragraph 18(b) of the Award, which restricts the time in which the Bureau may initiate
discipline.

6. Paragraph 21 of the Award, which would allow reopening of the contract upon amendment of

the Act 47 Recovery Plan.

138
Draft 4/25/11

SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT

 

SECTION 24 — SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT

1. Members of the bargaining unit are first and foremost police officers or police supervisors of the
City. There shall be no conflict of time or conflict of interest between their duties on behalf of
the City and any secondary employment. It is within the sole discretion of the City to permit or
to prohibit the wearing of the Pittsburgh Police uniform and/or the use of police equipment for

any purpose, including its use in the furtherance of secondary employment.

2. All secondary employment will be voluntary. No police officer will be compelled to work for a
Secondary Employer.

3. The parties agree that the hours spent in secondary employment do not constitute hours of work
on behalf of the City for purposes of federal or state overtime law, and the parties recognize the
City as a "primary employer" under 29 C.F.R. § 553.227(d). Police officers engaged in secondary
employment will receive the rate of pay for such work as agreed upon by and between the City and

the Secondary Employer.

4. The City may enact reasonable rules and regulations to govern the secondary employment of
police personnel, including but not limited to a method of assigning and recording all secondary
employment, requirements concerning notice of all secondary employment to the City,
limitations on who may be an approved Secondary Employer, and limitations on the number of

hours that a police officer may engage in secondary employment.

5. The City may discipline a police officer for violation of Bureau of Police rules and Regulations,

including any violation of provisions pertaining to secondary employment. Such disciplinary

139
Draft 4/25/11

action may include a suspension or termination of the privilege to engage in secondary employment.
If an officer is denied secondary employment privileges for any reason, the reason for the denial
will be made in writing within five (5) days. The police officer may appeal any such decision by
means of the contractual grievance-arbitration procedure. The parties will make a good faith effort
to expedite any arbitration hearing under this addendum, and the Panel hereby appoints Arbitrator
Jack Morgan to handle such expedited arbitration through calendar year 2007. Thereafter, either
party may seek a new arbitrator by serving notice in writing on the other party. The remedy in
grievance arbitration will be strictly limited to the restoration of secondary employment

privileges.

The City, and the police officers working secondary employment, will not enforce business rules or

directions of the Secondary Employer.

In case a police emergency exists, as determined by the City, any police officer may be ordered from
secondary employment to active duty. At such point, the police officer will be entitled to all

compensation for active service under the labor agreement.

Subject to the officer's availability and disciplinary action that would affect eligibility, the City
shall honor a written request from a Secondary Employer with regard to which officer or officers
will be assigned to a particular detail. However, any such request will be subject to the Secondary
Employer meeting the qualification requirements established by the Bureau, and the officer or
officers involved being in compliance with the rules or directive regarding secondary

employment.

If a secondary employment detail requires assignment of an officer other than one specially

requested by the Secondary Employer, said assignment will be made through the Bureau's

140
10.

ll.

12.

13.

Draft 4/25/11

Special Events office.

An approved Secondary employer may designate a particular officer to coordinate and assist in
scheduling a detail, such designation must be in a written form, and approved by the Bureau's
Special Events office. In such circumstances, the City may impose a reasonable cost recovery fee upon
the Secondary Employer for the work of the designated scheduler. Such scheduling hours on the

part of the designated officer will be considered secondary employment time.

If a police officer is in compliance with these requirements regarding secondary employment,
the City will consider any injury or illness that the police officer suffers while so engaged in
secondary employment to be the same as if actively employed on behalf of the Bureau. That is, if
otherwise qualified, the police officer will be entitled to Heart and Lung or Workers compensation

Benefits under the law.

If a police officer is in compliance with all requirements regarding secondary employment, the
officer will be entitled to legal representation under the contractual FOP Legal Defense Fund in
connection with any civil action brought against him or her arising out of the performance of his or
her duties, provided such duties are both lawful and consistent with the purposes of this
secondary employment program. Indemnification by the City for any judgment is subject to all

defenses or provisions of federal or state law.

The City shall provide the FOP a monthly printout of all secondary employment details worked
during the prior month. The purpose of providing this information is to ensure that there is an

equitable distribution of secondary employment opportunities.

141
Draft 4/25/11

TERM

SECTION 25 - TERM.

This Agreement shall be for five (5) years beginning January 1, 2010 and ending
December 31, 2014, and shall remain in force and effect from year to year thereafter unless either
party shall notify the other in writing on or before July 1, of 2014 and on or before July 1 of each
calendar year thereafter, of any desire to terminate and/or modify any of its provisions in effect at

that time, as of the first day of the next following calendar year.

DATE

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE CITY OF PITTSBURGH

FORT PITT LODGE NO. 1

142
Draft 4/25/11
Appendix A: Compensatory Time Bank

1. An officer may elect to take compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay for either
court time or for shift overtime. The election shall be made by written payroll designation which
shall be submitted by the officer within 48 hours of the time the overtime was worked. Any such
election is irrevocable.

2. Only overtime hours may be banked as compensatory time. When elected, an officer
shall bank compensatory time at one and one half hours for each one hour of work identified
above that would be paid at an overtime rate.

3. Each officer shall have a compensatory time bank which shall be maintained by the
Bureau, and which may accrue no more than forty compensatory hours at any time.

4. An officer is entitled to use compensatory time with the same restrictions as set forth in
Section 13 for the use of personal days. The supervisor is to be notified prior to seventy-two
hours of the use of time, and a request for compensatory time will not be denied unless staffing
does not permit it.

5. Compensatory time may not be requested during special events wherein the Chief of
Police has restricted discretionary time.

6. An officer may only use compensatory time in increments of eight (8) hours.

Appendix B: Catastrophic Leave Bank

The City and the Union will establish a program to permit bargaining unit employees covered by
this Agreement to donate appropriate leave to a leave bank for catastrophic illness or injury. The
program shall be administered by a joint labor-management committee consisting of three (3)
members appointed by the Union and three (3) members appointed by the City. The program
shall be subject to the following rules:

1. A "Catastrophic Illness or Injury" is a single condition which causes an absence from
duty exceeding fifteen (15) work days in a current calendar year. The 15 work day absence may
be accumulated on an intermittent basis if properly documented as being related to the same
condition.

2. "Catastrophic Illness or Injury" does not include any work-related illness or injury; minor
illnesses, injuries or impairments; sporadic, short-term recurrences of chronic, non-life
threatening conditions; short-term absences due to contagious diseases; or short-term recurring
medical or therapeutic treatments.

3. The Catastrophic Leave Bank (Bank) is limited to qualified employees who are without

143
Draft 4/25/11
available paid leave time. All personal, sick and vacation time must be exhausted prior to the
use of Bank time.

4. Each year, during the period of January 1 to March 31, employees may contribute
accrued vacation or personal days to the Bank.

5. Employees may only donate available vacation or personal days, and must make an
irrevocable transfer of such days in writing. Employees may contribute from one to five days in
whole day (eight hour) increments only.

6. Eligibility for receiving a transfer of days from the Bank shall be limited to employees
who have donated at least one day to the Bank in the current calendar year. Only eligible
employees who can demonstrate a Catastrophic Illness or Injury are eligible for a transfer of
Bank days.

7. The Committee shall have the sole authority to determine eligibility for a grant of leave.
The Committee shall review applications from employees for a grant of leave from the Bank and
shall determine the amount of leave to be granted. Grants of leave shall be made each pay
period, and the total grant of a leave to any individual employee shall not exceed a total of 130
eight (8) hour shifts for any single condition, and under no condition shall the Bank grant any
individual more than 130 shifts in any single year. Grants need not be in a single block of time,
but each grant request must qualify for a transfer of time. No determination of the Committee
shall be subject to the grievance/arbitration procedure.

8. All leave time shall be considered as "wages" and shall be subject to all pension and
benefit contribution required.

9. The Committee shall not grant leave of days in excess of the number of days available in

the Bank. In the event that the Committee reaches impasse in its determination, then the current
Act 111 neutral arbitrator shall rule based on this Agreement and the Act 47 Plan.

144
