AGREEMENT

Between

The City Of Orlando

Orlando Lodge #25,
Fraternal Order of Police, Inc.

October 1, 2013 through
September 30, 2016

 

 
41

42

5.1

5.2

Article 4
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

Employees shail have the right to join, or refuse to join, the Union without interference or
intimidation/coercion by either the City or the Police Union. Further, all employees shall enjoy all
rights and privileges as outlined in this Agreement.

Employees who do not join the Union may enjoy the rights and privileges of this Agreement, with
the understanding that the Union provide to non-members reasonable notice of voting that
affects the bargaining unit and information affecting their employment. The Union, however, is
not obligated (except as may be set forth in State Law) to assist and may assist any non-member
in obtaining any right or privilege sought to be enforced hereunder.

Article 5
EMPLOYEE DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES

The procedure for discipline and discharge shall be in accordance with the Policies and
Procedures of the Department as issued by the Chief of Police (or designee), or as contained in
this Agreement, or Florida Statute Chapter 112, et. seq.

Complaints, Initial Notice of Inquiry (I.N.O.1.) against employees will be accompanied by a sworn
written statement indicating the allegations are true to the best of the complaining party's
knowledge. However, it is agreed that no sworn written statement is required when the
complaining or initiating party is a member of the judiciary, the Orlando Police Department, or
from any governmental agency/officer or when, under law, the case must be forwarded to the
Criminal Justice Standards and Training Commission.

All oral testimony given in an interview conducted by the Internal Affairs Section investigators
shall be swor testimony.

A. Employees shail be allowed five (5) business days, excluding contractual holidays, to
review the completed inquiry (I.N.O.1.) and provide a written response to the investigation
prior to any initial recommendation from the employee's supervisor(s). Additional time for
response, not to exceed five (5) additional business days, will be granted by the
Department's Labor Advisor. Employees who provide a written response are to comment
only upon the facts or lack of facts contained in the investigation.

B. An employee may request at any time up to and during the five (5) day review period, a
meeting to discuss the resolution of the charges filed against that employee. The meeting
will be attended by the employee, and if he requests, the employee shall be represented
4

 

5.3

5.4

5.5

by a union representative and/or counsel, the internal affairs investigator assigned to the
investigation concerning the employee, the Deputy Chief through whom the employee’s
chain of command runs, and any other person deemed necessary by the Deputy Chief.

Cc. The purpose of the meeting will be to discuss potential discipline and to determine if a
consensus can be reached on the appropriate discipline, if any.

D. If the parties reach a consensus, that consensus will be reduced to writing by the Deputy
Chief and forwarded to the Chief of Police for his approval. If the Chief approves the
agreement, the consensus reached shail be implemented and the investigation and
grievance process considered complete. If the Chief does not approve the agreement, the
matter will progress as if no meeting had been held.

E. Nothing discussed at any meeting so held shall be binding upon any party until a final
report is approved by the Chief and nothing discussed at the meeting shall be used
against the employee if a consensus is not implemented.

F. If the Union is not represented at any such meeting or if present and not in agreement
with the employee on the level of discipline, the Union will not be held to the discipline
accepted in that case in any future cases. The Union shall be notified in writing of the final
resolution in all such cases handled in this manner. Within ten days of receipt of this
notice, the Union shail notify the Department in writing should it disagree with the case
resolution.

No permanent Police Officer shall be disciplined or discharged without proper cause, nor in
violation of Florida Statute Chapter 112, et. seq. Discharge of probationary police officers shall
not be subject to the grievance/arbitration procedure until after successful completion of the
Probationary period, when they attain the rank of Permanent Police Officer. Probationary
employees who are terminated during this period shall have a right to have a Union
representative present during the termination meeting. The Union shall be notified at least one
(1) business day prior to imposition of discipline when the recommended discipline is termination.
Prior to the meeting imposing discipline in such cases, the officer shall be relieved of duty and
departmental weapons will be obtained.

The charge "standards of conduct" must contain the specific details of the charged conduct. No
employee will be disciplined for damages to equipment or vehicles occurring during authorized
training except for damage caused by careless, negligent or intentional conduct.

Whenever an employee is under an investigation and subject to interrogation by the Police
Department for any reason that could lead to disciplinary action, demotion or dismissal, such
5

investigation or interrogation shalt be conducted in compliance with Florida Statute Chapter 112,

et. seq. and under the following conditions:

A.

The interrogation shall be conducted at a reasonable hour, preferably at a time when the
employee is on duty, unless the seriousness of the investigation is of such a degree that
immediate action is required.

The employee will be informed of the charges against him when notified of a pending
investigation/interview and/or upon relief from duty, unless, in the Department's opinion,
such information would compromise the investigation, and the employee shall be so
informed,

At the time of interview, the employee under investigation must be informed of the
charges against him, the names of all known complaining parties, the name and rank of
the officer in charge of the investigation, and all persons present during the
interview/interrogation prior to giving a statement to the investigator. Officers waiting to be
interviewed will not be required to wait in the same location as the civilian witnesses. The
Union representative or counsel will be provided a location not being actively monitored to
meet with the employee under investigation and review the complaint and statements
made available.

The employee under investigation will be allowed to read the 1.N.O.I. before the
interrogation begins, must be informed of the person or persons in charge of the
investigation, and who will be conducting the questioning; however, no more than one
person shall ask questions at any time. Prior to the beginning of the interview, the officer
who is the subject of the complaint and the officers representative may review the
complaint and statements to the extent required by Florida Statute.

The length of questioning periods must be reasonable, with rest periods being called
periodically for personal necessities, meals, and telephone calls. All questioning will
normaily be conducted in the Orlando Police Headquarters Building.

The formal interrogatior/interview of an employee, or any issuance of orders in
disciplinary matters shall be recorded, and there shail be no unrecorded questions or
statements. The employee or the employee's representative shall be allowed to record
these sessions.

The employee will not be threatened with transfer or any disciplinary action as a means of
obtaining information. The employee cannot be subjected to abusive language or promise
of reward as inducement for answering questions.
F.

 

6

If at any time during the course of an internal investigation, the employee under
investigation is suspected of committing a criminal offense, for which charges may result,
the employee shall be advised of the employee’s constitutional rights, prior to
commencement of any interrogation concerning criminal charges.

Upon request the employee shall have the right to be represented by counsel or any
other representative of the employee’s choice, who shall be present during any
interrogation and with whom the employee may be granted reasonable periods of private
consultation. For the purpose of initial training, two (2) Union representatives will be
permitted to be present during an interrogation. Where such counsel or representative is
not immediately available, the interrogation shall not be postponed for more than seventy
two (72) hours, excluding contractual holidays, provided, however, those cases involving
allegations of illegal drug use shall not be subject to postponement. During the interview,
counsel or representatives may not advise the employee on how to answer questions.
The counsel or representative may discuss the incident or the interview with the
employee during breaks. Moreover, at the end of the interview, the employee and the
employee's counsel or representative will be allowed to meet privately for a reasonable
period. Thereafter, the employee will be allowed to make any final comments regarding
the subject of the inquiry. Any such comments will be tape-recorded and if the comments
raise additional questions in the mind of the investigator, the investigator may ask follow-
up questions. Representatives may ask questions of the officer at the conclusion of the
interview. Total time for this additional questioning shall not exceed fifteen (15) minutes.

A Breathalyzer test may be administered to any employee who is reasonably suspected
of being intoxicated while in an on-duty status. If a traffic related offense is committed in
an on-duty status or involving the operation of a City owned vehicle, an employee may be
ordered to submit to any test designed to determine intoxication or the presence of
alcohol or controlled substance in the body. Furthermore, an employee may be subjected
to a polygraph examination designed to determine truthfulness, but only with the
employee's consent. Since employees have the right to refuse to submit to a polygraph
test, no reference will be made in any document/proceeding concerning the employees’
refusal. Polygraph information shall not be used for disciplinary purposes without
corroborating evidence. Only relevant questions to the issue at hand will be asked.
Reports of such tests and/or examinations will be made a part of the investigative files.

During internal investigations or interrogations, questions must be limited to the
circumstances surrounding the employee's alleged violation, and information relating
directly to the violation at hand. In instances of alleged criminal acts and with respect to
investigation of charges involving a series of alleged misconduct, such as harassment,
5.6

5.7

5.8

5.9

5.10

5.11

§.12

$.13

7

questions may also be asked relating to other violations of the same category. Employees
will be required to answer truthfully all case-related questions asked of them.

The City may establish a Citizen's Police Review Board as provided for in Chapter 48 of the
Code of the City of Orlando provided, however, no such Board shall have the authority to impose
or modify disciplinary actions against employees.

Prior to the final resolution of the disciplinary matter (through Step 4 of the Grievance procedure),
no public statements will be issued which are known to deliberately jeopardize an accused
employee's right to a fair hearing and/or trial.

An employee under investigation for charges not covered in section 5.14 may be relieved of
Police powers by sworn managers, the Chief, Deputy Chief of Police, or the Internal Affairs
Section Manager for investigation of alleged violation(s) and may be reassigned during the
pendency of the investigation. If so relieved, the employee shall carry a pager supplied by the
Department and shall respond to all pages and be able to arrive at the police headquarters
building within forty five (45) minutes, during business hours (8 a.m. to 5 p.m.), Monday through
Friday, excluding contractual holidays and previously approved leave time. The employee shall
Temain on full salary until recalled and/or disciplinary action is served.

The findings of Internal Affairs Investigations shall be labeled “sustained” (guilty as charged), or
“not sustained" (not guilty), “unfounded” (without merit), or "exonerated" (act was legal or policy
deficiency). No other terminology may be used.

Any "sustained" findings inserted in an employee's Civil Service Personnel File shall be removed
after one (1) year from the employee's Civil Service Personnel File and placed in the Internal
Affairs disciplinary file which will be retained in accordance with Florida State Statutes or as
otherwise legally provided by law. Files shall include computer records, whether on disks, or on
hard drives.

For the purposes of recommending discipline for a sustained violation, the employee's
supervisor(s) shall only receive a printout of the employee's past sustained unpurged violations.

An employee who is originally interviewed as a witness and subsequently becomes a principal
will be immediately so advised and all appropriate rights shail immediately attach.

When the administrative investigation is complete and a recommendation is made, copies of any
tape recordings of witnesses will be made available, at no cost, to the Union or to the officer
being investigated.

 
8

5.14 An employee under investigation or having pending criminal charges may be relieved of duty or
may be relieved of police powers and/or may be reassigned to reasonable alternative
departmental duty during the pendency of the disciplinary process.

An employee who is arrested or charged with a felony or designated misdemeanor under Section
943.13, Florida Statutes, who is not terminated, may be reassigned to reasonable alternative
departmental duty or may be relieved of duty without pay upon completion of the disciplinary
process. The employee may be required to remain in a relieved without pay status until a final
court disposition is rendered. Said employee may use any accrued Personal Leave or
Compensatory Time during this period.

An employee who is convicted of, or pleads nolo contendere to a felony or designated
misdemeanor under Section 943.13, Florida Statutes shall be terminated and shall not be entitled
to any back pay or benefits for any period of relief of duty pursuant to this section.

Any employee relieved of duty pursuant to this section who is convicted or pleads guilty or nolo
contendere to a lesser offense, or who otherwise plea bargains the employee's case, and is
therefore not convicted, nor has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or designated
misdemeanor under Section 943.13, Florida Statutes, will be fully restored to duty, but shall not
be entitled to any back pay or benefits for any period of relief of duty pursuant to this section.

Any employee relieved of duty pursuant to this section who is completely acquitted of all charges
(or has all charges dropped) related to the felony or designated misdemeanor under Section
943.13, Florida Statutes, will be fully restored to duty with all back pay and benefits for the period
of relief from duty, except for such discipline imposed against the employee in accordance with
this Article.

§.15 Any employee who is summoned before a departmental investigator, or Internal Affairs Section
during the employee’s normal off-duty hours will be compensated at the appropriately
established rate. Phone calls to an employee on behalf of the department during the employee's
off-duty hours, of a duration of less than three (3) minutes, will not be cause for compensation to
the employee. Such phone cails shall not be used for interviewinvestigation purposes without
the employee's consent.

5.16 All employees shall have the right to inspect and make notes of their individual records and no
records will be hidden from the employee's inspection. One copy of a disciplinary action (1.N.O.1.)
report will, upon request, be provided to the subject employee at no cost. One copy of the Notice
of Disciplinary Action and of the I.N.O.1, will also be furnished to the Union at no cost.

5.17 Violations & Disciplines
Violations of Regulations:

In that Regulations are standards of conduct, members and employees will be held
accountable for violations of Regulations. Initiation of investigations of alleged violations
of Policies or Regulations will be documented in the form of an Initial Notice of Inquiry
(.N.O.1)

Violations of Other Written Directives:
In that General Orders, Policy and Procedures, Supervisory Directives and Special

Orders are work rules, violations of these Directives will be documented in the employee's
supervisory notebook unless investigated pursuant to 5.8.
Types of Discipline:

For one (1) violation, there will be one (1) type discipline. The types of discipline shall be
as follows:

1) Oral Reprimand
2) Written Censure

3) Suspension Without Pay up to two hundred forty (240) work hours per violation.
Upon request of the employee, the forfeiture of accrued personal leave in lieu of a
suspension without pay is permitted provided the violation does not involve
indebtedness to the City. Furthermore, forfeiture of personal leave in lieu of the first
sixteen (16) hours of suspension without Pay is with the concurrence of the Chief of
Police (or designee).

4) Demotion
5) Termination

Progressive Discipline:

Discipline will be consistent and Progressive for similar or substantially similar violations
in the preceding 10-year period. The City shall make available electronically to the Union
its Disciplinary History, indexed by Rule and sub-part for the past ten years.

An employee's 10-year prior discipline history and the seriousness of the offense will be
important factors in determining discipline.

Recommendations for Discipline:

Recommendations as to the appropriate discipline will be requested from the employee’s
5.18

5.19

5.20

5.21

5.22

6.1

6.2

chain of command.

The discipline of, oral reprimand, written censure, and termination shall be invoked immediately.
All other disciplines shall be invoked at the conclusion of the grievance process.

Unless a disciplinary reason for a transfer is documented in writing, transfers may not be grieved
or arbitrated. Documentation of performance deficiencies shall not be considered documentation
of a disciplinary reason for transfer. This section does not waive any officer's fights existing
under Florida Statute 112.532 or other applicable federal, state or local law.

CJSTC results will be forwarded to any officer currently an employee of the Department, without
undue delay.

The Department will assign a liaison officer to accompany an involuntarily terminated officer in
completing the checkout procedure.

Work Rules

A Employees shail be required to observe and comply with written regulations governing
their empioyment as set forth in Departmental procedures and such special and general
orders and written communications which are not in conflict with this Agreement.

B. Employees shall be required to observe and comply with such additional or supplemental
tules and regulations promulgated and published by the Chief of the Police (or designees),
Provided only that such rules and regulations shall not be contrary to any of the provisions
of this collective bargaining agreement. No disciplinary action will be taken for violation ofa
tule or regulation until at least forty-eight (48) hours after posting.

Article 6
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

The purpose of this article is to establish a mechanism for the sole, expeditious and orderly
adjustment of grievances regarding contract and disciplinary disputes or disagreements between
the employer and employee, or group of employees, or Union involving the interpretation or
application of this collective bargaining agreement. However, the grievance procedure does not
bar any rights protected under Local, State or Federal Law.

Any formal grievance filed shall be on Proper forms supplied by the City (see Appendices A or B)
and shall refer to the Provision(s) of the Agreement alleged to have been violated and shall set
forth the facts pertaining to the alleged violation(s). Grievance forms submitted which do not
contain the above information and the remedy and are incomplete shall be returned to the
employee(s) or the Union to be re-filed. No grievance form may be amended from the original

 
