MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

BETWEEN

CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO

AND

SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION

UNITS P-1 AND P-2A

July 1, 2007 - June 30, 2018

Per Amendment #5
TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

  
 
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
 

 

ARTICLE I. REPRESENTATION ......cccsscssscssssssssssscssssssssssssssssssssssscssssssssesssssssssssesssesssesssensees 1
Section 1. Recognition. 1
Section 2. No Work Stoppages. 2
Section 3. Management Authorities. 2
Section 4. Negotiation Responsibility. 3
Section 5. Grievance Procedure. 3

A. Expedited Arbitration. 6
Section 6. Release Time for POA Representatives. 6
Section 7. Association. 7
A. Payroll Deductions. 7
B. Maintenance of Membership 8
Cc. Agency Shop.......... 8
Section 8. Bulletin Boards and Distribution of Material: 9

ARTICLE II. EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS. .......ccccscsssssssssssssssssssesssssssssssesesesssesssessseseees 11
Section 1. Non-Discrimimation. .........c.ccccccsessesessssesessssessesesessesessesesesssseseesesesseseseeneees 11
Section 2. Disabilities. . 12
Section 3. Personnel Files 12
Section 4. Rights of Individual Employees. 13
Section 5. Access to Records of Office of Citizen Complaints. 13
Section 6. Physical Fitness Program 14
Section 7. Pregnancy, Maternity and Family Care Leaves. 14

A. Pregnancy Policy. 14

B. Maternity Polic 15

Cc. Family Care Leave . 15
Section 8. Temporary Modified Duty Assignments 15
Section 9. Seniority List..... 16
Section 10. ‘Trading Privileges. 16
Section 11. | Watch Sign-Up.. 16
Section 12. Vacation Sign-U, 18
Section 13. _ Filling Vacancies. 19
Section 14. | Non-Emergency Special Event Assignments. 19
Section 15. Meals and Breaks During Demonstrations. .. 20
Section 16. Courtesy Parking System for Court Attendance. 20
Section 17. District Station Parking. 21
Section 18. | Code Book. .... 21
Section 19. | Employee Training Reimbursement Program 21
Section 20. | Medal of Valor Awards Ceremony............ 21
Section 21. _ Recruitment. 21

A. Referral bonu: 21

B. Lateral Signing Bonus 22

Cc. Recruitment Committee 22
Section 22. Officer Rotation. ...........c. 22
Section 23. | Substance Abuse Testing. 22

 

A. Mandatory Testing . 23

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
i

 
 
 
 
 

B. Reasonable Suspicion

Cc. Employee Responsibilities
D. Management Responsibilities and Guidelines
ARTICLE III. PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS. .......ccccscsssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssesssesssessseseees 26
Section 1. WAGES. ..seesescsesecscsescscscscscscsescssscssscsesescscscsesescsescsescasscacscasscaescscscasseasscaeacaes

Section 2.

Section 3.
Section 4.

Section 5.
Section 6.
Section 7.
Section 8.
Section 9.

Section 10.
Section 11.
Section 12.

ARTICLE IV. SCOPE.

Section 1.
Section 2.

 

A. General Wage Increases:..
B. Assistant Inspector Pay Parity.
Cc
D.

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 

Probationary Period and Step Advancement

Lateral and Current Permanent City Employees Step Plan and

Salary Adjustment 00.0... cccceeceeeceneseneeeneseneseneseneseneneneeeneeeneeees
Overtime and Compensatory Time-Off.
A. Overtime sees
B. Compensatory Time-Of
Holidays. .
Special Pays.
Canine Duty
Field Training and Training Unit Coordinator Pay.
Bomb Squad/SWAT Team Pay .
Specialist Pay..
Motorcycle Pay
Retention Pay......
Experienced Officer Incentive Pay 35
Standby Premium
Call-Back Pay .
Night Shift Differential .
Bilingual Pay.
Pyramiding...
Court Appearance Premium Pay and Administrative Hearings.
Acting Assignment Pay (Like Pay for Like Work).
Uniform and Clothing Allowance
Health and Dental Coverage
Retirement.
Wellness Programs.
Pilot Program for San Francisco Housin:
Paid Sick Leave Ordinance. ............000+

 

 

 

 

PROTEOME OOD>

 

 
 

Severability.
Duration. ......cecececeesesesseseeeeseseesesesessssesessesessssessesssessssessessseseescseessseseseseenees 47

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
ii
DEFINITIONS
City
Association
Commission
Day
Department
Charter

Immediate Supervisor

Intermediate Supervisor

Employee

Memorandum
Watch

Working Conditions

The City and County of San Francisco.

The San Francisco Police Officers' Association.

The Police Commission of the City and County of San Francisco.
Calendar day, unless otherwise specified.

The San Francisco Police Department.

The Charter of the City and County of San Francisco.

The individual who immediately assigns, reviews, or directs the work
of an employee.

The next higher supervisor based on the organization pattern of the
Department.

A full time peace officer within each classification listed in paragraph
1 herein, and used interchangeably with the word "officer."

This Memorandum of Understanding.
The period of time an employee is scheduled to be on duty.
Wages, hours, benefits and other terms and conditions of

employment, i.e., those matters within the scope of representation
under the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act.

The parties recognize that recodifications may have rendered the references to specific Civil Service
Rules and Charter sections contained herein, incorrect. Therefore, the parties agree that such terms
will read as if they accurately referenced the same sections in their codified form as of July 1, 2007.

PREAMBLE

This Memorandum of Understanding (hereinafter "MOU") constitutes a mutual agreement between
the San Francisco Police Officers’ Association (hereinafter referred to as the Association") and the
City and County of San Francisco (hereinafter referred to as the "City"), through the Office of the
Mayor acting on behalf of the City and County of San Francisco, arrived at through good faith
meeting and conferring pursuant to the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act and Charter Section A8.590-1, et.

seq.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND

SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

iii
ARTICLE I - REPRESENTATION

ARTICLE I. REPRESENTATION

Section 1. Recognition.

1. Pursuant to Government Code Section 3500, et. seq., the City recognizes the Association as the
majority bargaining agent for sworn personnel of the San Francisco Police Department in the
following bargaining units and classifications:

P-1 Police Rank and File
Q2 Police Officer
Q:3 Police Officer II
Q-4 Police Officer III
Q-35 Assistant Inspector
Q-36 Assistant Inspector II
Q-37 Assistant Inspector III
Q-50 Sergeant
Q-51 Sergeant II
Q-52 Sergeant III
0380 Inspector
0381 Inspector II
0382 Inspector III
9350 Harbor Police Officer

P-2A Police Supervisory
Q-60 Lieutenant

Q-61 Lieutenant II
Q-62 Lieutenant III
Q-80 Captain

Q-81 Captain II
Q-82 Captain III

2. Active officers who obtain sufficient education and experience to meet the minimum qualifications
of the ranks containing a POST certificate requirement shall be appointed to such ranks within thirty
(30) days after they present to the appointing officer evidence that they possess the POST
certification required for the rank.

3. It is the mutual understanding of the City and the Association that the compensation attached to
those ranks for which a POST certificate is required is not an increase in the general rate of
remuneration for the ranks or position of Q-2, Q-35, Q-50 and 0380, Q-60 and 0460, Q-80, 0488
and/or 0400, within the meaning of the Charter of the City and County, including but not limited to
Section A8.559-6.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
1
ARTICLE I - REPRESENTATION

4.

Should any retiree or other party initiate litigation challenging this mutual interpretation, and the
mutual intent of these parties, and seek to obtain an adjustment of allowances for any Police
Department retirees pursuant to the Charter of the City and County based upon this Agreement, the
SFPOA shall fully support the defense of such claims by the City and County, and shall take
appropriate legal steps to intervene in, and become party to, such litigation and in such litigation
will fully support the mutual intention of the parties as described in this Agreement.

The parties and each and every individual employee specifically agree and recognize that this
Agreement creates no vested rights. Should any final judgment by superior court or court of
competent jurisdiction at any time adjudge and decree that retirees are entitled to an adjustment of
their allowances as a result of the establishment of these ranks, then the Agreement which created
these ranks and set a new base rate for such ranks to be included within the rate of remuneration for
pension calculation purposes shall be null and void, and shall cease immediately. If such a
judgment issues, the parties further hereby agree that the base pay rate and premium of each
appointee to these ranks shall retroactively revert to the then current base rate of pay and to the
premium eligibility provided by the Memorandum of Understanding prior to the creation of these
ranks. The parties also agree to retroactively recalculate the retirement contribution and allowance
of such officers as if this agreement had never been in effect. Provided, however, that if such a
recalculation should occur, no bargaining unit employee who had received compensation based on
the rates of pay for these ranks shall be obligated to pay back any monies which they had received
between the effective date of their appointment and the time of such recalculation. Thereafter, the
City and the Association shall mutually engage in meeting and conferring in order to reach
agreement on alternative benefits.

Section 2. No Work Stoppages.

During the time this MOU is in force and effect, the Association and each member of its bargaining
unit covenant and agree that she/he/it will not authorize, engage or participate in any strike, work
slowdown or any form of work stoppage including but not limited to absenteeism, observing picket
lines or any other form of sympathy strike.

Section 3. Management Authorities.

The City shall have authority for the policies and administration of the Department and the power to
organize, reorganize and manage the Police Department and its employees. Nothing in this
document shall be interpreted as abrogating the Charter in any of its parts. Said authority shall
include, but not be limited to, work rules and regulations. This paragraph is not to be interpreted as
a limitation on the rights of the Association under the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
2
ARTICLE I - REPRESENTATION

8.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Section 4. Negotiation Responsibility.

A. Except in cases of emergency, the City/Department shall give reasonable written notice to the

Association of any proposed change in general orders or other matters within the scope of
representation as specified in Government Code Section 3504.5. The Association shall be
provided with the opportunity to meet and confer with regard to any such proposed change
should it desire to do so.

In cases of emergency when the City/Department determines that a proposed change as
described herein must be adopted immediately without prior notice or meetings with the
Association, the City/Department shall provide such notice and opportunity to meet at the
earliest practicable time following the adoption of such change.

. If the Association does not respond within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of receipt of

written notification of a proposed change as described in subsection A. hereof, the Association
shall be deemed to have waived its opportunity to meet and confer on the proposed change.

. If the Association timely requests the opportunity to meet and confer as provided herein, the

City/Department, with the direct assistance and participation of the Employee Relations
Division, agrees to meet and confer with the Association over such proposed change or changes,
within thirty (30) calendar days of such timely request, unless a longer period of time is
mutually agreed upon, in order to freely exchange information, opinions and proposals and to
endeavor to reach agreement on the proposed change or changes.

. If no agreement is reached, the matter shall, at the request of either party, be resolved pursuant

to the impasse procedures set forth in Charter Sections A8.590-1 through A8.590-7. Staffing
matters, except for current safety practices pertaining to two-officer vehicles, shall be excluded
from the impasse procedures set forth in Charter Sections A8.590-1 through A8.590-7.

. Except as provided in subsection C. hereof, the Association agrees that it will make no

proposals for change in the terms and conditions of employment of bargaining unit members for
the duration of this Memorandum.

This Memorandum sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties regarding the
matters set forth herein, and any and all prior and existing Memoranda of Understanding,
Understandings, or Agreements, whether formal or informal, are hereby superseded or
terminated in their entirety. This Memorandum may be modified, but only in writing, upon the
mutual consent of the parties and ratification by the Board of Supervisors.

Section 5. Grievance Procedure.

The City and the Association recognize that early settlement of grievances is essential to sound
employee-employer relations. The parties seek to establish a mutually satisfactory method for the

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
3
ARTICLE I - REPRESENTATION

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

settlement of grievances, as provided for below. In presenting a grievance, the aggrieved and/or his
or her representative is assured freedom from restraint, interference, coercion, discrimination or
reprisal.

Grievances or disputes regarding the application or interpretation of this Agreement or relating to
working conditions arising out of this Agreement, or relating to General Orders 3.08, 3.15, 11.01,
11.03, 11.05, 11.06 and 11.10, including the arbitrability thereof, shall be settled in conformity with
the following procedure. Except, however, actions taken by the City that are necessary to ensure
compliance with federal, state or local laws, ordinances or regulations, or that are mandated by the
terms of a consent decree, shall not be grievable hereunder. After notice of such intended action by
the City, the Association may however, offer in writing its view on compliance and possible
alternative solutions, within ten (10) days to the Chief of Police who shall respond in writing to the
Association within ten (10) business days. In addition, in the event the City acts on a matter it has
reasonably determined to be mandated by or necessary to ensure compliance with a consent decree
or with federal, state, or local laws, ordinances or regulations, that action shall not be grievable
hereunder. In the event a grievance is filed relating to such actions, arbitrability shall be determined
by a court of competent jurisdiction.

Step I

Where an employee initiates the grievance, the employee shall submit the grievance in writing
to the employee’s immediate supervisor within thirty (30) days of the facts or event giving rise
to the grievance. The supervisor shall attempt to adjust the grievance at the time and render a
written decision within seven (7) calendar days.

Step II

If the grievance is not resolved in Step I, the grievant or the Association representative shall
submit the grievance in writing to the commanding officer. The grievance must be filed with
the commanding officer not later than seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the decision by the
employee from the immediate supervisor, stating the reasons why the Step I answer was not
satisfactory.

After review and discussion, the commanding officer shall notify the grievant(s) and the
Association representative within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the grievance, in writing,
of the decision and the reasons.

Step III

If the grievance is not resolved in Step II, the Association representative shall submit the
grievance to the Chief of Police within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the commanding
officer's decision stating the reasons why the Step II answer is not satisfactory.

The Chief will review the material submitted and shall hold a meeting on the grievance at the
request of the Association representative on behalf of the grievant, unless the Chief is not

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
4
ARTICLE I - REPRESENTATION

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

empowered to act. The Chief shall respond in writing to the grievant, and the Association,
within ten (10) working days.

Step IV

If the grievance is not resolved at Step III, the Association has the right to appeal the decision of
the Chief of Police to arbitration. Prior to doing so and within seven (7) calendar days, the
Association shall notify the Chief of Police and the Director, Employee Relations Division or
his/her designee of the Association’s decision to so appeal, and shall forward the relevant
materials to the Director, Employee Relations. The Director, Employee Relations shall have
twelve (12) calendar days after receipt of the written grievance to review and seek resolution of
the grievance.

If the Director, Employee Relations is unable to resolve the grievance to the mutual satisfaction
of the parties in the time prescribed, the grievance may then be submitted only by the
Association to arbitration.

The arbitrator shall be an impartial person selected by mutual consent of the parties. If the
parties cannot agree on an arbitrator within seven (7) calendar days from the date of receipt of
the Employee Relations Division’s response, the parties shall select an arbitrator from a list of
seven (7) names from the California State Mediation and Conciliation Service.

The decision of the Arbitrator shall be final and binding upon the parties. The Arbitrator shall
not have the right to alter, amend, delete or add to any of the terms of this Agreement.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this MOU, disciplinary or punitive actions described in
Charter Section 8.343 cannot be grieved or arbitrated. An arbitrator selected pursuant hereto
shall have no authority to hear or decide any such disciplinary or punitive actions.

An Arbitrator selected pursuant to this Agreement shall have no power or authority to alter or
supersede the Charter, the Civil Service Commission rules, the Administrative Code or the
Federal Consent Decree.

The parties shall share the jointly-incurred costs of the arbitration proceedings. Each party shall
in good faith divulge to the other party all available material facts at the time said party acquires
knowledge thereof concerning the matter in dispute.

Nothing herein shall restrict the right of the City or the Department to initiate grievances under
this Agreement. In such instance, only Steps III and IV shall be applicable prior to the
determination to proceed to arbitration.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
5
ARTICLE I - REPRESENTATION

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

A. Expedited Arbitration

Notwithstanding the above provisions, the parties may by mutual agreement agree to submit a
particular grievance to expedited arbitration. Expedited arbitration may include, by the
agreement of the parties:

time-limited argument;

waiver of court reporter and/or transcript;

closing arguments in lieu of briefs;

bench decision by the arbitrator; and

such other expedited procedures as the parties deem advisable for the case at hand.

YRWNP

Section 6. Release Time for POA Representatives.

 

An employee may designate another employee below the rank of Commander to represent him/her
in grievance or discipline meetings mutually scheduled with Department management and
scheduled appeals hearings without loss of pay or benefits to the extent such representation occurs
on regular scheduled time, and provided such use of on-duty time is reasonable.

A reasonable number of Association representatives may participate with management in mutually
scheduled employer-employee relations meetings on their regularly scheduled duty time without
loss of pay or benefits. One Association representative other than the President may be released
from duty as necessary to attend public meetings of the Police Commission. This representative
shall not appear before the Commission in uniform. This release from duty is subject to the
operational needs of the department.

The City agrees to provide the POA President with eighty (80) hours of release time each pay
period. Sixty (60) of these release time hours each pay period will be on City time. The POA will
reimburse the Department for the remaining twenty (20) hours each pay period.

The POA agrees that the start of the term of office for a newly-elected POA President will coincide
with the start of a City pay period. The President’s pay rate shall include POST pay and any
retention pay for which he/she is eligible. The President shall not be eligible for other pay
premiums, other special pays, overtime assignments, or “10B” assignments during the period of
release time. The POA President will be considered to be on a standard five (5) day workweek
during such release time.

While on release time, the President will utilize accrued leave, as appropriate, for any absences.
The use of such leave time will be reported to the Departmental Human Resources Officer for
accounting purposes.

During the sixty (60) hours each pay period of City-paid release time, the POA President shall
engage only in the following activities:

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
6
ARTICLE I - REPRESENTATION

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

1. preparing for and participating in meet and confer or consultation with representatives of the
City or Police Department on matters relating to employment conditions and employee
relations, including wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment; and

2. investigating or processing grievances or appeals.

The POA President shall not participate in any other activities, including but not limited to political
activities, during this City-paid release time. The POA President shall provide documentation to the
Chief certifying that during each pay period, the POA President used the sixty (60) hours of City-
paid release time only for authorized purposes. The POA President shall provide this certification at
the conclusion of each pay period.

The POA agrees to reimburse the City for the balance of the release time, which is twenty (20)
hours of release time each pay period. The amount reimbursed to the City shall be 1.35 times the
base hourly rate of pay for the permanent rank held by the POA President. The POA shall submit
the required payment to the Police Department within 11 days after the close of each pay period.

It is understood and agreed that during all release time hours, including those for which the City is
reimbursed by the POA, the President is required to comply with all applicable departmental and
City rules and policies for active duty officers, including attendance at training, maintenance of
certifications, and compliance with the substance abuse policy and any applicable departmental
Statement of Incompatible Activities. The President will sign a statement to that effect at the
commencement of the initial period of release time.

As a precondition to providing this release time, the POA agrees to execute an agreement, in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney, that indemnifies and holds the City harmless from any legal claims
by any party as to the conduct of the President during any period of release time. This agreement
will be executed prior to the start of the release time.

The parties acknowledge that qualified POA officials utilizing unpaid union leave may be entitled to
receive service credit consistent with Charter Section A8.519.

Section 7. Association.

A. Payroll Deductions

The Association shall provide the Employee Relations Director and the City Controller with a
complete list of the City classifications subject to this section represented by the Association, a
statement of the membership dues for employees in each classification, and a list of employees
in said classification who have signed authorizations for payroll dues deductions. Such list of
represented classifications and statement of membership dues shall be amended as necessary.
The Controller may take up to thirty (30) days to implement such changes. The Controller shall
make required membership dues payroll deductions for the Association as designated from the

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
7
ARTICLE I - REPRESENTATION

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

list submitted by the Association. The Association shall pay the reasonable costs of this service.
Such costs shall be established by the Controller of the City and County of San Francisco.

Effective the first complete pay period commencing after the receipt of dues authorization
deduction forms by the Controller and each pay period thereafter, the Controller shall make
membership dues deductions, as appropriate, from the regular periodic payroll warrant of each
POA member described above.

Maintenance of Membership

Employees covered by this MOU who have voluntarily joined the Association, and have
authorized payroll deduction of dues, initiation fees, premiums for insurance programs and
political action fund contributions, shall, for the administrative convenience of the parties, be
permitted to revoke authorization for the deduction of Association dues only during the month
of May for any year. Any request for such revocation shall be delivered in person to the Office
of the Controller or may be sent by U.S. mail to the Controller, whose current address is 875
Stevenson Street, San Francisco, CA 94103. The City shall deliver a copy of any revocation
notice to the Association not later than July 1.

Agency Shop

1. Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to all police officers of bargaining
unit P-1.

2. Implementation. An agency shop shall be implemented within representation units or
subunits when:

a. Election

The Union has requested, in writing, an election on the issue, to be conducted by the
State Conciliation Service and 50% plus one of those voting favor implementation
of an agency shop, or

b. 2/3 Membership

The Union makes a showing that 2/3 of the employees within the unit or subunit are
dues-paying members of the Union, or

c New Employees

The Union requests, in writing, an agency shop be implemented for all employees
hired after a date to be agreed to by the Union and the Employee Relations Division.

3. Service Fee. All police officers of bargaining unit P-1 except as set forth below, shall, as a
condition of continued employment, become and remain a member of the Association, or in
lieu thereof, shall pay a service fee to the Association. The fair share service fee payment

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
8
ARTICLE I - REPRESENTATION

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

shall be established annually by the Association, provided that such fair share agency shop
service fee will be used by the Association only for the purposes permitted by law. The
Association shall give all non-member employees of affected bargaining units written notice
of their obligation to either join or pay an agency shop fee as a condition of employment.
After such notice and a time period agreed to by the parties, service fees from non-members
shall be collected by payroll deduction pursuant to Administrative Code Section 16.90.
Failure to comply with this section shall be grounds for termination. The Association, at its
option, may elect to waive its rights to demand termination and instead utilize judicial
process to compel payment.

. Financial Reporting. Annually, the Association will provide an explanation of the fee and

sufficient financial information to enable the fair share service fee payer to gauge the
appropriateness of the fee. The Association will provide a reasonably prompt opportunity to
challenge the amount of the fee before an impartial decision-maker, not chosen by the
Association, and will make provision for an escrow account to hold amounts reasonably in
dispute while challenges are pending.

. Religious Exemption. Any employee covered by this provision who is a member of a bona

fide religion, body or sect that has historically held conscientious objections to joining or
financially supporting a public employee organization and is recognized by the National
Labor Relations Board to hold such objections to labor union membership shall, upon
presentation of membership and historical objection, be relieved of any obligation to pay the
required service fee. The Association shall be informed in writing of any such requests.

 

. Payment of Sums Withheld. Nine (9) working days following payday, the City will

promptly pay over to the Association, less the fee for making such deductions, all sums
withheld for membership or service fees. The City shall also provide with each payment a
list of employees paying such service fees.

Indemnification. The Association agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless for any
loss or damage arising from the operation of this section.

. The Union shall comply with the requirements set forth in Chicago Teachers Union v.

Hudson, 475 U.S. 292 (1986) for the deduction of agency shop fees. Annually, the Union
shall certify in writing to the City that the content of the written notice meets the
requirements set forth in this section and in Hudson.

Section 8. Bulletin Boards and Distribution of Materials.

 

A reasonable amount of space on bulletin boards within police buildings shall be made available for
the dissemination of Association literature. All literature shall be dated, shall be identified by
affiliation and author, and shall be neatly displayed, and removed from said bulletin board when no
longer timely. The Department agrees that Association literature shall not be removed from said
bulletin boards without first consulting with the station, bureau, or unit representative of the
Association to determine if the literature should remain for an additional period of time. The

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
9
ARTICLE I - REPRESENTATION

Department is authorized to remove any literature not posted within the specific limits of this
section upon notifying the affected Association representative.

59. Distribution of Association literature by any Association member shall be done so as not to interfere
with or interrupt the performance of official police duties.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
10
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

ARTICLE IT. EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

Section 1. Non-Discrimination.

The City and the Association agree that no person employed or applying for employment shall in
any way be discriminated against because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin,
physical handicap, age, political affiliation or opinion, gender identity or sexual orientation, nor
shall such a person be the subject of sexual or racial harassment. This paragraph shall not be
construed to restrict or proscribe voluntary affirmative action efforts by the Department; nor shall
any rule, policy, procedure, order, action, determination or practice taken to ensure compliance with
the purpose, goals, or requirements of a consent decree be restricted by the provisions of this
paragraph.

This section is not intended to affect the right of an employee to elect any applicable administrative
remedy for discrimination proscribed herein. Provided, however, the parties agree that an employee
may elect only one administrative remedy, except as provided in paragraph 64. It is understood that
this paragraph shall not foreclose the election by an affected employee of any administrative or
statutory remedy provided by law.

The parties recognize that in a disciplinary proceeding, or any other context in which EEO issues
are administratively determined by the City or the police department, the City does not represent
individual police officers. Accordingly, the parties recognize the Association has a duty to fairly
represent all of its members and that this duty applies to POA members who are complainants in
discrimination cases, as well as to POA members who may be accused of discriminatory conduct.

Neither the City nor the Association shall interfere with, intimidate, restrain, coerce or discriminate
against any employee because of the exercise of rights granted pursuant to the Meyers-Milias-
Brown Act.

An employee who elects an administrative remedy other than the grievance procedure contained in
this MOU for discrimination proscribed herein, and whose complaint is not resolved within thirty
(30) days, shall have the right to seek relief in accord with the grievance procedure. In such
instances, the employee may initiate his/her grievance at Step III.

It is understood and agreed that any disciplinary action against an employee that may be initiated or
result from the application or interpretation of these provisions shall not be subject to the grievance
and arbitration provisions of Article I, Section 5 of this Agreement. Any action grieved pursuant to
this section and determined to be violative thereof may be set aside by the Chief of the Department
or the Police Commission.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
11
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

Section 2. Disabilities.

The parties agree that they are required to provide reasonable accommodations for persons with
disabilities in order to comply with the provisions of the Americans With Disabilities Act (“ADA”),
the Fair Employment and Housing Act (“FEHA”) and all other applicable federal, state and local
disability anti-discrimination statutes and further agree that this Memorandum will not be
interpreted, administered or applied in any manner which is inconsistent with said statutes. The
City reserves the right to take any action necessary to comply therewith.

Section 3. Personnel Files.

The City shall maintain personnel files for each employee. Employees or their authorized
representatives have the right to examine the contents of their master personnel files maintained by
the Personnel Division during business hours Monday through Friday excluding legal holidays.
Adverse comments may not be placed in the employees’ master personnel files without the
employees’ having acknowledged notice of the adverse comments on the face of the document prior
to placement of the comments in the files. Employees may cause to be placed in their master
personnel files responses to adverse material inserted therein and a reasonable amount of
correspondence as determined by the Chief originating from other sources directly related to their
job performance may be placed in employees’ master personnel files.

Only persons authorized by the Commanding Officer of the Personnel Division may review an
employee’s master personnel file.

This section regarding employee access and authorized review applies to materials contained in files
of cases classified as improper conduct in the Management Control Division and EEO Unit after the
Chief determines to proceed with disciplinary action. All other access to the files at the
Management Control Division and EEO Unit must be pursuant to a valid discovery motion filed and
approved by the Police Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction except as provided in
subsection D. below regarding sealed reprimands except where access is deemed by the City to
pertain to investigations, EEO compliance, Consent Decrees or other legal or administrative
proceedings.

Formal reprimands without further penalty will not be considered for purposes of promotion,
transfer or special assignments after the formal reprimand has been in the employee’s personnel file
for two (2) years or after the earlier of the two time periods listed below have elapsed:

1. not later than three (3) years from the date the complaint against the officer is filed, absent
requests for hearing, appeals, delays requested by the employee or the Union, and the tolling
of time periods under Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights Act (POBR); or

2. not later than two (2) years from the notice of the intent to reprimand, absent requests for
hearing, appeals, delays requested by the employee or the Union, and the tolling of time
periods under POBR.

 

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
12
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

Formal reprimands with additional penalty more than five (5) years old will not be considered for
purposes of promotion, transfer or special assignments.

All officers shall have the right to review their master personnel file and identify all such
documents. Upon concurrence of the Commanding Officer of Personnel that such documents have
been appropriately identified, they will be placed in an envelope, sealed and initialed by the officer.
The envelope will be placed in the officer's personnel file and will be opened only in the event that
the officer is in the future subject to discipline or access is deemed by the City to pertain to
investigations, EEO compliance, Consent Decrees or other legal or administrative proceedings.

Section 4. Rights of Individual Employees.

An employee may not be disciplined or subjected to punitive action without written notice of the
disciplinary action. The employee is entitled to receive a copy of the charges and material upon
which the disciplinary action is based. This provision shall not be subject to the grievance and
arbitration procedure set forth in this Agreement.

The Employer agrees to use the principle of progressive discipline in the application of punitive
action where appropriate. The Employer is not precluded from imposing suspension and/or
termination if the facts so indicate without first imposing lesser forms of punitive action. This
provision shall not be subject to the grievance and arbitration procedure set forth in this Agreement.

The Department shall not subject an employee to examination by the Police Physician without
informing the employee of the underlying reasons for the examination. Employees are entitled to
have a person of the same sex designated by the Chief of Police present during any examination by
the Police Physician. An employee may seek an opinion of another physician of his/her choice and
at his/her own expense and this supplemental report of such physician is to be submitted to the
Police Physician. The Police Physician must consider the supplemental information in making his
recommendation to the Chief. The employee is entitled to receive a copy of the recommendation of
the Police Physician’s final report. The Chief of Police will make the final decision as to the
recommendation filed by the Police Physician.

Section 5. Access to Records of Office of Citizen Complaints.

 

It is agreed that a complainant's Office of Citizen Complaints (OCC) complaint form shall be
released to the complainant upon request.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Memorandum of Understanding, in the event an OCC
investigative hearing is determined to be appropriate and is scheduled, the affected employee and
the complainant, prior to said hearing and upon seventy-two (72) hours’ advance notice, shall have
access to all evidence not deemed to be confidential pursuant to the Police Commission rules. Such

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
13
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

access shall consist of inspection of materials and, upon request, copies of materials for use by the
employee and the complainant.

Review and receipt of evidence shall be permitted only upon the execution by the requesting party
and his or her representative of a confidentiality statement approved by the Police Commission.
The Police Commission shall monitor the application of this paragraph and shall implement policies
and procedures designed to ensure compliance herewith.

Summary disposition reports, the format of which shall be set by the Police Commission and which
shall include a brief description of the complaint and summary findings of fact, shall be prepared by
the OCC in matters that are not sustained, as well as in those matters which are disposed of by the
Chief of Police and do not result in a Police Commission hearing. These reports shall be available
for public review and disclosure. Such reports shall not contain the name(s) of the complainant(s)
nor of the charged officer(s) nor contain any information which would (a) deprive a person of the
right to a fair trial or an impartial adjudication; (b) disclose investigative techniques and procedures
deemed confidential by the Police Commission; (c) disclose confidential information when
disclosure is prohibited by any law; (d) endanger the life or physical safety of any person, including
but not limited to, law enforcement personnel; or (e) result in an unnecessary invasion of the
personal privacy of an individual.

The OCC, in conjunction with the Police Commission, shall develop procedures which may utilize
face-to-face dispute resolution in appropriate cases. Use of these procedures will be voluntary and
subject to the veto power of the OCC for the complainant or the affected employee.

Disputes regarding this section shall be resolved by utilization of existing rules and regulations and
shall not be subject to the grievance and arbitration procedure contained in this Memorandum of
Understanding.

Section 6. Physical Fitness Program.

The physical fitness program as set forth in General Order 11.10 and as outlined in the Physical

Fitness Program Information Booklet (revised July, 1993) shall remain in effect, and shall be
available to all employees covered under this MOU.

Section 7. Pregnancy, Maternity and Family Care Leaves.

 

A. Pregnancy Policy

The medical opinion of the employee’s attending physician as to the length of time the
employee can perform full duty without danger due to pregnancy will be honored subject to
Civil Service Commission Rules.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
14
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

At the time the attending physician notifies the Department in writing requesting limited duty
status for the pregnant employee, the employee will be released to limited duty consistent with
Department policy.

Pregnant employees may wear their civilian clothing or, with the approval of the Department, a
uniform modified for pregnancy. There is no official Department maternity wear.

Vacation and sick leave with pay may be taken by the pregnant officer at any time up to amount
accumulated and consistent with Department and Civil Service Rules governing the use of such
time.

B. Maternity Policy
Maternity leave is the right of every employee in accordance with Civil Service Commission
Rules. Attached for informational purposes only as Appendix A is Civil Service Rule 220 (in
part) dealing with leaves of absence (general requirements) and sick leave (sick leave -
maternity).
The starting date for maternity leave is a decision of the employee and her doctor.
The return date from maternity is a decision of the employee and her doctor.

The employee has the right to include vacation time in maternity leave.

When an employee returns to work from her maternity leave, she will be reinstated to her
original job (same location and shift) as assigned to her on the start date of her maternity leave.

Cc. Family Care Leave

Family care leave shall be granted to employees in accordance with Civil Service Commission
Rule 220.

An employee’s return to work from family care leave shall be governed by the existing practices
of the Department with respect to all other leaves of absence.

Section 8. Temporary Modified Duty Assignments.

 

Temporary modified duty assignments shall be administered in accordance with the revised General
Order 11.12. The parties agree that, except for matters related to compensation while engaged in
temporary modified duty assignments, decisions made pursuant to General Order 11.12 shall not be
grievable under the parties’ MOU.

For reference, General Order 11.12 is incorporated herein as Appendix B.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
15
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

Section 9. Seniority List.

The Department shall establish a master seniority list comprised of all employees by Civil Service
rank, which shall be maintained on a current basis, and which shall be posted each year from
January 1 until December 31 in each district station, bureau and unit, in conspicuous places, and a
copy thereof shall be delivered to the Secretary of the Association. Objections to the seniority list
shall be reported to the Chief on or before January 15 of each year.

Traffic Company Seniority. Notwithstanding the preceding paragraph, seniority within the Traffic
Company shall first be based upon the date of assignment to the Traffic Company. Should officers
be assigned on the same date, their seniority on the Department’s DGO 11.06 list will be
determinative. Unit seniority will be utilized through June 30, 2015 only.

All objections shall be considered on their merits and appropriate actions shall be promptly taken.

Section 10. _ Trading Privileges.

An employee may trade his or her tour of duty with another employee of the same rank within
his/her unit with the approval of his/her Commanding Officer, provided said trade results in no net
increase in cost to the City and further provided that employees shall not exceed one trade for every
two pay periods. Such trades shall be paid back within 90 days.

Section 11. _ Watch Sign-Up.

A. Employees assigned to a station or unit shall be assigned to watches according to a semi
annual seniority sign-up.

B. Rules of the Sign-Ups.
Each unit/station will conduct two (2) seniority sign-ups per year as follows:
1. Commanding Officers will determine the size of each watch in advance of the sign-up.
2. Employees will sign up for their choice of watch in order of seniority.

3. The results of the Sign-Up will take effect on the first day of the first pay period in the
months of March and September of each year of this MOU.

4. The Sign-Up period will commence thirty (30) calendar days prior to the first day of the first
pay period in the months of March and September of each year of this MOU.

5. The Sign-Up period will close no sooner than seven (7) calendar days prior to the first day
of the first pay period in the months of March and September of each year of this MOU.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
16
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

6. Each unit/station will publish and post the final results of the Sign-Up no later than five (5)
calendar days prior to the first day of the first pay period in the months of March and
September of each year of this MOU.

Transfers Between Stations.

If an employee is transferred from one station to another by Department action, the employee’s
current watch choice continues until the next station sign-up.

If an employee transfers to another station at his/her own request, he/she forfeits his/her right to
a particular watch, and may have to wait for the next station sign-up. If more than one
employee transfers to the same station, seniority shall apply to watch assignments for the
interim period.

Applicability of the Watch Sign-Ups.

1. The seniority watch sign-up policy will apply to assignments to watches as determined by
the Commanding Officer's analysis of deployment needs and to the
Community/Neighborhood Policing Program.

2. Employees who are reassigned to another watch as a result of the semiannual seniority
watch sign-up shall be entitled to their original vacation selection based on prior sign-up.

The District Station Commanding Officer shall have the authority to assign up to seven (7)
individual employees without regard to seniority at each station including the Airport
Bureau, for purposes of filling specialized and staff positions (i.e., permit investigation
officer, plain-clothes cars, special duty or community relations officer) but not limited to
them, when it is necessary to have an individual assigned to a special unit which requires
experience or other articulable qualifications possessed by the employee to be assigned, and
which experience or qualifications would not be attained by filling the assignment by
seniority.

The District Commanding Officer may assign employees with the lowest qualifying
seniority to another watch for the following reasons:

1. Agreement of officer after conducting a canvass of employees of the station or unit.

2. Need for non-probationary officers to work with probationary officers in order to field the
platoon.

3. Employees who have a special need may be reassigned to another watch during the year
based on need or unforeseen conditions which occurred after the semiannual watch sign-up.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
17
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

G. Solo Motorcycle Officers.
The following shall apply to Solo Motorcycle Officers in the ranks of “Police Officer.”

1. There shall be one Department-wide transfer list for Co. K Solos and the Airport Bureau
Solos.

2. For purpose of the bi-annual seniority sign-up, Solo Motorcycle Officers in Co. K and at the
Airport Bureau will be treated as one unit.

3. The Airport Bureau Solo Motorcycle Officers shall have a unit seniority date of January 1,
2001 for the purposes, only, of the bi-annual seniority sign-up. These Officers shall have
this unit seniority date for watch-sign purposes so long as they remain at the Airport Bureau.

4. Inthe event two Solo Motorcycle Officers from either Co. K or the Airport Bureau share the
same unit seniority date, their departmental seniority date will be the tiebreaker for seniority
sign-up purposes.

5. During each bi-annual seniority sign-up, Co. K will post its bid positions; then Airport
Bureau will post its bid positions. Solo Motorcycle Officers, from either unit, may then
sign-up for open positions in either unit on the basis of their unit seniority.

6. No employee of the Co. K Solo Motorcycle Unit or the Airport Bureau Solo Motorcycle
Unit assigned to such unit prior to January 1, 2001, will be displaced from their unit as a
result of the bi-annual seniority sign-up.

7. Consistent with past practice, any Solo Motorcycle Officers assigned in the future to either
Co. K or the Airport Bureau will commence their unit seniority on the first day of their
assignment. Unit seniority will be utilized through June 30, 2015 only.

8. Any future Solo Motorcycle Officer vacancies in either Co. K or the Airport Bureau will be
offered to the next officer on the P-1 list. Any officer filling a vacancy from the P-1 list
shall remain in that assignment until the next bi-annual seniority sign-up. At that time any
such officer may exercise his or her unit seniority to fill any vacancy in either unit.

H. Watch sign-ups are not final until five (5) calendar days prior to adoption.

Section 12. _ Vacation Sign-Up.

When using discretionary time-off, employees shall use accrued EH (Equivalent Holiday), FH
(Floating Holiday), and/or PE (Physical Fitness Time) prior to using accrued VA (Vacation) and/or
OU (Overtime Use). Employees who have reached maximum vacation time accrual limits are
exempted from the application of this section.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
18
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

Employees at each station or unit shall, by watch, sign up by seniority for vacation on an annual
basis prior to the first full pay period in March of each year but in all cases after the first watch sign-
up in any calendar year. After the date of this vacation sign-up, no employee’s scheduled vacation
may be displaced by a subsequent request by a more senior employee. An appropriate and sufficient
number of vacation slots shall be made available so that all employees on a given watch may
exercise their vacation rights.

Additionally, time shall be provided on such vacation sign-up to allow employees, by reverse
seniority, to sign up for one week of compensatory time-off.

If an employee is transferred from one station or unit to another by Department action, his or her
vacation choice shall continue. If an employee transfers to another station or unit by his or her
request, the employee’s choice of vacation may be forfeited based on staffing needs at the new
assignment.

Section 13. _ Filling Vacancies.

When a vacancy occurs in a promotional rank, an eligible list exists for that rank, a position exists
in the budget for the promotion and an appointment is made, the promotional appointment shall be
made immediately on a permanent basis. Upon request, the City will provide the POA with the
number of all available, authorized, budgeted positions for each promotive rank (i.e., sergeant,
lieutenant, and captain) covered by this Agreement.

Section 14. | Non-Emergency Special Event Assignments.

 

This Department is frequently called upon to provide police services for one-time special events
such as, but not limited to, parades, marathons, community festivals, and bicycle races. These
events take place on City streets and usually require large numbers of police officers.

In order to minimize the impact on the Department's ability to provide police services at the district
stations, it is necessary to utilize off-duty personnel to augment the normal complement of officers
assigned for duty on the day of the event.

The Department shall determine the number of officers that are needed to police the special event
and utilize the following:

1. On-duty personnel working their regular watch who can be spared from normal police
duties within the district.

2. Officers Working EWW. This group will include officers working beyond their normal
tour of duty and officers working their normal watch off.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
19
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

An employee’s regular watch shall not be changed more than three (3) hours to avoid the payment
of overtime in the policing of an event of this sort except that management may adjust regular
watches up to seven (7) hours for July 4", October 31°, and December 31° without incurring
overtime costs.

Specialized units in the Department (Tactical, Solos, Hondas, etc.) are an exception to this policy in
that the very nature of their assignment requires flexible scheduling. EWW will be used for these
units only if policing the event requires additional manpower beyond their normal operating
complement.

Employees who are called in to work during their normal watch off pursuant to this Section shall be
granted a minimum of four (4) hours’ pay (or compensatory time-off pursuant to Article III., Section
2 of this Agreement) at the applicable rate or shall be compensated for all hours actually worked at
the applicable rate, whichever is greater. The Department will make every reasonable effort to call-
in only those employees whose service is necessary for the special event, and shall release
employees when their service is no longer reasonably required.

Before preparing any operations order, District Station Commanding Officers shall confer with the
Chief's designee as to whether or not this Special Order covers a specific event scheduled to occur
within their district.

Section 15. __ Meals and Breaks During Demonstrations.

The Department shall provide meals or a reasonable meal break time for employees assigned to
special events where active duty thereat continues for more than four (4) consecutive hours. If the
Department fails to or is unable to provide such meals, the Association may do so and will be
reimbursed for the reasonable cost thereof on such occasions by the Department. This provision is
subject to the development of procedures by the Department for the reimbursement for the cost of
meals provided by the Association.

The Department shall assure that employees have reasonable access to restroom facilities during
special events where active duty thereat continues for more than four (4) consecutive hours.

Section 16. __ Courtesy Parking System for Court Attendance.

 

The Department agrees to maintain the current courtesy parking system for employees while
attending court as a result of a subpoena on behalf of or in defense of the City or the Department
when attendance is in the Hall of Justice.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
20
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

145.

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

Section 17. _ District Station Parking.

The City will make a reasonable effort to provide adequate parking to employees at the district
stations.

Section 18. | Code Book.

The Department shall make available to all units at least two (2) complete sets of Code Books and
Department Orders which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: Penal Code, Police
Code, Vehicle Code, Park Code, Health Code, Fire Code, Training Bulletins, Information Bulletins,
Special Orders, General Orders. Of the two (2) complete sets, one (1) set shall be kept in the station
equipment room which is accessible to the station keeper or his/her designee and made available to
all employees.

Section 19. __ Employee Training Reimbursement Program.

 

The City will contribute five thousand dollars ($5,000) annually to the Employee Tuition
Reimbursement Program for the exclusive use of employees covered under this MOU.

Subject to available monies, an employee may submit a request for tuition reimbursement up to
five-hundred dollars ($500) during each fiscal year.

Section 20. __ Medal of Valor Awards Ceremony.

 

The City acknowledges the authority of the Police Commission to honor bargaining unit members
with formal awards for outstanding service, above and beyond the call of duty. Such awards shall
include, but are not limited to, Medals of Valor, Meritorious Conduct and Police Commission
Commendations. Such awards shall be presented at an awards ceremony. The cost of each
ceremony shall not exceed $3,000 and the cost per Fiscal Year shall not exceed $6,000.

Section 21. _ Recruitment.

A. Referral bonus

An officer who refers a new applicant to the department shall receive a referral bonus of $1,000
($500 upon that candidate’s successful completion of the Police Academy and an additional $500
upon that candidate’s successful completion of field training). To qualify, the referring officer must
verify that he/she has made at least three contacts with the applicant prior to the start date of the
Academy. Officers assigned to recruitment on a full or part-time basis will not be eligible for the
referral bonus. For purposes of this provision, a “new applicant” is an individual who has not

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
21
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

151.

152.

153.

154.

155.

156.

157.

previously applied to be a Cadet or a Police Officer in San Francisco. This provision shall sunset on
June 30, 2013 and no new referrals thereafter shall qualify for the bonus.

This bonus is not considered “salary attached to the rank” and shall not be included for purposes of
retirement benefit calculations and contributions in accordance with those Sections.

B. Lateral Signing Bonus

Laterally hired employees (i.e., employees that did not promote from the 8274 Police Cadet
classification) shall receive a $5,000 signing bonus that shall be paid within 30 days after the
employee’s successful completion of the FTO program, if the employee is still employed at the time
the signing bonus is due to be paid.

This bonus is not considered “salary attached to the rank” and shall not be included for purposes of
retirement benefit calculations and contributions in accordance with those Sections.

Cc. Recruitment Committee

The City and the Union agree to form a joint labor-management committee to improve the City’s
recruitment of highly-qualified police officers. The committee will include representatives from
Police Department management, the POA, and the Department of Human Resources. For fiscal
year 2006-07 and thereafter, the Department of Human Resources will receive an annual allocation
of $250,000 to fund committee activities, programs and expenses. These funds may be used to
develop enhanced recruitment and marketing programs, applicant preparation activities, and
innovative new recruitment and hiring strategies. These funds may also be used for cultural
competency and other training for new and experienced officers through City University or similar
resources.

Section 22. _ Officer Rotation.

The parties have agreed that employees hired after January 1, 2007 will be subject to a mandatory
five-year rotation. The rotation will be implemented according to the provisions of the Mandatory
Rotation Policy, incorporated herein as Appendix C.

The parties further agree to continue discussions regarding expansion of this program in the interest
of promoting career development for all officers.

Section 23. _ Substance Abuse Testing.

It is the policy of the City and County of San Francisco to maintain a safe, healthful and productive
work environment for all employees. To that end, the City will act to eliminate any substance
abuse. Substance abuse may include abuse of alcohol, illegal drugs, prescription drugs or any other

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
22
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

158.

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

166.

167.

substance which could impair an employee’s ability to safely and effectively perform the functions
of the particular job.

This provision will be administered consistent with any General Orders regarding substance abuse.
Nothing in this provision is intended to make discipline related to substance abuse subject to the
grievance procedure.

A. Mandatory Testing

Mandatory physical examinations for sworn employees shall include the submission of a urine
specimen for routine analysis and screening for the presence of drugs or alcohol. Analysis and
screening for drugs and alcohol is required for sworn employees in the following circumstances:

1. Prior to the expiration of a newly hired employee’s twelve (12) month probationary period.
2. For employees being promoted to a higher rank, prior to the effective date of promotion.
3. Prior to return from:

a.) medical leaves of absence in excess of thirty (30) calendar days, and

b.) unpaid leaves of absence in excess of ninety (90) calendar days.

4. When a pattern of sick leave develops which indicates a reasonable suspicion of substance
abuse.

5. When there is reasonable suspicion that an employee is under the influence of drugs or
alcohol while on duty.

6. In the event an employee is involved in an on-duty vehicular accident resulting in death or
an injury requiring transport for medical treatment. In such cases the employee will have
the option for either a blood or urine analysis and screening. An “injury requiring transport
for medical treatment” is an injury that results in the medical transport by ambulance of any
person involved in the accident from the accident scene; or an injury to any person involved
in the accident where that person declines transport by ambulance from the accident scene
against medical advice (also known as “AMA”). If testing is required under this section, the
SFPD shall direct the involved SFPD vehicle operator to undergo testing within twelve (12)
hours of the time of the accident, and shall conduct testing of the involved SFPD vehicle
operator within twenty four (24) hours of the time of the accident. If testing is not directed
and conducted within these time periods (assuming no interference by the SFPD vehicle
operator that delays the SFPD’s directive or testing), testing of the involved SFPD operator
is not required or permitted under this paragraph.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
23
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

175.

176.

177.

178.

179.

180.

B. Reasonable Suspicion

Reasonable suspicion as used within this section is defined as a belief based on objective and
articulable facts sufficient to lead a reasonable supervisor to suspect that an employee is under the
influence of drugs or alcohol, such that the employee’s ability to perform the functions of the job
safely and effectively is impaired or reduced.

1. Examples of situations in which there may be reasonable suspicion include but are not

limited to:
a. A pattern of documented abnormal or erratic behavior;
b. The direct observation of drug or alcohol use; or a report by a reliable and credible

source that an employee has engaged in drug or alcohol use, the identity of which
source shall be available to the employee and the Union;

c The presence of the mental or physical symptoms of drug or alcohol use (e.g., glassy
or bloodshot eyes, alcohol odor on breath, slurred speech, poor coordination and/or

reflexes, etc.); or

d. A work-related incident in conjunction with other facts which together support
reasonable cause.

Cc. Employee Responsibilities
An employee must not:

1. report to work while his/her ability to perform job duties is impaired due to alcohol or drug
use;

2. possess or use, or have the odor of alcohol or drugs on his/her breath during working hours;
or

3. directly or through a third party sell or provide drugs or alcohol to any person or to any other
employee while either employee is on duty or on paid stand-by.

An employee must:

1. submit immediately to requests for alcohol and/or drugs analysis when requested by an
authorized representative of the department director, or designee, and may request union
representation;

2. notify his/her supervisor before operating City equipment when taking any medications or

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
24
ARTICLE II - EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

187.

drugs, prescription or non-prescription, which may create an unsafe or dangerous situation
for the public or the employee’s co-workers, including but not limited to Valium, muscle
relaxants, and painkillers; and

provide, within 24 hours of request, a current valid prescription in the employee’s name for
any drug or medication identified when a drug screen/analysis is positive.

Management Responsibilities and Guidelines
Managers and supervisors are responsible for consistent enforcement of this provision.

The Department may request that an employee submit to a drug and/or alcohol analysis
when a manager or supervisor has a reasonable suspicion that an employee is intoxicated or
under the influence of drugs or alcohol.

Managers and supervisors shall document in writing the facts constituting reasonable
suspicion that the employee in question is intoxicated or under the influence of drugs.

Managers and supervisors shall not physically search employees without consent or a valid
warrant.

Managers and supervisors shall not confiscate, without consent, prescription drugs or
medications from an employee who has a prescription.

One of the supervisory employees who made the reasonable suspicion determination shall
inform the employee of the requirement that he/she undergo testing in a confidential manner.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
25
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

ARTICLE III. PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS
Section 1. Wages.
A. General Wage Increases:

188. Employees shall receive the following base wage increases:

July 1, 2015-1%
July 1, 2016 — 2%
July 1, 2017 —- 2%

188a. The parties acknowledge that covered employees previously deferred to January 8, 2011 a 2%
wage increase that was originally scheduled to be effective on July 1, 2009.

188aa. Employees shall defer to March 31, 2012, the 2% wage increase which is scheduled to be
effective on January 7, 2012. Such deferral is subject to the terms set forth in section 188b.

188b. In the event that any of the circumstances set forth below in subsection (1) occur during any of
the economic concession periods set forth in paragraph 188c, the economic concessions
described in paragraphs 188, 188aa, 223a, and 296a shall terminate at the close of business on
the last day of the applicable economic concession period and no subsequent economic
concessions shall become effective during the term of this Agreement:

1) a City Charter amendment (other than a retirement benefits ballot
measure adopted by the voters in the November 2011 election) or a State
ballot measure or State legislation is implemented by the City during any
economic concession period set forth in paragraph 188c, resulting in any
reduction in represented employee wages or fringe benefits; In such event, the
parties will thereafter meet and confer in good faith regarding the impact of
any such Charter amendment, State ballot measure or State legislation,
pursuant to Government Code section 3505 and Charter section A8.590 et
seq.

188c. Economic Concession periods are as follows:

(1) July 1, 2010 to December 24, 2010.
(2) December 25, 2010 to June 30, 2011.
(3) July 1, 2011 to December 23, 2011.
(4) December 24, 2011 to June 30, 2012.
(5) July 1, 2012 to December 21, 2012
(6) December 22, 2012 to June 30, 2013

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
26
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

188d.

188e.

189.

189a.

189b.

189c.

189d.

189e.

In the event that the City’s FY 2011-2012 Joint Report, issued on or about March 30, 2011,
projects the General Fund deficit in FY 2011-2012 to be less than $261 million dollars, then the
parties shall reopen the contract to determine whether the economic concession for FY 2011-12
should be adjusted and, if so, by what amount.

Effective July 1, 2013 for Police Officer I (Q2, Q3, and Q4), for employees hired on or after
July 1, 2013 there shall be two new steps, at 5% below and 10% below each current entry step,
and the current entry step for each of these classifications shall become step 3 in the step plan.

Effective July 1, 2007, the entry step for Police Officer I (Q2, Q3, and Q4) shall be increased by
four percent (4%) in order to decrease the differential between steps 1 and 2, and more
effectively recruit Police Officers.

Effective July 1, 2011, employees shall receive a base wage increase in an amount equal to
100% of the difference between the average total amount of all survey data points and the
comparable total amount for San Francisco Police Officers. However, this base wage increase
shall be no lower than 3% and no higher than 5%.

A survey shall be conducted by the City of the following cities: Berkeley, Concord, Daly City,
Fairfield, Fremont, Hayward, Oakland, Richmond, San Jose, Santa Clara and Santa Rosa.

The salary survey shall measure total compensation for the rank of Q2 Police Officer based on
the following data points:

e Maximum monthly salary for the rank of Q2 Police Officer;
e Maximum educational incentive premiums (e.g., Adv. POST);

e Employer payment of mandatory employee retirement contributions and retirement
supplements;

e Uniform Pay

The salary survey shall be completed no later than May 15, 2011 for the base wage adjustment
effective on July 1, 2011. The rates reported for the cities listed above shall be those known and
officially authorized for payment as of May 15, 2011 for July 1, 2011. If rates are not known
and authorized by May 15, 2011 for July 1, 2011, the rates reported shall be those in effect on
May 15, 2011. Authorized rates to be surveyed are those contained in resolutions, ordinances,
charters or memoranda of understanding.

For memoranda of understanding or other authorizing salary instruments that provide for CPI
adjustments, the minimum adjustment, if provided, shall be utilized as the rate effective on the
date of the market wage adjustment. If no minimum adjustment is provided, the rates used shall
be those in effect when the survey is conducted.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
27
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

189f.

189g.

189h.

190.

191.

192.

193.

194.

195.

The parties shall consult regarding the survey results. Any disputes regarding the results of the
survey or its methodology shall be submitted to Expedited Arbitration under the Grievance
Procedure.

The surveyed data shall be reported by each city and for each category, and as an average. The
difference between the average total amount of all survey data points and the total amount for
San Francisco Police Officers for the identical data points shall be calculated as a percentage
and the difference, if any, shall be the basis for the base wage adjustment.

The parties acknowledge and understand that the wage-setting process set forth herein was
reached by mutual agreement and is intended to determine wages only during the term of this
Agreement. The parties further acknowledge and understand that this wage setting process shall
sunset upon expiration of this Agreement and that the terms and conditions of employment
contained in successor MOUs, including wages, shall be determined pursuant to Charter Section
A8.590, et. seq.

Assistant Inspector Pay Parity

Effective not later than July 1, 2007, assistant inspectors will receive a rate of pay equivalent to
that of sergeants.

Probationary Period and Step Advancement
1. Probationary Period

A Class Q-2 officer shall be required to complete a 12-month full duty probationary period that
shall begin the day following completion of the prescribed department field training officer
program.

Except as specified in this section, the time to complete the required 12-month full duty
probationary period shall be extended, for a period not to exceed 126 weeks from the date of
appointment by: (1) the total time of absence for all periods of unpaid authorized leave; (2) all
periods of disciplinary suspension; (3) all periods of sick leave, with or without pay; and (4) all
periods of administrative assignments pending the results of administrative investigations.

The time to complete the required 12-month full duty probationary period shall be further
extended for all periods of temporary modified duty or disability leave. Such extension may not
exceed 52 weeks and, except as provided below, the total time to complete the required 12-
month full duty probationary period shall not exceed 178 weeks from the date of appointment.

The time to complete the required 12-month full duty probationary period shall be extended,
without any limitation, for all periods of time the officer is required to serve on active military
duty or on jury duty.

Advancement to step 2 shall be made upon satisfactory completion of the probationary period.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
28
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

196.

197.

198.

199.

200.

201.

202.

203.

204.

Dz.

The probationary period for all other ranks shall be 12 months.

2. Subsequent Step Advancement

a. Advancement to subsequent steps shall be made upon completion of one year of
satisfactory service at that step. Salary adjustments shall be made effective the first
full pay period following the effective date.

b. Satisfactory Performance: An employee’s scheduled step increase may be denied if
the employee’s performance has been unsatisfactory to the City. The Chief shall
provide an affected employee at least sixty (60) calendar days’ notice of his/her
intent to withhold a step increase. However, if the unsatisfactory performance
occurs within that time period, the Chief shall provide reasonable notice of his/her
intent to withhold a step increase at that time.

An employee's performance evaluation(s) may be used as evidence by the City
and/or an affected employee for the purpose of determining whether a step
advancement should be withheld.

If an employee’s step advancement is withheld, that employee shall next be eligible
for a step advancement upon his/her salary anniversary date in the following fiscal
year. An employee’s salary anniversary date shall be unaffected by this provision.

The denial of a step increase is subject to the grievance procedure; provided,
however, that nothing in this section is intended to or shall make performance
evaluations subject to the grievance procedure.

Lateral and Current Permanent City Employees Step Plan and Salary Adjustments

Subject to the approval of the Police Chief, a current permanent City employee who has
completed the probationary period and or a lateral new employee who is appointed to a Q-2, Q-
3, or Q-4 rank shall enter at the salary step which is the same or closest to the salary which is
immediately in excess of that received in their prior appointment provided that such salary shall
not exceed the maximum of the salary schedule.

However, advancement to the next step in the Q-2, Q-3, or Q-4 rank shall not occur until the
employee has served the satisfactory time as prescribed herein for an entry-level police officer to
move to that step and satisfactory completion of the probationary period.

Effective July 1, 2007, a one-time adjustment of one percent (1%) shall be included in the base
rate of pay, reflecting the provisions of Article III, Section 4(J) of the 2003-2007 MOU.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
29
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

205.

206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

211.

Section 2. Overtime and Compensatory Time-Off.

 

A.

Overtime

The Chief of Police or designee may require employees to work longer than the normal work
day or longer than the normal work week. Any time worked by an employee who holds a
permanent rank below the rank of Captain under proper authorization of the Chief of Police or
his/her designated representative or any hours suffered to be worked by an employee who holds
a permanent rank below the rank of Captain in excess of the regular or normal work day or week
shall be designated as overtime and shall be compensated at one-and-one-half times the base
hourly rate. Vacation leave and Legal Holidays shall be considered hours worked for overtime
purposes. Mandatory, unscheduled overtime shall be calculated at the one-and-one-half (1.5)
overtime rate.

The parties acknowledge that, for purposes of calculating overtime payable under the Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA), 29 USC Section 207k, the work period for all sworn members is a 28-
day period (171 hours). The implementation of the FLSA work period for all sworn members
began at 0001 hours on Saturday, April 12th 1986 and continues to repeat each 28 days
thereafter.

The parties further acknowledge that Captains are exempt from the application of the FLSA as
permitted by 29 USC Section 213.

Captains are frequently required to work in excess of forty (40) hours per week to perform the
job duties of their positions. In recognition of this work requirement, Captains will receive an
eight percent (8%) wage increase in lieu of earning overtime or compensatory time off.
Lieutenants on a “like work, like pay” Captain assignment will not be eligible for overtime.
This provision shall not preclude Captains from compensation as defined in Section 10B of the
Administrative Code.

Employees shall not be eligible for 10B overtime assignments during hours on SP, VA, FH, In-
Lieu, or DP.

Compensatory Time-Off

1. Employees who are required or suffered to work overtime shall receive paid overtime.
However, employees may request to earn compensatory time-off at the rate of time-and-one-
half in lieu of paid overtime, subject to the approval of the Chief of Police or designee and
except as provided below:

a. Employees may not accrue more than 480 hours of compensatory time-off.
Employees with more than 480 hours of compensatory time-off as of July 1, 2003
may not accrue additional compensatory time-off until and unless their
compensatory time-off balances fall below 480 hours.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
30
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

212.

213.

214.

215.

216.

217.

217a.

b.

Effective June 30, 2010, employees may not accumulate a balance of compensatory
time in excess of 300 hours. Any employee who has a compensatory time balance in
excess of 300 hours on June 30, 2010, may maintain his or her compensatory time
balance, but will not accrue any additional compensatory time until the balance
drops below 300 hours.

Captains with existing compensatory time off balances in excess of 480 hours as of
June 30, 2003 may continue to carry such balances provided that such balances may
not exceed 1500 hours as of June 30, 2005, and 1300 hours as of June 30, 2007. For
those occupying this rank, compensatory time-off balances in excess of these
amounts on the dates set forth shall be forfeited. Captains newly hired or promoted
into such ranks on or after July 1, 2003 may not accrue more than 480 hours of
compensatory time-off.

Effective July 1, 2008, an employee that is promoted to a higher rank shall have his
or her compensatory time balances paid out at the lower rank prior to promotion;
however, at his/her option, he/she may maintain up to 80 hours accrual.

The City has the right to pay off accrued compensatory time off above 480 hours at
its discretion, so long as such a pay off is uniform, by percentage, as to all
employees within one of the four bureaus (i.e., FOB, Admin., Investigations,
Airport).

2. Employees shall provide the Department with 72 hours notice when requesting use of

compensatory time-off. Compensatory time-off requests shall not be denied, except in
writing when use of compensatory time-off will unduly disrupt operations or when an
employee fails to provide 72 hours notice.

Section 3. Holidays.

A. Employees are entitled to the following holidays each year with pay:

New Year's Day Fourth of July

Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday Labor Day

Columbus Day Thanksgiving Day

Veteran's Day The Day after Thanksgiving

Presidents’ Day Christmas Day

Memorial Day Four (4) floating holidays each fiscal year

In lieu of wage increases for Fiscal Year 2012-2013, officers shall receive four (4) additional
(one-time) Floating Holidays on July 1, 2012 and four (4) additional (one-time) Floating
Holidays close of business on June 30, 2013. Notwithstanding paragraph 219 below, any unused
floating holidays accrued from July 1, 2010 through June 30, 2012 may be carried over to be
used in FY 2012-13, FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
31
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

218.

219.

220.

221.

222.

223.

223a.

In addition, included shall be any day declared to be a holiday by proclamation of the Mayor
after such day has heretofore been declared a holiday by the Governor of the State of California
or the President of the United States.

The above floating holidays are to be taken on days selected by the employee subject to the
approval of the Department which shall not be unreasonably withheld. No compensation of any
kind shall be earned or granted for floating holidays not taken. Floating holidays received in
one fiscal year but not used may be carried forward to the next succeeding fiscal year. The
number of floating holidays carried forward to a succeeding fiscal year may not exceed the total
number of floating holidays received in the previous fiscal year. Floating holidays may be taken
in hourly increments up to and including the number of hours contained in the employee’s
regular shift.

B. Employees who are required to work on any of the above-listed holidays, except floating
holidays, shall receive additional compensation at the rate of time-and-one-half, or
compensatory time at the rate of time-and-one-half at the employee's option pursuant to Article
IIL, Section 2 of this Agreement.

. Employees working a work week other than Monday through Friday shall be allowed another

day off if a holiday falls on one of their regularly scheduled days off. Employees whose
holidays are changed because of shift rotations shall be allowed another day off if a legal
holiday falls on one of their days off.

. If the provisions of this section deprive any employee of the same number of holidays that an

 

 

employee receives who works Monday through Friday, he/she shall be granted additional days
off to equal such number of holidays. The designation of such days off shall be by mutual
agreement of the employee and the appropriate supervisor with the approval of the appointing
officer. In no event shall the provisions of this section result in such employee receiving more
or less holidays than an employee on a Monday through Friday work schedule.

.. This section shall not modify existing holiday compensation practice.

Mandatory Unpaid Floating Holidays

a. Officers shall each receive six (6) mandatory floating holidays to be used in Fiscal Year
2010-2011 or thereafter; thus, officers shall contribute the value of six such floating
holidays for Fiscal Year 2010-2011. The reduction in pay associated with these unpaid
days will be “smoothed” over the course of the fiscal year. Six (6) unpaid days equates
to a wage reduction of 2.31%.

 

b. Officers shall each receive four (4) mandatory floating holidays to be used in Fiscal
Year 2011-2012 or thereafter; thus, officers shall contribute the value of four such
floating holidays for Fiscal Year 2011-2012. The reduction in pay associated with these
unpaid days will be “smoothed” over the course of the fiscal year. Four (4) unpaid days
equates to a wage reduction of 1.54%.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
32
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

c. All mandatory unpaid floating holidays for Fiscal Year 2010-2011 and Fiscal Year
2011-2012 must be used prior to any use of vacation time; provided, however, that this
limitation (i.e. use of such floating holidays before vacation) will not apply to employees
at the point at which they would otherwise cease to accrue vacation because they will
reach the accrual maximums.

Section 4. Special Pays.

224. Special pay shall be provided to employees as follows:

A.
225.
226.

B.
227.
228.

Canine Duty

Employees assigned to canine duty shall receive additional compensation bi-weekly equal to
5% of base wage as compensation for off duty time authorized and expended in the care and
maintenance of the assigned canine, including feeding, grooming, exercising and cleaning up
after the canine. This amount has been calculated by the parties to represent approximately
eight hours of overtime per week paid at one and one-half times the hourly rate of the federal
minimum wage. This extra compensation is not to be considered base pay or premium pay, nor
shall it be included for purposes of retirement benefit calculations or contributions.

In addition to the above referenced overtime compensation for the ordinary and extraordinary
care of the canine and, as authorized by the Department, the City will provide for basic canine
food and supplies and shall provide for all appropriate veterinary care through approved City
vendors. The City will reimburse other expenses reasonably and customarily incurred in the
maintenance and care of the dog. Employees assigned to the Airport Bureau who perform
canine duties shall be provided with vehicles for transportation of canines from their home to
work and back.

Field Training and Training Unit Coordinator Pay
1. Field Training

Employees assigned to Field Training Officer or Field Training Sergeant
responsibilities shall receive the following premiums while training:

Officer (Q2-Q4) $550.00 Per Pay Period
Supervisor (Q50-Q52) $400.00 Per Pay Period
Station Coordinator (Q50-Q52) $125.00 Per Pay Period

Additionally, when a class is in the FTO program, certified FTO police officers and
sergeants assigned to the FTO office shall be eligible for FTO premiums described
above.

2. Training Unit Coordinator Pay

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
33
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

229.

230.

231.

232.

233.

234.

235.

Effective July 1, 2007, employees assigned to Training Unit Coordinator
responsibilities shall receive $125.00 per pay period.

Employees shall no longer receive compensatory time-off for Training Unit Coordinator
responsibilities. Field Training and Training Unit Coordinator Pay shall not be included for
purposes of retirement benefit calculations or contributions.

Bomb Squad/SWAT Team Pay

Employees assigned to the Bomb Squad or the SWAT team shall receive a premium of 5%
biweekly. Employees assigned to both the Bomb Squad and the Swat Team shall receive a
premium of 5% for one of the two assignments, but not both. This premium shall not be
included for purposes of retirement benefit calculations or contributions.

Specialist Pay

An employee designated as a Specialist and assigned to the Specialist Team shall receive a
premium of three percent (3%) biweekly. This premium shall not be included for purposes of
retirement benefit calculations or contributions. Specialists are subject to changes in watches
and assigned work locations for operational reasons. The number of Specialist positions
available per shift or location shall be determined by the Chief or his/her designee.

Motorcycle Pay

Employees below the rank of captain assigned to Motorcycle and Honda units shall continue to
receive a premium in an amount in accord with current practice pursuant to Charter
Section A8.405(b). It is the parties’ understanding that this benefit is part of the salary attached
to all ranks for employees below the rank of captain assigned to Motorcycle and Honda units
covered by this Agreement and shall be included for purposes of retirement benefit calculations
or contributions.

Retention Pay

Employees who have completed twenty-three (23) years or more of service as asworn member
of the Department or Airport Bureau shall receive 2% retention pay. Retention pay shall be
included for purposes of retirement benefit calculations and contributions. Further, it is the
parties’ understanding that this benefit is part of the salary attached to all ranks for employees
who have completed twenty-three (23) years or more of sworn service covered by this
Agreement.

Eligible employees who have completed thirty (30) years or more of service as a sworn member
of the Department or Airport Bureau shall receive an additional 4% (6% total) retention pay for
each pay period during which they are eligible. Eligibility is subject to the following conditions
and limitations:

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
34
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

236.

237.

238.

239.

240.

241.

242.

243.

244.

245.

246.

247.

248.

1. employees must have worked and continue to work (regular paycode ‘WK’) not less
than seventeen-hundred (1,700) hours in an on-going, consecutive (rolling) twelve
(12) month period; and

2. employees that have been issued a suspension of thirty (30) or more days during the
preceding twelve (12) months shall not be eligible.

Retention pay shall be included for purposes of retirement benefit calculations and
contributions. It is the parties’ understanding that this benefit is part of the salary attached to all
ranks for employees who completed the above defined conditions.

Use of mandatory unpaid floating holidays under paragraph 223a, will count as “time
worked” for determining eligibility for retention pay under paragraph 236.

Experienced Officer Incentive Pay

To ensure each district station is adequately staffed with senior officers at night, the most senior
officer and the most senior sergeant (i.e., seniority in rank) at each district station and the Patrol
Division of the Airport Bureau and on each watch with twenty-three (23) or more years of
service shall receive a premium in the amount equal to 2% of base pay as additional incentive to
work night duty assignments, subject to the following conditions and limitations:

1. Night duty assignments are defined as 2100-0700 hours (9:00pm-7:00am);
2. The premium shall be limited to the Patrol Division of the Airport Bureau and to
night duty field assignments in FOB District Stations. (Station duty and station

keeper assignments shall not be eligible for Experienced Officer Incentive Pay);

3. Only the ranks of police officer (Q2-Q4) and sergeant (Q50-Q52) shall be eligible to
receive Experienced Officer Incentive Pay;

4. If the senior officer on a watch is off-duty, then the next senior officer with twenty-
three years or more of service shall be eligible;

5. Employees that have been issued a suspension (whether the suspension was served
or held in abeyance) in the three years immediately preceding shall not be eligible;

6. Experienced Officer assignments shall be for a minimum of twelve (12) months;
7. Employees shall only receive Experienced Officer Incentive Pay for actual hours
worked.

In accordance with the provisions of Charter Section A8.597-1, this premium shall be included
for purposes of retirement benefit calculations and contributions. This amount is not considered

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
35
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

249.

250.

251.

252.

252a.

253.

H.

“salary attached to the rank” as defined by Charter Sections A8.595-1, A8.559-1, A8.558 and
A8.544.

Standby Premium

Employees, who as part of the duties of their positions are required by the Chief of the
Department or designee to be on standby when normally off duty and to be instantly available to
return to work to perform their duties, shall be paid a premium at the rate equivalent to two (2)
hours of their regular rate of pay for each assignment that begins on a regularly assigned work
day, and three (3) hours of their regular base rate of pay for each assignment that begins on a
regularly scheduled day off. The duration of the assignments shall be determined by the Chief
of the Department or designee based upon the operational needs of the Department, but shall not
exceed twenty-four (24) hours.

Standby pay shall not be allowed in the classes or positions whose duties are primarily
administrative in nature, as designated by the Chief of the Department. Standby premiums shall
not be included for purposes of retirement benefit calculations or contributions.

Call-Back Pay

An employee who is called back to work following the completion of his/her work day and
departure from his/her place of employment shall be granted a minimum of three (3) hours of
pay at the applicable rate, or shall be paid for all hours actually worked at the applicable rate,
whichever is greater. If an employee on standby is called back to work, call-back pay shall be
paid in lieu of the standby premium.

Night Shift Differential

Night shift differential shall be paid at the rate of six and one-quarter percent (6-1/4%) more
than the base rate for hours actually worked between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This
night differential shall not be included for purposes of retirement benefit calculations or
contributions.

For Fiscal Years 2009-2010, 2010-2011 and 2011-2012, night shift differential shall be paid at
the rate of six and one-quarter percent (6-1/4%) more than the base rate for hours actually
worked between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. This night differential shall not be
included for purposes of retirement benefit calculations or contributions.

Bilingual Pay

Bilingual pay, in the amount of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) biweekly, shall be paid to employees
who have been certified by the Department of Human Resources as having proficiency in the
Spanish, Russian or Chinese languages. Employees certified by the Department of Human
Resources as having proficiency in other languages, including sign language for the hearing
impaired and Braille for the visually impaired, shall, upon the approval of their supervisor,

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
36
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

254.

255.

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

261.

262.

receive si

such pay when they are required to utilize such skills, and subject to Department of

Human Resources guidelines. Bilingual pay shall not be included for purposes of retirement
benefit calculations or contributions.

L. Pyramiding

There shall be no pyramiding of premiums in this section.

Section 5.

Court Appearance Premium Pay and Administrative Hearings.

 

A. Watch-O!
of court

f Status. Employees appearing for court on watch-off days will receive three (3) hours
appearance premium pay (50% above base salary) for their first court appearance

commencing with the time indicated on the subpoena. This also includes court preparation and
conferences when accompanied by a same day court appearance. No court appearance premium

pay will

be allowed for an employee’s meal period.

Employees appearing in court for more than three (3) hours will receive court appearance pay on

an hour-

‘or-hour basis when appearing on scheduled watch-off days.

B. Scheduled-to-Work Status.

1. Emp
wate

loyees appearing for court less than one hour prior to the beginning of their scheduled
hes will receive one (1) hour of court appearance premium pay.

loyees appearing for court more than one (1) but less than two (2) hours prior to the

beginning of their scheduled watches will receive two hours of court appearance premium

2. Emp.
pay.
3. Emp.
the bi

loyees appearing for court more than two (2) hours, but less than three (3) hours prior to
eginning of their scheduled watches will receive three (3) hours of court appearance

premium pay.

4. Emp

loyees who appear for court during the morning session and are scheduled to start work

at 1200 hours will be entitled to a minimum of three (3) hours of court appearance premium

Pay

egardless of the time indicated on the subpoena. No court appearance premium pay

will be allowed for an employee’s meal period.

5. Emp

 

loyees appearing for court for more than three (3) hours will receive court appearance

premium pay on an hour for hour basis when off-duty during the entire period. No court
appearance premium pay will be allowed for an employee’s meal period.

C. Court Standby. Employees placed on court standby without appearing in court will receive (2)

hours of

court appearance premium pay only if they are off-duty the entire call-in period

indicated on the subpoena. On-duty time includes any overtime for purposes of this section.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
37
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

263.

264.

265.

266.

267.

268.

269.

270.

271.

272.

Employees on sick leave with pay or disability leave who appear in court or are placed on
standby are not entitled to additional compensation. Employees are paid as though they were
working during these leave periods.

Employees on suspension who are subpoenaed and appear in court or are on standby are entitled
to compensation at their regular rate of pay, not at the court appearance premium pay rate.

D. District Attorney Conferences. An employee attending an attorney’s conference but not
appearing in court will receive court appearance premium pay on an hour-for-hour basis.

E. Civil Court. Compensation requests for civil court appearances in which neither the City nor
the Department is a party will be processed, reviewed, and certified by the Accounting Section
of the Fiscal Division. These requests must be sent to the Accounting Section along with a copy
of the subpoena and the record of Civil Court Appearance (SFPD 203) approved by the
requesting employee’s commanding officer. Employees will receive a court appearance
premium on a half-hour for half-hour basis.

The Legal Division will review and approve overtime requests for civil cases in which the City
or Department is a party. If approved, compensation shall be awarded on a half-hour for half-
hour basis.

F. Administration Hearings. Any employee who, as part of his/her assigned duties, is required to
appear at any administrative hearing while off duty shall receive court appearance premium pay
for time actually spent, or shall receive two (2) hours of court appearance premium pay
whichever is greater.

G. Employees on VA, who are required by subpoena to appear in court in a criminal case, will
receive court appearance premium only when their appearance occurs on a date(s) for which the
employee had a previously approved vacation request for 40 hours or more that predated the
service of the subpoena. In all other cases, employees will be compensated only as provided by
the current Department Bulletin on the subject of court compensation.

H. Any court appearance premium pay provided in this section shall not be included for purpose of
retirement benefit calculations or contributions.

Section 6. Acting Assignment Pay (Like Pay for Like Work).

 

Eligibility for acting assignment pay will be determined as follows:

A. Unless otherwise authorized by the commanding officer, night supervising captain or weekend
duty captain, the person whose position is being filled must be on paid leave for a full watch:
VA, SP, OU, DP, EH or FH during the date and time period. If the commanding officer, night
supervising captain or weekend duty captain determines a position is to be filled temporarily by

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
38
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

273.

274.

275.

276.

277.

278.

279.

280.

281.

an employee in the next lower rank, the employee filling that position shall be compensated at
the salary of the rank being filled for the time worked.

B. Commissioned officers who are required to perform duties of the next highest rank are not
entitled to receive acting assignment pay compensation unless they receive prior approval from
the Deputy Chief of the employee’s respective bureau. If the deputy chief of the employee’s
respective bureau determines a position is to be filled temporarily by an employee in the next
lower rank, the employee filling that position shall be compensated at the salary of the rank
being filled for the time worked.

C. The employee filling a position must be permanent in the Police Officer or Sergeant ranks (or
Inspector rank if the employee is filling a position in the Investigation Bureau). Absent the
commanding officer being able to articulate specific reasons for not selecting the senior
employee, seniority in rank shall control. The Chief of Police, however, may designate officers
(including commissioned officers), to temporarily fill vacancies caused by officers in the next
highest rank who are off on long term paid leave status or have retired.

The City and the Association agree, for all hours between 0200 and 0600 when no Lieutenant is
scheduled to work, the Sergeant assigned to fill the Lieutenant position pursuant to subsection
C. will be compensated at the Lieutenant rate. No Police Officer, however, will be permitted to
fill the position of the Sergeant serving as a Lieutenant between the hours of 0200 and 0600.

D. The division commander or the deputy chief must approve filling the position in advance.

E. An employee entitled to receive acting assignment pay compensation must complete a
“Compensation Request/Equal Pay” (SFPD 319) card for the hours actually worked and submit
the card to Payroll by the end of the pay period.

F. The completed card must include the name and rank of the person replaced, if any, the
beginning and ending dates and times of the acting assignment pay status and the actual dates
circled on the back of the card or in accordance with any automated or alternative procedures
established by the Police Department.

G. Upon designation by the Chief of the Department that an assignment shall be for longer than
thirty (30) calendar days, the employee performing the duties of a higher rank shall receive the
compensation of the higher rank for the duration of the assignment (including paid leave).

All of the above conditions must be met before acting assignment compensation can be approved.
In the normal absence of a superior officer, the senior ranking officer on duty will be in charge, but
will not be expected to perform the duties of the higher rank.

Section 7. Uniform and Clothing Allowance.

Employees shall receive, as part of their regular rate of pay, eight-hundred and twenty dollars
($820.00) per year as an annual uniform allowance. In exchange for this additional compensation,

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
39
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

282.

283.

284.

285.

286.

287.

288.

employees shall be responsible for the maintenance, care and replacement of the following standard
uniform items: shirts, pants, shoes, jumpsuits, BDUs and regular raingear.

Newly hired recruit officers shall not be entitled to the annual uniform allowance for the first year of
service. Such recruit officers shall continue to be supplied with an initial set of uniforms.

Other safety equipment and uniform items, including specialized raingear and boots worn by the
Mounted Unit, Solo Motorcycles and Park and Beach Unit, shall continue to be issued by the
Department. Uniform items purchased by employees shall meet all specifications as provided by
the San Francisco Police Department. The specifications for uniform items to be purchased by
employees follows as Appendix D.

Also in exchange for the annual uniform allowance, employees shall assume all costs of
maintenance, repair and damage to the standard uniform items, including damage or repair to
normal business attire worn by inspectors and other non-uniformed sworn employees. Employees
shall be prohibited from filing personal property claims under General Order 3.15 for these items of
clothing. The annual uniform allowance is provided specifically for employees to purchase the
above listed standard uniform items. Employees shall, at all times, maintain a sufficient quantity
and quality of uniform items to meet uniform and grooming standards at all times.

This provision will satisfy any and all obligations to provide employees with uniform clothing and
maintenance.

Section 8. Health and Dental Coverage.

A. Employee Health Coverage.

Except as provided below, the City shall contribute annually for employee health benefits, the
contribution required under the Charter.

Except as provided below, in addition, the City shall contribute the full premium for the employee’s
own health care benefit coverage for “medically single” employees (i.e., employees not receiving a

City contribution for dependent health care benefits).

B. Dependent Health Coverage.
Except as provided below, the City shall contribute the greater amount of $225 per month or 75% of

the dependent rate charged by the City to employees for Kaiser coverage at the dependent plus two
or more level.

Cc. Health Coverage Effective January 1, 2015

288.a.1. If, by July 1, 2014, the Public Employee Committee of the San Francisco Labor Council (PEC)

and the City agree to a contribution model for employee health insurance premiums based on
the City’s contribution of a percentage of those premiums and the employee’s payment of the

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
40
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

288.b.2.

288c.3.

289. C.

290.

290a.

291. E.

292. F.

balance (Percentage-Based Contribution Model), to be effective January 1, 2015 (for calendar
year 2015 and thereafter), then effective January 1, 2015 the City shall contribute toward the
health premiums for enrolled POA members the same percentage described in the PEC
Percentage-Based Contribution Model, for the applicable health insurance plan, unless the City
and the POA mutually agree to a different Percentage-Based Contribution Model. If the PEC
and the City do not agree by July 1, 2014 to a new Percentage-Based Contribution Model to be
effective January 1, 2015, then the City and the POA will reopen the MOU on health insurance
premium contributions only, with any resulting impasse being subject to interest arbitration
under Charter section A8.590-5. Reopener negotiations and impasse procedures, including, but
not limited to, the 10-day period under Charter section A8.590-5(e), will be completed by no
later than August 15, 2014.

To ensure that all employees enrolled in health insurance through the City’s Health Service
System (HSS) are making premium contributions under a Percentage-Based Contribution
Model and therefore have a stake in controlling the long term growth in health insurance costs,
it is agreed that, to the extent the City's health insurance premium contribution under a
Percentage-Based Contribution Model is less than the “average contribution” for the City’s
HSS members, as established under Charter section A8.428(b) (Average Contribution), then, in
addition to the City’s contribution, the employee’s health insurance premium contribution shall
be deemed to apply to the annual Average Contribution. The parties intend that the City’s
contribution toward premiums for members’ health care should not exceed the amount
established under Percentage-Based Contribution Model.

Upon implementation of new contribution rates effective on January 1, 2015, Article IIIL.,
section 8.C shall supersede Article III., sections 8.A and 8.B, and those sections will no longer
be effective.

The aforesaid contributions shall be paid to the City Health Services System, not be considered
as a part of an employee's salary for the purposes of computing straight time earnings,
compensation for overtime worked, premium pay, retirement benefits, or retirement
contributions; nor shall such contributions be taken into account in determining the level of any
other benefit which is a function of or percentage of salary.

Dental Coverage.

The City shall continue to provide dental benefits at the existing level.

Effective July 1, 2011, employees who enroll in the Delta Dental PPO Plan shall pay the
following premiums for the respective coverage levels: $5/month for employee-only,
$10/month for employee + 1 dependent, or $15/month for employee + 2 or more dependents.

Employees shall be permitted to choose which available City plan they wish to participate in.

Benefits that are made available by the City to the domestic partners of other City employees
shall simultaneously be made available to the domestic partners of members of the Department.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
41
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

293.

294.

295.

296.

296a.

297.

298.

299.

G.

Hepatitis B Vaccine.

The City shall provide, at its cost, Hepatitis B vaccine immunization for employees whose
health plans do not provide the benefit.

Annual Tuberculosis Screening.
The City will provide, at its cost, annual tuberculosis screening for employees.
Employee Assistance Program.

The City shall continue to provide the existing or equivalent employee assistance benefits
presently provided by United Behavioral Health.

Section 9. Retirement.

A.

Mandatory Employee Retirement Contribution.

For the duration of this Agreement, employees shall pay their own retirement contributions. Tier
1 employees will contribute an amount equal to 7% of covered gross salary; Tier 2 employees
and Harbor Police Officers will contribute an amount equal to 7.5% of covered gross salary.
The parties acknowledge that said contributions satisfy the requirements of Charter Sections
A8.595-11(d) and A8.597-11(d) for the duration of this Agreement.

Notwithstanding paragraph 296. above, the parties agree to further extend employee cost sharing
by increasing the retirement contribution for all employees by three percent (3%) for the two-
year period beginning July 1, 2011 and ending June 30, 2013. As of July 1, 2013, the parties
agree to effectuate any applicable cost sharing provisions of a Charter amendment initiated by
the Mayor, approved by the Board of Supervisors, and approved by the voters in the November
2011 election.

If the majority of City & County of San Francisco employees agree to an employee contribution
to fund retiree health benefits, the parties agree to reopen the MOU on the subject of an
employee contribution to fund retiree health benefits. This reopener is subject to the impasse
resolution procedures as set forth in Charter Section A8.590-1 et seq.

Employees with twenty (20) years' service who leave the Department, but who retain their
membership in the retirement system, shall be deemed to be retired for purposes of Penal Code
Section 12027.

Rule changes by the City’s Retirement Board regarding the crediting of accrued sick leave for
retirement purposes shall be incorporated herein by reference. Any such rule changes, however,
shall not be subject to the grievance and arbitration provisions of current Memorandum of
Understanding or the impasse procedures of Charter Section A8.590-1, et. seq.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
42
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

300.

300a.

300b.

300c.

300d.

301.

Dz.

Pre-Retirement Planning Seminar and Retirement Ceremony.

The City shall continue to offer pre-retirement seminars and retirement ceremonies for
bargaining unit members. These functions shall be administered by the Police Academy in
consultation with the Police Officers Association. Bargaining unit members shall be offered the
opportunity to attend the seminar in order of the number of years of service credit they have
earned towards retirement. A preference shall be given to those members who have filed for
retirement with the Retirement System. The City's cost for such services shall not exceed
$15,000 per fiscal year.

Effective July 1, 2010, for Tier I employees who retire (including employees who enter the
DROP program) on or after July 1, 2010 and prior to July 1, 2013 and whose final
compensation for retirement purposes is impacted by the economic concessions described in
paragraphs 188, 188a, 188aa and 223a, said employees’ final compensation for retirement
purposes shall be calculated at the rate of remuneration that would have been attached to the
rank or position held by the employee, at the time of retirement, had there been no economic
concessions for Fiscal Years 2010-2011 and 2011-2012.

Effective July 1, 2010, for Tier II employees who retire (including employees who enter the
DROP program) on or after July 1, 2010 and prior to July 1, 2013, and whose final
compensation for retirement purposes is impacted by the pensionable economic concessions
described in paragraphs 188, 188a, 188aa and 223a for the period from July 1, 2010 through
June 30, 2012, the City will make available restoration pay in a lump sum equivalent to the
pensionable economic concessions for the period used by the San Francisco Employees
Retirement System to determine the employee’s final compensation for retirement purposes
(Final Compensation Period). Only pensionable economic concessions deferred from July 1,
2010 through June 30, 2012 are eligible for restoration.

For Tier I and Tier II employees who retire prior to July 1, 2013, payouts of vacation, vested
sick leave, compensatory time and wellness pay shall be at the employee’s normal (non-
deferred) hourly wage rate, although nothing herein requires the San Francisco Employees
Retirement System to include payouts of vacation, vested sick leave, compensatory time or
wellness pay in retirement calculations.

Employees who enter(ed) the DROP program prior to July 1, 2010 are not eligible for retirement
restoration described in this section.

Section 10. _ Wellness Programs.

A.

Wellness Program.

The City shall continue to provide a wellness program as follows:

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
43
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

302.

303.

304.

305.

305a.

306.

307.

308.

1. Employees must establish and maintain a core bank of sick leave hours in order to
qualify for the wellness program. That core bank shall be a minimum of three
hundred (300) hours.

2. Once an employee has established their core bank of sick leave hours (as provided in

(a) above) they shall be entitled to an annual conversion of sick leave hours for cash
out payment under the above conditions. If an employee utilizes thirty (30) hours or
less of sick leave in a fiscal year, they shall be entitled to cash out up to fifty (50)
hours accrued during that fiscal year. If an employee utilized more than thirty (30)
hours of sick leave in a fiscal year, they are not eligible for any sick leave cash out.
Sick leave hours donated to catastrophic sick leave bank(s) or used for authorized
bereavement leave according to the Civil Service Rules shall not be considered sick
leave utilization for purposes of this paragraph.

3. Payment of the cash out shall take place on annual basis on the pay period closest to
June 1 for each remaining fiscal year of this Agreement.

4. The aforesaid payments shall not be considered as part of an employee’s salary for
the purpose of computing retirement benefits or retirement contributions.

5. This program shall be suspended for Fiscal Years 2009-2010 and 2010-2011.
Pilot "wellness incentive program" to promote workforce attendance:

A full-time employee leaving the employment of the City upon service or disability retirement
may receive payment of a portion of accrued sick leave credits at the time of separation. To be
eligible, an employee must have utilized one hundred and sixty (160) hours or less of sick leave
during the final two-year period prior to retirement. Sick leave hours donated to catastrophic
sick leave bank(s) or used for authorized bereavement leave according to the Civil Service
Rules shall not be considered sick leave utilization for purposes of this paragraph.

The amount of this payment shall be equal to two-and-one-half percent (2.5%) of accrued sick
leave credits at the time of separation times the number of whole years of continuous
employment times an employee's salary rate, exclusive of premiums or supplements, at the time
of separation. Vested sick leave credits, as set forth under Civil Service Commission Rules,
shall not be included in this computation and shall be compensated pursuant to those Rules.

Example of Calculation

Employee A retires with 20 years of service.
Employee A has a sick leave balance of 500 hours.
Employee A has a base salary rate of $25.00 per hour at the time of separation.

Wellness Incentive = 2.5% for each year of service x 20 years of service = 50%
50% x 500 hours = 250 hours.
250 hours x $25.00 (base salary at time of separation) = $6,250.00

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
44
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

309.

310.

311.

312.

313.

314.

315.

316.

317.

318.

The number of hours for which an employee may receive cash payments shall not exceed one
thousand forty (1040) hours, including any vested sick leave.

A wellness incentive bonus payment shall not be considered as part of an employee's
compensation for the purpose of computing retirement benefits or retirement contributions.

The beneficiaries of employees who are killed in the line of duty, whose names are engraved on
the Memorial Wall of the SFPD Hall of Justice, shall receive payments provided by the wellness
incentive program.

The Pilot “wellness incentive program” to promote workforce attendance shall sunset on June
30, 2018.

Section 11. _ Pilot Program for San Francisco Housing.

 

The parties agree to establish a program intended to encourage San Francisco police officers to
live in the City of San Francisco. Participants must be employed as San Francisco police
officers for the duration of their participation in the housing program. The housing program
will consist of two options: the Home Ownership Incentive Program, and the Rental and
Relocation Assistance Program.

Home Ownership Incentive Program — San Francisco Police Officers who are first-time
homebuyers within the geographic boundaries of the City of San Francisco may be eligible
to receive up to $20,000 in down payment and closing costs assistance.

1. One forgivable loan is available per household, and may be used for down payment
assistance or closing costs, including title insurance, credit reports, recording fees,
appraisals, points, transfer stamps, third-party property inspection fees, first year's
payment of mortgage insurance, and other customary bank-related closing charges.
This loan will be fully forgiven if the officer resides in the home for at least five
years.

2. A maximum of $225,000 annually is available for this program. Funds will
be disbursed to eligible applicants on a first-come, first-served basis.

Rental and Relocation Assistance Program — San Francisco police officers who wish to
relocate to a rental unit within the City of San Francisco may be eligible for a forgivable
loan of up to $5,000 for relocation-related expenses.

1. One forgivable loan is available per household, and may be used for the following:
relocation expenses (including airfare or other transportation mode) movers, etc;
initial fees associated with rentals (broker fees, security deposits, first month's rent);
and other appropriate fees as determined by the Police Department.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
45
ARTICLE III - PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

319. 2. A maximum of $70,000 annually is available for this program. Funds will be
disbursed to eligible applicants on a first-come, first-served basis.

320. The program will expire as of June 30, 2015 unless renewed by the parties.

Section 12. _ Paid Sick Leave Ordinance.

321. San Francisco Administrative Code, Chapter 12W Paid Sick Leave Ordinance is expressly
waived in its entirety with respect to employees covered by this Agreement.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
46
ARTICLE IV - SCOPE

322.

323.

ARTICLE IV. SCOPE

Section 1. Severability.

Should any provision of this Memorandum or the application of such provision to any person or
circumstances, be held invalid, the remainder of this Agreement or the application of such
provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be
affected thereby.

Section 2. Duration.

This Agreement shall be effective upon ratification and shall be effective from July 1, 2007 through
June 30, 2018.

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
47
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Memorandum of Understanding this

 

 

day of , 2013.
FOR THE CITY FOR THE ASSOCIATION
Micki Callahan Date Martin Halloran Date
Director, Human Resources Department President, Police Officers’ Association
Martin R. Gran Date

Employee Relations Director

APPROVED AS TO FORM:
Dennis Herrera, City Attorney

Elizabeth Salveson Date
Chief Labor Attorney

2007 - 2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO AND
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
48
APPENDIX A

FOR INFORMATION PURPOSES ONLY

Civil Service Rule 220
Sec. 220.1 Leaves of Absence - General Requirements

220.1.1 Leaves of absence, hereinafter referred to in this Rule as "leave," shall be
governed by the provisions of this Rule. For the purpose of this Rule, "appointing officer"
shall mean all elected officials; all department heads designated by the Charter as
appointing officers; and all Boards and Commissions when officiating as appointing
officers.

220.1.2 Requests for leave shall be subject to the approval of the appointing officer or
designee. The decision of the appointing officer or designee is final unless provision for
appeal is specifically granted in this Rule. Such requests for appeal shall be processed in
accordance with the appeal procedure provided in this Rule. Requests for military,
maternity, or witness or jury duty leave shall be granted as provided herein.

220.1.3 Except for vacation leave, witness or jury duty leave, compulsory sick leave,
disability leave or unpaid administrative leave, an employee requesting a leave for more
than five (5) working days shall submit such request to the appointing officer or designee
on the form prescribed by the Human Resources Director. Requests for sick leave in
excess of five (5) continuous working days shall be certified by a licensed medical
doctor, doctor of dental surgery, doctor of podiatric medicine, licensed clinical
psychologist, Christian Science Practitioner or licensed doctor of chiropractic.
Verification of sick leave with pay for less than five (5) working days (seven (7) calendar
days in the case of part-time employees) as provided elsewhere in this Rule shall be
required on an individual basis only and shall be based upon an evaluation of the
individual attendance record of an employee.

220.1.4 The Human Resources Director may direct that leave requests be retained in the
department and maintained in a manner so as to be readily available for audit, review, or
analysis by Department of Human Resources staff.

220.1.5 Except as otherwise provided in these Rules, leave granted for the period stated
on the prescribed form may be extended or abridged only with the approval of the
appointing officer or designee. An employee who does not return to work on the
approved date shall be deemed as away without official leave and shall be subject to
automatic resignation as provided elsewhere in these Rules.

220.1.6 Except when an employee requesting sick leave has accumulated unused sick
leave with pay credits and except for employees eligible for military leave with pay,
witness or jury duty leave, disability leave or leave due to battery as provided elsewhere
in this Rule, or for authorized holiday or vacation, leaves shall be without pay.

220.1.7 Refer to the Probationary Period Rule on leave during the probationary period.
APPENDIX A
220.1.8 Exempt employees may be granted leaves in accordance with the provisions of
this Rule. The decision of the appointing officer shall be final and not subject to appeal.

220.1.9 An appointee shall not be required to sign a resignation form as a condition of
approval of a leave.

220.1.10 Leaves granted under this Rule shall be indicated on time rolls as designated by
the Controller.

220.1.11 An authorized leave granted under this Rule shall not be considered as a break
in the continuous service of an employee.

Sec. 220.7 Definition of Sick Leave
A leave granted under this Rule for One of the following reasons shall be known as "sick
leave":

220.7.4 Sick Leave - Maternity

Absence due to the employee's pregnancy or convalescent period following childbirth.
Such leave shall not exceed six (6) months provided that such leave may be extended for
permanent employees if a physician certifies that a longer convalescence period is
required. Such extensions shall be subject to the provisions of this Rule governing sick
leave without pay.
 

APPENDIX B

San Francisco Police Department 11.12

GENERAL ORDER Rev. 01/07/04

 

TEMPORARY MODIFIED DUTY/REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION

This order describes the Department's policies and procedures for temporary modified duty and
reasonable accommodation for sworn members of the Department. This order supersedes Information
Bulletin #86-133, and all other Bulletins, Orders, Policies or Procedures regarding modified duty and
reasonable accommodation. This order contains the Department's entire modified duty and reasonable
accommodation policy. This order is intended to be consistent with any rights members may have
under law, including without limitation, workers compensation, the Americans with Disabilities Act,
and the Fair Employment and Housing Act.

Except for matters related to compensation while engaged in temporary modified duty assignments,
nothing in this general order, and no decisions made pursuant to this general order, shall be grievable
under the Memorandum of Understanding between the Police Officers' Association and the City.

IL INTRODUCTION

A. This Department is charged with the duty to protect life and property, to maintain the
peace, to prevent crime, to enforce criminal laws and ordinances. These duties are best
accomplished when all members are capable of performing the essential functions of
their positions. Additionally, the Department's staffing has been impacted by the
amendment to the Charter regarding minimum staffing of the Department.

B. This policy has two parts. First, it outlines the temporary modified duty assignments for
members who are temporarily injured or ill. Second, it describes the procedure for
members to seek accommodation under State and Federal disabilities laws including the
Americans with Disabilities Act and the Fair Employment and Housing Act.

II. TEMPORARY MODIFIED DUTY POLICY

The temporary modified duty policy allows ‘sworn members who have a temporary illness or
injury to continue to serve in the Department when they are unable to perform the essential
functions of their position.

A. ELIGIBILITY FOR TEMPORARY MODIFIED DUTY ASSIGNMENTS

1. With the approval of the Chief of Police or his or her designee, a member who
sustains a temporary injury or illness and who is thereby limited from performing
the essential functions of his or her position may be provided a temporary
modified duty assignment.

2. This temporary modified duty policy applies only to sworn members of the
Department (hereinafter referred to as "members"). It does not apply to civilian
employees or employees in the academy. Probationary employees are eligible to
the extent that they can complete all probation requirements within the time
period set forth in the current Memorandum of Understanding between the City
and the Police Officers' Association.
DGO 11.12

Rev. 01/07/04

B.

DURATION OF TEMPORARY MODIFIED DUTY ASSIGNMENTS

1.

Limited To 365 Days. Temporary modified duty assignments shall be limited in
duration to a maximum of 365 days. At the end of 30 days of a temporary
modified duty assignment, or earlier if warranted, a member shall be reviewed by
the Staff Services Division to determine whether the member will be able to
return to his or her regular assignment. If the modified assignment extends
beyond 30 days, the member's status will be reviewed every 30 days up to the
maximum 365-day duration. Approximately 90 days prior to the expiration of
the 365 day temporary modified duty assignment, the Department will notify
members of the options set forth in subsection 3. below. Prior to the expiration
of the 365 day temporary modified duty assignment, the Department will
consider and discuss with those members the options set forth in subsection 3.
below.

Available Only If Members May Return To Regular Position. If before or
during the temporary modified duty assignment the Department's Physician
determines that the member will not be able to return to his or her regular
position prior to the expiration of the temporary modified duty assignment, then
the Department will consider and discuss with the member the options set forth
in subsection 3. below. At this point, the member will no longer be eligible for
temporary modified duty. In making this determination, the Department's
Physician may consult with the City's independent medical expert, medically
examine the member, review medical records, and/or consult with the member's
treating physician.

End Of Temporary Modified Duty Assignment. Once a member is permanent
and stationary and/or has served in a temporary modified duty position for 365
days, or earlier if warranted, the Department will consider and discuss with the
member the following options: (1) returning the member to full duty; (2)
granting a request for a disability accommodation under the ADA and/or state
law (which may include a disability transfer under the City's disability transfer
policy); (3) recommending disability retirement; (4) providing an unpaid leave of
absence pursuant to the Civil Service Rules; (5) allowing sick leave or FMLA
leave; or (6) initiating non-punitive medical separation if none of the above are
appropriate.

Members Currently On Modified Duty. Members who are on modified duty
as of the effective date of this General Order shall be entitled to a temporary
modified duty assignment for a period of 365 days starting the effective date of
this General Order. Approximately 90 days prior to the expiration of the 365 day
temporary modified duty assignment, the Department will notify members of the
options set forth in subsection 3. above. Prior to the expiration of the 365 day
temporary modified duty assignment, the Department will consider and discuss
with those members the options set forth in subsection 3. above.
DGO 11.12

Rev. 01/07/04

Cc. RULES GOVERNING TEMPORARY MODIFIED DUTY ASSIGNMENTS

1.

Temporary modified duty assignments are those assignments within the
Department that can be performed by members who temporarily cannot perform
the essential functions of their position.

Temporary modified duty assignments available to members will be subject to
the following limitations:

a. Members will not be placed at district stations unless otherwise
authorized by the Deputy Chief of Administration, and approved by the
Chief of Police. These assignments shall be reviewed every 30 days.

b. Members in temporary modified duty assignments shall be eligible for
premium pay such as like work-like pay and overtime assignments,
including but not limited to PLES overtime, as long as such assignments
are consistent with the member's medical restrictions and the needs of the
Department. Disputes about this issue will be submitted to the Deputy
Chief of Administration for determination.

c. Any involuntary transfer or reassignment shall require 48 hours notice,
absent an emergency.

No sworn member shall be given a temporary modified duty assignment in a
budgeted non-sworn position.

D. PROCESS FOR RECEIVING A TEMPORARY MODIFIED DUTY
ASSIGNMENT

1.

The process for receiving a temporary modified duty assignment begins either
when the Department receives: (1) notification from Workers' Compensation
Division that a member with an industrial injury may return to work ina
modified duty capacity; or (2) a memorandum from a member with a non-
industrial injury requesting to return to work in a temporary modified duty
capacity.

The member's medical work restrictions are reviewed at the Staff Services
Division, which shall compare the limitation(s) placed on the member by his or
her treating physician with available temporary modified duty assignments. The
Department may review the limitation(s) placed on the member by his or her
treating physician with the City's independent medical expert and/or the
Department Physician.
DGO 11.12

Rev. 01/07/04
3. In the event of questions regarding a member's ability to perform (1) the essential
functions of a member's position, or (2) modified duties, the Department shall
contact the member's treating physician and/or the City's medical expert for
clarification. For industrial injuries, if there is a dispute over this issue, a final
determination will be made in accordance with Workers' Compensation Rules.
4. The Deputy Chief of Administration may make a recommendation for a

Til.

IV.

temporary modified duty assignment to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police
shall make the final decision regarding the availability of a temporary modified
duty assignment based on the member's medical restrictions and the personnel
needs of the Department. His or her decision shall also take into consideration
the member's job skills, job qualifications, training, experience, and any other
relevant factors.

5. If a member is placed in a temporary modified duty assignment, he or she will be
required to sign an acknowledgment confirming that he or she understands this
policy, including its time limits, and agrees to abide by it.

REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION

A.

POLICY. Members may request a reasonable accommodation when they have a
physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities. This
impairment may or may not be as a result of a work-related incident. A copy of the
City's "Employee Information Sheet Regarding CCSF Reasonable Accommodation
Process" is available through the Department's ADA coordinator.

REQUESTING A REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION. To request a reasonable
accommodation, a member shall contact the Department's ADA coordinator and
complete a request for accommodation form and a medical release. The ADA
coordinator will engage in the interactive process with the member, and will review
whether any reasonable accommodation is possible in the member's position.

ADA COORDINATOR RECOMMENDATION. Without disclosing confidential
medical information, the ADA coordinator shall present the member's restrictions and a
recommendation regarding reasonable accommodation to the Duty Evaluation
Committee.

DUTY EVALUATION COMMITTEE.

A.

The Duty Evaluation Committee shall be composed of the following members: the
Deputy Chief of Administration Bureau (Chair), the Commanding Officer of the Staff
Services Division, the Personnel Sergeant, the Police Physician, and the Department's
ADA Coordinator.
DGO 11.12
Rev. 01/07/04

B. The Committee shall convene within 30 days of the receipt of the ADA coordinator's
recommendation or sooner at the request of the member. At the meeting, the member
requesting accommodation is entitled to be present and be represented by the Police
Officers' Association or any other representative chosen by the member. The Committee

shall consider the following:

1. The nature, extent and seriousness of the member's restrictions, i.e., whether the
member has restrictions that limit one or more major life activities.

2. Whether the member, with reasonable accommodation, could perform the
essential functions of his or her full-duty position, including through such
methods as restructuring nonessential functions, or other means which do not
pose an undue hardship to the Department or pose a direct threat to the health or
safety of the members and others.

3. When the Committee determines that a member cannot be reasonably
accommodated to perform the essential job functions of his or her sworn
position, the ADA coordinator shall refer the member to the Department of
Human Resources for a 60 day concurrent Department and City-wide search for
job vacancies which meet the member's medical restrictions and for which the
member meets the minimum qualifications. The member may elect not to
participate in the Citywide search by notifying the Department of this election in
writing.

4. In addition, when the Committee determines that a member cannot be reasonably
accommodated to perform the essential job functions of his or her sworn
position, the Committee will consider and discuss with the member of the
following options: (1) recommending disability retirement; (2) providing an
unpaid leave of absence pursuant to the Civil Service Rules; (3) allowing sick
leave or FMLA leave; or (4) initiating non-punitive medical separation if none of
the above are appropriate, and the member has not been placed in another
position pursuant to the 60 day concurrent Department and City-wide search for
job vacancies.

5. In determining whether to recommend a member for ordinary or industrial
disability retirement, the Committee shall consider, any or all of the following:
Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board determinations(s), Disability Evaluation
Unit rating(s), nature and extent of medical restrictions or limitations, body
part(s) affected, length of service, and relevant medical reports.

6. The Duty Evaluation Committee will consider the factors above, and will not
consider a member's refusal to participate in the Citywide search or to accept an
offered non-sworn position.

7. Based on all of the above, the Duty Evaluation Committee shall make a
determination and shall communicate that to the member in a timely fashion.
DGO 11.12

Rev. 01/07/04

c.

REVIEW TO CHIEF OF POLICE. Ifthe member disagrees with the determination
of the Duty Evaluation Committee, the member may request a review of the
Committee's determination by the Chief of Police.

ACCOMMODATION IN NON-SWORN POSITION. No member shall be granted
an accommodation in a budgeted non-sworn position, unless the position is vacant and
the member received a disability transfer to that position pursuant to City policy.
APPENDIX C
Mandatory Rotation Policy in the
San Francisco Police Department’s Field Operations Bureau

The primary goal of the Mandatory Rotation Policy (MRP) is to expose both newly hired
officers, along with future hires, to the various diverse communities in our City. Asa
result of the wide-array of experiences, it is believed that officers will increase their
overall knowledge of the communities they serve. This policy will effect a change to
Department General Order 11.06, Personnel Transfers.

5-Year rotation for recently hired officers.

Under the MRP, officers hired on or after January 1, 2007 will be subject to a mandatory
5-year rotation.

Officers affected by the MRP will not be precluded from transferring to another station
prior to the five-year period expiring. All permanent transfer rights (DGO 11.06) will
still be protected under this plan. For example, an officer who was given an opportunity
to transfer to another station assignment during his/her third year at a particular station
will be allowed to transfer, but he/she will have five years at the new assignment. Under
no circumstances will any officer affected under this plan be allowed to remain at an
assignment for more than five years.

During the months of November and May of each year, officers shall submit a
“Mandatory Transfer Request Form” for whatever station they would like to be
transferred. After the first 20 positions (2 slots at each station) are filled at the district
stations, the Deputy Chief of FOB, or his/her designee, will personally contact the
remaining officers affected by this plan and inform them of what stations will have
positions available. The implementation of the MRP will go into effect during the month
of February and July each year, prior to the mandated station sign up.

In the second year of the program, the number of available slots per station will go from 2
per station to 3 per station. The Administration and the Police Officer’s Association will
meet and confer regarding additional slots per station after the second year of the
rotational (“P2”) plan.

The Staff Services Division will be responsible for keeping accurate records of those
officers involved in the rotational (“P2”) program. During the first week of November
and May of every year, the Staff Services Division will consult the Commander and
Deputy Chief of Patrol as to which officers must rotation in February and July. A
designee from the Staff Services Division will send notices out to those officers
transferring in February and July indicating that they will be contacted during the last two
weeks in January and June for stations requests. The Staff Services Division or a
designee from the Field Operations Bureau Headquarters will contact those officers due
for rotation, by seniority, and will provide them with the opportunity to choose their
assignment, based on availability and their seniority. After the mandatory slots are filled,
the Field Operations Bureau will designate assignments based on the needs for staffing at
the district stations.

TACTICAL COMPANY

All Q-2 officers who are currently assigned to the Tactical Company will not be affected
by the 5-year mandatory rotation. All new transfers into the Tactical Company
(S.W.A.T.) will be subject to a seven (7) year rotation. At the conclusion of the seven-
year period, the Tactical officer will be given an opportunity to complete a “Mandatory
Transfer Request Form” to request a station assignment, consistent with the above listed
policy. The existing Department policy of requiring officers to pass a battery of tests
before becoming a member of Tactical Company will remain in effect.

CANINE UNIT/TACTICAL COMPANY

Effective with the next transfer into the Canine Unit, all new Q-2 officers will be subject
to a seven (7) year rotation in the unit. All officers who are presently assigned to the
Canine Unit will not be affected by this plan. At the conclusion of the seven-year
assignment, all new officers will be required to leave the unit. At the conclusion of the
seven-year period, the Canine officer will be given an opportunity to complete a
“Mandatory Transfer Request Form” to request a station assignment, consistent with the
MRP. Any present or future requirements that need to be met prior to becoming a
member of the Canine Unit are not effected by this agreement.

YOUTH SERVICES UNIT/SRO

All Q-2 officers who are currently assigned to the Youth Services Unit will not be
affected by the 5-year mandatory rotation. The School Resource Officer Unit is an
exempt position in the Field Operations Bureau. Upon implementation of the MRP, all
officers must have at least 3 years seniority in the Department before being assigned to
the Youth Services Unit and will remain in the unit for no longer than 5 years. At the
conclusion of the 5 years, officers will return to their original assignments or they may
choose to participate in the mandatory rotation program. (See above for veteran officer
participation)

TACTICAL COMPANY/MARINE UNIT
All Q-2 officers who are currently assigned to the Marine Unit will not be affected by the

5-year mandatory rotation. All new transfers into the Tactical Company/Marine Unit will
be subject to a seven (7) year rotation. At the conclusion of the seven-year period, the
Marine Unit officer will be given an opportunity to complete a “Mandatory Transfer
Request Form” to request a station assignment, consistent with the MRP. The existing
Department policy of requiring officers to pass a battery of tests before becoming a
member of Marine Unit officer will remain in effect.

HOMELAND SECURITY UNIT

All Q-2 officers who are currently assigned to the Homeland Security Unit will not be
affected by the 5-year mandatory rotation. The Homeland Security Unit is an exempt
position in the Field Operations Bureau. Upon implementation of the MRP, all officers
who are assigned to the Homeland Security Unit thereafter will remain in the unit for no
longer than 5 years. At the conclusion of the 5 years, the officer will return to their
original assignment or they may choose to participate in the mandatory rotation program.
(See above for veteran officer participation)

SERGEANTS IN FIELD OPERATIONS BUREAU

 

Beginning with new appointments after June 1, 2007, all new Sergeants will be subject to
a five (5) year rotation. After receiving their permanent assignment as a Sergeant, they
will be allowed to remain in that assignment for a period not to exceed five years. During
this five-year time period, nothing precludes a Sergeant from accepting a transfer to
another assignment in accordance with D.G.O. 11.06 to another station/assignment. At
the start of this program, there should be 1 slot available at every station for veteran
Sergeants who wish to participate in the MRP.
a6”

C

APPENDIX D

=IELD OPERATIONS > 95574919

San Francisco Police Department

GENERAL ORDER

UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT CLASSES

NO. @58

10.01
08/10/94

This order identifies the Department's uniform classes and specifies the uniform
and equipment items within each class.

I. POLICY

A. UNIFORM CLASSES, The following constitute the various classes of
uniform used by the San Francisco Police Department:

1. FORMAL, CLASS AA, COMMISSIONED OFFICERS

a

b

Pn

ow

Service hat.

White shirt (long sleeve).

Black necktie.

Dress coat.

Trousers with black belt.

Black socks,

Black shoes (shined).

Department-authorized
and holster

{not exposed below the coat).

Gloves (as specified).

Medal(s) of Valor or ribbon(s).

 

page

 

 
@6/0172804 18:47 FIELD OPERATIONS * 95574919

DGO 10.01
08/10/94

2. FORMAL, CLASS AA, MOUNTED OFFICERS (all ranks)
a. Campaign hat. ,
b. White shirt dong sleeve).
¢ Black necktie,
d. Dress coat.

e. Riding breeches
with trouser belt.

£ Black boots (shined),

g Equipment belt with shoulder
strap (holster and Department-
authorized handgun, speed
loaders, handcuffs and case) worn
on the outside of the dress coat.

   

of Valor or ribbon(s).

 

 

 

NO.@58

baes

 

 
6/81/2884

18:47 FIELD OPERATIONS > 95574919

3. FORMAL, CLASS AA, MOTORCYCLE OFFICERS (all ranks)
a. White helmet.
bh Dark blue shirt (long sleeve).
« Black necktie.
d. Dress coat.

e. Riding breeches with trouser
belt.

£ Black boots (shined).

g Equipment belt with shoulder
strap (holster and Department-
authorized handgun, speed -
loaders, handcuffs and case}
worn on the outside of the
dress coat.

h. Gloves (as specified).

All other required equipment.

rn

j. Medal(s) of Valor or ribbon(s).

 

NO.@58 aa4

DGO 10.01"
08/10/94

The Formal Uniform shall be worn at ceremonies, funerals, state functions and

other formal events as directed by the Chief of Police.

 

 
 

06/81/2884 18:47

DGO 10.01
08/10/94

FIELD OPERATIONS > 95574919. NO.@58

4. DRESS, CLASS A, ALI. BUREAUS AND DIVISIONS (all ranks)

a

e.

h.

je

Service hat (motorcycle officers:
white helmet).

Dark blue shirt (long sleeve).
Black necktie.

Dark blue dress “Tke” jacket.
Trouser (motorcycle and
mounted officers, breeches)
with trouser belt.

Black socks for shoes.

Black shoes (shined)
(motorcycle and mounted
officers: black boots). _
Equipmient belt with holster,
Department-authorized

handgun, handcuffs with case
and all required equipment.

  

Gloves (as specified).
Medal(s) of Valor or ribbon(s).

Baas

 

 
66/81/2804

14:47

FIELD OPERATIONS > 95574919 NO.@58 b@a6

DGO 10.01
08/10/94

5. DUTY, CLASS B, PATROL DIVISION (all ranks)

a

b. Dark blue shirt

th

Pog

”

|. Field sweater (optional).

. Equipment belt, holster with

i. Ribbons (optional).

Service hat.

(long or short sleeve).

Foul weather jacket (optional).

Trousers with belt.
Black shoes (shined).
Black socks for shoes.

Department-authorized handgun
and all required equipment.

 

 

 

 
 

96/81/2804 10:47 FIELD OPERATIONS > 95574919 NO.@58 baa?

DGO 10.01
08/10/94

 

6. DUTY, CLASS B, TRAFFIC DIVISION (Motorcycle Officers)
a. White helmet.

b Dark blue shirt :
(long or short sleeve).

c Black leather jacket {optional).”'
d. Foul weather jacket (optional).

e Field sweater (optional).

  

£° Breéche is with trouser belt.

 

g Black boots (shined).

h. Equipment belt, holster with
Department-authorized "*
handgun and all required
equipment.

  
6/81/2084 18:47 FIELD OPERATIONS > 95574919 NO.@58 228

DGO 10.01
08/10/94

7. DUTY, CLASS B, SPECIAL OPERATIONS DIVISION (Mounted Officers)

a. Service hat.

bh Dark blue shirt &

(long or short sleeve).
c. Black leather jacket (optional).
d. Field sweater (optional).
&. Breeches with trouser belt.
f. Black boots (shined).
g Equipment belt, holster with

Department-authorized handgun
and all required equipment.

 
 

0678172804 18:47 FIELD OPERATIONS > 95574919 NO. @58 peas

DGO 10.01
08/10/94 €

8. DUTY, CLASS B, SPECIAL OPERATIONS DIVISION (Motorbike Unit)

a. White helmet.

b. Jumpsuit.

G Motocross boots.

d. Equipment belt, Department-
authorized handgun and ail
required equipment.

e. 36” baton,

£ Glovesas tequired.

g All other required equipment.

k. Black leather jacket (optional).

   

 

 

 

 
06/8172084 10:47

FIELD OPERATIONS > 95574919 NO.@58 aia

DGO 10.01
08/10/94

9. DUTY, CLASS B, PATROL DIVISION (Bicycle Officer)

a

b

Pow

c

Bicycle helmet.

Dark blue shirt
(long or short sleeve).

Foul weather jacket or |
windbreaker (optional).

Field sweater (optional).

Bicycle pants.

Bicycle shoes (shined).

Bicycle gloves.

Sunglasses.

Equipment belt, holster with
Department-authorized handgun
and all required equipment.
Ribbons (optional).

 

 

 

 
8678172884 10:47 FIELD OPERATIONS > 95574919 No. @58

DGO 10.01
08/10/94

10, SPECIAL, CLASS C, ALL BUREAUS AND DIVISIONS (all ranks)
a. Service cap (baseball cap).
b Jumpsuit.
&, Black shoes or boots (shined).
Black socks for shoes.

p

a Equipment belt, Department-
authorized handgun and all
required equipment.

£ 26” baton.

g Gloves as required.

h. All other required equipment.

  

10

Da11

 

 

 

 

 

 
FIELD OPERATIONS > 95574919

11. TACTICAL, CLASS D (all officers)

Riot helmet.

. Service cap (baseball cap)
carried in jumpsuit pocket.

Jampsuit.
Black socks for shoes.

Black shoes or black boots
(shined).

Black leather equipment belt
with all required equipment.

Department-authorized
handgun,

. 36” baton.
Black leather gloves.

. All other required equipment.

1

NO. 858 DbZ12

DGO 10.01
08/10/94

 

 

 

 

 
26/01/2004 18:47 FIELD OPERATIONS > 95574919 NO.@58 6@13

DGO 10.01
08/10/94 €

12, TACTICAL, CLASS D (SPECIAL OPERATIONS GROUP)
a Service cap (baseball cap).
b Camouflage jumpsuit.
« Black boots.

ad. Black leather equipment belt
with all required equipment.

e, Department-authorized
handgun.

f£ Black leather gloves.

g. All other required equipment.

  

 

 

 

 

 
06/81/2004

OC

10:47

13. RECRUIT, CLASS E {all recruit officers)

FIELD OPERATIONS + 95574919

. Service cap (baseball cap).

Light blue shirt.

¢ Dark blue undershirt.

a

Foe

Dark blue pants.
Black leather belt.
Black shoes (shined).
Black socks.

All other required equipment.

13

NO.@58

DGO 10.01
08/10/94

 

G14

 

 
 

06/81/2884

18:47 FIELD OPERATIONS + 95574919 NO. 258:

DGO 10.01
08/10/94

B,

UNIFORM OF THE DAY

1, PATROL DIVISION. Unless otherwise specified, the uniform of the day for
the Patrol Division is DUTY, Class B. .

2. PROPERTY CONTROL SECTION, Unless otherwise specified, the uniform of
the day for Property Control Section personnel is Special, Class C
Gumpsuit).

C. RAIN GEAR. Rain gear may be worn as required.

D

E

‘FIELD SWEATERS. Field sweaters may be worn only with the Duty, Class B

uniform, over‘a long or short-sleeved shirt.

UNDERSHIRTS, DICKIES. Officers shall not wear anything tinder the
uniform shirt or jumpsuit, visible at the neckline, that is not solid black or
navy blue. No undergarment shall show below the hem or-cuff of the sleeve.

SERVICE HAT. ' Officers shall ensure that their service hats are serviceable
and immediately accessible within the passenger compartment of their
assigned vehicles. The service hat shall be worn in any the following
circumstances:

1. When working a footbeat.

2 When working an assignment in which the primary function is crowd
control, e.g., parades, sporting events, etc. :

_ 3. When conducting traffic stops.

4. When directing traffic.
5. When conducting an investigation at the scene of a traffic accident.

6, At inspections, ceremonies, funerals and other appropriate formal events. -
3 :
7. In situations requiring immediate recognition for officer safety, eg.,
building searches, in-progress burglaries, in-progress robberies, in progress
aggravated assaults, hostage sitnations, critical incidents, etc.

“14

pais

 

 

 
86/81/2804 10:47 FIELD OPERATIONS > 95574919 NO.@58 B16

. DGO 10.01
Cy 08/10/94

8. When circumstances ate such that the wearing of the service hat is
appropriate, e.g., non-violent protests and demonstrations, dignitary
protection, fixed post assignments, etc.

G. SENIORITY STRIPES. Seniority stripes may be worm only by non-
comunissioned officers, i.e., patrol officers and sergeants, and shall be placed
only on the “Ike” jacket and/or the long-sleeved uniform shirt, centered on
the left forearm. Each stripe represents five years of service to the ine
Department.

H. MEDALS OF VALOR/RIBBONS. Medals of Valor may be worn only on the
formal coat or on the dress “Ike” jacket centered below the star. Medals of
Valor and ribbons shall not be worn simultaneously.

IL SHOULDER PATCHES AND CHEVRONS. Shoulder patches and chevrons
(sergeants stripes) shall not be placed on the leather jacket or on the rain
jacket. : .

 

 

 
INDEMNITY AGREEMENT

This Indemnity Agreement ("Agreement") is made between the San Francisco
Police Officers Association ("POA") and the City and County of San Francisco ("City").

WHEREAS the City and the POA entered into a Memorandum of Understanding,
effective July 1, 2007;

WHEREAS section 6 of the MOU contains an agreement for release time of the
POA President ("President's Release Time");

WHEREAS the POA has agreed to "execute an agreement, in a form acceptable
to the City Attorney, that indemnifies and holds the City harmless from any legal claims
by any party as to the conduct of the President during any period of release time"; and

WHEREAS the parties wish to hereby make said agreement;
NOW, THEREFORE, the City and the POA hereby agree as follows:

1. The POA shall indemnify and save harmless the City and its officers,
agents and employees (collectively, "Indemnitees") and, if requested by the City, shall
defend Indemnitees against any and all loss, cost, damage, injury, liability and claims
thereof, arising directly or indirectly out of or relating to the conduct of the POA
President while on release time, including but not limited to the President's use of
facilities or equipment provided by the City or others. The foregoing indemnity shall
include reasonable fees of attorneys, consultants and experts, and costs, including such
fees and costs incurred by the City in investigating and defending any claims against
Indemnitees. This Agreement does not extend to the good faith exercise of peace officer
powers under section 830.1 of the California Penal Code should the President be required
to take such action pursuant to G.O. 2.01 Rule 2 or as directed by the Department.

2. The indemnity provided by this Agreement applies regardless of the
negligence of, and regardless of whether liability without fault is imposed or sought to be
imposed on any Indemnitee, except to the extent that such indemnity is void or otherwise
unenforceable under applicable law in effect on or validly retroactive to the date of this
Agreement.

3. If tender of defense is made to the POA, the POA has an immediate and
independent obligation to defend Indemnitees from any claim which actually or
potentially falls within this indemnification provision, even if the allegations are or may
be groundless, false or fraudulent, which obligation arises at the time such claim is
tendered to POA by City and continues at all times thereafter.

4. This Agreement shall be effective for all periods from July 1, 2007 to and
including June 30, 2011, with respect to any POA president during that period of time.

n:\labor\shared\negotiation 2007\indem3.doc
5. The parties acknowledge that this Agreement constitutes the sole
agreement between them relating to indemnity, that it supercedes any prior oral or written
agreements on the topic, and that it may be modified only by a writing signed by all
parties to this Agreement.

6. The parties agree that the San Francisco Superior Court will have
jurisdiction to enforce this Agreement. All disputes arising out of this Agreement shall be
resolved by the San Francisco Superior Court.

SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICER'S

   

ASSOCIATION
bates: _1[30f Roo __
By:
Authorized Agent
CITY AND COUNTY OF
SAN FRANCISCO

     
  

Wh

LA 2
HORAN, Acting Director
artment of Human Resourcest

Dated: CHE 250 7
By:

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

DENNIS J. HERRERA, CITY ATTORNEY
City and County of San Francisco

Sé1y lt /1. flit
ELIZABETH SALVESON
Chief Labor Attorney

n\labor\shared\negotiation 2007\indem3.doc
