MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

BETWEEN

THE CITY OF REDWOOD CITY

REDWOOD CITY POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION

SEPTEMBER 1, 2008 - AUGUST 31, 2015

Original MOU term 9/1/08 through 8/31/11.
This is amended MOU document amended July 2011 to incorporate side letters during term of original
MOU which include 2 contract extensions - one to 8-31-12 and the second to 8-31-15

 
Section
PREAMBLE
SECTION 1 -

SECTION 2 -

SECTION 3 -

SECTION 4 -
SECTION 5 -
SECTION 6 -

SECTION 7 -

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 
 
 
 

RECOGNITION ..
1.1. Union Recog!
1.2 Employer Recognition...

EEO/ADA
2.1 No Discrimination..
2.2. Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA)

  
 
 
  
 

ved
2
eed

ASSOCIATION SECURITY...
Dues Deductions .
Bulletin Boards ..

Use of City Facilities :
Advance Notice .......
Access to Work Locations...

 

ww ew oe
oe
ADA RWW

CITY RIGHTS..........ccccesssceccceeesseecceeeeeeececeseceseeeeeesneaseeeesetaeeereereees 5

 

 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
 

7.1 Salary Increases...
7.2 Salary Increase on Promotion ..
7.3. Pay Period .....
Premium Pay
Bilingual Pay...
Officer-In-Charg
Court Pay ......
Longevity Pay..
Call-Back / Call-Out Pay
Educational Incentive ..
K-9 Maintenance Compensation ..
Overtime .........cceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeee
7.12.1 Forty (40) Hour Workweek Employees.
7.12.2 Definition of Overtime Rate of Pay .

NNNANNNNN
ae roaAnoaouar

Nao

7.12.3 Compensatory Time ...... ~10
7.13 Uniforms and Safety Equipment .. - 10
7.14 Holidays -12
7.15 Vacations... - 13
SECTION 8 -

SECTION 9 -

SECTION 10 -

SECTION 11 -

SECTION 12 -

SECTION 13 -

SECTION 14 -

SECTION 15 -

  
   

 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7.16 Illness During Vacation..

7.17 Mileage Payment .....

7.18 Tuition Reimbursement.

7.19 Lateral Recruitment Incentive Award .

WORK WEEK AND WORK PERIOD...

8.1 Regular Workweek and Work

8.2 4/10 and 3/12% Schedule

ul -17
9.41 -17
9.2 Industrial Disability Leave .19
9.3 Military Leave .... . 20
9.4 Leave of Absence . 20
9.5 Jury Duty........ceceeeceeeeceee 21
9.6 Maternity Leave of Absence Without Pay . .21
9.7 Leave for Pregnancy Disability. :
9.8 Absence Notification .

9.9 Bereavement Leave ..

9.10 Family and Medical Leave

HEALTH PLANS
10.1 Health and Cafeteria Plans..
10.2 Cafeteria Plan.
10.3 Savings Clause.
10.4 Dental
10.5 Life Insurance .
10.6 Long Term Disability Insurance
10.7 Vision Care

PROBATION...........006
11.1 New Employees ..
11.2 Promoted Employees....

PROMOTION
12.1 Examination
12.2 Eligible List ....

 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 

RESIGNATION.........0ccccccceeesececeeeeeeeeceeeseeeseceeeseeesceesseueasessseesensaes 30
RETIREMENT. .

14.1 Retirement Plan.. - 30
14.2 Optional Provisions Added. 31
14.3 City's Contribution to Retirement System.. 31

14.4 Employee's Contribution to Retirement Syste:
14.5 414(h)(2) Internal Revenue Service Code ..
14.6 Exit Incentive Plan (EIP)

 
SECTION 16 -
SECTION 17 -

SECTION 18 -
SECTION 19 -
SECTION 20 -
SECTION 21 -
SECTION 22 -
APPENDICIES

A - Core Reference Materials ....

15.2 Order of Rehire ....
15.3 Break in Service...
15.4 Benefits During Layoff ....

   
 

PERSONNEL FILES ..........cceesssceseesssseeeeessseeeseceesesseesecerensseeeesesaeees 33

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE .
17.1 Definitions .......
17.2 General Provisions.
17.3 Procedure...........
17.3.1 Level - Informal Resolution .
17.3.2 Level Il - Formal Written Grievance
17.3.3 Level ill - Appeal to the Personnel Offi

  
 
  
 
 
 
 

 

17.3.4 Level IV - Binding Arbitration - 38
OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT ..........s.ccccccccesseeecececeessereseesneeeceseeseeeneeeeee 39
SAFETY .....cccsseeececcessececeeseeeseeessccceesesscescessnseessceuaeseseeeeeesesseeees 40
LIMITED DUTY WORK..............00seeescccesssssscnecseesueeecceeseseeaeerereeseseees 41
DAMAGED PROPERTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES. ............ccec0000+ 41
SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS ..........sessseecesecceeesesecceseeseseeceeceesseeees 42

 
PREAMBLE

This Memorandum of Understanding (hereinafter MOU) is entered into pursuant to the
provisions of Section 3500 et. seq. of the Government Code of the State of California.

The parties have met and conferred in good faith regarding wages, hours and other
terms and conditions of employment for the employees in said representation unit,
and have freely exchanged information, opinions and proposals and have reached
agreement on all matters relating to the employment conditions and employer-
employee relations of such employees.

This MOU shall be presented to the City Council of the City of Redwood City as the
joint recommendation of the undersigned parties for salary and employee benefit
adjustments for the period commencing September 1, 2008, and ending August 31,
2015.
SECTION 1 - RECOGNITION

1.1

1.2

Union Recognition

Redwood City Police Officers Association, hereinafter referred to as “the
Association,” has been recognized as the Majority Representative, pursuant to
the Employer-Employee Resolution of the City adopted August 7, 1972, for the
regular full-time employees assigned to the classes set forth in Section 7 of this
MOU. This unit of employees shall for the purposes of identification be titled
the Police Unit.

Employer Recognition

The City Manager is the representative of the City of Redwood City, hereinafter
referred to as "the City," in employer-employee relations pursuant to the
Employer-Employee Resolution of the City adopted August 7, 1972.

SECTION 2 - EEO/ADA

2.1

2.2

No Discrimination

It is the policy of the City of Redwood City to provide equal employment
opportunity to all employees and applicants for employment. All employment
practices, such as recruitment, selection, promotions, and other terms and
conditions of employment are administered in a manner designed to ensure
that employees and applicants for employment or services are not subjected to
discrimination on the basis of age (over 40), race, color, sex, national origin,
medical condition, disability (except where a disability is a bona fide
occupational disqualification), sexual orientation, marital status, religious or
political preference or union affiliations.

Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA)

Because the ADA requires accommodations for individuals protected under the
Act, and because these accommodations must be determined on an individual,
case-by-case basis, the parties agree that the provisions of this MOU may be
disregarded in order for the City to avoid discrimination relative to hiring,
promotion, granting permanency, transfer, layoff, reassignment, termination,
rehire, rates of pay, job and duty classification, seniority, leaves, fringe
benefits, training opportunities, hours of work or other terms and conditions of
employment.
The Association recognizes that the City has the legal obligation to meet with
the individual employee to be accommodated before any adjustment is made in
working conditions. The Association will be notified of these proposed
accommodations prior to implementation by the City.

Any accommodation provided to an individual protected by the ADA shall not
establish a past practice in the grievance/arbitration procedure.

Prior to disregarding any provision of this MOU in order to undertake required
accommodations for an individual protected by the Act, the City will provide
the Association with written notice of its intent to disregard the provision and
will allow the Association the opportunity to discuss options to disregarding the
MOU.

SECTION 3 - ASSOCIATION SECURITY

3.1

Dues Deductions

The Association may have the regular dues of its members deducted from the
employees’ paychecks; provided, however, that such dues deduction shall be
made only upon the written authorization of the individual employee.

Payroll deductions shall be for an amount specified by the Association and
uniform as between employee members of the Association, and shall not
include fines or fees.

Authorization, cancellation or modification of payroll deduction shall be made
upon forms provided by the City. The voluntary payroll deduction
authorization will remain in effect until employment with the City is
terminated or until canceled or modified by the employee by thirty (30) days
advance written notice to the City.

Amounts deducted and withheld by the City shall be transmitted to the officer
designated in writing by the Association as the person authorized to receive
such funds, at the address specified.

The employee's earnings must be sufficient, after all other required deductions
are made, to cover the amount of the deductions herein authorized. When an
employee is in a non-pay status for an entire pay period, no deductions will be
made to cover that pay period. In the case of an employee who is in a non-pay
status during a part of the pay period, and the salary is not sufficient to cover
the full withholding, no deduction shall be made. In this connection, all
required deductions have priority over the Association deduction.

The Association hereby agrees to indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless
against any claim made and against any suit initiated against the City on
account of check off of Association dues. In addition, the Association shall
3.2

3.3

3.4

3.5

refund to the City any amount paid to it in error upon presentation of
supporting evidence.

Bulletin Boards

The City shall provide suitable space for a bulletin board in the Police
Department. The Association shall provide a bulletin board no larger than 30" x
40". The Association shall only be allowed to use such bulletin boards for
communications having to do with official Association business, such as time
and place of meetings.

Use of City Facilities

City employees or the Association or their representatives may in accordance
with established City policies, be granted the use of City facilities for meetings
of City employees provided space is available.

The use of City equipment other than items normally used in the conduct of
business meetings, such as desks, chairs, ashtrays, and blackboards, is strictly
prohibited unless written approval is received in advance from the City, the
presence of such equipment in approved City facilities notwithstanding.

Advance Notice

Except in cases of emergency, reasonable advance written notice shall be given
to the Association if affected by any ordinance, rule, resolution or regulation
directly relating to matters within the scope of representation proposed to be
adopted by the City Council, by any board or commission of the City, or by any
department, and the Association shall be given the opportunity to meet with
such body prior to adoption. In cases of emergency when the City management
determines that an ordinance, rule, resolution, or regulation must be adopted
immediately, without prior notice of meeting with the Association, City
management shall provide such notice and opportunity to meet at the earliest
practical time following the adoption of such ordinance, rule, resolution or
regulation.

Access to Work Locations

Reasonable access to employee work locations shall be granted officers of the
Association and their officially designated representatives, for the purpose of
processing grievances or contacting members of the Association concerning
business within the scope of representation.

Such officers or representatives shall not enter any work location without the
prior consent of the City Manager or his or her designated representative.

Prearrangement for routine contact may be made by agreement between the
Association and the department head and when made shall continue until
revoked.
Access shall be restricted so as not to interfere with the normal operations of
the department or with established safety or security requirements.
Solicitation of membership and activities concerned with the internal
management of the Association, such as collecting dues, holding membership
Meetings, campaigning for office, conducting elections and distributing
literature shall not be conducted during working hours unless approved in
advance by the City Manager or his or her designated representative.

SECTION 4. CITY RIGHTS

To insure that the City is able to carry out its constitutional, chartered and statutory
functions and responsibilities, nothing contained herein shall be construed to require
the City to meet and confer on matters which are solely a function of management,
including the right to direct the work force; to select and determine the number and
types of employees required; to determine the content of job classifications; to hire,
transfer, promote, suspend, discipline and discharge employees; to assign work to
employees in accordance with the requirements of the City; to establish and change
work schedules and assignments; to lay off employees for lack of work; to expand or
diminish services; to subcontract any work or operations; to determine and change
methods of operations; to determine and change work locations and the processes
and materials to be employed; to take all necessary actions to perform its functions in
emergencies.

SECTION 5. ASSOCIATION REPRESENTATIVES

City employees who are official representatives or unit representatives of the
Association shall be given reasonable time off with pay to attend meetings with
management representatives, labor conferences, labor training seminars, or to be
present at hearings where matters within the scope of representation or grievances
are being considered. The use of official time for this purpose shall be reasonable and
shall not interfere with the performance of City services as determined by the City
Personnel Officer. Such Employee representatives shall submit a written request for
excused absence to the Police Department Head or his or her designated
representative with an information copy to the City Manager, at least two (2) weeks
prior to the scheduled meeting, labor conference, or labor training seminar whenever
possible. Except by mutual agreement, the number of employees excused for such
purposes shall not exceed two (2) contingent upon minimum staffing requirements.
The affected shift supervisor will post any necessary overtime to backfill their
respective shift; however, if there are no takers for the overtime, no officer will be
compelled to work overtime and permission will not be granted for the requested
absence. It is incumbent on the association representative who is attending the
meeting, labor conference or labor training seminar to check with the affected shift
supervisor to ensure that in the event any overtime is needed, it is posted and filled.
SECTION 6. NO STRIKE

The Association, its members and representatives, agree that it and they will not
engage in, authorize, sanction, or support any strike, slowdown, stoppage of work,
curtailment of production, concerted refusal of overtime work, refusal to operate
designated equipment (provided such equipment is safe and sound) or to perform
customary duties; and neither the Association nor any representatives thereof shall
engage in job action for the purpose of effecting changes in the directives or decisions
of management of the City, not to effect a change of personnel or operations of
management or of employees not covered by this MOU.

SECTION 7. PAY

7.1 Salary Increases

7.1.1 Effective with the first full pay period beginning on or after
September 1, 2008, salaries shall be calculated by comparing the total
compensation rates of Police Officers in Redwood City to the mean or
median, whichever is greater, plus .8% of Police Officers in the
following listed cities: Mountain View, Palo Alto, San Mateo, South
San Francisco, Union City, Milpitas and Santa Clara. Based on this
formula, for the first full pay period beginning on or after September
1, 2008, the percent increase will be 4.39%.

Effective the first full pay period that begins on or after September 1
in each subsequent year of this agreement, salary increases will be
tied to median or mean, whichever is greater, of the salary survey
market as allowed for in Sections 7.1.1 through 7.1.5 of the current
MOU. If Police Officers in Redwood City are less than 3% below the
mean or median, whichever is greater, they shall receive a 3% salary
increase.

7.1.2 The comparative calculation shall include top step base salary,
employee PERS payments, educational incentives, and health and
welfare contributions. Employee payments toward employer PERS costs
outlined in 14.3, shall not be included in the comparative calculation
outlined in 7.1.1.

7.1.3 In the event one or more of the above listed comparative cities is in
labor negotiations due to the expiration of their labor MOU and does not
have salary data available as of September 1 in each year of this
agreement, the total compensation factor for those cities shall be equal
to the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers for the San
Francisco/San Jose area for the preceding fiscal year. This factor shall
be no less than 4% nor greater than 7% should the C.P.I. fall below or
exceed these percentages.
7.2

7.3

7.4

7.1.4 The City shall implement the results of the September 1, 2008,
September 1, 2010, September 1, 2011, September 1, 2012, September
1, 2013, and September 1, 2014, survey effective the first full pay
period beginning on or after September 1, 2008, September 1, 2010,
September 1, 2011, September 1. 2012, September 1, 2013, and
September 1, 2014 respectively. There is no salary increase in 2009 due
an agreed upon salary freeze.

7.1.5 Initial appointments shall normally be made at the lowest step or rate
of pay. Upon approval of the Council, such appointments may be made
at the second or third step, justified by consideration of the difficulty
of locating qualified personnel and an appointee’s experience,
education, knowledge of particular duties required, personal fitness for
the position, and such other criteria as may be reasonably related to
such preferential consideration on the basis of merit.

7.1.6 Increases within the salary range established for the classification of
Police Officer or Police Officer Trainee shall be administered as follows:
Initial appointments shall normally be made at the first step in the
salary range. With continued satisfactory performance, an employee in
the classification of Police Officer may be eligible for a salary increase
at twelve (12) month intervals between salary steps two, three, four
and five and at a six (6) month interval, between salary steps one and
two for an employee in the classification of Police Officer or Police
Officer Trainee.

Salary Increase on Promotion

Promotional appointments shall be made at the salary step in the new salary
range which results in a one-step increase in salary. In the event the
promotional appointment is made at the second or higher step, the promoted
employee shall be eligible for a salary increase in six (6) months following the
promotional appointment.

Pay Period
Employees shall be paid bi-weekly.

Effective with Council adoption of the new Memorandum of Understanding, the
City will implement a mandatory direct deposit program for all new hires.

Premium Pay

Police Officers assigned as Detectives, regularly assigned as Traffic Unit
Officers, Field Training Officers, Canine Handlers, and officers assigned to C-
CAT, PAL and DARE shall receive premium pay in the amount of 5% of the
officer’s base pay.
7.5

7.6

7.7

Police Officers and Police Officer Trainees who are regularly assigned to swing
shift (C-Watch) or night shift (A-Watch) shall receive premium pay in the
amount of 5% of the officer’s base pay.

Police Officers who are regularly scheduled to work between the hours of 2:00
p.m. and 2:00 a.m. shall receive premium pay in the amount of 5% of the
officer’s base pay.

Bilingual Pay

The City, with Department Head approval, shall pay a differential of 2.5% of
base pay to employees who are proficient in Spanish and who successfully pass
a proficiency examination.

The City, with Department Head approval, shall pay a differential of 5% of base
pay to employees who can translate Spanish well enough to conduct intense
suspect and victim interviews at a level that will hold up in court. Officers
that accept the 5% pay would be required to agree, when called upon, to
translate city wide and be a spokesperson for the police department when
communications between the Spanish press and the police department are
needed.

To retain either the 2.5% or the 5% differential, employees will be required to
pass a bi-annual recertification proficiency examination.

Officer-In-Charge Pay

When a Police Officer is assigned by the Police Chief or his/her designee to act
as the Officer-In-Charge for a period of two (2) hours or more, such Police
Officer shall be paid an additional five percent (5%) of his/her regular hourly
rate of pay for all hours so assigned.

Court Pay

Except for employees whose work shift ends at 8:00 A.M., an off-duty
employee who is subpoenaed to appear in court in cases in which the City is a
party shall be compensated at one and one-half (1-1/2) times the employee's
regular straight-time rate for all hours the employee is so ordered by the City
to appear with a minimum of four (4) hours.

Any employee whose work shift ends at 8:00 A.M., who is subpoenaed to
appear in court at 9:30 A.M. or earlier in cases in which the City is a party shall
remain on duty and perform regularly scheduled assignments until
commencement of the court appearance. The employee shall be compensated
at one and one-half (1-1/2) times the employee's regular straight-time rate of
pay for hours worked in excess of his/her regularly scheduled hours and for
hours he/she is required to spend attending court proceedings.
7.8

7.9

7.10

711

Longevity Pay

Employees with ten or more years of service with the City of Redwood City who
maintain a current satisfactory performance evaluation and possess a valid
advanced certificate awarded by the California Commission on Peace Officer
Standards and Training along with sixty (60) college semester credits of which

twenty-four (24) must be in the Administration of Justice or in the alternative,
an employee who possesses an A.A. or higher degree from an accredited
institution of higher learning, shall be eligible to receive an additional 7-1/2%
of pay.

Section 7.8 shall be interpreted to include prior service as a Redwood City
Police Officer in meeting the ten (10) year service criterion for longevity pay.
An officer must also meet the other criteria for longevity pay per Section 7.8 of
the current MOU.

It is understood that an employee shall not receive both Educational Incentive
Pay and Longevity Pay.

Call-Back / Call-Out Pay

Employees who are called back after leaving work at the end of the normal
working day or called in to work on their days off shall be credited with no less
than three (3) hours at the overtime rate.

Educational Incentive

Police Officers who obtain a P.0.S.T. Intermediate Certificate shall receive
educational incentive pay equal to 2.5% of base salary. Police Officers who
obtain a P.O.S.T. Advanced Certificate shall receive educational incentive pay
equal to 5.0% of base salary. It is the employee’s responsibility to submit to the
department training officer a written request for educational incentive pay
upon eligibility. Therefore, upon receiving the written notification and the
certificate, the City shall process the educational incentive pay effective
retroactively to the date of written request.

The Training Manager shall post on a semi-annual basis the P.O.S.T.
requirements for Intermediate and Advanced Certificates and a list of the
names of officers who currently possess either Certificate.

K-9 Maintenance Compensation

Police Officers who are assigned as K-9 officers shall receive seven (7) hours of
pay per pay period, compensated at one and-half (1-1/2) times the employee’s
base pay, for the care and maintenance of their dog.
7.12 Overtime

7.12.1 Forty (40) Hour Workweek Employees

Overtime for unit members in the Police Department is the authorized
time worked beyond the forty (40) hour workweek. Payment for
overtime will not be made unless such overtime has been authorized
in writing by the Police Chief or designated representative prior to
such overtime being worked. Overtime shall be compensated at one
and one-half (1-1/2) times the employee's rate of pay.

7.12.2 Definition of Overtime Rate of Pay

The overtime rate of pay is defined as one and one-half (1-1/2) times
the total of the employee's base rate of pay plus any premium pay,

and any educational incentive pay, prorated to an hourly amount, that
the employee receives pursuant to Section 7.4, Section 7.5, Section
7.6, Section 7.8, and Section 7.9 herein. Premium pay under Section
7.4 includes night differential, investigation division differential,
motorcycle differential, canine differential, field training officer
differential, and C-CAT, PAL and DARE differentials. In the event that
the City and the POA agree to establish any additional forms of
premium pay, such newly created forms of premium pay will also be
included in computing the overtime rate of pay.

7.12.3 Compensatory Time

Upon request employees represented by the Association shall be
compensated for such overtime in compensatory time off to a
maximum accumulation of eighty (80) hours of compensatory time off.
Additional compensatory time may be granted, over the eighty (80)
hours, upon approval of the Police Chief, on a case by case basis.

7.13 Uniforms and Safety Equipment

7.13.1 The City shall furnish, at its own expense, all safety equipment
required by the City, consisting of service pistol, rain gear, flashlight,
handcuffs, PR-24 baton, soft body armor threat level Ila, leather gear
to include utility belt, chemical agent holder, holster, handcuff case,
ammunition holders, baton ring, and four (4) keeper straps. Riot
helmet and protective gas mask shall be provided by the City as
needed. Such furnished safety equipment and any and all
replacements furnished by the City at any time shall remain the
property of and under the control of the City.

Use of soft body armor shall be optional, and shall not be required by
the City.

10
7.13.2

7.13.3

The City will provide for all new Police Officers the following articles
of uniform clothing:

3 pairs of pants

3 long-sleeve shirts

3 short-sleeve shirts

1 underbelt

1 cold weather (non-leather) jacket with patches

1 dress cap or baseball cap with patch (officer’s choice)

1 dress tie

2 name tags

$125.00 maximum annual reimbursement for boots (purchase or
resoling).

The City will also provide and maintain the following Battle Dress
Uniforms (BDU) to be worn at the direction of the Police Chief or
his/her designee:

1 pair of BDU pants
1 long-sleeve BDU shirt
1 short-sleeve BDU shirt

The City will provide for all Police Officers cleaning, altering,
repairing and/or replacement of damaged uniforms as authorized by
the Police Chief or his/her designee.

Such furnished uniforms shall remain the property of and under the
control of the City.

At the end of each fiscal year, the Finance Department will calculate
the total cost of cleaning, altering, repairing and/or replacement of
damaged uniforms. This total cost will be divided by the number of
Police Officers who have been assigned to patrol duty during the fiscal
year. The time during which a Police Officer is assigned to detective
duty during the fiscal year shall not be factored into the calculations
described herein. The resulting quotient will be part of the PERS
reportable compensation only for those Police Officers who were
assigned to patrol duty at any time during the fiscal year. Any
Officers assigned to patrol duty for less than the full fiscal year will
have this amount prorated based on the number of pay periods
assigned to patrol.

Police Officers assigned as detectives will receive a uniform allowance
of thirty dollars ($30.00) each pay period as part of their regular
paychecks for all pay periods during which they are assigned as
detectives. This amount will be PERS reportable compensation.

11
7.14

7.13.4 Articles 7.13.2 and 7.13.3 are mutually exclusive such that at no time
shall a Police Officer have his/her PERS reportable compensation
increased as described in Article 7.13.2 and also receive a uniform
allowance as described in Article 7.13.3 for the same time period.

Holidays

For the period September 1, 2008 through December 31, 2011, regular full-time
employees shall be entitled to take all authorized holidays at full pay, not to
exceed ten (10) hours, for any one (1) day, provided they are in a pay status
ten (10) hours, as the case may be, on both their regularly scheduled workdays
immediately preceding and following the holiday; and provided further that
original probationary employees shall be eligible for the following holidays one
(1) through eleven (11) below only at the straight-time rate of pay during the
first six (6) months of service with the City and for the three (3) floating
holidays noted in twelve (12) below only upon completion of twelve (12)
months’ service with the City.

Effective January 1, 2012, regular full-time employees shall be entitled to take
all authorized holidays at full pay, not to exceed ten (10) hours, for any one (1)
day, provided they are in a pay status ten (10) hours, as the case may be, on
both their regularly scheduled workdays immediately preceding and following
the holiday; and provided further that original probationary employees shall be
eligible for the following holidays one (1) through twelve (12) below only at the
straight-time rate of pay during the first six (6) months of service with the City
and for the two (2) floating holidays noted in thirteen (13) below only upon
completion of twelve (12) months’ service with the City.

The following shall be paid holidays to all employees who are covered by this
MOU:

. New Year's Day

. Martin Luther King Jr. Day (observed on the third Monday in January)

. Washington's Birthday (Observed on the third Monday in February)

. Memorial Day (Observed on the last Monday in May)

Independence Day

. Labor Day (Observed on the first Monday in September)

. Veterans Day (Observed November 11)

. Thanksgiving Day

. The Day after Thanksgiving

. Christmas Eve

. Christmas Day

12. New Year’s Eve (added in trade of 1 administrative holiday effective
January 1, 2012)

13. Three administrative holidays through December 31, 2011, and two

administrative holidays beginning effective January 1, 2012, and such

other days as may be proclaimed local holidays.

==
POECMONAMAWNA

12
7.15

If one of the holidays listed above falls during the employee's vacation or on an
employee's day off or if an employee is scheduled or required to work on a
holiday, the employee shall be allowed a regular workday off at a time
determined by agreement between the employee and the Department Head. If
the Department Head determines that it is not feasible to grant such other
workday off, the employee shall be paid for the holiday on the basis of time
and one-half (1-1/2) but not to exceed ten (10) hours for any one (1) holiday.

In the event any of the holidays specified in this section occurs while an
employee is on vacation or sick leave, the holiday shall not be charged as
vacation or sick leave.

A holiday that falls on Saturday shall be celebrated on Friday and a holiday that
falls on Sunday shall be celebrated on Monday.

In the event that any Administrative Holiday has not been used by the last pay
period in the year (based on the preceding 26 pay periods), payment will be
made no later than the first pay period in February.

Vacations

7.15.1 Effective July 1, 2005, all regular full-time employees shall be
entitled to vacation leave from the commencement of their
employment with the City.

The times during the calendar year at which an employee shall take
vacation shall be determined by the Police Chief or designated
representative with due regard to the wishes of the employee and
particular regard to the need of the service. All employees shall, on a
form provided by the City, indicate their preference for vacation
periods during November and December of each calendar year.
Preference of vacation date shall be given to employees according to
their length of service in as reasonable a manner as possible. The
Department will post a final vacation schedule by January 1 of each
year.

7.15.2 Full-time employees shall be entitled to annual vacation leave as
follows:

During the first four (4) years of employment, full-time employees will
accrue vacation at the rate of eighty (80) hours of vacation leave per
year of service as determined by the employee’s anniversary-of-hire
rate (3.0769 hours per pay period). Upon completion of four (4) years
of employment and thereafter through the ninth year of employment,
full-time employees will accrue vacation at the rate of one-hundred-
twenty (120) hours per year of service (4.6154 hours per pay period).
Upon completion of nine (9) years of employment and thereafter
through the sixteenth year of service, full-time employees will accrue
vacation at the rate of one-hundred-sixty (160) hours per year of
service (6.1538 hours per pay period). Upon completion of sixteen
7.16

7.15.3

7.15.4

7.15.5

7.15.6

7.16.1

(16) years of employment and thereafter through the nineteenth year
of service, full-time employees will accrue vacation at the rate of
one-hundred-eighty (180) hours per year of service (6.9231 hours per
pay period). Upon completion of nineteen (19) years of employment
and thereafter, full-time employees will accrue vacation at the rate
of two-hundred (200) hours per year (7.6923 hours per pay period).

Section 7.15.2 of the current MOU will be interpreted to include prior
service as a Redwood City Police Officer in determining annual
vacation leave accrual.

If the original separation from service is due to layoff, layoff
provisions of the MOU would govern reinstatement and treatment of
prior service for the duration of layoff separation as outlined in the
current MOU.

Vacation leave shall not be accumulated in excess of two (2) years
accrued vacation leave computed through the pay period that includes
December 31st, except upon written authorization of the Human
Resources Director.

In the event an employee is reinstated, prior service shall be included
in determining the applicable rate of accrual of vacation leave. Upon
termination of employment a regular employee shall be paid cash
value of his/her accrued vacation leave at the time of termination, in
accordance with the above schedule. Vacation leave shall not be
credited to any employee whose employment is terminated prior to
certification as a regular employee.

Vacation leave shall not be granted during the first twelve (12)
months of the original probationary period.

New hire lateral Police Officers will assume, at hire, a vacation
accrual rate based upon their total of years of full-time sworn law
enforcement experience.

Illness During Vacation

An employee who commences a scheduled vacation period and
subsequently becomes ill before his or her vacation period has been
completed shall be placed on illness leave under the following
conditions:

7.16.1.1 The employee otherwise qualified for illness leave as
provided by this MOU; and

7.16.1.2 The employee, if no longer ill, returns to duty immediately
following the vacation period; and,

14
7.17

7.18

7.16.1.3 The employee's illness is verified by a statement from an
accredited medical doctor for each such day of illness
leave requested.

7.16.2 When the employee's vacation leave is to be converted to illness
leave, the appropriate vacation credit shall be restored to the
worker's earned vacation balance, and a reasonable opportunity to
utilize this vacation credit shall be provided within the City's existing
practices in order to avoid loss of vacation credit.

Mileage Payment

The City shall reimburse employees for those miles employees are required to
drive their personal vehicles in the performance of assigned job duties as
follows:

Actual costs to and from destination not to exceed a maximum computed at a
rate not to exceed current IRS mileage reimbursement limits for miles traveled
both within and outside the City by carrier service, including any privately-
owned conveyance; provided, however, that for travel to and from destination
in excess of 300 miles, said maximum shall not exceed actual air coach fare
when such fare is less than the amount computed at the aforesaid rates. For
the purposes of this subsection, the actual cost for miles, actually traveled by
privately-owned conveyance, including cost of fuel, maintenance, repairs,
insurance and depreciation, shall be deemed equal to the maximum allowance
provided for in this subsection.

If the City is reimbursed by P.O.S.T. for an employee's mileage payment, the
City shall pay to the employee the full amount of the P.O.S.T. reimbursement.

Tuition Reimbursement

All. members shall be eligible for reimbursement of costs of tuition,
registration, fees and books incurred in connection with enrollment in and
successful completion of courses of instruction related to the member’s
Position with the City or a higher position with the City, professional
development workshops or seminars, post secondary courses offered at an
accredited college or university, or P.O.S.T. approved courses.

Each member shall be eligible to receive reimbursement, not to exceed six
hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) each fiscal year, provided that the course of
instruction, workshop or seminar is approved in advance of enrollment by the
Police Chief and the Human Resources Director, and the member must
successfully complete each course submitted for reimbursement with a grade
of “C” or better, or a passing grade in a pass/fail course, or with receipt of a
certificate of completion or letter certifying the awarding of C.E.U. units.

All members shall be eligible to receive reimbursement, not to exceed three
hundred dollars ($300.00) of the maximum six hundred fifty dollar ($650.00)

15
7.19

tuition reimbursement fiscal year entitlement, for the purchase of reference
materials listed in the core reference material appendix to this M.O.U.

The Human Resources Director and the Police Chief may establish standards
and criteria and enact such rules, regulations, procedures and policies as are
necessary or appropriate to implement the provisions of this Section.

Lateral Recruitment Incentive Award

Any POA Member who recruits a lateral candidate who is hired will receive five
hundred dollars when the lateral hire successfully passes the FTO program.
The Police Training Manager will not be eligible for this award.

Recruit defined: When a POA Member independently contacts a Lateral Peace
Officer and persuades him/her to apply to, and subsequently is hired by this
agency. This incentive does not apply to a POA Member who assists a Lateral
Peace Officer in the hiring process after that Lateral Peace Officer has already
contacted the Department in regards to being hired.

SECTION 8. WORK WEEK AND WORK PERIOD

8.1

8.2

Regular Workweek and Work Period

The regular workweek for unit members occupying full-time positions in the
Police Department shall consist of forty (40) hours. The regular work period
shall be twenty-eight (28) days.

4/10 and 3/12¥2 Schedules

8.2.1 All unit members shall be placed on either a four (4) day, ten (10)
hours per day weekly schedule, or a three (3) day, twelve and one-
half (12%) hours per day weekly schedule.

8.2.2 In the event of an emergency or periods of significant staffing
shortages, the City reserves the right to place unit members on a five
(5) day, eight (8) hours per day weekly schedule, in which event the
association shall be notified as far in advance as reasonably possible
under the circumstances.

8.2.3 Except as provided in Section 8.2.2, in the event the City proposes to
change the 4/10 schedule to anything other than four (4) ten (10) hour
days the association shall be notified at least ten (10) days in advance
of the proposed change and given an opportunity to meet and confer
regarding the impact of such proposed change prior to
implementation.

8.2.4 Except as provided in Section 8.2.2, in the event the Police Officers

Association or the City proposes to discontinue the 3/12% schedule
and return to the 4/10 schedule as outlined in Section 8.2.1, a three

16
(3) month notice will be given and the schedule change would take
place at the next regular shift change in February or August.

SECTION 9. LEAVES

9.1 Sick Leave

9.1.1

9.1.2

Regular full-time and probationary employees that are assigned on a
regular basis to work a 12.5 hour shift will accrue sick leave at the
rate of 12.5 hours per month providing they have worked one-hundred
sixty (160) hours that month to a maximum accrual of one thousand
two-hundred (1200) hours. Working a 12.5 hour shift on a regular
basis is defined as being assigned to a 12.5 hour shift through the
department’s regular shift bidding process. Employees that do not
normally work a 12.5 hour shift but do so on occasion as a result of
overtime or trade to cover another officer’s 12.5 hour shift are not
eligible for the 12.5 hour monthly sick leave accrual. All other regular
full-time and probationary employees shall accrue sick leave at the
rate of ten (10) hours per month, provided they have worked one
hundred sixty (160) hours that month, to a maximum of one-thousand
two-hundred (1200) hours. Sick leave usage shall be considered as a
privilege which an employee may use at his or her discretion, but shall
be allowed only in case of necessity of actual sickness or disability.
Charge for sick leave used shall be on the basis of one (1) hour for
each hour used; provided however, that sick leave shall be charged
for only those hours when the employee was absent from work. Sick
leave may not be used before it is earned.

Effective July 1, 2005, employees shall be eligible for sick leave
benefits from the commencement of their employment with the City,
to a maximum of the hours accrued, for absence due to non-
occupational disability only during the time such disability, illness, or
other sickness or injury continues. Sick leave during the first six (6)
months of employment may only be used with the approval of the
Police Chief or his or her designee. Sick leave shall not be credited to
any employee whose employment is terminated prior to six (6) months
of employment.

At the City’s request, an employee who has been absent more than
three (3) days must file with the City a statement by a person licensed
to practice medicine or dentistry that the employee was under said
doctor's care while absent. When an employee returns to work after
any absence chargeable to sick leave or as a result of an industrial
absence or illness, the City may require a statement from a physician
that the employee is in fit physical condition to perform all the duties
of his or her position. In addition, the employee may be required to
undergo a medical examination at the City’s expense to be performed

17
9.1.3

9.1.4

9.1.5

9.1.6

by a doctor designated by the City, before the employee is permitted
to return to work.

An employee may use up to five (5) days of accrued sick leave in any
calendar year for illness in the immediate family. For the purpose of
this Section, immediate family means spouse, child or parent.

Except in cases of extreme emergency or exceptional unforeseen
circumstances, in order to receive compensation for absences charged
to sick leave, the employee shall notify his/her immediate supervisor
no less than one-half hour plus travel time prior to the scheduled time
for beginning his/her work duties of the impending absence. At the
same time, the employee shall provide the immediate supervisor with
a telephone number where he/she can be reached during the term of
the absence. The burden of proof of extreme emergency or
exceptional unforeseen circumstances shall be upon the unit member.

Sick leave with pay shall not be granted or accrued when the disability
arises from any illness, sickness or injury purposely self-inflicted or
caused by any willful misconduct or when disability is sustained while
engaged in a gainful occupation (other than City service) either as an
employee, officer, executive or as a business or professional
proprietor or partner.

In the event an employee has accumulated the maximum sick leave
credits of one-thousand two-hundred (1200) hours and the employee
becomes so severely ill that he or she exhausts his or her sick leave,
the Personnel Officer may, upon written recommendation of the
employee's department head, authorize additional sick leave to
include any sick leave in excess of the one-thousand two-hundred
(1200) hours maximum which may have been lost due to the maximum
limitation: provided, however, that sick leave credits were not
accumulated for a period of six (6) months or longer.

An employee may elect to receive compensation in lieu of sick leave
credits for any calendar year (based on the preceding 26 pay periods)
by requesting payment of unused sick leave in writing to the Director
of Finance on or before December 1 of that year. Payment shall be
made at twenty-five percent (25%) of the value of the unused sick
leave (50% when no more than 12.5 hours of sick leave have been
used) for the preceding 26 pay periods. The City will endeavor to
make payment on the non-payroll Friday immediately following the
first payroll Friday in January; however, the payment will be made no
later than the first pay period in February and shall be paid using the
salary in effect December 31. There shall be no payment in lieu of
accumulated sick leave benefits for years prior to such calendar year.

18
9.2

9.1.7

9.1.9

Accumulated sick leave credits shall be reduced by the value of the
sick leave compensated as provided in the above paragraph and the
remaining balance shall be accumulated to a maximum of one-
thousand two-hundred (1200) hours in accordance with Section 9.1.1.

If a unit member terminates for reasons other than death, retirement
or discharge, compensation in lieu of unused sick leave shall be paid
in accordance with the terms provided for an employee who may elect
to receive compensation in lieu of sick leave credits, prorated to the
date of termination of service.

Unit members with twenty (20) years of service with the City, who
retire from City employment with benefits from PERS, shall be eligible
to receive fifty percent (50%) of accrued unused sick leave.
Employees who die while in the employ of the City shall be eligible to
receive twenty-five percent (25%) of accrued unused sick leave.
Employees who die in the line of duty or whose death is determined to
be directly attributable to injury or illness sustained while on duty
shall be eligible to receive one-hundred percent (100%) of accrued
unused sick leave.

In the event of the death of a unit member, such payments shall be
made to the designated beneficiary filed with the Director of Finance,
or, in the event no designated beneficiary has been chosen, the
beneficiary listed in the unit member's insurance policy will receive
payment of such unused sick leave as provided under the provisions
for a unit member who elects to receive compensation in lieu of sick
leave credits. Unit members discharged shall not be eligible for
payment of unused sick leave.

Unused accumulated sick leave at the time of retirement, for which
the employee receives no compensation, shall be converted to
additional service credit at the rate of 0.004 years of service for each
day, i.e., 250 days of sick leave for one additional year of service
credit. Local safety member benefits subject to a maximum of 90% of
the average final compensation will not be increased beyond that
limit for unused sick leave credit.

Industrial Disability Leave

Any safety employee as defined by the MOU between the City and the Public
Employees’ Retirement System, who has suffered a disability arising out of and
in the course of his or her employment, as defined by Workers’ Compensation
Laws of the State of California, shall be entitled to industrial disability leave
while so disabled without loss of salary, for the period of such disability to a
maximum of one (1) year or until the condition is permanent and stationary or
until retirement, whichever occurs first. During the period the employee is
paid by the City, the employee shall assign or endorse to the City any benefit
payments received as a result of Workers’ Compensation Insurance coverage.

19
9.3

9.4

The City reserves the right to withhold payment of any disability benefits until
such time as it is determined whether or not the illness or injury is covered by
Workers’ Compensation.

A safety employee on industrial disability leave shall accrue sick leave and
vacation in accordance with the Workers’ Compensation laws of the State of
California.

Employees in the classification of Police Officer Trainee who suffer any
disability arising out of and in the course of their employment, as defined by
the Workers’ Compensation Laws of the State of California, shall be entitled to
industrial disability leave while so disabled for the period of such disability to a
maximum of one (1) year or retirement, whichever occurs first. Compensation
benefits shall be determined and paid in accordance with the Workers’
Compensation Laws of the State of California.

Employees in the classification of Police Officer Trainee shall not accrue sick
leave or vacation leave benefits during any period of disability.

In the event that the City exercises its right to withhold immediate payment of
industrial disability benefits, and until such time that a coverage determination
is made, employees may elect to utilize accrued sick leave for the interim
period. If accrued sick leave becomes exhausted, workers may then elect to
utilize accrued vacation leave or accrued compensatory leave for any
remaining interim time.

Military Leave

Military leave shall be granted by the City in accordance with the provisions of
State and Federal laws and there may be a deduction for any military
compensation that the employee receives for service during the period that he
is receiving full pay from the City, if permitted by law. All employees taking
military leave shall give the City an opportunity, within the limits of military
regulations, to determine when such military leave shall be taken.

Leave of Absence Without Pay

Any employee desiring a leave of absence without pay from his or her
employment for any reason shall secure written permission from the Police
Chief and Personnel Officer. The decision of the Personnel Officer on granting
or refusing to grant a leave of absence or extension thereof shall be final and
conclusive and shall not be subject to the grievance procedure of this MOU.
Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the maximum leave of absence
shall be for one (1) year.

During any approved leave of absence the employee shall not engage in gainful

employment unless authorized to do so by the written permission of the
Personnel Officer. The Personnel Officer may terminate any employee who

20
9.5

9.6

violates the terms and conditions of the written permission for leave or
extension thereof.

Jury Duty

Any employee whose name shall be selected from the list of trial jurors to
serve as a juror in a civil or criminal action pending in a Superior, Municipal, or
Justice Court of the State of California, or any Federal Court convening in the
State of California, or any employee required to report for the selection of a
jury in any of these courts shall receive pay for the time such service requires
his absence from work; provided, however, that the City may require proof of
the time such service was required and any monies received from jury service
shall be turned into the City; provided, further, that the employee shall report
to work whenever a reasonable portion of the shift remains for completion. An
employee required to serve as a juror shall not have his regular starting or
quitting time changed as a result of being called for jury service.

Maternity Leave of Absence Without Pay

9.6.1 Maternity leave of absence without pay or benefits shall be granted
upon request to non-disabled probationary and permanent female
employees for that period of time requested up to one (1) year.

9.6.2 Maternity leave shall be granted when the following conditions have
been met:

9.6.2.1 The employee shall notify her immediate supervisor in
writing accompanied by her physician's certificate of
Pregnancy as soon as possible after pregnancy has
definitely been determined, but no later than ninety (90)
days prior to the tentative date on which the leave is to
begin. Such notice shall include the tentative dates on
which the leave shall begin and end.

9.6.2.2 Within thirty (30) days of the beginning of the maternity
leave, the employee shall submit to the Personnel Officer
the specific date she intends to begin the leave,
accompanied by her physician's written statement attesting
to the worker's ability to continue performing the full
schedule of duties and responsibilities. She shall continue
her regular active duty until the specific date providing she
is able to perform the full duties and responsibilities of her
position and furnishes additional health statements from
her physician upon reasonable request. In the event the
employee is unable to perform the full duties and
responsibilities of her position, she shall be assigned to
light duty until the specific leave date, and shall continue
to furnish additional health statements from her physician
upon reasonable request.

21
9.7

9.6.3

9.6.4

9.6.2.3 Prior to the establishment of a specific date for return to
duty, the employee shall submit to the Personnel Officer a
notice of intention to return to duty, accompanied by her
physician's statement certifying that the employee is
medically qualified to assume regular duties and
responsibilities.

9.6.2.4 The Personnel Officer or his/her designee may designate
the specific beginning and ending dates within the pay
period requested by the employee to meet the needs of the
employee and the City.

The employee on leave shall be returned to an equivalent position
within her classification.

A maternity leave, absent physical disability, is granted without pay
for the duration of the leave. The employee may elect to continue
medical and dental insurance coverage for up to one (1) year during
that leave at her own expense.

Leave for Pregnancy Disability

9.7.1

9.7.2

9.7.3

Employees who are working are entitled to use personal illness and
injury leave for disabilities caused or contributed to by pregnancy,
miscarriage, childbirth, and recovery therefrom on the same terms
and conditions governing leaves of absence for other illness or medical
disability. Such leave shall not be used for child care, child rearing,
or preparation for childbearing, but shall be limited to those
disabilities as set forth above. The length of such disability leave,
including the date on which the leave shall commence and the date on
which the duties are to be resumed, shall be determined by the
employee and the employee's physician; however, the Personnel
Officer may require a verification of the extent of disability through a
physical examination of the employee by a physician appointed by the
City at City expense.

Employees are entitled to leave without pay or other benefits for
disabilities because of pregnancy, miscarriage, childbirth, or recovery
therefrom when sick leave has been exhausted. The date on which
the employee shall resume duties shall be determined by the
employee on leave and the employee's physician; however, the
Personnel Officer may require a verification of the extent of disability
through a physical examination of the employee by a physician
appointed by the City.

The employee on leave shall be returned to an equivalent position
within her classification.

22
9.8

9.9

9.10

Absence Notification

Failure on the part of an employee to report for duty or notify the designated
management official one-half (1/2) hour prior to the employee's scheduled
starting time as to a reason why the employee cannot report may subject the
employee to disciplinary action.

Bereavement Leave

9.9.1

9.9.2

9.9.3

9.9.4

In the event of a death in the immediate family of an employee of the
City, that employee shall, upon request, be granted such time off with
Pay as is necessary to make arrangements for the funeral and attend
same, not to exceed three (3) regularly scheduled working days or
four (4) days in the event the funeral is 300 or more miles from the
City.

For the purpose of this provision, the immediate family shall be
restricted to father, mother, brother, sister, spouse, domestic
partner, child, half brother, half sister, step brother, step sister,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandparent, grandparent- in-law, great
grandparent, grandchild, great grandchild, stepfather, stepmother,
stepchild and step grandchild.

In the event of the death of an active City employee, the City will
excuse (without loss of pay) those employees who wish to attend the
locally conducted funeral only to the extent it does not interfere with
the operation of the City.

Bereavement leave applies only in instances in which the employee
attends the funeral, or is required to make funeral arrangements, but
is not applicable for other purposes, such as settling the estate of the
deceased.

Family and Medical Leave

9.10.1

In accordance with the California Family Rights Act of 1991 and the
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, regular part-time and full-time
employees with one year or more of service are entitled to leave to a
maximum of 12 weeks in a 12-month period (or 16 weeks in a 24-
month period):

9.10.1.1 to care for a child following a birth or placement of a child
with the employee for adoption or foster care;

9.10.1.2 to care for the spouse, child or parent of the employee
who has a serious health condition;

9.10.1.3 if the employee is unable to perform his/her job because
of the employee's own serious health condition.

23
9.10.2

9.10.3

9.10.4

When an employee desires leave for the above stated reasons, the
employee should give 30 calendar days written advance notice to
his/her immediate supervisor (or if the event is unforseeable
employee should give as much notice as possible).

The City may require that a request for family leave be supported by a
certification issued by the employee's health care provider.

Certification may also be required from the health care provider of
the employee's child, parent or spouse who has a serious health
condition before the employee is approved to use family/medical
leave to take care of that family member.

Failure to comply with the above requirements may lead to denial of
leave.

The employee may elect, or the City may require the employee, to
substitute accrued vacation leave or other accrued time off during
family/medical leave. Sick leave may be used during the period of
family/medical leave in accordance with the sick leave provisions
found in Section 9.1 of this Memorandum of Understanding.

The City will maintain contributions for the employee's health benefits
under group health plans at the same level as prior to the leave, in
accordance with the Family & Medical Leave Act. The equivalent
benefits, pay and other terms and conditions of employment upon
completion of the leave.

SECTION 10, HEALTH PLANS

10.1

10.1.1

Health and Cafeteria Plans

The City will contract with the California Public Employee's
Retirement System (CalPERS) for participation under the Public
Employees Medical and Hospital Care Act (Government Code Section
22751, et, seq.), for the purpose of providing medical insurance
benefits for employees.

Upon the request of the City, the parties will re-open this Article
10.1.1 to meet and confer on modifying 10.1.1 to provide a different
group health plan. It is understood that any such change is subject to
approval of the P.O.A. membership.

24
10.2

10.1.2

The City’s maximum, monthly contribution for each eligible, active
employee for a Health Benefit Plan (as referenced in Government
Code 22892) shall not exceed the CalPERS minimum contribution,
adjusted annually by the PERS Board to reflect any change to the
medical care component of the Consumer Price Index and shall be
rounded to the nearest dollar.

Cafeteria Plan

10.2.1

10.2.2

10.2.3

10.2.4

Available Benefits: The City shall establish, in accordance with
Section 125 of the IRS Code, a Cafeteria Plan for the purpose of
providing employees with access to various health and welfare
benefits. Benefits available through the Cafeteria Plan include, but
are not limited to:

A. Group Health Plan Medical Insurance
B. Flexible Spending Account for Dependent Care
C. Flexible Spending Account for Medical Expenses

City Contribution: For each active, full-time employee enrolled in a
City-provided medical plan, the City will provide, on a monthly basis,
a Cafeteria Plan Allowance equal to the cost of premium for the
employee’s selected plan and level of coverage, up to the cost of the
Kaiser Bay Area three (3) party premium per month per employee
minus any costs incurred by the City to maintain said Cafeteria Plan in
compliance with IRS Code Section 125, and minus any costs incurred
by the City to maintain the Group Health Benefits Plans in compliance
with Government code Section 22750, et. seq. Such costs include, but
are not limited to, surcharges and/or administrative fees.

Effective January 1, 2012, if an employee elects no health coverage
and shows evident of other coverage, $100 per month will be credited
to the employee’s flexible spending accounts.

For permanent part-time employees working (20) or more hours per
week covered by the MOU this amount shall be prorated.

The health plans offered shall be those of the California Public
Employee's Retirement System (PERS) provided however, upon the
request of the City, the parties will re-open this Article 10.2.4 to
meet and confer on modifying 10.2.4 to provide a different group
health plan. It is understood that any change from the group health
plans offered by the California Public Employee’s Retirement System
(CalPERS) will only be made by mutual agreement between the City of
Redwood City and the Police Officers Association. It is understood
that any such change is subject to approval of the P.O.A. membership.

25
10.2.5

10.2.6

10.2.7

10.2.8

For employees who have ten (10) years of service and retire under the
City's retirement plan, the retirement stipend paid by the City shall be
equal to the premium paid for a current employee (employee only),
for the same plan based on the Bay Area Regional pricing
schedule.Retirees that reside in other higher priced regions will be
required to pay the additional premium amount that is in excess of
the Bay Area rates. For employees retired prior to September 1,
1985, the City shall pay the cost of health plans in accordance with
the applicable MOU or City practice in effect at the time of
retirement.

Section 10.2.5 shall be interpreted to include prior service as a
Redwood City Police Officer in meeting the eligibility requirement for
retiree medical coverage when a Redwood City Police Officer retires
from the City.

If the original separation from service is due to layoff, layoff
provisions of the MOU would govern reinstatement and treatment of
prior service for the duration of layoff separation as outlined in the
current MOU.

All costs incurred by the City to maintain the Group Health Benefits
Plan in compliance with Government Code Section 22751, et. seq.,
and all costs incurred by the City to maintain the Cafeteria Plan in
compliance with IRS Code Section 125, shall be paid from the
aforementioned monthly dollar caps identified in Sections 10.2.2, and
10.2.3. Such costs include, but are not limited to, premiums,
surcharges, and/or administrative fees.

In the event there are any costs not charged to the City due to delays
by the Group Health Plan Administrator and/or other administrative
agencies in calculating or reporting these costs, said costs shall be
carried over and charged as administrative costs to the following plan
year and deducted from the aforementioned monthly dollar caps
accordingly.

An employee who is receiving a disability retirement due to a work
related illness or injury, shall receive paid medical benefits provided
that the following conditions are met:

A. The employee is not eligible for benefits under 10.2.5; and,

B. The employee is not eligible for similar benefits through a
spouse’s health plan.

Whenever the above eligibility criteria are met, the City will provide
medical benefits at the same benefit tier (single, two-party, family)
which the employee would have been receiving if he/she had
continued as an active employee.

26
10.3

10.2.9 For employees who leave the City in good standing, for reasons other
than retirement, who are not eligible for benefits as provided in
Section 10.2.5 or 10.2.8, and who have twenty (20) years of service
with the City of Redwood City, the maximum City contribution toward
health plan coverage shall be equal to the percent of premium paid
for a current employee (employee only), for the same plan, for the
period September 1, 2008 through August 31, 2015, provided that the
following conditions are met:

A. The employee is not eligible for similar medical benefits
through a spouse’s health plan.

B. The employee is not eligible for similar medical benefits
through other employment.

Whenever the above eligibility criteria are met, the City will provide
paid medical benefits for the employee only.

Savings Clause

If, pursuant to any federal or state law which may become effective
subsequent to the effective date of this MOU, the City is required to pay
contributions or taxes for hospital-medical-surgical, dental care, prescription
drug or other health benefits to be provided its employees under such federal
or state act, the City's obligation to furnish the same benefits under the
hospital-medical-surgical, dental care and major medical programs existing at
this time shall be suspended and the contributions agreed to be paid monthly
hereunder by the City shall be reduced each month by the amounts which the
City is required to expend during any such month in the form of contributions
or taxes to support said federal or state health plan.

If, as a result of such a law, the level of benefits provided by such law for any
group of employees, or their dependents, is lower in certain categories of
services than that provided under the existing major plans the City shall, to the
extent practical, provide a plan of benefits supplementary to the federal or
state benefits so as to make benefits in each category of coverage as nearly
comparable as possible to the benefits provided under the major medical
plans. The City need only expend for this purpose the actual amount required
to achieve parity between the benefits agreed to be provided under the major
medical plans and the benefits provided under any federal or state plan as
supplemented in the manner hereinabove described. In no event shall the City
required to expend for such purposes an amount which, when added to the
contributions or taxes required of the City under the federal or state act, shall
exceed the amounts paid at the time such legislation becomes effective.

If the benefits provided under the federal or state act exceed the benefits

provided hereunder in each category of coverage, the City shall be under no
further obligation to make any contributions.

27
10.4

10.5

10.6

10.7

The City intends to evaluate the hospital-medical, life insurance, and dental
plans which are currently available to employees. In the event that it may be
possible to provide hospital-medical, life insurance and dental coverage as
nearly comparable as possible to the benefits in effect on November 1, 1980,
without additional cost to the City or the employees, the City may substitute
new insurance carriers. The Association will be given an opportunity to review
the coverage afforded under such substitute plans before they are
implemented.

The City and RCPOA agree that in the event state or federal law changes to the
extent that mandates are placed on the City or the level of benefits changes
during the term of this MOU, the parties agree to reopen the MOU to meet and
confer over such changes or mandates, if either party requests to do so.

Dental

The City shall continue to provide to eligible employees and dependents fully
paid dental insurance through Delta Dental Fee for Service program or through
a mutually agreed upon alternative program through the term of this
Agreement to include coverage as follows: $2,000.00 annual cap for basic
coverage and $2,500.00 lifetime cap for orthodonture.

Life Insurance

The City shall continue to offer to eligible employees the life insurance
program in effect on February 1, 1974. Effective September 1, 2011, the City
shall provide employees Basic Life Insurance coverage of $50,000, and
Accidental Death and Dismemberment (ADD) coverage of $50,000, with the City
paying 100% of the premium.

Long Term Disability Insurance

Effective with the first full pay period after the adoption by the City Council of
the Memorandum of Understanding between the POA and the City of Redwood
City, the City will reimburse $19.50 per month, per employee towards the cost
of Long Term Disability.

In the event the cost of the current Long Term Disability plan increases during
the term of this Memorandum of Understanding, the City will reimburse the
actual premium cost up to a maximum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per
month per employee.

Vision Care

The City will contract with Vision Service Plan (VSP) or comparable vision care
provider to provide vision care benefits for employees and their dependents.
The Vision Service Plan B provides for an exam every 12 months, lenses every
12 months if needed, and frames every two years if needed. There is no
deductible for employees, but a $20.00 per person deductible will apply to
dependents each time benefits are available and will be paid by the employee.

28
SECTION 11. PROBATION

11.1

New Employees

An employee shall serve a probationary period of eighteen (18) months. New
hire lateral Police Officers shall serve a probationary period of twelve (12)
months. Upon satisfactory completion of such probationary period, the
employee shall be appointed as a regular full-time employee of the City of
Redwood City.

New employees on probation who are off work for more than 30 work days shall
have their probationary period extended by the same amount of time as the
work absence.

During the first six (6) months of his or her probationary period, an employee
may be required to pass physical agility and endurance tests, written
examinations, and other job related subjects. During the last twelve (12)
months of the probationary period, an employee may be required to pass
Periodical written examinations pertaining to all phases of the employee's
work. At the conclusion of the probationary period, an employee may be
required to pass a written examination and performance test.

A probationary employee shall have the opportunity to read and discuss his or
her monthly performance report with his or her supervisor before such report
becomes part of the employee's employment record.

An employee may be separated from the City service at any time during the
probationary period without right of appeal or hearing.

Any employee appointed to the classification of Police Officer Trainee shall be
considered in a training status during the probationary period. A Police Officer
Trainee who has not completed the required basic P.0.S.T training academy
shall be considered a local miscellaneous retirement employee for all purposes
and will only be considered a safety retirement member on the first (1st) day
he or she is assigned to regular police duties.

Promoted Employees

All promotional appointments shall be tentative and subject to a probationary
period of twelve (12) months of service from the date of appointment. During
the probationary period an employee may be rejected at any time by the City
Manager upon recommendation of the Police Chief. Any regular employee
rejected during the probationary period following a promotional appointment
shall be reinstated to the position from which he or she was promoted unless
conditions warrant his or her dismissal.

Upon satisfactory completion of such probationary period, the employee shall
be appointed to a regular full-time position in that classification.

29
SECTION 12. PROMOTION
12.1 Examination

In the event the City desires to fill a vacancy by promotion, the Personnel
Officer shall prepare and administer an examination for those employees
holding similar positions in lower classes.

Promotional examinations scheduled by the City during an employee’s regular
working hours may be taken without any loss in compensation.

12.2 Eligible List

The names of the successful qualified candidates shall be recorded on an
eligible list. Eligible lists shall continue in effect one (1) year after
establishment. The name of any person on an eligible list may be removed by
the Personnel Office if the eligible person requests in writing that his or her
name be removed, or if he or she fails to respond to a written offer of
employment within five (5) business days next succeeding the mailing of
notice.

If a candidate waives an offer of employment the candidate shall be removed
from the eligible list.

SECTION 13. RESIGNATION

An employee wishing to leave the service of the City in good standing shall file with
the Police Chief at least two (2) weeks notice of an intention to leave the service
unless the Police Chief consents to the employee's leaving sooner. The written
resignation shall state the effective date and reasons for leaving. The resignation
shall be forwarded to the Personnel Officer, with a statement by the Police Chief as to
the resigned employee's service performance and other pertinent information
concerning the cause for resignation.

SECTION 14, RETIREMENT

14.1 Retirement Plan
Retirement benefits for employees shall be those established by the Public
Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS) for Local Safety Members Two Percent
(2%) at Age Fifty (50) Formula.
Effective the first full pay period that includes July 1, 2004 retirement benefits
for employees hired before the date of the City’s 2011 amendment of its

contract with CalPERS shall be those established by CalPERS for Local Safety
Members Three Percent (3%) at Age Fifty (50) Formula.

30
14.2

14.3

Retirement benefits for employees hired on or after the date of the City’s 2011
amendment of its contract with CalPERS will be those established by CalPERS
for Local Safety Members, Three Percent (3%) at Age Fifty-Five (55) Formula.

Optional Provisions Added

Optional Public Agency Provisions under the Public Employees’ Retirement
System shall also be provided as follows:

1. Effective April 1, 1969, 1959 Survivor Allowance as set forth in Article 6 of
Chapter 9 of the Public Employees’ Retirement Law (commencing with
Section 21380 of the Government Code), which will provide the third tier of
benefits. Effective July 9, 2007, 1959 Survivor Allowance as authorized by
Section 21574 of the Government Code, which will provide the fourth level
of survivor benefits.

2. Effective March 16, 1989, retirement benefits for employees hired before
the date of the City’s 2011 amendment of its contract with CalPERS will be
calculated based on one (1) year highest compensation as authorized by
Section 20042 of the Government Code.

3. Retirement benefits for employees hired on or after the date of the City’s
2011 amendment of its contract with CalPERS will be calculated based on
the average of three years of compensation as authorized by Section 20037
of the Government Code.

4. Effective July 9, 2007, Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2 Death
Benefits as authorized by Section 21548.

City's Contribution to Retirement System

The City shall pay the rate prescribed by the Public Employees’ Retirement
system for employer contributions to the Public Employees’ Retirement System
in accordance with the rules and regulations governing such employer
contributions.

In accordance with Section 20516(f) of the Government Code:

Effective the first full pay period beginning on or after September 1, 2011,
each unit member shall pay two percent (2%) toward the employer cost of
retirement.

Effective the first full pay period beginning on or after September 1, 2012,
each unit member shall pay an additional two percent (2%) for a total of four
percent (4%) toward the employer cost of retirement.

Effective the first full pay period beginning on or after September 1, 2013,

each unit member shall pay an additional three percent (3%) for a total of
seven percent (7%) toward the employer cost of retirement.

31
The seven percent (7%) employee cost sharing of the employer cost of
retirement identified above shall end no later than the first full pay period
beginning on or after August 1, 2015.

All such employee contributions toward employer cost of retirement will be
made on a pre-tax basis. The contributions shall not be credited to the
employee account at CalPERS and shall not be reimbursed to the contributor by
the City at any time for any reason.

If beginning on or after the first full pay period of September 1, 2013, the
employer cost of retirement for the bargaining unit falls below thirty-seven
percent (37%) at anytime, the employee contribution toward the employer cost
of retirement will be reduced by one percent (1%) for each full one percent
reduction in the employer rate below 37%.

14.4 Employee’s Contribution to Retirement System

Effective September 1, 1999, each employee will pay the Employee’s
Contribution to the Public Employees’ Retirement System in accordance with
the rules and regulations governing such contributions.

14.5 414(h)(2) Internal Revenue Service Code

Effective September 1, 1999, the City shall implement the provisions of
414(h)(2) for the term of this M.O.U., so long as those provisions [414(h)(2)]
remain substantially the same, and so long as there is no additional cost to the
employer for this 414(h)(2) participation. In the event of such additional cost
to the employer, the parties will meet and confer regarding alternative
provisions.

14.6 Exit Incentive Plan (EIP)

An employee who retires with a Service Retirement from the City between and
including the date the tentative agreement is ratified and adopted, and June
30, 2013, will be eligible to receive a payment under the City’s EIP equivalent
to the cost of purchasing two years of additional service credit with CalPERS.
Such payment will be made by the City into an account for the retiree within
the City Council approved tax deferred IRC Section 401(a) Plan. EIP’s are only
offered to those who retire on a service retirement. If an employee has a
disability retirement application pending with CalPERS at the time of service
retirement, the employee is not eligible for the EIP but remains eligible for the
industrial disability retirement. An employee who elects to participate must
notify the City in writing no later than three months before their planned
retirement date. The details of that Plan are set forth in the Plan Document
dated January 1, 2004. The City may amend said Plan from time to time to
conform to law and provide for the general administration of the Plan. The
employee will sign a release agreement stating they agree with these terms
and conditions of the EIP before receiving the benefit.

32
SECTION 15. LAYOFF

15.1

15.2

15.3

15.4

Order of Layoff

In the event of a reduction of force, the employee with the least service in the
classification effected shall be laid off first.

Order of Rehire

An employee who is laid off shall be placed, for a period of one (1) year from
the date of the employee's most recent layoff, on a rehire list. In hiring for a
vacant position in a classification, such rehire list shall take precedence over
all other employment lists and the last employee laid off shall be the first
employee rehired until the rehire list of employees is exhausted; provided,
however, that the employee hired from the rehire list is determined as
capable, in the sole opinion of the City, by virtue of prior training and
experience with the City of Redwood City to perform the work required in the
classification in which the opening exists.

Break in Service

Service with the City shall be terminated by discharge, resignation, refusal by
an employee to accept a reassignment to a related classification as stated in
Section 15.1 of this MOU, six (6) consecutive months of unemployment with the
City of Redwood City, one (l) year on a rehire list, or the refusal by an
employee on the rehire list to report to a rehire assignment made by the City
as stated in Section 15.2 of this MOU.

Benefits During Layoff

During the one (1) year on a rehire list the employee shall not accrue any
benefits, including but not limited to vacation, sick leave, holidays, medical,
dental, and life insurance.

SECTION 16. PERSONNEL FILES

An employee or his or her representative, on presentation of written authorization
from the employee, shall have access to the employee's personnel file on request.
The City shall furnish the employee copies of all performance evaluation reports and
letters of reprimand or warning prior to placement of such documents into the
employee's personnel file. The Employee may be required to acknowledge the receipt
of any document entered into his personnel file without prejudice to subsequent
arguments concerning the contents of such documents.

33
SECTION 17. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

17.1 Definitions

17.2

17.1.1

17.1.2

17.1.3

17.1.4

A “grievance” is a formal written allegation by a member of the
bargaining unit who has been adversely affected by an alleged
violation of the specific provisions of this MOU during its term,
excluding all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, the
subject of which is not specifically covered by the provisions of this
MOU. Such excluded ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations
shall not be subject to the Grievance Procedure.

A “disciplinary grievance” is a formal written objection or challenge to
any punitive disciplinary action including dismissal, demotion,
suspension, reduction in salary, written reprimand, or transfer for
purposes of punishment. Any reduction in pay for change in
assignment which occurs in the course of regular rotation and is not
punitive shall not be subject to this grievance procedure.

Any punitive disciplinary action including dismissal, demotion,
suspension, reduction in salary, written reprimand, or transfer for
purposes of punishment shall be for cause.

A "grievant" is any unit member adversely affected by an alleged
violation of the specific provisions of this MOU, or a punitive
disciplinary action.

A “day” is any day in which the administrative offices of the City of
Redwood City are open for regularly scheduled business.

General Provisions

17.2.1

17.2.2

17.2.3

Until final disposition of a grievance, the grievant shall comply with
the directions of the grievant's immediate supervisor.

All documents dealing with the processing of a grievance shall be filed
separately from the personnel files of the participants.

Any disciplinary grievances arising out of an incident in which the
maximum corrective action imposed is a letter of reprimand or
warnings shall not be appealed beyond Level Ill of this Section 17,
Grievance Procedure. At the request of the employee, a letter of
reprimand may be removed from the employee’s file, at the
discretion of the Police Chief, if the employee has not been subject to
subsequent disciplinary action in which the minimum corrective action
imposed is a letter of reprimand during the initial two year period

34
following the issuance of the letter of reprimand the employee is
requesting be removed from his/her file.

17.2.4 Time limits for appeal provided at any level of this procedure shall
begin the first day following receipt of the written decision by the
grievant and/or the Association.

Failure of the grievant to adhere to the time deadlines shall mean
that the grievant is satisfied with the previous decision and waives the
right to further appeal. The grievant and the City may extend any
time deadline by mutual agreement.

17.2.5 Every effort will be made to schedule meetings for the processing of
grievances at time which will not interfere with the regular work
schedule of the participants. If any grievance meeting or hearing
must be scheduled during duty hours, any employee required by either
party to participate as a witness or grievant in such meeting or
hearing shall be released from regular duties without loss of pay for a
reasonable amount of time.

17.2.6 Any unit member may at any time present grievances to the City and
have such grievances adjusted without the intervention of the
Association, as long as the adjustment is reached prior to arbitration

and the adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of this MOU:
provided that the City shali not agree to a resolution of the grievance
until the Association has received a copy of the grievance and the
proposed resolution and has been given the opportunity to file a
response. Upon request of the grievant, the grievant may be
represented at any stage of the grievance procedure by a
representative of the Association.

17.2.7 This grievance procedure shall be the sole and exclusive procedure for
processing objections or challenges to punitive disciplinary actions and
shall satisfy all administrative appeal rights and protections afforded
by the Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights Act, Government
Code Sections 3300, et seq.

17.3 Procedure
Grievances will be processed in accordance with the following procedures:
17.3.1 Level | - Informal Resolution
17.3.1.1 Any unit member who believes he/she has a grievance
which is an alleged violation of the specific provisions of
this MOU shall present the grievance orally to the
immediate supervisor within ten (10) days after the

grievant knew, or reasonably should have known, of the
circumstances which form the basis for the grievance.

35
17.3.1.2

Failure to do so will render the grievance null and void.
The immediate supervisor shall hold discussions and
attempt to resolve the matter within ten (10) days after

the presentation of the grievance. It is the intent of this
informal meeting that at least one personal conference be
held between the aggrieved employee and the immediate
supervisor.

Any unit member who believes he/she has a grievance
which is an objection or challenge to any punitive
disciplinary action shall present the grievance orally to the
Captain within ten (10) days after the grievant knew, or
reasonably should have known, of the circumstances which
form the basis for the grievance. Failure to do so will
render the grievance null and void. The Captain shall hold
discussions and attempt to resolve the matter within ten
(10) days after the presentation of the grievance. It is the
intent of this informal meeting that at least one personal
conference be held between the aggrieved employee and
the Captain.

17.3.2 Level Il - Formal Written Grievance

17.3.2.1

17.3.2.2

17.3.2.3

17.3.2.4

If the grievance is not settled during the informal
conference and the grievant wishes to press the matter,
the grievant shall present the grievance in writing on the
appropriate form to the Chief of Police within ten (10) days
after the oral decision by the immediate supervisor. The
written information shall include: (a) A description of the
specific grounds of the grievance, including names, dates,
and places necessary for a complete understanding of the
grievance; (b) A listing of the provisions of this MOU which
are alleged to have been violated; (c) A listing of the
reasons why the immediate supervisor's proposed resolution
of the problem is unacceptable; and (d) A listing of specific
actions requested of the City which will remedy the
grievance.

The Chief of Police shall communicate the decision to the
grievant in writing within ten (10) days after receiving the
grievance. If the Chief of Police does not respond within
the time limits, the grievant may appeal to the next level.

Within the above time limits either party may request a
personal conference.

Prior to determining the level of discipline to be taken on

alleged violations of City or Department rules and/or
regulations, the Chief or his designee will:

36
1. Ascertain if the represented employee wishes the
association to intervene on their behalf prior to the
decision being made by the Chief as to level of
discipline.

2. In those cases where intervention is not desired, the
Chiefs decision will be made without Association
intervention. Denial of Association involvement at this
level does not affect any other part of the grievance
procedure contained in this MOU.

3. When intervention is desired, the Chief will contact
the President or their designee to schedule a meeting
where the representative will be granted access to the
investigative file. This access will not include the right
to copy any portion of the file in question.
Appropriate copies will be made available after the
actual discipline is determined. After being given a
reasonable amount of time to read the file, the Chief
will listen to confidential, oral input as it relates to
the actual level of discipline to be taken. Association
involvement at this level, does not affect any other
part of the grievance procedure contained in this MOU.

4. The entire process from date of notification to the
POA, by the Chief, will be no longer than ten (10)
working days unless extended by mutual agreement.

5. All communications between the Chief and the
Association at this level is advisory and confidential.

17.3.3 Level lll - Appeal to Personnel Officer

17.3.3.1 If the grievant is not satisfied with the decision at Level Il,
the grievant may within ten (10) days of the receipt of the
decision at Level II appeal the decision on the appropriate
form to the Personnel Officer. This statement shall include
a copy of the original grievance and appeal, and a clear,
concise statement of the reasons for the appeal. Evidence
offered in support of a disciplinary grievance filed pursuant
to Section 17.2.3 of this MOU shall be submitted in the
form of written declarations executed under penalty of

perjury.

17.3.3.2 The Personnel Officer shall communicate the decision to
the grievant within ten (10) days. If the Personnel Officer
does not respond within the time limits provided, the
grievant may appeal to the next level.

37
17.3.4 Level IV - Binding Arbitration

17.3.4.1

17.3.4.2

17.3.4.3

17.3.4.4

If the grievant is not satisfied with the decision at Level Ill,
the grievant may within ten (10) days of the receipt of the
decision submit a request in writing to the Association for
arbitration of the dispute. Within twenty (20) days of the
grievant's receipt of the decision at Level Ill, the

Association shall inform the City of its intent as to whether
or not the grievance will be arbitrated. The Association
and the City shall attempt to agree upon an arbitrator. If
no agreement can be reached, they shall request that the
State Conciliation Service supply a panel of five names of
persons experienced in hearing grievances in cities. Each
party shall alternately strike a name until only one
remains. The remaining panel member shall be the
arbitrator. The order of the striking shall be determined by
lot.

If either the City or the Association so requests, a separate
arbitrator shall be selected to hear the merits of any issues
raised regarding the arbitrability of a grievance. No
hearing on the merits of the grievance will be conducted
until the issue of arbitrability has been decided. The
process to be used in selecting an arbitrator shall be as set
forth in 17.3.4.1.

The arbitrator shall, as soon as possible, hear evidence and
render a decision on the issue or issues submitted to him.
If the parties cannot agree upon a submission agreement,
the arbitrator shall determine the issues by referring to the
written grievance and the answers thereto at each step.

The City and the Association agree that the jurisdiction and
authority of the arbitrator so selected and the opinions the
arbitrator expresses will be confined exclusively to the
interpretation of the express provision or provisions of this
MOU at issue between the parties. The arbitrator shall
have no authority to add to, subtract from, alter, amend,
or modify any provisions of this MOU or the written
ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and procedures
of the City, nor shall he/she impose any limitations or
obligations not specifically provided for under the terms of
this MOU. The Arbitrator shall be without power of
authority to make any decision that requires the City or
management to do an act prohibited by law.

38
17.3.4.5 In the event that this grievance procedure is used to
challenge punitive disciplinary actions as provided in
Section 17.2.7 above, the City and the Association agree
that the arbitrator shall prepare a written decision
containing findings of fact, determinations, of issues and a
disposition either:

(1) that the position of the grievant shall be sustained; or
(2) that the position of the Police Chief shall be sustained.

17.3.4.6 After a hearing and after both parties have had an
opportunity to make written arguments, the arbitrator shall
submit in writing to all parties his findings and award.

17.3.4.7 The award of the arbitrator shall be final and binding.

17.3.4.8 The fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be shared
equally by the City and the Association.

All other expenses shall be borne by the party incurring
them, and neither party shall be responsible for the
expense of witnesses called by the other. Either party may
request a certified court reporter to record the entire
arbitration hearing. The cost of the services of such court
reporter shall be shared equally by the parties.

17.3.4.9 By filing a grievance and processing it beyond Level Ill, the
grievant expressly waives any right to statutory remedies or
to the exercise of any legal process other than as provided
by this grievance/arbitration procedure. The processing of
a grievance beyond Level Ill shall constitute an express
election on the part of the grievant that the
grievance/arbitration procedure is the chosen forum for
resolving the issues contained in the grievance, and that
the grievant will not resort to any other forum or
procedure for resolution or review of the issues. The
parties do not intend by the provisions of this paragraph to
preclude the enforcement of any arbitration award in any
court of competent jurisdiction.

SECTION 18. OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT

18.1

A unit member shall not engage in any employment, activity or enterprise for
compensation which is inconsistent, incompatible, in conflict with, or inimical
to his/her duties as an employee of the City, or with the duties, functions, or
responsibilities of the City.

39
18.2 A unit member shall secure written approval from the Chief of Police prior to

18.3

18.4

engaging in any employment, activity, or enterprise for compensation which
could be judged to be inconsistent with, incompatible to, or in conflict with
the unit member's duties as an employee of the City. Requests for approval of

such outside employment shall be submitted to the Chief of Police on the
appropriate City form no less than five (5) days prior to the anticipated
commencement date of the outside employment.

Any outside employment, activity, or enterprise shall be prohibited if it
involves any of the following:

18.3.1 The use for private gain or advantage of City time, facilities,
equipment, or supplies;

18.3.2 The use of the badge, uniform, prestige or influence of the unit
member's City office or employment;

18.3.3 Receipt or acceptance by the unit member of any money or other
consideration from anyone other than the City for the performance of
an act which the unit member, if not performing such act, would be
required or expected to render in the regular course or hours of
his/her City employment or as a part of his/her duties as a City
employee;

18.3.4 The performance of an act in other than his/her capacity as a City
employee, which act may later be subject directly or indirectly to the
control, inspection, review, audit or enforcement of the City or any of
its officers or employees;

18.3.5 Such time demands as would render performance of his/her duties as
a City employee less efficient.

Any unit member who is determined to have engaged in an activity prohibited
by or in violation of this Section 18 shall be subject to disciplinary action
including, without limitation, suspension or termination. The unit member
shall receive notice of the proposed discipline and shall have the right to
appeal through the Grievance Procedure contained in this MOU.

SECTION 19. SAFETY

Each employee covered by this MOU agrees to comply with all safety rules and
regulations in effect and any subsequent rules and regulations that may be adopted.
Employees further agree that they will report all accidents and safety hazards to the
appropriate management official immediately. Any employee having knowledge of or
who is a witness to an accident shall, if requested, give full and truthful testimony as
to same.

40
SECTION 20. LIMITED DUTY WORK

20.1

20.2

20.3

20.4

20.5

An injured employee who is receiving medical attention for an alleged
industrial injury, and who is determined to be temporarily disabled, is required
to return to the department after initial treatment a medical report indicating

that, if any, limited duty the employee can perform. If none, the report should
so indicate. The department routinely requires periodic updating reports and
these should also contain this information.

An employee on extended sick leave is likewise required to provide these
periodic reports which should also contain limited duty information.

For employees whose limited duty arrangement calls for less than the regular
number of hours worked per payroll period, the hours actually worked will be
shown as regular time on the time card and the remaining hours (the difference
between hours actually worked and hours normally scheduled) charged to the
appropriate leave. For persons expected to be on a less-than-normal schedule
for more than thirty (30) days, the department will initiate a personnel action
form adjusting accrual rates of such work scheduled-related benefits as
vacation, sick leave or industrial disability as set forth in Section 9. When the
individual returns to his or her regular work schedule, the department will
initiate another personnel action form for return accrual rates to normal;
however, there will be no adjustment of balances as a result of an accrual rate
change.

The duty limitations specified by the treating physician must be strictly
adhered to when making work assignments.

Limited-duty assignments should be such that there is minimum risk of further
injury or aggravation.

SECTION 21. DAMAGED PROPERTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES

21.1

21.2

21.3

Any employee of the department may be reimbursed for the costs of replacing
or repairing property, such as eyeglasses, dentures, watches, or articles of
clothing necessarily worn or carried when such items are damaged in the line
of duty, without fault of the employee.

Luxury items such as jewelry, watches over Seventy-five Dollars ($75.00) in
value, and other non-required items will not be covered by Section 21.

Before the allowance or payment is made, the employee shall file a claim with
the department. There shall be attached to said claim all receipts showing the
monies expended by the claimant for the repair or replacement of said
property.

41
21.4 The department shall reserve the right to refer any claim, which is excessive or
does not meet the previously stated criteria, to the normal City of Redwood
City claim procedure.

SECTION 22. SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS

Should any section clause or provision of this MOU be declared illegal by final
judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidation of such section,
clause or provision shall not invalidate the remaining portions hereof, and such
remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect for the duration of this MOU.

Upon such invalidation the parties agree to meet and confer concerning substitute
provisions rendered or declared illegal.

This MOU is a resolution of all issues raised during this meet and confer process and
shall become effective on the date ratified by the City Council.

REDWOOD CITY POLICE OFFICERS CITY OF REDWOOD CITY
ASSOCIATION

    

BY:
olds, President Robert Bell, City Manager

DATED-CU-272- AA patep:_A-Z9-11

42
APPENDIX A

CORE REFERENCE MATERIALS

1. The core list should include, but will not necessarily be limited to, the following:

Legal Sourcebook (includes software program)
Penal Code (complete text)

Penal Code - Qwik Code and abridged edition
Vehicle Code - Qwik Code and abridged edition
Spanish Translation - Qwik Code (Law Tech Pub.)
Drug & Narcotics Law Summary (Law Tech Pub.)
Search & Seizure Checklist

Search Warrant Checklist

Police Promotional Guide

Sergeant’s Examination Manual

Law Enforcement Reference Manual

Criminal Justice Terms & Definitions (Law Tech Pub.)
Dictionary, Speller, Thesaurus (pocket size)
Passenger Vehicle Identification Manual

Local Area Maps (e.g. Thomas Guide)

Starlett Guide (vehicle profile recognition)
Starlett Guide (in-field narcotics recognition)

2. The Chief or the Chief’s designee may approve individual textual or reference
materials submitted for consideration by any association member. The core list of
reference materials shall be contained in an appendix, and shall be reviewed and
updated by the parties when they meet and confer to negotiate the general terms of
the Memorandum of Understanding or any other agreed upon re-opener to the MOU.

43
 

Department of Human Resources Telephone 650.780.7285,
PI

1017 Middlefield Road a i ji Fax: 650.364.3539
Redwood City, CA 94063 Cit Yemtorms www.redwoodeity.org/hr

    
 

SIDELETTER OF AGREEMENT

Kenneth Kammuller
President
Redwood City Police Officers’ Association

Dear Kenneth:

Effective January 1, 2013, the California Legislature created a third tier for retirement benefits
and statutory contribution amounts via enactment of the PEPRA. In accordance with the
enactment of PEPRA, Article 14.1 of the existing MOU is hereby amended as follows:

14.1 Retirement Plan

Effective the first full pay period that included July 1, 2004 retirement benefits for employees
hired before the date of October 13, 2011 (Tier 1) shall be those established by CalPERS for Local
Safety Members Three Percent (3%) at Age Fifty (50) Formula.

Retirement benefits for employees hired on or after the date of October 13, 2011 (Tier 2) shall
be those established by CalPERS for Local Safety Members, Three Percent (3%) at Age Fifty-Five
(55) Formula.

Retirement benefits for employees hired on or after January 1, 2013, and defined as a “new
member” pursuant to California Government Code Section 7522.04 (f) (Tier 3) shall be those
established by CalPERS for Local Safety Members, Two point Seven (2.7%) at Age Fifty-Seven
(57) Formula.
Article 14.4 is hereby amended as follows:

Effective September 1, 1999, each employee (Tier 1 and Tier 2) shall pay the Employee's
Contribution currently set at nine (9) percent of pensionable income to CalPERS in accordance
with the rules and regulations governing such contributions.

Effective January 1, 2013, employees subject to the Tier 3 (2.7% at 57 Formula) level benefits,
shall contribute an amount equivalent to half the normal costs as established by CalPERS,
currently established as twelve (12) percent of pensionable income. As of the date of this side
letter such employees shall make a twelve percent (12%) contribution towards their retirement
benefits. If the normal cost as determined by CalPERS increases or decreases during the term of
this MOU, the employee contribution shall also increase or decrease accordingly. Tier 3
employees shall not be responsible for the increased employee contribution amounts set forth
in Article 14.3. The increased employee contribution amounts set forth in Article 14.3 shall only
be applicable to Tier 1 and Tier 2 employees.

APPROVED AND ACCEPTED: Very Truly Yours,

REDWOOD CITY CITY OF REDWOOD CITY
POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

By LCL AE Bi
Kenneth Kammuller, President Robert B. Bell, City Manager
Dated: September 29°*2013 Dated: September__, 2013
  

i
Department of Human Resources Redwoot Telephone 650.780.7285
1017 Middlefield Road Git California Fax: 650.364.3539

87

Redwood City, CA 94063 www.redwoodcity.org/hr
wy

 

SIDELETTER OF AGREEMENT

Kenneth Kammuller
President
Redwood City Police Officers’ Association

Dear Kenneth:

On March 5, 2013, CalPERS advised the City of Redwood City, that the current Article 7.11 “K-9
Maintenance Compensation” did not qualify as pensionable compensation and would be
excluded from inclusion when calculating retiree benefits. The City and POA have understood
that compensation to be pensionable and over the last several months have worked together to
resolve the conflict with CalPERS to ensure that such compensation be pensionable. The
changes below reflect the mutual agreement between the City and POA and have also been
approved by CalPERS. This Sideletter is intended to memorialize that agreement.

Article 7.4 is hereby amended as follows:

74 Premium Pay

Police Officers assigned as Detectives, regularly assigned as Traffic Unit Officers, Field Training
Officers, and officers assigned to C-CAT, PAL, and DARE shall receive premium pay in the amount
of 5% of the officer’s base pay.

Police Officers and Police Officer Trainees who are regularly assigned to swing shirt (C-Watch) or
night shift (A-Watch) shall receive premium pay in the amount of 5% of the officer’s base pay.

Police Officers who are regularly scheduled to work between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 2:00
a.m. shall receive premium pay in the amount of 5% of the officer's base pay.
Article 7.11 is hereby amended as follows:

7.11 Canine Handler Premium

 

Police Officers assigned as canine handlers shall receive premium pay in the amount of 5% of
the officer's base pay. Those officers shall also receive an additional seven (7) hours of pay per
pay period, compensated at a rate of one (1) and one-half (1/2) times the officer’s base pay to
pay for the time to handle, train and care for their canine partner.

APPROVED AND ACCEPTED: Very Truly Yours,

REDWOOD CITY CITY OF REDWOOD CITY
POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

By Sf. ¢ 2c By
Kenneth Kammuller, President Robert B. Bell, City Manager
Dated: October 7“, 2013 Dated: October ily, 2013
 

/ \
Department of Human Resources Redwood Telephone 650.780.7285

1017 Middlefield Road ity California Fax: 650.364.3539
\
\

Redwood City, CA 94063 www.redwoodcity.org/hr

 

SIDELETTER OF AGREEMENT

Kenneth Kammuller
President
Redwood City Police Officers’ Association

Dear Kenneth:

The Police Department has updated its Department Policy Manual which requires several
modifications and additions to the existing Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in order to
incorporate current practices and rules, and to resolve conflict with the updated Policy Manual
and the current MOU. Accordingly, the MOU is hereby updated as follows:

74 Premium Pay

Police Officers assigned as Detective, Juvenile Detective, Street Crime Suppression Team,
Vehicle Theft Task Force, Narcotics Task Force, Drug Enforcement Administration, School
Resources Officer, DARE Officer, Motorcycle Officer, PAL Officer, CCAT Officer, or Field Training
Officer shall receive premium pay in the amount of 5% of the officer’s base pay.

Police Officers and Police Officer Trainees who are regularly assigned to swing shift (C-Watch) or
night shift (A-Watch) shall receive premium pay in the amount of 5% of the officer’s base pay.

Police Officers who are regularly scheduled to work between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 2:00
a.m. shall receive premium pay in the amount of 5% of the officer's base pay.

Article 7.13 is hereby amended as follows:
7.13 Uniforms and Safety Equipment
Section 7.13.1 is amended as follows:

The City shall furnish, at its own expense, all safety equipment required by the City, consisting of
service pistol, rain gear, flashlight, handcuffs, PR-24 baton, soft body armor threat level Ila,
leather gear to include: utility belt, chemical agent holder, holster, handcuff case, ammunition
holder, baton ring, and four (4) keeper straps. Riot helmet and protective gas mask shall be
provided by the City as needed. Such furnished safety equipment and any and all replacements
furnished by the City at any time shall remain the property of and under the Control of the City.

The City will provide for all new Police Officers the following articles of uniform clothing:

3 pairs of pants

3 long-sleeve shirts

3 short-sleeve shirts

1 underbelt

1 cold weather (non-leather) jacket with patches

1 dress cap or baseball cap with patch (officer’s choice)

1 dress tie

2 name tags

$125.00 maximum annual reimbursement for boots (purchase or resoling)

The City will also provide and maintain the following Battle Dress Uniforms (BDU) to be worn at
the direction of the Police Chief or his/her designee:

1 pair of BDU pants
1 long-sleeve BDU shirt
1 short-sleeve BDU shirt

Officers shall not be required to wear soft body armor unless working in uniform in an
enforcement capacity or taking part in Department range training. The following sections
outline the exceptions to this requirement:

(a) Officers assigned as Detective shall not be required to wear body armor unless they are
involved in a pre-planned raid or arrest scenario of an anticipated suspect, or when directed
by a supervisor.

(b) Officers may be excused from wearing body armor when they are functioning in a primarily
administrative or support capacity.

(c) Officers shall not be considered to be working in an enforcement capacity while appearing
in Court.

(d) Officers may be excused from wearing body armor when medical clearance has been
provided by a valid medical authority.

(e) Officers may be excepted from this requirement on a case by case basis and when deemed
appropriate by a supervisor.
Article 7.13.3 is hereby amended as follows:

Police Officers assigned in the following positions: Detective, Juvenile Detective, Street Crime
Suppression Team, Vehicle Theft Task Force, Narcotics Task Force, and Drug Enforcement
Administration shall receive a uniform allowance of thirty dollars ($30.00) per pay period as part
of their regular paychecks for each pay period for which they are in one of the above positions.

The following Article 17.20 shall be added and incorporated as follows:

17.20 Specialty Assignments

An officer will be eligible for a Specialty Assignment under this Article if he or she has been
employed as a full-time sworn police officer for a minimum of three years, with the most recent
two years being served as a Redwood City Police Officer. This requirement must be met by the
date the Specialty Assignment is scheduled to begin.

The following limitations shall apply to Specialty Assignments: Officer may not have held a
Specialty position for the six (6) months prior to the beginning date of the assignment. The
positions of Field Training Officer, Canine Officer, and Drug Enforcement Administration Special
Agent are exempt from the six (6) month waiting period, and any Officer who meets the
qualifications may apply. Officers currently in a specialty assignment may apply for any of these
aforementioned three Specialty Assignments without regard to the waiting period.

17.20.1 Three Year Specialty Assignments

Those Officers assigned to the following specialty assignments shall be assigned for a period not
to exceed three (3) years: Detective, Juvenile Detective, Street Crime Suppression Team
Detective, School Resource Officer, DARE Officer, and Motorcycle Officer.

17.20.2 Two Year Specialty Assignments

Those Officers assigned to the following specialty assignments shall be assigned for a period not
to exceed two (2) years, but may be extended by one (1) additional year by mutual agreement
of the Officer and Police Department Administration when noted: Field Training Officer; the
following assignments may all be extended by one year by mutual agreement: CCAT Officer,
Narcotics Task Force Special Agent, Drug Enforcement Administration Special Agent, and Vehicle
Theft Task Force Special Agent.

17.20.3 Canine Handler

The length of assignment for a canine handler shall be the working life of the dog, with the
minimum assignment of three (3) years.
17.20.4 Permanent Assignment

Any officer in a specialty assignment shall be eligible to apply for a permanent position if one
becomes available while they are in their rotational assignment or within six months from the
date of completion of the Specialty Assignment.

There will be two permanent assignments for Detective, and two permanent assignments for
Motorcycle Officer.

Any officer in the specialty assignment of Canine Handler, Permanent Detective, or Permanent
Motorcycle Officer may apply for another specialty assignment without a waiting period.

17.20.5 Seniority within Specialty Unit

Excluding vacation request, seniority will be recognized as length of time the employee has
worked within the specialty unit.

APPROVED AND ACCEPTED: Very Truly Yours,

REDWOOD CITY CITY OF REDWOOD CITY
POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

By_ 20 «ceZ B
Kenneth Kammuller, President Robert B. Bell, City Manager

Dated: November /s, 2013 Dated: Novemberl& 2013
