Promotional Memorandum
of Agreement

City of San José

and

San José Police Officers’ Association

SAN JOSE

CAPITAL OF SILICON VALLEY

July 1, 2013 - December 31, 2015

 
ARTICLE 1
ARTICLE 2
ARTICLE 3
ARTICLE 4
ARTICLE 5
ARTICLE 6
ARTICLE 7
ARTICLE 8
ARTICLE 9

SIGNATURE PAGE

PROMOTIONAL MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN

THE CITY OF SAN JOSE
&
THE SAN JOSE POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TERM

 

NON-DISCRIMINATION

 

ELIGIBILITY

 

EXAMINATION NOTIFICATIONS
EXAMINATIONS

 

EXAMINATION PROTESTS
PROMOTIONAL SELECTIONS
DISPUTES

 

PROBATIONARY PERIODS

 

ao BR RB BON PP PB

 

 

SJPOA Promotional MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015

Table of Contents
The Memorandum of Agreement for Promotions hereinafter referred to as the “Agreement” is
established by agreement at San José, California, this 15" day of July, 2010 by and between
the City of San José, California, hereinafter referred to as the “City” and the San José Police
Officers’ Association, hereinafter referred to as the Employee Association or “Association.” This
Agreement sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties regarding the matters set
forth herein, and any or all prior or existing Memorandum of Understanding, understandings and
agreements, whether formal or informal, including grievance settlements and arbitration
decisions interpreting those understandings, are hereby superseded and terminated in their
entirety. The use of the term “Memorandum of Agreement” or “Agreement” is to be considered
the same as the term Memorandum of Understanding contained in Section 3505.1 of the
“Meyers-Milias-Brown-Act.”

ARTICLE 1 TERM

This Promotions Memorandum of Agreement shall become effective July 1, 2010, except where
otherwise provided, and shall remain in effect through June 30, 2011. No amendment or
change to the provisions of this Agreement shall be valid or binding unless reduced to writing
and signed by duly authorized representative(s) of the parties.

ARTICLE 2 NON-DISCRIMINATION

The Parties agree that they and each of them shall not discriminate with respect to promotions
against any employee or organization member in accordance with the City of San Jose
Discrimination and Harassment policy, Section 1.1.1 of the City Policy Manual and/or any
applicable State or Federal laws.

ARTICLE 3 ELIGIBILITY

3.1. To qualify for an examination for Police Sergeant, an individual must have at least three
(3) years experience as a Police Officer for the City of San Jose.

3.2. To qualify for an examination for Police Lieutenant, an individual must have at least two
(2) years experience as a Police Sergeant for the City of San Jose.

3.3. To qualify for an examination for Police Captain, an individual must have at least two (2)
years experience as a Police Lieutenant for the City of San Jose.

3.4 To qualify for an examination for Deputy Chief of Police, an individual must currently hold
the position of Police Captain and have at least two (2) years experience as a Police
Lieutenant for the City of San Jose.

3.5 Please note that there may also be minimum education requirements for certain positions
that are included in the Classification Specifications.

ARTICLE 4 EXAMINATION NOTIFICATIONS

4.1 Public notice of upcoming test shall be posted no later than sixty (60) days before test
date.

 

SJPOA Promotional MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 1
4.2

4.3

There shall be no extension of the applicant filing date or test date unless announced to
all potential candidates.

The City shall provide, no less than one time every calendar year, a promotional
counseling session available to all Police Officers seeking advice on how best to prepare
for their specific promotional testing process. Officers may participate on their own time.

ARTICLE 5 EXAMINATIONS

5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5

5.6

5.7

5.8

5.9

5.10

Booklets containing test questions shall be officially numbered in sequence with test
answer sheets containing the same number. Candidates taking an exam shall be given a
test booklet and answer sheet identified with identical numbers.

All questions used in all written examinations shall have their source listed in parenthesis
under questions on exams.

With respect to Sergeant and Lieutenant examinations, questions on the written
examination will be based upon the content of the departmental reading list if a written
examination is given as part of that promotion process.

The weights of the Sergeant examination will be 50% written and 50% oral. The oral
examination will include a writing exercise component, which will account for 5% of the
candidate’s total score.

The City may use more than one oral board for an examination.

The use of audio-taping or videotaping may be implemented in the “Oral” portion of an
examination. If any candidate is recorded, all candidates shall be similarly recorded; that
is, there shall be uniformity in the process. In addition, there shall be four (4) week
written notice to all candidates of such recordation. Notice of taping/recordation in the
exam announcement shall suffice.

The Sergeant and Lieutenant oral boards should represent the diversity of the workforce.
If the oral board elected through the participants’ voting process fails to do so, the Chief
may elect to appoint an extra member of each board. In that event, the Sergeant boards
will have a maximum of five (5) raters and the Lieutenant boards will have a maximum of
four (4) raters.

The Sergeant and Lieutenant oral board will include a representative from the Office of
Employee Relations or the Human Resources Department as an observer.

For oral board rater selection for promotional examinations for Sergeants and
Lieutenants, the examinees shall elect two raters from Lieutenants and/or Captains in the
San Jose Police Department and the Director of Human Resources shall appoint two
additional raters whom can be any persons who he/she deems appropriate.

For examinations for Sergeant, Lieutenant and Captain, an observer designated by the
Association, who is not an employee of the City of San Jose, may be present during pre-

 

SJPOA Promotional MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 2
examination training of oral board members, the oral board itself and discussion by oral
board raters, if any, to coordinate their scores.

5.10.1 The observer shall report to the City and the Police Officers’ Association
examination process irregularities, if any, which appear to be a violation of the City
of San Jose Harassment and Discrimination policy and/or other applicable State
and/or Federal laws. To do so, the observer first reports such perceived
irregularities to the examination administrator designated by the City by the
conclusion of the examination phase in which the alleged irregularity occurs. If
that concern continues, the observer shall promptly report the concern to the
Office of Employee Relations.

5.10.2 If no irregularity is presented by the end of an examination phase, the observer
may not raise an issue solely related to that examination phase at any later time
with respect to discrimination. The observer shall not be concerned with or report
on the content of an examination. With respect to oral examinations in which there
are exercises that are being carried out simultaneously among different
examinees, and if the observer cannot watch more than one such exercise without
disrupting it, then the observer will watch but one exercise at a time.

5.10.3 The observer shall not talk, disrupt, provide clues to any candidate or rater during
the examination process, interrupt proceedings in progress or otherwise disrupt
the examination process. The observer shall at all times protect the confidentiality
of the examination content and candidates’ performance except with regard to
reports to the parties herein.

5.10.4 The observer at the conclusion of the examination process will make a report
concerning the examination, and any recommendations the observer may have,
jointly to the City and to the Association.

5.10.5 The Association will arrange for the presence of its selected observer, including
payment, if any is required. The schedule for the examination will not be affected
by the ability or inability of the observer to be present.

ARTICLE 6 EXAMINATION PROTESTS

6.1

6.2

During the protest period of seven (7) calendar days, candidates may view a keyed copy
of the test booklet. (Candidates will be allowed an initial key review of two (2) hours by
the Wednesday following a Saturday written test. Additional time will be provided as
requested within the seven-day period during normal office hours.)

Protest Review Meeting (Optional
6.2.1 The Human Resources Director or designee will discuss protests with all

interested candidates. The Human Resources Director or designee will indicate a
tentative resolution at the Protest Review Meeting.

 

SJPOA Promotional MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 3
6.2.2. The Human Resources Director or designee shall prepare a letter to each
candidate indicating the Human Resources Director’s determination. Candidates
have five (5) business days to appeal in writing to the Civil Service Commission.

6.2.3. All appeals must be filed in writing, within five (5) business days of receipt of the
letter from Human Resources.

6.2.4 City Clerk will notify appellant of the date, time and place of the meeting. The
meeting will be held within ten (10) calendar days of the final day an appeal may
be filed.

ARTICLE 7 PROMOTIONAL SELECTIONS

71

7.2

7.3

TA

7.5

Promotion lists shall be maintained for two (2) years. At the discretion of the Director of
Human Resources the life of a list may be extended for an additional year.

The Director of Human Resources shall make every reasonable effort with respect to
Sergeant and Lieutenant list(s) to provide a new list within 90 days of the exhaustion or
expiration of the Sergeant and/or Lieutenant list(s).

The “Rule of 10” will apply in all promotions.

For the purposes of seniority, points added to test scores for placement on all Police
promotional eligible lists, seniority points will be based solely on time in the qualifying
grade.

In the event that a person on a list is passed over for the second certification off that
same list, in that someone listed below that person was appointed instead of the
individual, then the person shall, on request, meet with the Chief or designee to discuss
the specifics as to why the individual was passed over, and to receive suggestions as to
what the individual can do that will enhance his or her chances for future promotion
selection.

ARTICLE 8 DISPUTES

Any disputes concerning the interpretation or application of this agreement shall be resolved by
the grievance procedures set forth in the Memorandum of Agreement between the City of San
José and San José Police Officers’ Association.

ARTICLE 9 PROBATIONARY PERIODS

For those persons promoted to the rank of Sergeant or above, the probationary period will be
twelve (12) months.

 

SJPOA Promotional MOA July 1, 2013 —- December 31, 2015 Page 4
THIS AGREEMENT executed on the 29" day of January, 2014 between the City of San Jose
and the San Jose Police Officers’ Association, in WITNESS thereof, the appropriate
representative if the parties have affixed their signature thereto.

For the City of San Jose: For the San Jose
Police Officers’ Association:

Ed Shikada Jk. Ud

 

 

 

 

City Manager President, SJPOA

Alex Gurza John Robb

Deputy City Manager Vice President, SJPOA
Jerinifer Schembri Franco Vado

Deputy Director of Emplo ‘elations Chief Financial Officer, SJPOA

  

ALL

 

 

Edgar David Woolsey

Assistant Chief of Police Director, SJPOA
Rob Perrin ies Gonzales
Executive Analyst Director, SJPOA

 

Carroll, Burdick & McDonough LLP

 

SJPOA Promotional MOA July 1, 2013 — December 31, 2015 Page 5
