MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Between
THE CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO
And

MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION
POLICE

July 1, 2007- June 30, 2018

Per Amendment 5
ARTICLE I:
LA.
LB.
LC.
LD.

LE.
LF.

ARTICLE II:
ILA.
ILB.
ILC.
ILD.

ARTICLE III: PAY, HOURS AND BENEFIT:

TABLE OF CONTENTS

REPRESENTATIO
RECOGNITION...
NO STRIKE PROVISION
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES
Time Limits
Steps of the Procedure
Selection of the Arbitrator
Authority of the Arbitrator
Fees and Expenses of Arbitrator .
Hearing Dates and Date of Award.
Monetary Relief ..
Failure to Respond..
OFFICIAL REPRESENTATIVES
ASSOCIATION SECURITY
Authorization for Deductions
Dues Deductions

EMPLOYMENT CONDITION:
NON-DISCRIMINATION
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES AC
EMPLOYMENT STATUS
SEVERANCE PAY.

   
 
  
 

 

 

 
  
 

 

 

 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 
  

 

 

 

 

TILA.
IIL.B.
TILC.
ILD.

TILE.

IILF.
IILG.
TILH.
TILI.
TIL.J.
TILK.

TILL.
TILM.

WAGEG.....
ACTING ASSIGNMENT PAY.
METHOD OF CALCULATION.
WORK SCHEDULES
Regular Work Day ..
Regular Work Week
EXECUTIVE LEAVE/ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE
Executive Leave.......
Administrative Leave.
HOLIDAYS
FLOATING HOLIDAY:
HOLIDAY PAY FOR EMPLOYEES WHO SEPARATE
HOLIDAYS THAT FALL ON A SATURDAY
IN-LIEU HOLIDAY
HOLIDAYS FOR EMPLOYEES ON WORK SCHEDULES OTHER THAN

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 

 

 
 

MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY 11
VACATION.. 12
SICK LEAVE.. 12

 

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE
TILN.
III.O.

TILP.
111.Q.
IILR.
IILS.

  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

PILOT WELLNESS PROGRAM
HEALTH AND DENTAL INSURANCE
Health Coverage................
Management Cafeteria Plan.
Dental Insurance se
RETIREMENT BENEFITS .

13

 

14
UNIFORMS. 14
THIRD PARTY FUNDED CRIME LABORATORY WORK. 15

PARENTAL RELEASE TIME

ARTICLE IV: TRAINING, CAREER DEVELOPMENT AND INCENTIVES ..........se+e000¢

IV.A.

ARTICLE V: IMPLEMENTATION AND TERM OF AGREEMENT....

V.A.

V.B.
V.C.
V.D.

   
  
 

DIRECT DEPOSIT OF PAYMENTS AND PAPERLESS PAY POLICY

SCOPE..
Scope Of Agreement Meet and Confer Responsibi
Agreement...
SAVINGS CLAUSE.
DURATION OF AGREEMENT
SIGNATURE PAGE

 

ty During the Term of The

 

 

 

2007-2013 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

“Le
ARTICLE I:_ REPRESENTATION

This Agreement is entered into by the City and County of San Francisco (hereinafter "City")
and the Municipal Executives Association (hereinafter "Association"). It is agreed that the
delivery of municipal services in the most efficient, effective, and courteous manner is of
paramount importance to the City, the Association, and represented employees. Such
achievement is recognized to be a mutual obligation of the parties to this Agreement within
their respective roles and responsibilities.

It is the intent of the parties that the provisions of this Agreement shall become binding upon
adoption or acceptance by the City and ratification by the covered members, or upon a final
decision rendered by an arbitration panel pursuant to the interest arbitration procedure under
Charter Section A8.590-1, et seq.

LA. RECOGNITION

The City acknowledges that the Association has been certified by the Civil Service
Commission as the recognized employee representative, pursuant to the provisions set
forth in the City's Employee Relations Ordinance for the bargaining units listed below:

P-3-0 0390 Chief of Police
0395 Assistant Chief of Police
0400 Deputy Chief
0401 Deputy Chief 2
0402 Deputy Chief 3
P-3-1 Q63  Criminologist

Recognition shall only be extended to individual jobcodes (ranks) accreted to existing
bargaining units covered by this Agreement. Application of this provision shall not
extend to bargaining units acquired through affiliations or service agreements. Upon
request of the Association the City will meet and confer concerning proposed changes
to bargaining units.

1B. NOSTRIKE PROVISION

During the term of this Agreement the City will not lock out the employees who are
covered by this Agreement. This Association and the employees shall not strike, cause,
encourage, or condone a work stoppage, slowdown, or sympathy strike during the term
of this Agreement.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

“Le
10.

11.

12.

13.

LC.

LD.

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

In accordance with applicable state law, nothing herein shall be construed to restrict
any legal City rights concerning direction of its work force, or consideration of the
merits, necessity, or organization of any service or activity provided by the City.

The City shall also have the right to determine the mission of its constituent
departments, officers, boards and commissions; set standards of services to be offered
to the public and exercise control and discretion over the City's organization and
operations. The City may also relieve city employees from duty due to lack of work or
funds, and may determine the methods, means and personnel by which the City's
operations are to be conducted.

However, the exercise of such rights does not preclude employees from utilizing the
grievance procedure to process grievances regarding the practical consequences of any
such actions on wages, hours, benefits or other terms and conditions of employment
whenever memoranda of understanding providing a grievance procedure are in full
force and effect.

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES

The following procedures are adopted by the parties to provide for the orderly and
efficient disposition of grievances and are the sole and exclusive procedures for
resolving grievances as defined herein.

A grievance is defined as an allegation by an employee, a group of employees or the
Association that the City has violated a term or condition of employment provided in
this Agreement.

Time Limits

The time limits set forth herein may be extended by agreement of the parties. Any such
extension must be confirmed in writing. For purposes of calculation of time, a "day" is
defined as a "calendar day," including weekends and holidays.

Steps of the Procedure

Except for grievances involving multiple employees, all grievances must be initiated at
Step 1 of the grievance procedure.

A grievance affecting more than one employee shall be filed with the Appointing
Officer. Grievances affecting more than one department shall be filed with the
Employee Relations Division. In the event the City disagrees with the level at which
the grievance is filed it may submit the matter to the Step it believes is appropriate for
consideration of the dispute.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-2-
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

Step 1:

Step 2:

Step 3:

Step 4:

Step 5:

An employee shall discuss the grievance informally with his/her immediate
supervisor as soon as possible but in no case later than twenty (20) days
from the date of the occurrence of the act or the date the grievant might
reasonably have been expected to have learned of the alleged violation
being grieved. The grievant may have an Association representative
present.

If the grievance is not resolved within seven (7) days after contact with the
immediate supervisor, the grievant will submit the grievance in writing to
the immediate supervisor on a mutually agreeable grievance form. The
grievance will set forth the facts of the grievance, the terms and conditions
of employment claimed to have been violated, misapplied or
misinterpreted, and the remedy or solution being sought by the grievant.

The immediate supervisor shall respond in writing within ten (10) days
following receipt of the written grievance.

A grievant dissatisfied with the supervisor's response at Step 2 may appeal
to the Appointing Officer, in writing, within ten (10) days of receipt of the
Step 2 answer. The Appointing Officer may convene a meeting within
fifteen (15) days with the grievant and/or the grievant's Association
representative. The Appointing Officer shall respond in writing within
twenty (20) days of the hearing or receipt of the grievance, whichever is
later.

A grievant dissatisfied with the Appointing Officer's response at Step 3 may
appeal to the Director, Employee Relations, in writing, within fifteen (15)
days of receipt of the Step 3 answer. The Director may convene a
grievance meeting within fifteen (15) days with the grievant and/or the
grievant's Association. The Director shall respond to the grievance in
writing within twenty (20) days of the meeting or, if none is held, within
twenty (20) days of receipt of the appeal.

If the Association is dissatisfied with the Step 4 answer it may appeal by
notifying the Director, Employee Relations, in writing, within twenty (20)
days of the 4th Step decision that arbitration is being invoked.

Selection of the Arbitrator

When a matter is appealed to arbitration, the parties shall first attempt to mutually
agree upon an Arbitrator to hear the matter. In the event no agreement is reached
within ten (10) working days, or any extension of time mutually agreed upon, the
parties shall request that the State Mediation and Conciliation Service (“SMCS”) or the
American Arbitration Association (“AAA”) provide the parties with a list of seven (7)

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-3-
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

LE.

potential arbitrators. The parties, by lot, shall alternately strike names from the list, and
the name that remains shall be the arbitrator designated to hear the particular matter.

The parties may, by mutual agreement, agree to an alternate method of arbitrator
selection and appointment, including, the expedited appointment of an arbitrator from a
list provided by the SMCS or AAA.

Authority of the Arbitrator

The arbitrator shall have no authority to add to, ignore, modify or amend the terms of
this Agreement.

Fees and Expenses of Arbitrator

The fees and expenses of the Arbitrator shall be shared equally by the parties. Direct
expenses of the arbitration shall be borne equally by the parties.

Hearing Dates and Date of Award

Hearings shall be scheduled within forty-five (45) days of selection of an arbitrator.
Awards shall be due within forty-five (45) days following the receipt of closing
arguments. As a condition of appointment to the permanent panel arbitrators shall be
advised of this requirement and shall certify their willingness to abide by these time
limits.

Monetary Relief

Any claim for monetary relief shall not extend more than twenty (20) days prior to the
filing of a grievance, unless considerations of equity or bad faith justify a greater
entitlement. The arbitrator shall be required to deduct from any monetary awards all
income from any source received by the employee. The arbitrator shall not be
authorized to award any interest on any pre or post monetary award.

Failure to Respond

In the event a grievance is not initiated or appealed through the steps in accordance
with the time periods set above, it shall be void. Failure of the City to timely reply toa
grievance shall authorize appeal to the next grievance step.

OFFICIAL REPRESENTATIVES

The Association may select as many as three (3) members of the Association to attend
during regular duty or work hours without loss of compensation, meetings scheduled
with the Civil Service Commission, the Department of Human Resources, the Director
of Employee Relations, or designee, when such meetings have been scheduled for the
purpose of meeting and conferring on matters within the scope of representation

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-4-
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

LF.

affecting such appropriate units, and to participate in the discussions, deliberations and
decisions at such meetings.

ASSOCIATION SECURITY
Authorization for Deductions

The City shall deduct Association dues, initiation fees, premiums for insurance
programs and political action fund contributions from an employee's pay upon receipt
by the Controller of a form authorizing such deductions by the employee. The City
shall pay over to the designated payee all sums so deducted. Upon request of the
Association, a representative designated by the Controller agrees to meet with the
Association to discuss and attempt to resolve issues pertaining to delivery of services
relating to such deductions.

Dues Deductions

Dues deductions, once initiated, shall continue until an individual covered member
submits a written revocation of dues. The revocation notice shall be delivered to the
Controller either in person at the Controller's office or by depositing it in the U.S. Mail
addressed to the Payroll/Personnel Services Division, Office of the Controller, 875
Stevenson Street, San Francisco, CA 94103; Attention: Dues Deduction. The City
shall deliver a copy of the notices of revocation of dues deductions authorizations to
the Association within two (2) weeks of receipt.

No later than nine working days following payday, the Controller will promptly pay
over to the Association all sums withheld for membership dues. The Controller shall
also provide with each payment a list of employees paying dues. Such lists shall
contain the employee's name, employee number, jobcode (rank), department number,
and the amount deducted.

On a quarterly basis, the City shall provide the Association a list of covered employees
containing employee name, employee number, jobcode (rank), department, Civil
Service status, annual salary, and whether the employee pays dues to the Association.
Such list shall be provided in hard copy and on computer disk in a mutually agreeable
format.

The above information shall be provided by the City at no cost to the Association.

The Association agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless for any loss or damage
arising from the operation of this section, provided the City has complied with its
obligations in this section.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE
34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

ILA.

ILB.

ILC.

ILD.

ARTICLE Il: EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

NON-DISCRIMINATION

The City and the Association agree that this Agreement shall be administered in a
nondiscriminatory manner and that no person covered by this Agreement shall in any
way be discriminated against because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, national origin, physical or mental disability, age, political
affiliation or opinion or Association membership or activity, or nonmembership, nor
shall a person be subject to sexual harassment. The City shall process complaints of
sexual harassment pursuant to Civil Service Rules, the Administrative Code and
Federal and State laws.

AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT

The parties agree that the City is obligated to provide reasonable accommodations for
persons with disabilities, in order to comply with the provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act, the Fair Employment and Housing Act and all other applicable federal,
state and local disability anti-discrimination statutes. The parties further agree that this
Memorandum shall be interpreted, administered and applied in a manner consistent
with such statutes. The City reserves the right to take any action necessary to comply
therewith.

EMPLOYMENT STATUS

It is recognized, understood and agreed that employees in jobcodes (ranks) assigned to
bargaining units covered under this contract are Civil Service exempt and serve at the
sole discretion of the Appointing Officer.

SEVERANCE PAY

The City agrees that when involuntarily removing or releasing from employment a
represented, exempt employee, the Appointing Officer will endeavor to inform the
employee at least thirty (30) calendar days before his/her final day of work. Where the
Appointing Officer fails or declines to inform the employee a full thirty (30) days in
advance, the member shall receive pay in lieu of the number of days less than thirty
(30) upon which she/he was informed.

In addition to paragraph (1), the parties agree that the severance is available per this
paragraph to the following covered employees: (a) represented exempt employees who
are involuntarily removed or released from City employment; and (b) represented,
exempt employees who are involuntarily returned to a permanent job code (rank) and
who elect to separate from City Service. Said employees who elect severance shall
receive two months’ severance pay in exchange for a release signed by the employee

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

6-
and MEA of any and all claims arising under this Agreement that the employee or
MEA may have against the City including any officer or employee thereof. This
release shall also include a waiver of any rights the employee may have to return to
City employment, e.g., holdover roster. This release does not affect claims or rights an
employee may have independent of this Agreement such as those rights arising under
state or federal law.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

7-
39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

TILA.

IIL.B.

ARTICLE III: PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

 

WAGES

Established wage rate differentials, including any special payments based exclusively
on service, between covered job-codes (ranks) and the highest paid Deputy Chief rank
shall be maintained for the duration of this Agreement, exclusive of the additional 4%
in wages received by the Deputy Chiefs on July 1, 2007 pursuant to the 2007-2011
POA P-2B MOU, Article III.2.A. Overtime.

The City shall continue to implement a merit pay based recognition program. Subject
to the recommendation and approval of the Police Commission for the Police Chief and
subject to the approval of the Police Chief for the other represented job-codes (ranks),
merit pay base annual adjustments may be awarded to an employee ranging from 0% to
5% of an employee’s base annual salary.

Employees shall receive the following base wage increases:

July 1, 2015-1%
July 1, 2016 — 2%
July 1, 2017 - 2%

ACTING ASSIGNMENT PAY

The Appointing Officer assigns duties to employees covered by this Agreement.
Employees assigned by the Appointing Officer or designated to perform the full range
of essential functions of a position in a higher job-code (rank) shall receive
compensation at a higher salary if all of the following conditions are met:

1. The assignment shall be in writing.
2. The position to which the employee is assigned must be a budgeted position.
3. The employee is assigned to perform the duties of a higher job-code (rank) for

longer than thirty (30) consecutive working days.

4. Upon written approval by the Appointing Officer, an employee shall be paid a
5% adjustment as long as it does not exceed the maximum range of the job-
code (rank) to which temporarily assigned. Premiums based on percent of
salary shall be paid at a rate which includes out of job-code (rank) pay.

5. Requests for classification or reclassification review shall not be governed by
this provision.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

8.
48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

TILC.

ILD.

TILE.

METHOD OF CALCULATION

Bi-Weekly. An employee whose compensation is fixed on a bi-weekly basis shall be
paid the bi-weekly salary for his/her position for work performed during the bi-weekly
payroll period. There shall be no compensation for time not worked unless such time-
off is authorized time-off with pay.

WORK SCHEDULES

Regular Work Day

A regular workday is a tour of duty of eight (8) hours of work completed within not
more than twenty-four (24) hours.

Regular Work Week

The Appointing Officer shall determine the work schedule for employees in his/her
department. A regular work week is a tour of duty of five (5) worked days within a
seven day period.

EXECUTIVE LEAVE/ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE

Employees covered by this Agreement shall not be eligible to accrue compensatory
time-off.

Any new hires in job-codes (ranks) covered by this Agreement shall cash-out any
accumulated compensatory time-off at their former base rate of pay upon appointment
to a job-code (rank) covered by this Agreement.

Covered employees are required to work the days and hours necessary to perform the
job duties of their position and shall schedule their time accordingly.

Executive Leave

Employees covered by Safety P-3-0 shall receive five days of paid executive leave per
year. Executive leave may not be carried over into subsequent fiscal years and may not
be cashed-out.

Administrative Leave

Employees covered by the P-3-1 Safety Unit may earn up to one hundred (100) hours
of paid administrative leave (AL) per fiscal year under the following conditions:

The employee must work time in excess of normally scheduled hours in order
to earn AL. Such excess hours worked shall be credited toward AL at straight
time.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-9-
57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

IILF.

Accrual or use of AL must be approved in advance by the Appointing Officer.
Approval to accrue or use AL shall not be unreasonably withheld.

An employee may carry forward up to one hundred (100) hours of earned but unused
AL into the next fiscal year.

Employees shall not maintain balances of more than one hundred twenty (120) hours of
AL.

Administrative leave may only be taken in paid time-off and cannot be “cashed out.”
HOLIDAYS

Except when normal operations require, or in an emergency, employees shall not be
required to work on the following days hereby declared to be holidays for such
employees:

January | (New Year's Day)

the third Monday in January (Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday)
the third Monday in February (President's Day)
the last Monday in May (Memorial Day)

July 4 (Independence Day)

the first Monday in September (Labor Day)

the second Monday in October (Columbus Day)
November 11 (Veteran's Day)

Thanksgiving Day

the day after Thanksgiving

December 25 (Christmas Day)

Provided further, if January 1, July 4, November 11 or December 25 falls on a Sunday,
the Monday following is a holiday.

In addition, any day declared to be a holiday by proclamation of the Mayor after such
day has heretofore been declared a holiday by the Governor of the State of California or
the President of the United States.

The City shall accommodate religious belief or observance of employees as required by
law.

Employees required to work on any of the above holidays shall be allowed an in lieu
day thereof as scheduled by the Appointing Officer in the current fiscal year.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-10-
66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

IILG.

TILH.

TILI.

TILJ.

TILK.

FLOATING HOLIDAYS

Four (4) additional floating holidays may be taken on days selected by the employee
subject to prior scheduling approval of the Appointing Officer. Employees (both full-
time and part-time) must complete six (6) months continuous service to establish initial
eligibility for the floating holidays. No compensation of any kind shall be earned or
granted for floating days off not taken. Floating holidays received in one fiscal year but
not used may be carried forward to the next succeeding fiscal year. The number of
floating holidays carried forward to a succeeding fiscal year may not exceed the total
number of floating holidays received in the previous fiscal year. Floating holidays may
be taken in hourly increments up to and including the number of hours contained in the
employee’s regular shift.

HOLIDAY PAY FOR EMPLOYEES WHO SEPARATE

Employees who have established initial eligibility for floating holidays and
subsequently separate from City employment, may at the sole discretion of the
appointing authority, be paid those floating holidays to which the separating employee
was eligible and had not yet taken off.

HOLIDAYS THAT FALL ON A SATURDAY

For those employees assigned to a work week of Monday through Friday, and in the
event a legal holiday falls on Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed as a
holiday; provided, however, that except where the Governor declares that such
preceding Friday shall be a legal holiday, each department head shall make provision
for the staffing of public offices under his/her jurisdiction on such preceding Friday so
that said public offices may serve the public. Those employees who work on a Friday
which is observed as a holiday in lieu of a holiday falling on Saturday shall be allowed
a day off in lieu thereof as scheduled by the Appointing Officer in the current fiscal
year. The City shall provide one week's advance notice to employees scheduled to work
on the observed holiday, except in cases of unforeseen operational needs.

IN-LIEU HOLIDAY
In-Lieu Holidays must be taken within the fiscal year earned.

HOLIDAYS FOR EMPLOYEES ON WORK SCHEDULES OTHER THAN
MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY

Employees assigned to seven (7) day operation departments or employees working a
five (5) day work week other than Monday through Friday shall be allowed another day
off if a holiday falls on one of their regularly scheduled days off.

If the provisions of this section deprive an employee of the same number of holidays
that an employee receives who works Monday through Friday, s/he shall be granted

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

cll
72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

TILL.

TILM.

TILN.

additional days off to equal such number of holidays. The designation of such days off
shall be by mutual agreement of the employee and the appropriate employer
representative. Such days off must be taken within the fiscal year. In no event shall the
provisions of this section result in such employee receiving more or less holidays than
an employee on a Monday through Friday work schedule.

VACATION

Award and accrual of vacation benefits shall be as specified in the Administrative
Code, and may not be changed during the duration of this Agreement without the
concurrence of the Association.

SICK LEAVE

Award and accrual of sick leave benefits shall be provided as specified in Civil Service
Commission Rule 220.

San Francisco Administrative Code, Chapter 12W Paid Sick Leave Ordinance is
expressly waived in its entirety with respect to employees covered by this Agreement.

PILOT WELLNESS PROGRAM

The City shall continue the pilot “wellness program.” Any fulltime employee leaving
the employment of the City upon service or disability retirement may receive payment
for a portion of sick leave earned but unused at the time of separation. To be eligible,
an employee must have utilized one hundred and sixty (160) hours or less of sick leave
during the final two-year period prior to retirement. Sick leave hours donated to
catastrophic sick leave bank(s) or used for authorized bereavement leave according to
the Civil Service Rules shall not be considered sick leave utilization for purposes of
this paragraph. The pilot "wellness incentive program" shall sunset on June 30, 2018.

The amount of this payment shall be equal to two and one-half percent (2% %) of sick
leave balances earned but unused at the time of separation times the number of whole
years of continuous employment times an employee’s salary rate, exclusive of
premiums or supplements, at the time of separation. Vested sick leave hours, as
described by CSC rules, shall not be included in this computation.

 

Example of calculation:
Employee A retires with 20 years of service.

Employee A has a sick leave balance of 500 hours.
Employee A has a base salary rate of $25.00 per hour at the time of separation.

Wellness incentive=2 % % for each year of service x 20 years of service=50%
50% x 500 hours=250 hours
250 hours x $25.00 (base salary rate at time of separation)=$6,250.00

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-12-
77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

III.O.

The number of hours for which an employee may receive cash payment shall not
exceed one thousand forty (1040), including any vested sick leave hours.

This wellness incentive bonus shall not be considered as part of an employee’s
compensation for the purpose of computing retirement benefits.

HEALTH AND DENTAL INSURANCE

Health Coverage

The City shall provide contributions for employee health benefits at the rate prescribed
in Charter sections A8.423 through A8.428.

Management Cafeteria Plan

For July 1, 2014 through December 31, 2015, the City shall contribute the greater
amount of $225 per month or 75% of the dependent rate charged to employees for
Kaiser coverage at the dependent plus two or more level, including any additional
charges assessed to Health Service System members by vote of the Health Services
Board.

Effective January 1, 2016, the City shall make the following monthly contributions
based on the employee’s enrollment status with the Health Service System:

Employee Only or Unenrolled: 65% of the dependent rate charged to
employees for Kaiser coverage at the dependent plus two or more level,
including any additional charges assessed to Health Service System members
by vote of the Health Services Board.

Employee plus 1: 75% of the dependent rate charged to employees for Kaiser
coverage at the dependent plus two or more level, including any additional
charges assessed to Health Service System members by vote of the Health
Services Board.

Employee Plus Two or More: 83% of the total health insurance premium for
the plan selected inclusive of the contribution described in Charter section
A8.428(b); provided, however, that the City’s contribution shall be capped at
83% of the Employee Plus Two or More premium of the second-highest-cost
plan.

The Management Cafeteria Plan benefit year will correspond with the benefit plan year
for all other Health Service System members.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-13-
83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

IILP.

111.Q.

Employees shall not be eligible for the Management Cafeteria Plan during months in
which they are not eligible to receive City-paid contributions for healthcare.

Dental Insurance

The City agrees to maintain dental benefits at present levels for the duration of the
Agreement.

Effective July 1, 2011, employees who enroll in the Delta Dental PPO Plan shall pay
the following premiums for the respective coverage levels: $5/month for employee-
only, $10/month for employee + 1 dependent, or $15/month for employee + 2 or more
dependents.

The aforesaid contributions shall not be considered as a part of an employee's
compensation for the purpose of computing straight time earnings or retirement
benefits; nor shall such contributions be taken into account in determining the level of
any other benefit which is a function of, or percentage of salary.

RETIREMENT BENEFITS

Employees shall pay their own retirement contributions in an amount equal to 7.0%
(old plan) or 7.5% (new plan) of covered gross salary. The parties acknowledge that
said contributions satisfy the requirements of Charter Sections A8.595-11(d) and
A8.597-11(d).

If the majority of City & County of San Francisco employees agree to an employee
contribution to fund retiree health benefits, the parties agree to reopen the MOU on the
subject of an employee contribution to fund retiree health benefits. This reopener is
subject to the impasse resolution procedures as set forth in Charter Section A8.590-1 et
seq.

Notwithstanding paragraph 98 above, the parties agree to further extend employee cost
sharing by increasing the retirement contribution for all employees by three percent
(3%) for the two year period beginning July 1, 2011, and ending June 30, 2013. As of
July 1, 2013, the parties agree to effectuate any applicable cost sharing provisions of a
Charter amendment initiated by the Mayor, approved by the Board of Supervisors, and
approved by the voters in the November 2011 election.

UNIFORMS

Employees shall receive as part of their regular rate of pay eight-hundred-twenty
dollars ($820) per year as an annual uniform allowance.

The uniform items covered by this provision shall be the same as those covered under
the agreement between the City and the Police Officers’ Association 2003-2007 MOU.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-14-
92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

TILR.

IILS.

This provision will satisfy any and all obligations to provide employees with uniform
clothing and maintenance.

THIRD PARTY FUNDED CRIME LABORATORY WORK

Subject to the approval of the Chief of Police or his/her designee, the Q-63 Director of
Forensic Services, shall be compensated one-and-one-half (1.5) times the base rate of
pay for hours worked in excess of the employee’s normal work schedule when
performing work in which a third party, non-City agency (i.e., person, corporation, firm
or organization) is reimbursing the department for the cost of such services.

PARENTAL RELEASE TIME

Upon proper advance notification, employees may be granted up to forty (40) hours
Parental Leave — two (2) hours of which will be paid leave each semester — each year to
participate in the activities of a school or licensed child day care facility of any of the
employee’s children. Parental Leave shall not exceed eight (8) hours in any calendar
month of the year.

In order to qualify for Parental Leave, the employee must give reasonable notice to
his/her immediate supervisor prior to taking the time off. The employee must provide
written verification from the school or licensed child day care facility that he/she
participated in school/child care related activities on a specific date and at a particular
time, if requested by management.

The employee may utilize either existing vacation, executive leave, administrative
leave or personal (unpaid) leave to account for absences after the two (2) paid hours per
semester have been used. If both of the child’s parents are employed by the City at the
same worksite, the entitlement to a planned absence applies only to the parent who first
gives notice.

Denial of Parental Leave under this section is not subject to the grievance process.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-15-
97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

ARTICLE IV: TRAINING, CAREER DEVELOPMENT AND INCENTIVES

Covered employees shall be eligible to continue to participate in the management development
training programs as provided for under the agreement between the City and MEA
Miscellaneous 2006-2009 MOU or its successor.

IV.A. DIRECT DEPOSIT OF PAYMENTS AND PAPERLESS PAY POLICY

Effective on a date to be established by the Controller, but not sooner than September
1, 2014, the City shall implement a Citywide “Paperless Pay” Policy. This policy will
apply to all City employees, regardless of start date.

Under the policy, all employees shall be able to access their pay advices electronically
on a password protected site, and print them in a confidential manner, using City
Internet, computers and printers. Such use of City equipment shall be free of charge to
employees, is expressly authorized under this section of the Agreement, and shall not
be considered “inappropriate use” under any City policy. Pay advices shall also be
available to employees on a password protected site that is accessible from home or
other non-worksite computers, and that allows the employees to print the pay advices.
Employees shall receive assistance to print hard copies of their pay advices through
their payroll offices upon request. Upon implementation of the policy, other than for
employees described in the preceding sentence, paper pay advices will no longer be
available through Citywide central payroll distribution.

In addition to payroll information already provided, the pay advices shall reflect usage
and balance (broken out for vacation, sick leave, etc.) the employee’s hours of
compensatory time, overtime, and premiums earned during the relevant payroll period.
The City shall maintain electronic pay advices and/or wage statements for at least
seven (7) years.

Under the policy, all employees (regardless of start date) will have two options for
receiving pay: direct deposit or pay card. Employees not signing up for either option
will be defaulted into pay cards.

Every employee shall possess the right to do the following with any frequency and
without incurring any cost to the employee:

1. Change the account into which the direct deposit is made;

2. Switch from the direct deposit option to the pay card option, or vice versa;

3. Obtain a new pay card the first time the employee’s pay card is lost, stolen or
misplaced;

The City assures that the pay card shall be FDIC insured. The City further assures that
in the event of an alleged overpayment by the City to the employee, the City shall not
unilaterally reverse a payment to the direct deposit account or pay card.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-16-
104.

105.

106.

Prior to implementing the “Paperless Pay Policy,” the City will give all employee
organizations a minimum of 30-days’ advance notice. Prior to implementation of the
policy, the City shall notify employees regarding the policy, including how to access
and print their pay advices at work or elsewhere. Training shall be available for
employees who need additional assistance.

The City will work with the vendor to evaluate options to provide no-cost ATMs
available at large worksites and remote worksites.

The parties mutually agree that employees may print out pay advices during work
hours.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-17-
107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

V.A.

ARTICLE V: IMPLEMENTATION AND TERM OF AGREEMENT

SCOPE

Scope Of Agreement Meet_and Confer Responsibility During the Term of The
Agreement

 

Except in cases of emergency involving an imminent or substantial threat to the public
health or safety or as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the City shall give
reasonable written notice to the Association of proposed changes directly relating to
matters within the scope of representation as specified in Government Code Section
3504.5. The Association shall be provided with the opportunity to meet and confer
with regard to any such proposed change should it desire to do so.

In cases of emergency when the City determines that a proposed change as described
herein must be adopted immediately without prior notice or meeting with the
Association, the City shall provide such notice and opportunity to meet at the earliest
practical time following the adoption of such change. If the Association does not
respond within ten (10) working days from the date of mailing of written notification of
a proposed change as provided for in this article, the Association shall be deemed to
have waived its opportunity to meet and confer on the proposed change.

If the Association timely requests the opportunity to meet and confer as provided
herein, the City agrees to meet and confer with the Association over such proposed
change or changes within ten (10) days of receipt of such timely request, unless a
longer period of time is mutually agreed upon, in order freely to exchange information,
opinions and proposals and to endeavor to reach agreement on the proposed change or
changes.

During the term of this Agreement disputes regarding changes in wages, hours, benefits
and other terms and conditions of employment shall be subject to the impasse
procedures as provided in Charter Section A8.590-5(g).

Pursuant to the provisions of the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act, as amended, the City
agrees to meet and confer with the Association in advance regarding any proposed
changes in working conditions within the scope of representation except as provided
elsewhere in this Agreement.

The parties agree that unless specifically addressed herein, those terms and conditions
of employment which are currently set forth in the Civil Service Rules and are
otherwise consistent with this Agreement shall continue to apply to employees covered
by this contract. No matter set forth in the Civil Service Rules shall be subject to the
grievance procedure. Changes to the Civil Service Rules may be proposed during the
terms of this contract subject to meet and confer as appropriate. Changes to the Civil
Service Rules shall not be subject to arbitration.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-18-
113.

114.

115.

V.B.

V.C.

This Agreement sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties regarding the
matters herein. This Agreement may be modified, but only in writing, upon the mutual
consent of the parties.

SAVINGS CLAUSE

Should any part hereof or any provisions herein be declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such invalidation of such part or portion of this Agreement
shall not invalidate the remaining portions hereof and the remaining portions hereof
shall remain in full force and effect for the duration of this Agreement.

DURATION OF AGREEMENT

This Agreement shall be effective July 1, 2007, and shall remain in full force and effect
through June 30, 2018.

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-19-
V.D. SIGNATURE PAGE

In Witness Hereof, the parties have executed this AGREEMENT this day of

, 2014.

FOR THE CITY

FOR THE UNION

 

Martin Gran
Employee Relations Director

Micki Callahan
Human Resources Director

APPROVED AS TO FORM:
DENNIS J. HERRERA
City Attorney

Elizabeth Salveson
Chief Labor Attorney,
City Attorney

Date Rebecca Rhine
Municipal Executives’ Association

Date

Date

2007-2018 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,

MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVES' ASSOCIATION / POLICE

-20-

Date
